The Warden 

 by 

 Antony Trollope 

 

 

 chapter I 

 Hiram 's Hospital 

 

 the Rev. Septimus Harding be , a few year since , a benefice clergyman reside in the cathedral town of ---- ; let we call it Barchester . be we to name Wells or Salisbury , Exeter , Hereford , or Gloucester , it might be presume that something personal be intend ; and as this tale will refer mainly to the cathedral dignitary of the town in question , we be anxious that no personality may be suspect . let we presume that Barchester be a quiet town in the West of England , more remarkable for the beauty of its cathedral and the antiquity of its monument than for any commercial prosperity ; that the west end of Barchester be the cathedral close , and that the aristocracy of Barchester be the bishop , dean , and canon , with their respective wife and daughter . 

 early in life Mr Harding find himself locate at Barchester . a fine voice and a taste for sacred music have decide the position in which he be to exercise his calling , and for many year he perform the easy but not highly pay duty of a minor canon . at the age of forty a small living in the close vicinity of the town increase both his work and his income , and at the age of fifty he become precentor of the cathedral . 

 Mr Harding have marry early in life , and be the father of two daughter . the eld , Susan , be bear soon after his marriage ; the other , Eleanor , not till ten year later . 

 at the time at which we introduce he to our reader he be live as precentor at Barchester with his young daughter , then twenty - four year of age ; have be many year a widower , and have marry his eld daughter to a son of the bishop a very short time before his installation to the office of precentor . 

 scandal at Barchester affirm that have it not be for the beauty of his daughter , Mr Harding would have remain a minor canon ; but here probably scandal lie , as she so often do ; for even as a minor canon no one have be more popular among his reverend brother in the close than Mr Harding ; and scandal , before she have reprobate Mr Harding for be make precentor by his friend the bishop , have loudly blame the bishop for have so long omit to do something for his friend Mr Harding . be this as it may , Susan Harding , some twelve year since , have marry the Rev. Dr Theophilus Grantly , son of the bishop , archdeacon of Barchester , and rector of Plumstead Episcopi , and her father become , a few month later , precentor of Barchester Cathedral , that office be , as be not unusual , in the bishop 's gift . 

 now there be peculiar circumstance connect with the precentorship which must be explain . in the year 1434 there die at Barchester one John Hiram , who have make money in the town as a wool - stapler , and in his will he leave the house in which he die and certain meadow and close near the town , still call Hiram 's Butts , and Hiram 's Patch , for the support of twelve superannuate wool - carder , all of whom should have be bear and breed and spend their day in Barchester ; he also appoint that an alm - house should be build for their abode , with a fitting residence for a warden , which warden be also to receive a certain sum annually out of the rent of the say butt and patch . he , moreover , willed , have have a soul alive to harmony , that the precentor of the cathedral should have the option of be also warden of the almshouse , if the bishop in each case approve . 

 from that day to this the charity have go on and prosper at least , the charity have go on , and the estate have prosper . Wool - carding in Barchester there be no long any ; so the bishop , dean , and warden , who take it in turn to put in the old man , generally appoint some hanger - on of their own ; wear - out gardener , decrepit grave - digger , or octogenarian sexton , who thankfully receive a comfortable lodging and one shilling and fourpence a day , such be the stipend to which , under the will of John Hiram , they be declare to be entitle . formerly , indeed , that is , till within some fifty year of the present time , they receive but sixpence a day , and their breakfast and dinner be find they at a common table by the warden , such an arrangement be in strict conformity with the absolute wording of old Hiram 's will : but this be think to be inconvenient , and to suit the taste of neither warden nor bedesman , and the daily one shilling and fourpence be substitute with the common consent of all party , include the bishop and the corporation of Barchester . 

 such be the condition of Hiram 's twelve old man when Mr Harding be appoint warden ; but if they may be consider as well - to - do in the world accord to their condition , the happy warden be much more so . the patch and butt which , in John Hiram 's time , produce hay or fed cow , be now cover with row of house ; the value of the property have gradually increase from year to year and century to century , and be now presume by those who know anything about it , to bring in a very nice income ; and by some who know nothing about it , to have increase to an almost fabulous extent . 

 the property be farm by a gentleman in Barchester , who also act as the bishop 's steward , a man whose father and grandfather have be steward to the bishop of Barchester , and farmer of John Hiram 's estate . the Chadwicks have earn a good name in Barchester ; they have live respect by bishop , dean , canon , and precentor ; they have be bury in the precinct of the cathedral ; they have never be know as grip , hard man , but have always live comfortably , maintain a good house , and hold a high position in Barchester society . the present Mr Chadwick be a worthy scion of a worthy stock , and the tenant live on the butt and patch , as well as those on the wide episcopal domain of the see , be well pleased to have to do with so worthy and liberal a steward . 

 for many , many year , record hardly tell how many , probably from the time when Hiram 's wish have be first fully carry out , the proceed of the estate have be pay by the steward or farmer to the warden , and by he divide among the bedesman ; after which division he pay himself such sum as become his due . time have be when the poor warden get nothing but his bare house , for the patch have be subject to flood , and the land of Barchester butt be say to be unproductive ; and in these hard time the warden be hardly able to make out the daily dole for his twelve dependent . but by degree thing mend ; the patch be drain , and cottage begin to rise upon the butt , and the warden , with fairness enough , repay themselves for the evil day go by . in bad time the poor man have have their due , and therefore in good time they could expect no more . in this manner the income of the warden have increase ; the picturesque house attach to the hospital have be enlarge and adorn , and the office have become one of the most coveted of the snug clerical sinecure attach to our church . it be now wholly in the bishop 's gift , and though the dean and chapter , in former day , make a stand on the subject , they have think it more conducive to their honour to have a rich precentor appoint by the bishop , than a poor one appoint by themselves . the stipend of the precentor of Barchester be eighty pound a year . the income arise from the wardenship of the hospital be eight hundred , besides the value of the house . 

 murmur , very slight murmur , have be hear in Barchester , few indeed , and far between , that the proceed of John Hiram 's property have not be fairly divide : but they can hardly be say to have be of such a nature as to have cause uneasiness to anyone : still the thing have be whisper , and Mr Harding have hear it . such be his character in Barchester , so universal be his popularity , that the very fact of his appointment would have quiet loud whisper than those which have be hear ; but Mr Harding be an open - handed , just - minded man , and feel that there might be truth in what have be say , he have , on his instalment , declare his intention of add twopence a day to each man 's pittance , make a sum of sixty - two pound eleven shilling and fourpence , which he be to pay out of his own pocket . in do so , however , he distinctly and repeatedly observe to the man , that though he promise for himself , he could not promise for his successor , and that the extra twopence could only be look on as a gift from himself , and not from the trust . the bedesman , however , be most of they old than Mr Harding , and be quite satisfied with the security on which their extra income be base . 

 this munificence on the part of Mr Harding have not be unopposed . Mr Chadwick have mildly but seriously dissuade he from it ; and his strong - minded son - in - law , the archdeacon , the man of whom alone Mr Harding stand in awe , have urgently , nay , vehemently , oppose so impolitic a concession : but the warden have make known his intention to the hospital before the archdeacon have be able to interfere , and the deed be do . 

 Hiram 's Hospital , as the retreat be call , be a picturesque building enough , and show the correct taste with which the ecclesiastical architect of those day be imbue . it stand on the bank of the little river , which flow nearly round the cathedral close , be on the side furth from the town . the London road cross the river by a pretty one - arch bridge , and , look from this bridge , the stranger will see the window of the old man 's room , each pair of window separate by a small buttress . a broad gravel walk run between the building and the river , which be always trim and care for ; and at the end of the walk , under the parapet of the approach to the bridge , be a large and well - wear seat , on which , in mild weather , three or four of Hiram 's bedesman be sure to be see seat . beyond this row of buttress , and far from the bridge , and also far from the water which here suddenly bend , be the pretty oriel window of Mr Harding 's house , and his well - mow lawn . the entrance to the hospital be from the London road , and be make through a ponderous gateway under a heavy stone arch , unnecessary , one would suppose , at any time , for the protection of twelve old man , but greatly conducive to the good appearance of Hiram 's charity . on pass through this portal , never close to anyone from 6 a.m. till 10 p.m. , and never open afterwards , except on application to a huge , intricately hung mediaval bell , the handle of which no uninitiated intruder can possibly find , the six door of the old man 's abode be see , and beyond they be a slight iron screen , through which the more happy portion of the Barchester elite pass into the Elysium of Mr Harding 's dwelling . 

 Mr Harding be a small man , now verge on sixty year , but bear few of the sign of age ; his hair be rather grizzle , though not gray ; his eye be very mild , but clear and bright , though the double glass which be hold swing from his hand , unless when fix upon his nose , show that time have tell upon his sight ; his hand be delicately white , and both hand and foot be small ; he always wear a black frock coat , black knee - breech , and black gaiter , and somewhat scandalise some of his more hyperclerical brother by a black neck - handkerchief . 

 Mr Harding 's warm admirer can not say that he be ever an industrious man ; the circumstance of his life have not call on he to be so ; and yet he can hardly be call an idler . since his appointment to his precentorship , he have publish , with all possible addition of vellum , typography , and gilding , a collection of our ancient church music , with some correct dissertation on Purcell , Crotch , and naris . he have greatly improve the choir of Barchester , which , under his dominion , now rival that of any cathedral in England . he have take something more than his fair share in the cathedral service , and have play the violoncello daily to such audience as he could collect , or , faute de mieux , to no audience at all . 

 we must mention one other peculiarity of Mr Harding . as we have before state , he have an income of eight hundred a year , and have no family but his one daughter ; and yet he be never quite at ease in money matter . the vellum and gilding of " Harding 's Church Music " cost more than any one know , except the author , the publisher , and the Rev. Theophilus Grantly , who allow none of his father - in - law 's extravagance to escape he . then he be generous to his daughter , for whose service he keep a small carriage and pair of pony . he be , indeed , generous to all , but especially to the twelve old man who be in a peculiar manner under his care . no doubt with such an income Mr Harding should be above the world , as the saying be ; but , at any rate , he be not above Archdeacon Theophilus Grantly , for he be always more or less in debt to his son - in - law , who have , to a certain extent , assume the arrangement of the precentor 's pecuniary affair . 

 

 

 Chapter II 

 the Barchester Reformer 

 

 Mr Harding have be now precentor of Barchester for ten year ; and , alas , the murmur respect the proceed of Hiram 's estate be again become audible . it be not that any one begrudge to Mr Harding the income which he enjoy , and the comfortable place which so well become he ; but such matter have begin to be talk of in various part of England . Eager push politician have assert in the House of Commons , with very tell indignation , that the grasp priest of the Church of England be gorge with the wealth which the charity of former time have leave for the solace of the aged , or the education of the young . the well - know case of the Hospital of St Cross have even come before the law court of the country , and the struggle of Mr Whiston , at Rochester , have meet with sympathy and support . man be begin to say that these thing must be look into . 

 Mr Harding , whose conscience in the matter be clear , and who have never feel that he have receive a pound from Hiram 's will to which he be not entitle , have naturally take the part of the church in talk over these matter with his friend , the bishop , and his son - in - law , the archdeacon . the archdeacon , indeed , Dr Grantly , have be somewhat loud in the matter . he be a personal friend of the dignitary of the Rochester Chapter , and have write letter in the public press on the subject of that turbulent Dr Whiston , which , his admirer think , must well nigh set the question at rest . it be also know at Oxford that he be the author of the pamphlet sign " sacerdo " on the subject of the Earl of Guildford and St Cross , in which it be so clearly argue that the manner of the present time do not admit of a literal adhesion to the very word of the founder 's will , but that the interest of the church for which the founder be so deeply concerned be well consult in enable its bishop to reward those shin light whose service have be most signally serviceable to Christianity . in answer to this , it be assert that Henry de Blois , founder of St Cross , be not greatly interested in the welfare of the reform church , and that the master of St Cross , for many year past , can not be call shin light in the service of Christianity ; it be , however , stoutly maintain , and no doubt feel , by all the archdeacon 's friend , that his logic be conclusive , and have not , in fact , be answer . 

 with such a tower of strength to back both his argument and his conscience , it may be imagine that Mr Harding have never feel any compunction as to receive his quarterly sum of two hundred pound . indeed , the subject have never present itself to his mind in that shape . he have talk not unfrequently , and hear very much about the will of old founder and the income arise from their estate , during the last year or two ; he do even , at one moment , feel a doubt   since expel by his son - in - law 's logic   as to whether Lord Guildford be clearly entitle to receive so enormous an income as he do from the revenue of St Cross ; but that he himself be overpay with his modest eight hundred pound , he who , out of that , voluntarily give up sixty - two pound eleven shilling and fourpence a year to his twelve old neighbour , he who , for the money , do his precentor 's work as no precentor have do it before , since Barchester Cathedral be build , such an idea have never sully his quiet , or disturb his conscience . 

 nevertheless , Mr Harding be become uneasy at the rumour which he know to prevail in Barchester on the subject . he be aware that , at any rate , two of his old man have be hear to say , that if everyone have his own , they might each have their hundred pound a year , and live like gentleman , instead of a beggarly one shilling and sixpence a day ; and that they have slender cause to be thankful for a miserable dole of twopence , when Mr Harding and Mr Chadwick , between they , run away with thousand of pound which good old John Hiram never intend for the like of they . it be the ingratitude of this which sting Mr Harding . one of this discontent pair , Abel Handy , be put into the hospital by himself ; he have be a stone - mason in Barchester , and have break his thigh by a fall from a scaffolding , while employ about the cathedral ; and Mr Harding have give he the first vacancy in the hospital after the occurrence , although Dr Grantly have be very anxious to put into it an insufferable clerk of his at Plumstead Episcopi , who have lose all his tooth , and whom the archdeacon hardly know how to get rid of by other mean . Dr Grantly have not forget to remind Mr Harding how well satisfied with his one - and - sixpence a day old Joe Mutters would have be , and how injudicious it be on the part of Mr Harding to allow a radical from the town to get into the concern . probably Dr Grantly forget , at the moment , that the charity be intend for break - down journeyman of Barchester . 

 there be live at Barchester , a young man , a surgeon , name John Bold , and both Mr Harding and Dr Grantly be well aware that to he be owe the pestilent rebellious feeling which have show itself in the hospital ; yes , and the renewal , too , of that disagreeable talk about Hiram 's estate which be now again prevalent in Barchester . nevertheless , Mr Harding and Mr Bold be acquaint with each other ; we may say , be friend , consider the great disparity in their year . Dr Grantly , however , have a holy horror of the impious demagogue , as on one occasion he call Bold , when speak of he to the precentor ; and be a more prudent far - see man than Mr Harding , and possess of a strong head , he already perceive that this John Bold will work great trouble in Barchester . he consider that he be to be regard as an enemy , and think that he should not be admit into the camp on anything like friendly term . as John Bold will occupy much of our attention , we must endeavour to explain who he be , and why he take the part of John Hiram 's bedesman . 

 John Bold be a young surgeon , who pass many of his boyish year at Barchester . his father be a physician in the city of London , where he make a moderate fortune , which he invest in house in that city . the Dragon of Wantly inn and posting - house belong to he , also four shop in the High Street , and a moiety of the new row of genteel villa   so call in the advertisement , build outside the town just beyond Hiram 's Hospital . to one of these Dr Bold retire to spend the evening of his life , and to die ; and here his son John spend his holiday , and afterwards his Christmas vacation when he go from school to study surgery in the London hospital . just as John Bold be entitle to write himself surgeon and apothecary , old Dr Bold die , leave his Barchester property to his son , and a certain sum in the three per cent . to his daughter Mary , who be some four or five year old than her brother . 

 John Bold determine to settle himself at Barchester , and look after his own property , as well as the bone and body of such of his neighbour as would call upon he for assistance in their trouble . he therefore put up a large brass plate with " John Bold , Surgeon " on it , to the great disgust of the nine practitioner who be already try to get a living out of the bishop , dean , and canon ; and begin house - keeping with the aid of his sister . at this time he be not more than twenty - four year old ; and though he have now be three year in Barchester , we have not hear that he have do much harm to the nine worthy practitioner . indeed , their dread of he have die away ; for in three year he have not take three fee . 

 nevertheless , John Bold be a clever man , and would , with practice , be a clever surgeon ; but he have get quite into another line of life . have enough to live on , he have not be force to work for bread ; he have decline to subject himself to what he call the drudgery of the profession , by which , I believe , he mean the general work of a practise surgeon ; and have find other employment . he frequently bind up the bruise and set the limb of such of the poor class as profess his way of thinking , but this he do for love . now I will not say that the archdeacon be strictly correct in stigmatise John Bold as a demagogue , for I hardly know how extreme must be a man 's opinion before he can be justly so call ; but Bold be a strong reformer . his passion be the reform of all abuse ; state abuse , church abuse , corporation abuse   he have get himself elect a town councillor of Barchester , and have so worry three consecutive mayor , that it become somewhat difficult to find a fourth , abuse in medical practice , and general abuse in the world at large . Bold be thoroughly sincere in his patriotic endeavour to mend mankind , and there be something to be admire in the energy with which he devote himself to remedy evil and stop injustice ; but I fear that he be too much imbue with the idea that he have a special mission for reform . it would be well if one so young have a little more diffidence himself , and more trust in the honest purpose of other , if he could be bring to believe that old custom need not necessarily be evil , and that change may possibly be dangerous ; but no , Bold have all the ardour and all the self - assurance of a Danton , and hurl his anathema against time - honour practice with the violence of a French Jacobin . 

 no wonder that Dr Grantly should regard Bold as a firebrand , fall , as he have do , almost in the centre of the quiet ancient close of Barchester Cathedral . Dr Grantly would have he avoid as the plague ; but the old Doctor and Mr Harding be fast friend . young Johnny Bold use to play as a boy on Mr Harding 's lawn ; he have many a time win the precentor 's heart by listen with rapt attention to his sacred strain ; and since those day , to tell the truth at once , he have nearly win another heart within the same wall . 

 Eleanor Harding have not plight her troth to John Bold , nor have she , perhaps , own to herself how dear to she the young reformer be ; but she can not endure that anyone should speak harshly of he . she do not dare to defend he when her brother - in - law be so loud against he ; for she , like her father , be somewhat afraid of Dr Grantly ; but she be begin greatly to dislike the archdeacon . she persuade her father that it would be both unjust and injudicious to banish his young friend because of his politic ; she care little to go to house where she will not meet he , and , in fact , she be in love . 

 nor be there any good reason why Eleanor Harding should not love John Bold . he have all those quality which be likely to touch a girl 's heart . he be brave , eager , and amusing ; well - make and good - look ; young and enterprising ; his character be in all respect good ; he have sufficient income to support a wife ; he be her father 's friend ; and , above all , he be in love with she : then why should not Eleanor Harding be attach to John Bold ? 

 Dr Grantly , who have as many eye as Argus , and have long see how the wind blow in that direction , think there be various strong reason why this should not be so . he have not think it wise as yet to speak to his father - in - law on the subject , for he know how foolishly indulgent be Mr Harding in everything that concern his daughter ; but he have discuss the matter with his all - trust helpmate , within that sacred recess form by the clerical bed - curtain at Plumstead Episcopi . 

 how much sweet solace , how much value counsel have our archdeacon receive within that sainted enclosure ! ' tis there alone that he unbend , and come down from his high church pedestal to the level of a mortal man . in the world Dr Grantly never lay aside that demeanour which so well become he . he have all the dignity of an ancient saint with the sleekness of a modern bishop ; he be always the same ; he be always the archdeacon ; unlike Homer , he never nod . even with his father - in - law , even with the bishop and dean , he maintain that sonorous tone and lofty deportment which strike awe into the young heart of Barchester , and absolutely cow the whole parish of Plumstead Episcopi . ' tis only when he have exchange that ever - new shovel hat for a tasselled nightcap , and those shin black habiliment for his accustomed robe de nuit , that Dr Grantly talk , and look , and think like an ordinary man . 

 many of we have often think how severe a trial of faith must this be to the wife of our great church dignitary . to we these man be personification of St Paul ; their very gait be a speak sermon ; their clean and sombre apparel exact from us faith and submission , and the cardinal virtue seem to hover round their sacred hat . a dean or archbishop , in the garb of his order , be sure of our reverence , and a well - get - up bishop fill our very soul with awe . but how can this feeling be perpetuate in the bosom of those who see the bishop without their apron , and the archdeacon even in a low state of dishabille ? 

 do we not all know some reverend , all but sacred , personage before whom our tongue cease to be loud and our step to be elastic ? but be we once to see he stretch himself beneath the bed - clothe , yawn widely , and bury his face upon his pillow , we could chatter before he as glibly as before a doctor or a lawyer . from some such cause , doubtless , it arise that our archdeacon listen to the counsel of his wife , though he consider himself entitle to give counsel to every other be whom he meet . 

 " my dear , " he say , as he adjust the copious fold of his nightcap , " there be that John Bold at your father 's again to - day . I must say your father be very imprudent . " 

 " he be imprudent ; he always be , " reply Mrs Grantly , speak from under the comfortable bed - clothe . " there be nothing new in that . " 

 " no , my dear , there be nothing new ; I know that ; but , at the present juncture of affair , such imprudence be be I will tell you what , my dear , if he do not take care what he be about , John Bold will be off with Eleanor . " 

 " I think he will , whether papa take care or no ; and why not ? " 

 " why not ! " almost scream the archdeacon , give so rough a pull at his nightcap as almost to bring it over his nose ; " why not ! that pestilent , interfere upstart , John Bold ; the most vulgar young person I ever meet ! do you know that he be meddle with your father 's affair in a most uncalled - for most " and be at a loss for an epithet sufficiently injurious , he finish his expression of horror by mutter , " good heaven ! " in a manner that have be find very efficacious in clerical meeting of the diocese . he must for the moment have forget where he be . 

 " as to his vulgarity , archdeacon "   Mrs Grantly have never assume a more familiar term than this in address her husband , " I do not   agree with you . not that I like Mr Bold ; he be a great deal too conceited for I ; but then Eleanor do , and it would be the good thing in the world for papa if they be to marry . Bold would never trouble himself about Hiram 's Hospital if he be papa 's son - in - law . " and the lady turn herself round under the bed - clothe , in a manner to which the doctor be well accustom , and which tell he , as plainly as word , that as far as she be concern the subject be over for that night . 

 " good heaven ! " murmur the doctor again ; he be evidently much put beside himself . 

 Dr Grantly be by no mean a bad man ; he be exactly the man which such an education as his be most likely to form ; his intellect be sufficient for such a place in the world , but not sufficient to put he in advance of it . he perform with a rigid constancy such of the duty of a parish clergyman as be , to his thinking , above the sphere of his curate , but it be as an archdeacon that he shin . 

 we believe , as a general rule , that either a bishop or his archdeacon have sinecure : where a bishop work , archdeacon have but little to do , and vice versa . in the diocese of Barchester the Archdeacon of Barchester do the work . in that capacity he be diligent , authoritative , and , as his friend particularly boast , judicious . his great fault be an overbearing assurance of the virtue and claim of his order , and his great foible be an equally strong confidence in the dignity of his own manner and the eloquence of his own word . he be a moral man , believe the precept which he teach , and believe also that he act up to they ; though we can not say that he would give his coat to the man who take his cloak , or that he be prepared to forgive his brother even seven time . he be severe enough in exact his due , consider that any laxity in this respect would endanger the security of the church ; and , could he have his way , he would consign to darkness and perdition , not only every individual reformer , but every committee and every commission that would even dare to ask a question respect the appropriation of church revenue . 

 " they be church revenue : the laity admit it . surely the church be able to administer her own revenue . " ' twas thus he be accustom to argue , when the sacrilegious doing of Lord John Russell and other be discuss either at Barchester or at Oxford . 

 it be no wonder that Dr Grantly do not like John Bold , and that his wife 's suggestion that he should become closely connect with such a man dismay he . to give he his due , the archdeacon never want courage ; he be quite willing to meet his enemy on any field and with any weapon . he have that belief in his own argument that he feel sure of success , could he only be sure of a fair fight on the part of his adversary . he have no idea that John Bold could really prove that the income of the hospital be malappropriate ; why , then , should peace be seek for on such base term ? what ! bribe an unbelieve enemy of the church with the sister - in - law of one dignitary and the daughter of another with a young lady whose connection with the diocese and chapter of Barchester be so close as to give she an undeniable claim to a husband endow with some of its sacred wealth ! when Dr Grantly talk of unbelieve enemy , he do not mean to imply want of belief in the doctrine of the church , but an equally dangerous scepticism as to its purity in money matter . 

 Mrs Grantly be not usually deaf to the claim of the high order to which she belong . she and her husband rarely disagree as to the tone with which the church should be defend ; how singular , then , that in such a case as this she should be willing to succumb ! the archdeacon again murmur " good heaven ! " as he lay himself beside she , but he do so in a voice audible only to himself , and he repeat it till sleep relieve he from deep thought . 

 Mr Harding himself have see no reason why his daughter should not love John Bold . he have not be unobservant of her feeling , and perhaps his deep regret at the part which he fear Bold be about to take regard the hospital arise from the dread that he may be separate from his daughter , or that she may be separate from the man she love . he have never speak to Eleanor about her lover ; he be the last man in the world to allude to such a subject unconsulte , even with his own daughter ; and have he consider that he have grind to disapprove of Bold , he would have remove she , or forbid he his house ; but he see no such ground . he would probably have prefer a second clerical son - in - law , for Mr Harding , also , be attach to his order ; and , fail in that , he would at any rate have wish that so near a connection should have think alike with he on church matter . he would not , however , reject the man his daughter love because he differ on such subject with himself . 

 Hitherto Bold have take no step in the matter in any way annoying to Mr Harding personally . some month since , after a severe battle , which cost he not a little money , he gain a victory over a certain old turnpike woman in the neighbourhood , of whose charge another old woman have complain to he . he get the Act of Parliament relate to the trust , find that his protťgťe have be wrongly tax , ride through the gate himself , pay the toll , then bring an action against the gate - keeper , and prove that all people come up a certain by - lane , and go down a certain other by - lane , be toll - free . the fame of his success spread widely abroad , and he begin to be look on as the upholder of the right of the poor of Barchester . not long after this success , he hear from different quarter that Hiram 's bedesman be treat as pauper , whereas the property to which they be , in effect , heir be very large ; and he be instigate by the lawyer whom he have employ in the case of the turnpike to call upon Mr Chadwick for a statement as to the fund of the estate . 

 Bold have often express his indignation at the malappropriation of church fund in general , in the hearing of his friend the precentor ; but the conversation have never refer to anything at Barchester ; and when Finney , the attorney , induce he to interfere with the affair of the hospital , it be against Mr Chadwick that his effort be to be direct . Bold soon find that if he interfere with Mr Chadwick as steward , he must also interfere with Mr Harding as warden ; and though he regret the situation in which this would place he , he be not the man to flinch from his undertaking from personal motif . 

 as soon as he have determine to take the matter in hand , he set about his work with his usual energy . he get a copy of John Hiram 's will , of the wording of which he make himself perfectly master . he ascertain the extent of the property , and as nearly as he could the value of it ; and make out a schedule of what he be inform be the present distribution of its income . arm with these particular , he call on Mr Chadwick , have give that gentleman notice of his visit ; and ask he for a statement of the income and expenditure of the hospital for the last twenty - five year . 

 this be of course refuse , Mr Chadwick allege that he have no authority for make public the concern of a property in manage which he be only a pay servant . 

 " and who be competent to give you that authority , Mr Chadwick ? " ask Bold . 

 " only those who employ I , Mr Bold , " say the steward . 

 " and who be those , Mr Chadwick ? " demand Bold . 

 Mr Chadwick beg to say that if these inquiry be make merely out of curiosity , he must decline answer they : if Mr Bold have any ulterior proceed in view , perhaps it would be desirable that any necessary information should be seek for in a professional way by a professional man . Mr Chadwick 's attorney be Messrs Cox and Cummins , of Lincoln 's Inn . Mr Bold take down the address of Cox and Cummins , remark that the weather be cold for the time of the year , and wish Mr Chadwick good - morning . Mr Chadwick say it be cold for June , and bow he out . 

 he at once go to his lawyer , Finney . now , Bold be not very fond of his attorney , but , as he say , he merely want a man who know the form of law , and who would do what he be tell for his money . he have no idea of put himself in the hand of a lawyer . he want law from a lawyer as he do a coat from a tailor , because he could not make it so well himself ; and he think Finney the fit man in Barchester for his purpose . in one respect , at any rate , he be right : Finney be humility itself . 

 Finney advise an instant letter to Cox and Cummins , mindful of his six - and - eightpence . " slap at they at once , Mr Bold . demand categorically and explicitly a full statement of the affair of the hospital . " 

 " suppose I be to see Mr Harding first , " suggest Bold . 

 " yes , yes , by all mean , " say the acquiescing Finney ; " though , perhaps , as Mr Harding be no man of business , it may lead lead to some little difficulty ; but perhaps you be right . Mr Bold , I do not   think see Mr Harding can do any harm . " Finney see from the expression of his client 's face that he intend to have his own way . 

 

 

 Chapter III 

 the Bishop of Barchester 

 

 Bold at once repair to the hospital . the day be now far advanced , but he know that Mr Harding din in the summer at four , that Eleanor be accustom to drive in the evening , and that he might therefore probably find Mr Harding alone . it be between seven and eight when he reach the slight iron gate lead into the precentor 's garden , and though , as Mr Chadwick observe , the day have be cold for June , the evening be mild , and soft , and sweet . the little gate be open . as he raise the latch he hear the note of Mr Harding 's violoncello from the far end of the garden , and , advance before the house and across the lawn , he find he play ; and not without an audience . the musician be seat in a garden - chair just within the summer - house , so as to allow the violoncello which he hold between his knee to rest upon the dry stone flooring ; before he stand a rough music desk , on which be open a page of that dear sacred book , that much - labour and much - love volume of church music , which have cost so many guineas ; and around sit , and lay , and stand , and lean , ten of the twelve old man who dwelt with he beneath old John Hiram 's roof . the two reformer be not there . I will not say that in their heart they be conscious of any wrong do or to be do to their mild warden , but latterly they have keep aloof from he , and his music be no long to their taste . 

 it be amusing to see the position , and eager listening face of these well - to - do old man . I will not say that they all appreciate the music which they hear , but they be intent on appear to do so ; pleased at be where they be , they be determine , as far as in they lay , to give pleasure in return ; and they be not unsuccessful . it gladden the precentor 's heart to think that the old bedesman whom he love so well admire the strain which be to he so full of almost ecstatic joy ; and he use to boast that such be the air of the hospital , as to make it a precinct specially fit for the worship of St Cecilia . 

 immediately before he , on the extreme corner of the bench which run round the summer - house , sit one old man , with his handkerchief smoothly lain upon his knee , who do enjoy the moment , or act enjoyment well . he be one on whose large frame many year , for he be over eighty , have make small havoc ; he be still an upright , burly , handsome figure , with an open , ponderous brow , round which clung a few , though very few , thin gray lock . the coarse black gown of the hospital , the breech , and buckled shoe become he well ; and as he sit with his hand fold on his staff , and his chin rest on his hand , he be such a listener as most musician would be glad to welcome . 

 this man be certainly the pride of the hospital . it have always be the custom that one should be select as be to some extent in authority over the other ; and though Mr Bunce , for such be his name , and so he be always designate by his inferior brother , have no great emolument than they , he have assume , and well know how to maintain , the dignity of his elevation . the precentor delight to call he his sub - warden , and be not ashamed , occasionally , when no other guest be there , to bid he sit down by the same parlour fire , and drink the full glass of port which be place near he . bunce never go without the second glass , but no entreaty ever make he take a third . 

 " well , well , Mr Harding ; you be too good , much too good , " he would always say , as the second glass be fill ; but when that be drunk , and the half hour over , Bunce stand erect , and with a benediction which his patron value , retire to his own abode . he know the world too well to risk the comfort of such halcyon moment , by prolong they till they be disagreeable . 

 Mr Bunce , as may be imagine , be most strongly oppose to innovation . not even Dr Grantly have a more holy horror of those who would interfere in the affair of the hospital ; he be every inch a churchman , and though he be not very fond of Dr Grantly personally , that arise from there not be room in the hospital for two people so much alike as the doctor and himself , rather than from any dissimilarity in feel . Mr Bunce be inclined to think that the warden and himself could manage the hospital without further assistance ; and that , though the bishop be the constitutional visitor , and as such entitle to special reverence from all connect with John Hiram 's will , John Hiram never intend that his affair should be interfere with by an archdeacon . 

 at the present moment , however , these care be off his mind , and he be look at his warden , as though he think the music heavenly , and the musician hardly less so . 

 as Bold walk silently over the lawn , Mr Harding do not at first perceive he , and continue to draw his bow slowly across the plaintive wire ; but he soon find from his audience that some stranger be there , and look up , begin to welcome his young friend with frank hospitality . 

 " pray , Mr Harding pray do not   let I disturb you , " say Bold ; " you know how fond I be of sacred music . " 

 " oh ! it be nothing , " say the precentor , shut up the book and then open it again as he see the delightfully implore look of his old friend Bunce . oh , Bunce , Bunce , Bunce , I fear that after all thou art but a flatterer . " well , I will just finish it then ; it be a favourite little bit of Bishop 's ; and then , Mr Bold , we will have a stroll and a chat till Eleanor come in and give we tea . " and so Bold sit down on the soft turf to listen , or rather to think how , after such sweet harmony , he might well introduce a theme of so much discord , to disturb the peace of he who be so ready to welcome he kindly . 

 Bold think that the performance be soon over , for he feel that he have a somewhat difficult task , and he almost regret the final leave - taking of the last of the old man , slow as they be in go through their adieux . 

 Bold 's heart be in his mouth , as the precentor make some ordinary but kind remark as to the friendliness of the visit . 

 " one evening call , " say he , " be worth ten in the morning . it be all formality in the morning ; real social talk never begin till after dinner . that be why I dine early , so as to get as much as I can of it . " 

 " quite true , Mr Harding , " say the other ; " but I fear I have   reverse the order of thing , and I owe you much apology for trouble you on business at such an hour ; but it be on business that I have call just now . " 

 Mr Harding look blank and annoyed ; there be something in the tone of the young man 's voice which tell he that the interview be intend to be disagreeable , and he shrink back at find his kindly greeting so repulse . 

 " I wish to speak to you about the hospital , " continue Bold . 

 " well , well , anything I can tell you I shall be most happy " 

 " it be about the account . " 

 " then , my dear fellow , I can tell you nothing , for I be as ignorant as a child . all I know be , that they pay I L800 a year . go to Chadwick , he know all about the account ; and now tell I , will poor Mary Jones ever get the use of her limb again ? " 

 " well , I think she will , if she be careful ; but , Mr Harding , I hope you will not   object to discuss with I what I have to say about the hospital . " 

 Mr Harding give a deep , long - draw sigh . he do object , very strongly object , to discuss any such subject with John Bold ; but he have not the business tact of Mr Chadwick , and do not know how to relieve himself from the come evil ; he sigh sadly , but make no answer . 

 " I have the great regard for you , Mr Harding , " continue Bold ; " the true respect , the most sincere " 

 " thank ye , thank ye , Mr Bold , " interjaculate the precentor somewhat impatiently ; " I be much oblige , but never mind that ; I be as likely to be in the wrong as another man , quite as likely . " 

 " but , Mr Harding , I must express what I feel , lest you should think there be personal enmity in what I be go to do . " 

 " personal enmity ! go to do ! why , you be not go to cut my throat , nor put I into the Ecclesiastical Court ! " 

 Bold try to laugh , but he could not . he be quite in earnest , and determine in his course , and could not   make a joke of it . he walk on awhile in silence before he recommence his attack , during which Mr Harding , who have still the bow in his hand , play rapidly on an imaginary violoncello . " I fear there be reason to think that John Hiram 's will be not carry out to the letter , Mr Harding , " say the young man at last ; " and I have be ask to see into it . " 

 " very well , I have   no objection on earth ; and now we need not say another word about it . " 

 " only one word more , Mr Harding . Chadwick have refer I to Cox and Cummins , and I think it my duty to apply to they for some statement about the hospital . in what I do I may appear to be interfere with you , and I hope you will forgive I for do so . " 

 " Mr Bold , " say the other , stop , and speak with some solemnity , " if you act justly , say nothing in this matter but the truth , and use no unfair weapon in carry out your purpose , I shall have nothing to forgive . I presume you think I be not entitle to the income I receive from the hospital , and that other be entitle to it . whatever some may do , I shall never attribute to you base motif because you hold an opinion oppose to my own and adverse to my interest : pray do what you consider to be your duty ; I can give you no assistance , neither will I offer you any obstacle . let I , however , suggest to you , that you can in no wise forward your view nor I mine , by any discussion between we . here come Eleanor and the pony , and we will go in to tea . " 

 Bold , however , feel that he could not sit down at ease with Mr Harding and his daughter after what have pass , and therefore excuse himself with much awkward apology ; and merely raise his hat and bow as he pass Eleanor and the pony chair , leave she in disappoint amazement at his departure . 

 Mr Harding 's demeanour certainly impress Bold with a full conviction that the warden feel that he stand on strong ground , and almost make he think that he be about to interfere without due warrant in the private affair of a just and honourable man ; but Mr Harding himself be anything but satisfied with his own view of the case . 

 in the first place , he wish for Eleanor 's sake to think well of Bold and to like he , and yet he could not but feel disgusted at the arrogance of his conduct . what right have he to say that John Hiram 's will be not fairly carry out ? but then the question would arise within his heart , be that will fairly act on ? do John Hiram mean that the warden of his hospital should receive considerably more out of the legacy than all the twelve old man together for whose behoof the hospital be build ? could it be possible that John Bold be right , and that the reverend warden of the hospital have be for the last ten year and more the unjust recipient of an income legally and equitably belong to other ? what if it should be prove before the light of day that he , whose life have be so happy , so quiet , so respected , have absorb eight thousand pound to which he have no title , and which he could never repay ? I do not say that he fear that such be really the case ; but the first shade of doubt now fall across his mind , and from this evening , for many a long , long day , our good , kind love warden be neither happy nor at ease . 

 thought of this kind , these first moment of much misery , oppress Mr Harding as he sit sip his tea , absent and ill at ease . Poor Eleanor feel that all be not right , but her idea as to the cause of the evening 's discomfort do not go beyond her lover , and his sudden and uncivil departure . she think there must have be some quarrel between Bold and her father , and she be half angry with both , though she do not attempt to explain to herself why she be so . 

 Mr Harding think long and deeply over these thing , both before he go to bed and after it , as he lie awake , question within himself the validity of his claim to the income which he enjoy . it seem clear at any rate that , however unfortunate he might be at have be place in such a position , no one could say that he ought either to have refuse the appointment first , or to have reject the income afterwards . all the world , mean the ecclesiastical world as confine to the english church , know that the wardenship of the Barchester Hospital be a snug sinecure , but no one have ever be blame for accept it . to how much blame , however , would he have be open have he reject it ! how mad would he have be think have he declare , when the situation be vacant and offer to he , that he have scruple as to receive L800 a year from John Hiram 's property , and that he have rather some strange should possess it ! how would Dr Grantly have shake his wise head , and have consult with his friend in the close as to some decent retreat for the come insanity of the poor minor canon ! if he be right in accept the place , it be clear to he also that he would be wrong in reject any part of the income attach to it . the patronage be a valuable appanage of the bishopric ; and surely it would not be his duty to lessen the value of that preferment which have be bestow on himself ; surely he be bind to stand by his order . 

 but somehow these argument , though they seem logical , be not satisfactory . be John Hiram 's will fairly carry out ? that be the true question : and if not , be it not his especial duty to see that this be do , his especial duty , whatever injury it might do to his order , however ill such duty might be receive by his patron and his friend ? at the idea of his friend , his mind turn unhappily to his son - in - law . he know well how strongly he would be support by Dr Grantly , if he could bring himself to put his case into the archdeacon 's hand and to allow he to fight the battle ; but he know also that he would find no sympathy there for his doubt , no friendly feeling , no inward comfort . Dr Grantly would be ready enough to take up his cudgel against all comer on behalf of the church militant , but he would do so on the distasteful ground of the church 's infallibility . such a contest would give no comfort to Mr Harding 's doubt . he be not so anxious to prove himself right , as to be so . 

 I have say before that Dr Grantly be the work man of the diocese , and that his father the bishop be somewhat inclined to an idle life . so it be ; but the bishop , though he have never be an active man , be one whose quality have render he dear to all who know he . he be the very opposite to his son ; he be a bland and a kind old man , oppose by every feeling to authoritative demonstration and episcopal ostentation . it be perhaps well for he , in his situation , that his son have early in life be able to do that which he could not well do when he be young , and which he could not have do at all now that he be over seventy . the bishop know how to entertain the clergy of his diocese , to talk easy small - talk with the rector ' wife , and put curate at their ease ; but it require the strong hand of the archdeacon to deal with such as be refractory either in their doctrine or their life . 

 the bishop and Mr Harding love each other warmly . they have grow old together , and have together spend many , many year in clerical pursuit and clerical conversation . when one of they be a bishop and the other only a minor canon they be even then much together ; but since their child have marry , and Mr Harding have become warden and precentor , they be all in all to each other . I will not say that they manage the diocese between they , but they spend much time in discuss the man who do , and in form little plan to mitigate his wrath against church delinquent , and soften his aspiration for church dominion . 

 Mr Harding determine to open his mind and confess his doubt to his old friend ; and to he he go on the morning after John Bold 's uncourteous visit . 

 up to this period no rumour of these cruel proceeding against the hospital have reach the bishop 's ear . he have doubtless hear that man exist who question his right to present to a sinecure of L800 a year , as he have hear from time to time of some special immorality or disgraceful disturbance in the usually decent and quiet city of Barchester : but all he do , and all he be call on to do , on such occasion , be to shake his head , and to beg his son , the great dictator , to see that no harm happen to the church . 

 it be a long story that Mr Harding have to tell before he make the bishop comprehend his own view of the case ; but we need not follow he through the tale . at first the bishop counsel but one step , recommend but one remedy , have but one medicine in his whole pharmacopoeia strong enough to touch so grave a disorder ; he prescribe the archdeacon . " refer he to the archdeacon , " he repeat , as Mr Harding speak of Bold and his visit . " the archdeacon will set you quite right about that , " he kindly say , when his friend speak with hesitation of the justness of his cause . " no man have get up all that so well as the archdeacon ; " but the dose , though large , fail to quiet the patient ; indeed it almost produce nausea . 

 " but , bishop , " say he , " do you ever read John Hiram 's will ? " 

 the bishop think probably he have , thirty - five year ago , when first institute to his see , but could not state positively : however , he very well know that he have the absolute right to present to the wardenship , and that the income of the warden have be regularly settle . 

 " but , bishop , the question be , who have the power to settle it ? if , as this young man say , the will provide that the proceed of the property be to be divide into share , who have the power to alter these provision ? " the bishop have an indistinct idea that they alter themselves by the lapse of year ; that a kind of ecclesiastical statute of limitation bar the right of the twelve bedesman to any increase of income arise from the increase value of property . he say something about tradition ; more of the many learn man who by their practice have confirm the present arrangement ; then go at some length into the propriety of maintain the due difference in rank and income between a benefice clergyman and certain poor old man who be dependent on charity ; and conclude his argument by another reference to the archdeacon . 

 the precentor sit thoughtfully gaze at the fire , and listen to the good - natured reasoning of his friend . what the bishop say have a sort of comfort in it , but it be not a sustain comfort . it make Mr Harding feel that many other , indeed , all other of his own order , would think he right ; but it fail to prove to he that he truly be so . 

 " Bishop , " say he , at last , after both have sit silent for a while , " I should deceive you and myself too , if I do not tell you that I be very unhappy about this . suppose that I can not bring myself to agree with Dr Grantly ! that I find , after inquiry , that the young man be right , and that I be wrong , what then ? " 

 the two old man be sit near each other , so near that the bishop be able to lay his hand upon the other 's knee , and he do so with a gentle pressure . Mr Harding well know what that pressure mean . the bishop have no further argument to adduce ; he could not fight for the cause as his son would do ; he could not prove all the precentor 's doubt to be groundless ; but he could sympathise with his friend , and he do so ; and Mr Harding feel that he have receive that for which he come . there be another period of silence , after which the bishop ask , with a degree of irritable energy , very unusual with he , whether this " pestilent intruder "   mean John Bold   have any friend in Barchester . 

 Mr Harding have fully make up his mind to tell the bishop everything ; to speak of his daughter 's love , as well as his own trouble ; to talk of John Bold in his double capacity of future son - in - law and present enemy ; and though he feel it to be sufficiently disagreeable , now be his time to do it . 

 " he be very intimate at my own house , bishop . " the bishop star . he be not so far go in orthodoxy and church militancy as his son , but still he could not bring himself to understand how so declare an enemy of the establishment could be admit on term of intimacy into the house , not only of so firm a pillar as Mr Harding , but one so much injure as the warden of the hospital . 

 " indeed , I like Mr Bold much , personally , " continue the disinterested victim ; " and to tell you the ' truth , ' " he hesitate as he bring out the dreadful tiding , " I have sometimes think it not improbable that he would be my second son - in - law . " the bishop do not whistle : we believe that they lose the power of do so on be consecrate ; and that in these day one might as easily meet a corrupt judge as a whistle bishop ; but he look as though he would have do so , but for his apron . 

 what a brother - in - law for the archdeacon ! what an alliance for Barchester close ! what a connection for even the episcopal palace ! the bishop , in his simple mind , feel no doubt that John Bold , have he so much power , would shut up all cathedral , and probably all parish church ; distribute all tithe among Methodists , Baptists , and other savage tribe ; utterly annihilate the sacred bench , and make shovel hat and lawn sleeve as illegal as cowl , sandal , and sackcloth ! here be a nice man to be initiate into the comfortable arcana of ecclesiastical snuggery ; one who doubt the integrity of parson , and probably disbelieve the Trinity ! 

 Mr Harding see what an effect his communication have make , and almost repent the openness of his disclosure ; he , however , do what he could to moderate the grief of his friend and patron . " I do not say that there be any engagement between they . have there be , Eleanor would have tell I ; I know she well enough to be assure that she would have do so ; but I see that they be fond of each other ; and as a man and a father , I have have no objection to urge against their intimacy . " 

 " but , Mr Harding , " say the bishop , " how be you to oppose he , if he be your son - in - law ? " 

 " I do not   mean to oppose he ; it be he who oppose I ; if anything be to be do in defence , I suppose Chadwick will do it . I suppose " 

 " oh , the archdeacon will see to that : be the young man twice his brother - in - law , the archdeacon will never be deter from do what he feel to be right . " 

 Mr Harding remind the bishop that the archdeacon and the reformer be not yet brother , and very probably never would be ; exact from he a promise that Eleanor 's name should not be mention in any discussion between the father bishop and son archdeacon respect the hospital ; and then take his departure , leave his poor old friend bewilder , amazed , and confound . 

 

 

 Chapter IV 

 Hiram 's Bedesmen 

 

 the party most interested in the movement which be about to set Barchester by the ear be not the foremost to discuss the merit of the question , as be often the case ; but when the bishop , the archdeacon , the warden , the steward , and Messrs Cox and Cummins , be all busy with the matter , each in his own way , it be not to be suppose that Hiram 's bedesman themselves be altogether passive spectator . Finney , the attorney , have be among they , ask sly question , and raise immoderate hope , create a party hostile to the warden , and establish a corps in the enemy 's camp , as he figuratively call it to himself . poor old man : whoever may be right or wrong by this inquiry , they at any rate will assuredly be only injure : to they it can only be an unmixed evil . how can their lot be improve ? all their want be supply ; every comfort be administer ; they have warm house , good clothe , plentiful diet , and rest after a life of labour ; and above all , that treasure so inestimable in decline year , a true and kind friend to listen to their sorrow , watch over their sickness , and administer comfort as regard this world , and the world to come ! 

 John Bold sometimes think of this , when he be talk loudly of the right of the bedesman , whom he have take under his protection ; but he quiet the suggestion within his breast with the high - sound name of justice : " Fiat justitia , ruat colum . " these old man should , by right , have one hundred pound a year instead of one shilling and sixpence a day , and the warden should have two hundred or three hundred pound instead of eight hundred pound . what be unjust must be wrong ; what be wrong should be right ; and if he decline the task , who else would do it ? 

 " each one of you be clearly entitle to one hundred pound a year by common law " : such have be the important whisper make by Finney into the ear of Abel Handy , and by he retail to his eleven brother . 

 too much must not be expect from the flesh and blood even of John Hiram 's bedesman , and the positive promise of one hundred a year to each of the twelve old man have its way with most of they . the great Bunce be not to be wile away , and be uphold in his orthodoxy by two adherent . Abel Handy , who be the leader of the aspirant after wealth , have , alas , a strong following . no less than five of the twelve soon believe that his view be just , make with their leader a moiety of the hospital . the other three , volatile unstable mind , vacillate between the two chieftain , now lead away by the hope of gold , now anxious to propitiate the power that still exist . 

 it have be propose to address a petition to the bishop as visitor , pray his lordship to see justice do to the legal recipient of John Hiram 's Charity , and to send copy of this petition and of the reply it would elicit to all the lead London paper , and thereby to obtain notoriety for the subject . this it be think would pave the way for ulterior legal proceeding . it would have be a great thing to have have the signature and mark of all the twelve injured legatee ; but this be impossible : Bunce would have cut his hand off soon than have sign it . it be then suggest by Finney that if even eleven could be induce to sanction the document , the one obstinate recusant might have be represent as unfit to judge on such a question , in fact , as be non compos mentis , and the petition would have be take as represent the feeling of the man . but this could not be do : Bunce 's friend be as firm as himself , and as yet only six cross adorn the document . it be the more provoking , as Bunce himself could write his name legibly , and one of those three doubt soul have for year boast of like power , and possess , indeed , a Bible , in which he be proud to show his name write by himself some thirty year ago " Job Skulpit ; " but it be think that Job Skulpit , have forget his scholarship , on that account recoil from the petition , and that the other doubter would follow as he lead they . a petition sign by half the hospital would have but a poor effect . 

 it be in Skulpit 's room that the petition be now lie , wait such additional signature as Abel Handy , by his eloquence , could obtain for it . the six mark it bear be duly attest , thus : 

 his 
 Abel X Handy , 
 mark 	 his 
 Gregy x Moody , 
 mark 	 his 
 Mathew X Spriggs , 
 mark 
  c. , and place be duly designate in pencil for those brother who be now expect to join : for Skulpit alone be leave a spot on which his genuine signature might be write in fair clerk - like style . Handy have bring in the document , and spread it out on the small deal table , and be now stand by it persuasive and eager . Moody have follow with an inkhorn , carefully leave behind by Finney ; and Spriggs bore aloft , as though it be a sword , a well - wear ink - black pen , which from time to time he endeavour to thrust into Skulpit 's unwilling hand . 

 with the learn man be his two abettor in indecision , William Gazy and Jonathan Crumple . if ever the petition be to be forward , now be the time , so say Mr Finney ; and great be the anxiety on the part of those whose one hundred pound a year , as they believe , mainly depend on the document in question . 

 " to be keep out of all that money , " as the avaricious Moody have mutter to his friend Handy , " by an old fool say that he can write his own name like his better ! " 

 " well , Job , " say Handy , try to impart to his own sour , ill - omen visage a smile of approbation , in which he greatly fail ; ' so you be ready now , Mr Finney say ; here be the place , d'ye see ; " and he put his huge brown finger down on the dirty paper ; " name or mark , it be all one . come along , old boy ; if so be we be to have the spending of this money , why the soon the well , that be my maxim . " 

 " to be sure , " say Moody . " we a'n't   none of we so young ; we can not   stay wait for old Catgut no long . " 

 it be thus these miscreant name our excellent friend . the nickname he could easily have forgive , but the allusion to the divine source of all his melodious joy would have irritate even he . let we hope he never know the insult . 

 " only think , old Billy Gazy , " say Spriggs , who rejoice in great youth than his brother , but have fall into a fire when drunk , have have one eye burn out , one cheek burn through , and one arm nearly burn off , and who , therefore , in regard to personal appearance , be not the most prepossessing of man , " a hundred a year , and all to spend ; only think , old Billy Gazy ; " and he give a hideous grin that show off his misfortune to their full extent . 

 Old Billy Gazy be not alive to much enthusiasm . even these golden prospect do not arouse he to do more than rub his poor old bleared eye with the cuff of his bedesman 's gown , and gently mutter : " he do not   know , not he ; he do not   know . " 

 " but you would know , Jonathan , " continue Spriggs , turn to the other friend of Skulpit 's , who be sit on a stool by the table , gaze vacantly at the petition . Jonathan Crumple be a meek , mild man , who have know well day ; his mean have be waste by bad child , who have make his life wretched till he have be receive into the hospital , of which he have not long be a member . since that day he have know neither sorrow nor trouble , and this attempt to fill he with new hope be , indeed , a cruelty . 

 " a hundred a year 's a nice thing , for sartain , neighbour Spriggs , " say he . " I once have nigh to that myself , but it do not   do I no good . " and he give a low sigh , as he think of the child of his own loin who have rob he . 

 " and shall have again , Joe , " say Handy ; " and will have someone to keep it right and tight for you this time . " 

 Crumple sigh again ; he have learn the impotency of worldly wealth , and would have be satisfy , if leave untempted , to have remain happy with one and sixpence a day . 

 " come , Skulpit , " repeat Handy , get impatient , " you be not go to go along with old Bunce in help that parson to rob we all . take the pen , man , and right yourself . well , " he add , see that Skulpit still doubt , " to see a man as be afraid to stand by hisself be , to my thinking , the mean thing as be . " 

 " sink they all for parson , say I , " growl Moody ; " hungry beggar , as never think their belly full till they have rob all and everything ! " 

 " who be to harm you , man ? " argue Spriggs . " let they look never so black at you , they can not   get you put out when you be once in ; no , not old Catgut , with calf to help he ! " I be sorry to say the archdeacon himself be designate by this scurrilous allusion to his nether person . 

 " a hundred a year to win , and nothing to lose , " continue Handy . " my eye ! well , how a man 's to doubt about sich a bit of cheese as that pass I ; but some man be timorous ; some man be bear with no pluck in they ; some man be cow at the very first sight of a gentleman 's coat and waistcoat . " 

 oh , Mr Harding , if you have but take the archdeacon 's advice in that dispute case , when Joe Mutters be this ungrateful demagogue 's rival candidate ! 

 " Afraid of a parson , " growl Moody , with a look of ineffable scorn . " I tell ye what I would be afraid of I would be afraid of not get nothing from them but just what I could take by might and right ; that be the most I would be afraid on of any parson of them all . " 

 " but , " say Skulpit , apologetically , " Mr Harding 's not so bad ; he do give we twopence a day , do not   he now ? " 

 " twopence a day ! " exclaim Spriggs with scorn , open awfully the red cavern of his lost eye . 

 " Twopence a day ! " mutter Moody with a curse ; ' sink his twopence ! " 

 " twopence a day ! " exclaim Handy ; " and I be to go , hat in hand , and thank a chap for twopence a day , when he owe I a hundred pound a year ; no , thank ye ; that may do for you , but it will not   for I . come , I say , Skulpit , be you a go to put your mark to this here paper , or be you not ? " 

 Skulpit look round in wretched indecision to his two friend . " what d'ye think , Bill Gazy ? " say he . 

 but Bill Gazy could not   think . he make a noise like the bleating of an old sheep , which be intend to express the agony of his doubt , and again mutter that " he do not   know . " 

 " take hold , you old cripple , " say Handy , thrust the pen into poor Billy 's hand : " there , so ugh ! you old fool , you have   be and smear it all , there , that will do for you ; that be as good as the good name as ever be write " : and a big blotch of ink be presume to represent Billy Gazy 's acquiescence . 

 " now , Jonathan , " say Handy , turn to Crumple . 

 " a hundred a year 's a nice thing , for sartain , " again argue Crumple . " well , neighbour Skulpit , how be it to be ? " 

 " oh , please yourself , " say skulpit : " please yourself , and you will please I . " 

 the pen be thrust into Crumple 's hand , and a faint , wandering , meaningless sign be make , betoken such sanction and authority as Jonathan Crumple be able to convey . 

 " Come , Job , " say Handy , soften by success , " do not   let them have to say that old Bunce have a man like you under his thumb , a man that always hold his head in the hospital as high as Bunce himself , though you be never ax to drink wine , and sneak , and tell lie about your better as he do . " 

 Skulpit hold the pen , and make little flourish with it in the air , but still hesitate . 

 " and if you will be say by I , " continue Handy , " you will not write your name to it at all , but just put your mark like the other ; " the cloud begin to clear from Skulpit 's brow ; " we all know you can do it if you like , but maybe you would not   like to seem uppish , you know . " 

 " well , the mark would be good , " say Skulpit . " one name and the rest mark would not   look well , would it ? " 

 " the bad in the world , " say Handy ; " there there " : and stoop over the petition , the learn clerk make a huge cross on the place leave for his signature . 

 " that be the game , " say Handy , triumphantly pocket the petition ; " we be all in a boat now , that is , the nine of we ; and as for old Bunce , and his crony , they may " but as he be hobble off to the door , with a crutch on one side and a stick on the other , he be meet by Bunce himself . 

 " well handy , and what may old Bunce do ? " say the gray - haired , upright senior . 

 Handy mutter something , and be depart ; but he be stop in the doorway by the huge frame of the newcomer . 

 " you have   be do no good here , Abel Handy , " say he , " ' tis plain to see that ; and ' tisn't   much good , I be think , you ever do . " 

 " I mind my own business , Master Bunce , " mutter the other , " and do you do the same . it be not   nothing to you what I do ; and your spying and poking here will not   do no good nor yet no harm . " 

 " I suppose then , Job , " continue Bunce , not notice his opponent , " if the truth must out , you have   stick your name to that petition of theirs at last . " 

 Skulpit look as though he be about to sink into the ground with shame . 

 " what be it to you what he sign ? " say Handy . " I suppose if we all want to ax for our own , we need not   ax leave of you first , Mr Bunce , big a man as you be ; and as to your sneaking in here , into Job 's room when he be busy , and where you be not want " 

 " I have   know Job Skulpit , man and boy , sixty year , " say Bunce , look at the man of whom he speak , " and that be ever since the day he be bear . I know the mother that bear he , when she and I be little wee thing , pick daisy together in the close yonder ; and I have   live under the same roof with he more nor ten year ; and after that I may come into his room without ax leave , and yet no sneak neither . " 

 " so you can , Mr Bunce , " say Skulpit ; ' so you can , any hour , day or night . " 

 " and I be free also to tell he my mind , " continue Bunce , look at the one man and address the other ; " and I tell he now that he be do a foolish and a wrong thing . he be turn his back upon one who be his good friend ; and be play the game of other , who care nothing for he , whether he be poor or rich , well or ill , alive or dead . a hundred a year ? be the lot of you soft enough to think that if a hundred a year be to be give , it be the like of you that will get it ? " and he point to Billy Gazy , Spriggs , and Crumple . " do any of we ever do anything worth half the money ? be it to make gentleman of we we be bring in here , when all the world turn against we , and we could not   long earn our daily bread ? a'n't   you all as rich in your way as he in his ? " and the orator point to the side on which the warden live . " a'n't   you get all you hop for , ay , and more than you hop for ? would not   each of you have give the dear limb of his body to secure that which now make you so unthankful ? " 

 " we want what John Hiram leave we , " say Handy . " we want what be ourn by law ; it do not   matter what we expect . what be ourn by law should be ourn , and by gole we will have it . " 

 " Law ! " say Bunce , with all the scorn he know how to command " law ! do ye ever know a poor man yet be the well for law , or for a lawyer ? will Mr Finney ever be as good to you , Job , as that man have be ? will he see to you when you be sick , and comfort you when you be wretched ? will he " 

 " no , nor give you port wine , old boy , on cold winter night ! he will not   do that , will he ? " ask Handy ; and laugh at the severity of his own wit , he and his colleague retire , carry with they , however , the now powerful petition . 

 there be no help for spilt milk ; and Mr Bunce could only retire to his own room , disgust at the frailty of human nature . Job Skulpit scratch his head ; Jonathan Crumple again remark , that , " for sartain , sure a hundred a year be very nice ; " and Billy Gazy again rub his eye , and lowly mutter that " he do not   know . " 

 

 

 Chapter V 

 Dr Grantly visit the Hospital 

 

 though doubt and hesitation disturb the rest of our poor warden , no such weakness perplex the nobler breast of his son - in - law . as the indomitable cock prepare for the combat sharpen his spur , shake his feather , and erect his comb , so do the archdeacon arrange his weapon for the come war , without misgive and without fear . that he be fully confident of the justice of his cause let no one doubt . many a man can fight his battle with good courage , but with a doubt conscience . such be not the case with Dr Grantly . he do not believe in the Gospel with more assurance than he do in the sacred justice of all ecclesiastical revenue . when he put his shoulder to the wheel to defend the income of the present and future precentor of Barchester , he be animate by as strong a sense of a holy cause , as that which give courage to a missionary in Africa , or enable a sister of mercy to give up the pleasure of the world for the ward of a hospital . he be about to defend the holy of holy from the touch of the profane ; to guard the citadel of his church from the most rampant of its enemy ; to put on his good armour in the good of fight , and secure , if possible , the comfort of his creed for come generation of ecclesiastical dignitary . such a work require no ordinary vigour ; and the archdeacon be , therefore , extraordinarily vigorous . it demand a buoyant courage , and a heart happy in its toil ; and the archdeacon 's heart be happy , and his courage be buoyant . 

 he know that he would not be able to animate his father - in - law with feeling like his own , but this do not much disturb he . he prefer to bear the brunt of the battle alone , and do not doubt that the warden would resign himself into his hand with passive submission . 

 " well , Mr Chadwick , " he say , walk into the steward 's office a day or two after the signing of the petition as commemorate in the last chapter : " anything from Cox and Cummins this morning ? " Mr Chadwick hand he a letter ; which he read , stroke the tight - gaitere calf of his right leg as he do so . Messrs Cox and Cummins merely say that they have as yet receive no notice from their adversary ; that they could recommend no preliminary step ; but that should any proceeding really be take by the bedesman , it would be expedient to consult that very eminent Queen 's Counsel , Sir Abraham Haphazard . 

 " I quite agree with they , " say Dr Grantly , refolde the letter . " I perfectly agree with they . Haphazard be no doubt the good man ; a thorough churchman , a sound conservative , and in every respect the good man we could get ; he be in the House , too , which be a great thing . " 

 Mr Chadwick quite agree . 

 " you remember how completely he put down that scoundrel Horseman about the Bishop of Beverley 's income ; how completely he set they all adrift in the earl 's case . " since the question of St Cross have be moot by the public , one noble lord have become " the earl , " par excellence , in the doctor 's estimation . " how he silence that fellow at Rochester . of course we must have Haphazard ; and I will tell you what , Mr Chadwick , we must take care to be in time , or the other party will forestall we . " 

 with all his admiration for Sir Abraham , the doctor seem to think it not impossible that that great man might be induce to lend his gigantic power to the side of the church 's enemy . 

 have settle this point to his satisfaction , the doctor step down to the hospital , to learn how matter be go on there ; and as he walk across the hallowed close , and look up at the raven who caw with a peculiar reverence as he wend his way , he think with increase acerbity of those whose impiety would venture to disturb the goodly grace of cathedral institution . 

 and who have not feel the same ? we believe that Mr Horseman himself would relent , and the spirit of Sir Benjamin Hall give way , be those great reformer to allow themselves to stroll by moonlight round the tower of some of our ancient church . who would not feel charity for a prebendary when walk the quiet length of that long aisle at Winchester , look at those decent house , that trim grass - plat , and feeling , as one must , the solemn , orderly comfort of the spot ! who could be hard upon a dean while wander round the sweet close of Hereford , and own that in that precinct , tone and colour , design and form , solemn tower and storied window , be all in unison , and all perfect ! who could lie bask in the cloister of Salisbury , and gaze on Jewel 's library and that unequalled spire , without feel that bishop should sometimes be rich ! 

 the tone of our archdeacon 's mind must not astonish we ; it have be the growth of century of church ascendancy ; and though some fungus now disfigure the tree , though there be much dead wood , for how much good fruit have not we to be thankful ? who , without remorse , can batter down the dead branch of an old oak , now useless , but , ah ! still so beautiful , or drag out the fragment of the ancient forest , without feel that they shelter the young plant , to which they be now summon to give way in a tone so peremptory and so harsh ? 

 the archdeacon , with all his virtue , be not a man of delicate feeling ; and after have make his morning salutation in the warden 's drawing - room , he do not scruple to commence an attack on " pestilent " John Bold in the presence of Miss Harding , though he rightly guess that that lady be not indifferent to the name of his enemy . 

 " nelly , my dear , fetch I my spectacle from the back room , " say her father , anxious to save both her blush and her feeling . 

 Eleanor bring the spectacle , while her father be try , in ambiguous phrase , to explain to her too - practical brother - in - law that it might be as well not to say anything about Bold before she , and then retreat . nothing have be explain to she about Bold and the hospital ; but , with a woman 's instinct she know that thing be go wrong . 

 " we must soon be do something , " commence the archdeacon , wipe his brow with a large , bright - coloured handkerchief , for he have feel busy , and have walk quick , and it be a broiling summer 's day . " of course you have hear of the petition ? " 

 Mr Harding own , somewhat unwillingly , that he have hear of it . 

 " well ! " the archdeacon look for some expression of opinion , but none come , he continue , " we must be do something , you know ; we must not   allow these people to cut the ground from under we while we sit look on . " the archdeacon , who be a practical man , allow himself the use of everyday expressive mode of speech when among his close intimate , though no one could soar into a more intricate labyrinth of refined phraseology when the church be the subject , and his low brother be his auditor . 

 the warden still look mutely in his face , make the slight possible pass with an imaginary fiddle bow , and stop , as he do so , sundry imaginary string with the finger of his other hand . ' twas his constant consolation in conversational trouble . while these vex he sorely , the pass would be short and slow , and the upper hand would not be see to work ; nay , the string on which it operate would sometimes lie conceal in the musician 's pocket , and the instrument on which he play would be beneath his chair ; but as his spirit warm to the subject , as his trusting heart look to the bottom of that which vex he , would see its clear way out , he would rise to a high melody , sweep the unseen string with a bold hand , and swiftly finger the cord from his neck , down along his waistcoat , and up again to his very ear , create an ecstatic strain of perfect music , audible to himself and to St Cecilia , and not without effect . 

 " I quite agree with Cox and Cummins , " continue the archdeacon . " they say we must secure Sir Abraham Haphazard . I shall not have the slight fear in leave the case in Sir Abraham 's hand . " 

 the warden play the slow and sad of tune . it be but a dirge on one string . 

 " I think Sir Abraham will not be long in let Master Bold know what he be about . I fancy I hear Sir Abraham cross - question he at the Common Pleas . " 

 the warden thought of his income be thus discuss , his modest life , his daily habit , and his easy work ; and nothing issue from that single cord , but a low wail of sorrow . " I suppose they have   send this petition up to my father . " the warden do not   know ; he imagine they would do so this very day . 

 " what I can not   understand be , how you let they do it , with such a command as you have in the place , or should have with such a man as Bunce . I can not understand why you let they do it . " 

 " do what ? " ask the warden . 

 " why , listen to this fellow Bold , and that other low pettifogger , Finney ; and get up this petition too . why do not   you tell Bunce to destroy the petition ? " 

 " that would have be hardly wise , " say the warden . 

 " wise ; yes , it would have be very wise if they have do it among themselves . I must go up to the palace and answer it now , I suppose . it be a very short answer they will get , I can tell you . " 

 " but why should not   they petition , doctor ? " 

 " why should not   they ! " respond the archdeacon , in a loud brazen voice , as though all the man in the hospital be expect to hear he through the wall ; " why should not   they ? I will let they know why they should not ; by the bye , warden , I would like to say a few word to they all together . " 

 the warden 's mind misgave he , and even for a moment he forget to play . he by no mean wish to delegate to his son - in - law his place and authority of warden ; he have expressly determine not to interfere in any step which the man might wish to take in the matter under dispute ; he be most anxious neither to accuse they nor to defend himself . all these thing he be aware the archdeacon would do in his behalf , and that not in the mild manner ; and yet he know not how to refuse the permission request . 

 " I would so much soon remain quiet in the matter , " say he , in an apologetic voice . 

 " quiet ! " say the archdeacon , still speak with his brazen trumpet ; " do you wish to be ruin in quiet ? " 

 " why , if I be to be ruin , certainly . " 

 " Nonsense , warden ; I tell you something must be do ; we must act ; just let I ring the bell , and send the man word that I will speak to they in the quad . " 

 Mr Harding know not how to resist , and the disagreeable order be give . the quad , as it be familiarly call , be a small quadrangle , open on one side to the river , and surround on the other by the high wall of Mr Harding 's garden , by one gable end of Mr Harding 's house , and by the end of the row of building which form the residence of the bedesman . it be flag all round , and the centre be stone ; small stone gutter run from the four corner of the square to a grating in the centre ; and attach to the end of Mr Harding 's house be a conduit with four cock cover over from the weather , at which the old man get their water , and very generally perform their morning toilet . it be a quiet , sombre place , shade over by the tree of the warden 's garden . on the side towards the river , there stand a row of stone seat , on which the old man would sit and gaze at the little fish , as they flit by in the run stream . on the other side of the river be a rich , green meadow , run up to and join the deanery , and as little open to the public as the garden of the dean itself . nothing , therefore , could be more private than the quad of the hospital ; and it be there that the archdeacon determine to convey to they his sense of their refractory proceeding . 

 the servant soon bring in word that the man be assemble in the quad , and the archdeacon , big with his purpose , rise to address they . 

 " well , warden , of course you be come , " say he , see that Mr Harding do not prepare to follow he . 

 " I wish you would excuse I , " say Mr Harding . 

 " for heaven 's sake , do not   let we have division in the camp , " reply the archdeacon : " let we have a long pull and a strong pull , but above all a pull all together ; come , warden , come ; do not   be afraid of your duty . " 

 Mr Harding be afraid ; he be afraid that he be be lead to do that which be not his duty ; he be not , however , strong enough to resist , so he get up and follow his son - in - law . 

 the old man be assemble in group in the quadrangle eleven of they at least , for poor old Johnny Bell be bed - ride , and could not   come ; he have , however , put his mark to the petition , as one of Handy 's early follower . ' tis true he could not move from the bed where he lay ; ' tis true he have no friend on earth , but those whom the hospital contain ; and of those the warden and his daughter be the most constant and most appreciate ; ' tis true that everything be administer to he which his fail body could require , or which his faint appetite could enjoy ; but still his dull eye have glisten for a moment at the idea of possess a hundred pound a year " to his own cheek , " as Abel Handy have eloquently express it ; and poor old Johnny Bell have greedily put his mark to the petition . 

 when the two clergyman appear , they all uncover their head . Handy be slow to do it , and hesitate ; but the black coat and waistcoat of which he have speak so irreverently in Skulpit 's room , have its effect even on he , and he too doff his hat . bunce , advance before the other , bow lowly to the archdeacon , and with affectionate reverence express his wish , that the warden and Miss Eleanor be quite well ; " and the doctor 's lady , " he add , turn to the archdeacon , " and the child at Plumstead , and my lord ; " and have make his speech , he also retire among the other , and take his place with the rest upon the stone bench . 

 as the archdeacon stand up to make his speech , erect in the middle of that little square , he look like an ecclesiastical statue place there , as a fitting impersonation of the church militant here on earth ; his shovel hat , large , new , and well - pronounce , a churchman 's hat in every inch , declare the profession as plainly as do the Quaker 's broad brim ; his heavy eyebrow , large open eye , and full mouth and chin express the solidity of his order ; the broad chest , amply cover with fine cloth , tell how well to do be its estate ; one hand ensconce within his pocket , evince the practical hold which our mother church keep on her temporal possession ; and the other , loose for action , be ready to fight if need be in her defence ; and , below these , the decorous breech , and neat black gaiter show so admirably that well - turn leg , betoken the decency , the outward beauty and grace of our church establishment . 

 " now , my man , " he begin , when he have settle himself well in his position , " I want to say a few word to you . your good friend , the warden here , and myself , and my lord the bishop , on whose behalf I wish to speak to you , would all be very sorry , very sorry indeed , that you should have any just ground of complaint . any just ground of complaint on your part would be remove at once by the warden , or by his lordship , or by I on his behalf , without the necessity of any petition on your part . " here the orator stop for a moment , expect that some little murmur of applause would show that the weak of the man be begin to give way ; but no such murmur come . Bunce , himself , even sit with closed lip , mute and unsatisfactory . " without the necessity of any petition at all , " he repeat . " I be tell you have address a petition to my lord . " he pause for a reply from the man , and after a while , Handy pluck up courage and say , " yes , we have . " 

 " you have address a petition to my lord , in which , as I be inform , you express an opinion that you do not receive from Hiram 's estate all that be your due . " here most of the man express their assent . " now what be it you ask for ? what be it you want that you hav'n't   get here ? what be it " 

 " a hundred a year , " mutter old Moody , with a voice as if it come out of the ground . 

 " a hundred a year ! " ejaculate the archdeacon militant , defy the impudence of these claimant with one hand stretch out and close , while with the other he tightly grasp , and secure within his breech pocket , that symbol of the church 's wealth which his own loose half - crown not unaptly represent . " a hundred a year ! why , my man , you must be mad ; and you talk about John Hiram 's will ! when John Hiram build a hospital for wear - out old man , wear - out old labour man , infirm old man past their work , cripple , blind , bed - ride , and such like , do you think he mean to make gentleman of they ? do you think John Hiram intend to give a hundred a year to old single man , who earn perhaps two shilling or half - a - crown a day for themselves and family in the good of their time ? no , my man , I will tell you what John Hiram mean : he mean that twelve poor old wear - out labourer , man who could no long support themselves , who have no friend to support they , who must starve and perish miserably if not protect by the hand of charity ; he mean that twelve such man as these should come in here in their poverty and wretchedness , and find within these wall shelter and food before their death , and a little leisure to make their peace with God . that be what John Hiram mean : you have not read John Hiram 's will , and I doubt whether those wicked man who be advise you have do so . I have ; I know what his will be ; and I tell you that that be his will , and that that be his intention . " 

 not a sound come from the eleven bedesman , as they sit listen to what , accord to the archdeacon , be their intend estate . they grimly star upon his burly figure , but do not then express , by word or sign , the anger and disgust to which such language be sure to give rise . 

 " now let I ask you , " he continue : " do you think you be bad off than John Hiram intend to make you ? have you not shelter , and food , and leisure ? have you not much more ? have you not every indulgence which you be capable of enjoy ? have you not twice well food , twice a well bed , ten time more money in your pocket than you be ever able to earn for yourself before you be lucky enough to get into this place ? and now you send a petition to the bishop , ask for a hundred pound a year ! I tell you what , my friend ; you be delude , and make fool of by wicked man who be act for their own end . you will never get a hundred penny a year more than what you have now : it be very possible that you may get less ; it be very possible that my lord the bishop , and your warden , may make change " 

 " no , no , no , " interrupt Mr Harding , who have be listen with indescribable misery to the tirade of his son - in - law ; " no , my friend . I want no change , at least no change that shall make you bad off than you now be , as long as you and I live together . " 

 " God bless you , Mr Harding , " say Bunce ; and " God bless you , Mr Harding , God bless you , sir : we know you be always our friend , " be exclaim by enough of the man to make it appear that the sentiment be general . 

 the archdeacon have be interrupt in his speech before he have quite finish it ; but he feel that he could not recommence with dignity after this little ebullition , and he lead the way back into the garden , follow by his father - in - law . 

 " well , " say he , as soon as he find himself within the cool retreat of the warden 's garden ; " I think I speak to they plainly . " and he wipe the perspiration from his brow ; for make a speech under a broiling mid - day sun in summer , in a full suit of thick black cloth , be warm work . 

 " yes , you be plain enough , " reply the warden , in a tone which do not express approbation . 

 " and that be everything , " say the other , who be clearly well satisfied with himself ; " that be everything : with those sort of people one must be plain , or one will not be understand . now , I think they do understand I ; I think they know what I mean . " 

 the warden agree . he certainly think they have understand to the full what have be say to they . 

 " they know pretty well what they have to expect from we ; they know how we shall meet any refractory spirit on their part ; they know that we be not afraid of they . and now I will just step into Chadwick 's , and tell he what I have   do ; and then I will go up to the palace , and answer this petition of theirs . " 

 the warden 's mind be very full , full nearly to overcharge itself ; and have it do so , have he allow himself to speak the thought which be work within he , he would indeed have astonish the archdeacon by the reprobation he would have express as to the proceeding of which he have be so unwilling a witness . but different feeling keep he silent ; he be as yet afraid of differ from his son - in - law ; he be anxious beyond measure to avoid even a semblance of rupture with any of his order , and be painfully fearful of have to come to an open quarrel with any person on any subject . his life have hitherto be so quiet , so free from strife ; his little early trouble have require nothing but passive fortitude ; his subsequent prosperity have never force upon he any active care , have never bring he into disagreeable contact with anyone . he feel that he would give almost anything , much more than he know he ought to do , to relieve himself from the storm which he fear be come . it be so hard that the pleasant water of his little stream should be disturb and muddy by rough hand ; that his quiet path should be make a battlefield ; that the unobtrusive corner of the world which have be allot to he , as though by Providence , should be invade and desecrate , and all within it make miserable and unsound . 

 money he have none to give ; the knack of put guineas together have never belong to he ; but how willingly , with what a foolish easiness , with what happy alacrity , would he have abandon the half of his income for all time to come , could he by so do have quietly dispel the cloud that be gather over he , could he have thus compromise the matter between the reformer and the conservative , between his possible son - in - law , Bold , and his positive son - in - law , the archdeacon . 

 and this compromise would not have be make from any prudential motive of save what would yet remain , for Mr Harding still feel little doubt but he should be leave for life in quiet possession of the good thing he have , if he choose to retain they . no ; he would have do so from the sheer love of quiet , and from a horror of be make the subject of public talk . he have very often be move to pity , to that inward weeping of the heart for other ' woe ; but none have he ever pity more than that old lord , whose almost fabulous wealth , draw from his church preferment , have become the subject of so much opprobrium , of such public scorn ; that wretche clerical octogenarian Crosus , whom man would not allow to die in peace , whom all the world unite to decry and to abhor . 

 be he to suffer such a fate ? be his humble name to be bandy in man 's mouth , as the gormandiser of the resource of the poor , as of one who have filch from the charity of other age wealth which have be intend to relieve the old and the infirm ? be he to be gibbet in the press , to become a byword for oppression , to be name as an example of the greed of the english church ? should it ever be say that he have rob those old man , whom he so truly and so tenderly love in his heart of heart ? as he slowly pace , hour after hour , under those noble lime - tree , turn these sad thought within he , he become all but fix in his resolve that some great step must be take to relieve he from the risk of so terrible a fate . 

 in the meanwhile , the archdeacon , with contented mind and unruffled spirit , go about his business . he say a word or two to Mr Chadwick , and then find , as he expect , the petition lie in his father 's library , he write a short answer to the man , in which he tell they that they have no evil to redress , but rather great mercy for which to be thankful ; and have see the bishop sign it , he get into his brougham and return home to Mrs Grantly , and Plumstead Episcopi . 

 

 

 Chapter VI 

 the Warden 's Tea Party 

 

 after much painful doubt , on one thing only could Mr Harding resolve . he determine that at any rate he would take no offence , and that he would make this question no cause of quarrel either with Bold or with the bedesman . in furtherance of this resolution , he himself write a note to Mr Bold , the same afternoon , invite he to meet a few friend and hear some music on an evening name in the next week . have not this little party be promise to Eleanor , in his present state of mind he would probably have avoid such gaiety ; but the promise have be give , the invitation be to be write , and when Eleanor consult her father on the subject , she be not ill pleased to hear he say , " oh , I be think of Bold , so I take it into my head to write to he myself , but you must write to his sister . " 

 Mary Bold be old than her brother , and , at the time of our story , be just over thirty . she be not an unattractive young woman , though by no mean beautiful . her great merit be the kindliness of her disposition . she be not very clever , nor very animate , nor have she apparently the energy of her brother ; but she be guide by a high principle of right and wrong ; her temper be sweet , and her fault be few in number than her virtue . those who casually meet Mary Bold think little of she ; but those who know she well love she well , and the long they know she the more they love she . among those who be fondest of she be Eleanor Harding ; and though Eleanor have never openly talk to she of her brother , each understand the other 's feeling about he . the brother and sister be sit together when the two note be bring in . 

 " how odd , " say Mary , " that they should send two note . well , if Mr Harding become fashionable , the world be go to change . " 

 her brother understand immediately the nature and intention of the peace - offering ; but it be not so easy for he to behave well in the matter , as it be for Mr Harding . it be much less difficult for the sufferer to be generous than for the oppressor . John Bold feel that he could not go to the warden 's party : he never love Eleanor well than he do now ; he have never so strongly feel how anxious he be to make she his wife as now , when so many obstacle to his do so appear in view . yet here be her father himself , as it be , clear away those very obstacle , and still he feel that he could not go to the house any more as an open friend . 

 as he sit think of these thing with the note in his hand , his sister be wait for his decision . 

 " well , " say she , " I suppose we must write separate answer , and both say we shall be very happy . " 

 " you will go , of course , Mary , " say he ; to which she readily assent . " I can not , " he continue , look serious and gloomy . " I wish I could , with all my heart . " 

 " and why not , John ? " say she . she have as yet hear nothing of the new - find abuse which her brother be about to reform ; at least nothing which connect it with her brother 's name . 

 he sit think for a while till he determine that it would be good to tell she at once what it be that he be about : it must be do soon or later . 

 " I fear I can not go to Mr Harding 's house any more as a friend , just at present . " 

 " oh , John ! why not ? ah , you have   quarrel with Eleanor ! " 

 " no , indeed , " say he ; " I have   no quarrel with she as yet . " 

 " what be it , John ? " say she , look at he with an anxious , love face , for she know well how much of his heart be there in that house which he say he could no long enter . 

 " why , " say he at last , " I have   take up the case of these twelve old man of Hiram 's Hospital , and of course that bring I into contact with Mr Harding . I may have to oppose he , interfere with he , perhaps injure he . " 

 Mary look at he steadily for some time before she commit herself to reply , and then merely ask he what he mean to do for the old man . 

 " why , it be a long story , and I do not   know that I can make you understand it . John Hiram make a will , and leave his property in charity for certain poor old man , and the proceed , instead of go to the benefit of these man , go chiefly into the pocket of the warden and the bishop 's steward . " 

 " and you mean to take away from Mr Harding his share of it ? " 

 " I do not   know what I mean yet . I mean to inquire about it . I mean to see who be entitle to this property . I mean to see , if I can , that justice be do to the poor of the city of Barchester generally , who be , in fact , the legatee under the will . I mean , in short , to put the matter right , if I can . " 

 " and why be you to do this , John ? " 

 " you might ask the same question of anybody else , " say he ; " and accord to that the duty of right these poor man would belong to nobody . if we be to act on that principle , the weak be never to be protect , injustice be never to be oppose , and no one be to struggle for the poor ! " and Bold begin to comfort himself in the warmth of his own virtue . 

 " but be there no one to do this but you , who have know Mr Harding so long ? surely , John , as a friend , as a young friend , so much young than Mr Harding " 

 " that be woman 's logic , all over , Mary . what have age to do with it ? another man might plead that he be too old ; and as to his friendship , if the thing itself be right , private motif should never be allow to interfere . because I esteem Mr Harding , be that a reason that I should neglect a duty which I owe to these old man ? or should I give up a work which my conscience tell I be a good one , because I regret the loss of his society ? " 

 " and Eleanor , John ? " say the sister , look timidly into her brother 's face . 

 " Eleanor , that is , Miss Harding , if she think fit , that is , if her father or , rather , if she or , indeed , he , if they find it necessary but there be no necessity now to talk about Eleanor Harding ; but this I will say , that if she have the kind of spirit for which I give her credit , she will not condemn I for do what I think to be a duty . " and Bold console himself with the consolation of a Roman . 

 Mary sit silent for a while , till at last her brother remind she that the note must be answer , and she get up , and place her desk before she , take out her pen and paper , write on it slowly : 

 
  Pakenham Villas 
  Tuesday morning 

 my dear Eleanor , 

 I 
 

 and then stop , and look at her brother . 

 " well , Mary , why do not   you write it ? " 

 " oh , John , " say she , " dear John , pray think well of this . " 

 " think well of what ? " say he . 

 " of this about the hospital , of all this about Mr Harding , of what you say about those old man . nothing can call upon you , no duty can require you to set yourself against your old , your good friend . oh , John , think of Eleanor . you will break her heart , and your own . " 

 " Nonsense , Mary ; Miss Harding 's heart be as safe as your . " 

 " pray , pray , for my sake , John , give it up . you know how dearly you love she . " and she come and kneel before he on the rug . " pray give it up . you be go to make yourself , and she , and her father miserable : you be go to make we all miserable . and for what ? for a dream of justice . you will never make those twelve man happy than they now be . " 

 " you do not   understand it , my dear girl , " say he , smooth her hair with his hand . 

 " I do understand it , John . I understand that this be a chimera , a dream that you have get . I know well that no duty can require you to do this mad this suicidal thing . I know you love Eleanor Harding with all your heart , and I tell you now that she love you as well . if there be a plain , a positive duty before you , I would be the last to bid you neglect it for any woman 's love ; but this ; oh , think again , before you do anything to make it necessary that you and Mr Harding should be at variance . " he do not answer , as she kneel there , lean on his knee , but by his face she think that he be inclined to yield . " at any rate let I say that you will go to this party . at any rate do not break with they while your mind be in doubt . " and she get up , hop to conclude her note in the way she desire . 

 " my mind be not in doubt , " at last he say , rise . " I could never respect myself again be I to give way now , because Eleanor Harding be beautiful . I do love she : I would give a hand to hear she tell I what you have say , speak on her behalf ; but I can not for her sake go back from the task which I have commence . I hope she may hereafter acknowledge and respect my motif , but I can not now go as a guest to her father 's house . " and the Barchester Brutus go out to fortify his own resolution by meditation on his own virtue . 

 Poor Mary Bold sit down , and sadly finish her note , say that she would herself attend the party , but that her brother be unavoidably prevent from do so . I fear that she do not admire as she should have do the self - devotion of his singular virtue . 

 the party go off as such party do . there be fat old lady , in fine silk dress , and slim young lady , in gauzy muslin frock ; old gentleman stand up with their back to the empty fire - place , look by no mean so comfortable as they would have do in their own arm - chair at home ; and young gentleman , rather stiff about the neck , cluster near the door , not as yet sufficiently in courage to attack the muslin frock , who await the battle , draw up in a semicircular array . the warden endeavour to induce a charge , but fail signally , not have the tact of a general ; his daughter do what she could to comfort the force under her command , who take in refreshing ration of cake and tea , and patiently look for the coming engagement : but she herself , Eleanor , have no spirit for the work ; the only enemy whose lance she care to encounter be not there , and she and other be somewhat dull . 

 Loud above all voice be hear the clear sonorous tone of the archdeacon as he dilate to brother parson of the danger of the church , of the fearful rumour of mad reform even at Oxford , and of the damnable heresy of Dr Whiston . 

 soon , however , sweet sound begin timidly to make themselves audible . little movement be make in a quarter notable for round stool and music stand . wax candle be arrange in sconce , big book be bring from hidden recess , and the work of the evening commence . 

 how often be those peg twist and re - twisted before our friend find that he have twist they enough ; how many discordant scrape give promise of the come harmony . how much the muslin flutter and crumple before Eleanor and another nymph be duly seat at the piano ; how closely do that tall Apollo pack himself against the wall , with his flute , long as himself , extend high over the head of his pretty neighbour ; into how small a corner creep that round and florid little minor canon , and there with skill amazing find room to tune his accustomed fiddle ! 

 and now the crash begin : away they go in full flow of harmony together , up hill and down dale , now louder and louder , then lower and low ; now loud , as though stir the battle ; then low , as though mourn the slain . in all , through all , and above all , be hear the violoncello . ah , not for nothing be those peg so twisted and re - twisted ; listen , listen ! now alone that sad of instrument tell its touching tale . silent , and in awe , stand fiddle , flute , and piano , to hear the sorrow of their wail brother . ' tis but for a moment : before the melancholy of those low note have be fully realise , again come the full force of all the band ; down go the pedal , away rush twenty finger scour over the bass note with all the impetus of passion . Apollo blow till his stiff neckcloth be no well than a rope , and the minor canon work with both arm till he fall in a syncope of exhaustion against the wall . 

 how come it that now , when all should be silent , when courtesy , if not taste , should make man listen , how be it at this moment the black - coat corp leave their retreat and begin skirmish ? one by one they creep forth , and fire off little gun timidly , and without precision . ah , my man , effort such as these will take no city , even though the enemy should be never so open to assault . at length a more deadly artillery be bring to bear ; slowly , but with effect , the advance be make ; the muslin rank be break , and fall into confusion ; the formidable array of chair give way ; the battle be no long between oppose regiment , but hand to hand , and foot to foot with single combatant , as in the glorious day of old , when fighting be really noble . in corner , and under the shadow of curtain , behind sofa and half hide by door , in retire window , and shelter by hang tapestry , be blow give and return , fatal , incurable , deal death . 

 apart from this another combat arise , more sober and more serious . the archdeacon be engage against two prebendary , a pursy full - blow rector assist he , in all the peril and all the enjoyment of short whist . with solemn energy do they watch the shuffled pack , and , all - expectant , eye the come trump . with what anxious nicety do they arrange their card , jealous of each other 's eye ! why be that lean doctor so slow , cadaverous man with hollow jaw and sunken eye , ill beseem the richness of his mother church ! ah , why so slow , thou meagre doctor ? see how the archdeacon , speechless in his agony , deposit on the board his card , and look to heaven or to the ceiling for support . Hark , how he sigh , as with thumb in his waistcoat pocket he seem to signify that the end of such torment be not yet even nigh at hand ! Vain be the hope , if hope there be , to disturb that meagre doctor . with care precise he place every card , weigh well the value of each mighty ace , each guard king , and comfort - give queen ; speculate on knave and ten , count all his suit , and set his price upon the whole . at length a card be lead , and quick three other fall upon the board . the little doctor lead again , while with lustrous eye his partner absorb the trick . now thrice have this be do , thrice have constant fortune favour the brace of prebendary , ere the archdeacon rouse himself to the battle ; but at the fourth assault he pin to the earth a prostrate king , lay low his crown and sceptre , bushy beard , and lower brow , with a poor deuce . 

 " as David do Goliath , " say the archdeacon , push over the four card to his partner . and then a trump be lead , then another trump ; then a king , and then an ace , and then a long ten , which bring down from the meagre doctor his only remain tower of strength his cherished queen of trumps . 

 " what , no second club ? " say the archdeacon to his partner . 

 " only one club , " mutter from his inmost stomach the pursy rector , who sit there red - faced , silent , impervious , careful , a safe but not a brilliant ally . 

 but the archdeacon care not for many club , or for none . he dash out his remain card with a speed most annoying to his antagonist , push over to they some four card as their allotted portion , shove the remainder across the table to the red - faced rector ; call out " two by card and two by honour , and the odd trick last time , " mark a treble under the candle - stick , and have deal round the second pack before the meagre doctor have calculate his loss . 

 and so go off the warden 's party , and man and woman arrange shawl and shoe declare how pleasant it have be ; and Mrs Goodenough , the red - faced rector 's wife , press the warden 's hand , declare she have never enjoy herself well ; which show how little pleasure she allow herself in this world , as she have sit the whole evening through in the same chair without occupation , not speak , and unspeak to . and Matilda Johnson , when she allow young Dickson of the bank to fasten her cloak round her neck , think that two hundred pound a year and a little cottage would really do for happiness ; besides , he be sure to be manager some day . and Apollo , fold his flute into his pocket , feel that he have acquit himself with honour ; and the archdeacon pleasantly jingle his gain ; but the meagre doctor go off without much audible speech , mutter ever and anon as he go , " three and thirty point ! " " three and thirty point ! " 

 and so they all be go , and Mr Harding be leave alone with his daughter . 

 what have pass between Eleanor Harding and Mary Bold need not be tell . it be indeed a matter of thankfulness that neither the historian nor the novelist hear all that be say by their hero or heroine , or how would three volume or twenty suffice ! in the present case so little of this sort have I overhear , that I live in hope of finish my work within 300 page , and of complete that pleasant task a novel in one volume ; but something have pass between they , and as the warden blow out the wax candle , and put his instrument into its case , his daughter stand sad and thoughtful by the empty fire - place , determine to speak to her father , but irresolute as to what she would say . 

 " well , Eleanor , " say he , " be you for bed ? " 

 " yes , " say she , move , " I suppose so ; but papa Mr Bold be not here tonight ; do you know why not ? " 

 " he be ask ; I write to he myself , " say the warden . 

 " but do you know why he do not come , papa ? " 

 " well , Eleanor , I could guess ; but it be no use guess at such thing , my dear . what make you look so earnest about it ? " 

 " oh , papa , do tell I , " she exclaim , throw her arm round he , and look into his face ; " what be it he be go to do ? what be it all about ? be there any any any " she do not   well know what word to use " any danger ? " 

 " Danger , my dear , what sort of danger ? " 

 " danger to you , danger of trouble , and of loss , and of Oh , papa , why have not   you tell I of all this before ? " 

 Mr Harding be not the man to judge harshly of anyone , much less of the daughter whom he now love well than any live creature ; but still he do judge she wrongly at this moment . he know that she love John Bold ; he fully sympathise in her affection ; day after day he think more of the matter , and , with the tender care of a love father , try to arrange in his own mind how matter might be so manage that his daughter 's heart should not be make the sacrifice to the dispute which be likely to exist between he and Bold . now , when she speak to he for the first time on the subject , it be natural that he should think more of she than of himself , and that he should imagine that her own care , and not his , be trouble she . 

 he stand silent before her awhile , as she gaze up into his face , and then kiss her forehead he place she on the sofa . 

 " tell I , nelly , " he say   he only call she Nelly in his kind , softest , sweetest mood , and yet all his mood be kind and sweet , " tell I , nelly , do you like Mr Bold much ? " 

 she be quite take aback by the question . I will not say that she have forget herself , and her own love in think about John Bold , and while converse with Mary : she certainly have not do so . she have be sick at heart to think that a man of whom she could not but own to herself that she love he , of whose regard she have be so proud , that such a man should turn against her father to ruin he . she have feel her vanity hurt , that his affection for she have not keep he from such a course ; have he really care for she , he would not have risk her love by such an outrage . but her main fear have be for her father , and when she speak of danger , it be of danger to he and not to herself . 

 she be take aback by the question altogether : " do I like he , papa ? " 

 " yes , Nelly , do you like he ? why should not   you like he ? but that be a poor word ; do you love he ? " she sit still in his arm without answer he . she certainly have not prepare herself for an avowal of affection , intend , as she have do , to abuse John Bold herself , and to hear her father do so also . " come , my love , " say he , " let we make a clean breast of it : do you tell I what concern yourself , and I will tell you what concern I and the hospital . " 

 and then , without wait for an answer , he describe to she , as he well could , the accusation that be make about Hiram 's will ; the claim which the old man put forward ; what he consider the strength and what the weakness of his own position ; the course which Bold have take , and that which he presume he be about to take ; and then by degree , without further question , he presume on the fact of Eleanor 's love , and speak of that love as a feeling which he could in no way disapprove : he apologise for Bold , excuse what he be do ; nay , praise he for his energy and intention ; make much of his good quality , and harp on none of his foible ; then , remind his daughter how late it be , and comfort she with much assurance which he hardly feel himself , he send she to her room , with flow eye and a full heart . 

 when Mr Harding meet his daughter at breakfast the next morning , there be no further discussion on the matter , nor be the subject mention between they for some day . soon after the party Mary Bold call at the hospital , but there be various person in the drawing - room at the time , and she therefore say nothing about her brother . on the day follow , John Bold meet Miss Harding in one of the quiet , sombre , shade walk of the close . he be most anxious to see she , but unwilling to call at the warden 's house , and have in truth waylay she in her private haunt . 

 " my sister tell I , " say he , abruptly hurry on with his premeditated speech , " my sister tell I that you have a delightful party the other evening . I be so sorry I could not be there . " 

 " we be all sorry , " say Eleanor , with dignified composure . 

 " I believe , Miss Harding , you understand why , at this moment " and Bold hesitate , muttered , stop , commence his explanation again , and again break down . 

 Eleanor would not help he in the least . 

 " I think my sister explain to you , Miss Harding ? " 

 " pray do not   apologise , Mr Bold ; my father will , I be sure , always be glad to see you , if you like to come to the house now as formerly ; nothing have occur to alter his feeling : of your own view you be , of course , the good judge . " 

 " your father be all that be kind and generous ; he always be so ; but you , Miss Harding , yourself I hope you will not judge I harshly , because " 

 " Mr Bold , " say she , " you may be sure of one thing ; I shall always judge my father to be right , and those who oppose he I shall judge to be wrong . if those who do not know he oppose he , I shall have charity enough to believe that they be wrong , through error of judgment ; but should I see he attack by those who ought to know he , and to love he , and revere he , of such I shall be constrain to form a different opinion . " and then curtsey low she sail on , leave her lover in anything but a happy state of mind . 

 

 

 Chapter VII 

 the Jupiter 

 

 Though Eleanor Harding ride off from John Bold on a high horse , it must not be suppose that her heart be so elate as her demeanour . in the first place , she have a natural repugnance to lose her lover ; and in the next , she be not quite so sure that she be in the right as she pretend to be . her father have tell she , and that now repeatedly , that Bold be do nothing unjust or ungenerous ; and why then should she rebuke he , and throw he off , when she feel herself so ill able to bear his loss ? but such be human nature , and young - lady - nature especially . 

 as she walk off from he beneath the shady elm of the close , her look , her tone , every motion and gesture of her body , belie her heart ; she would have give the world to have take he by the hand , to have reason with he , persuade he , cajole he , coax he out of his project ; to have overcome he with all her female artillery , and to have redeem her father at the cost of herself ; but pride would not let she do this , and she leave he without a look of love or a word of kindness . 

 have Bold be judge of another lover and of another lady , he might have understand all this as well as we do ; but in matter of love man do not see clearly in their own affair . they say that faint heart never win fair lady ; and it be amazing to I how fair lady be win , so faint be often man 's heart ! be it not for the kindness of their nature , that see the weakness of our courage they will occasionally descend from their impregnable fortress , and themselves aid we in effect their own defeat , too often would they escape unconquered if not unscathed , and free of body if not of heart . 

 Poor Bold creep off quite crestfallen ; he feel that as regard Eleanor Harding his fate be seal , unless he could consent to give up a task to which he have pledge himself , and which indeed it would not be easy for he to give up . lawyer be engage , and the question have to a certain extent be take up by the public ; besides , how could a high - spirited girl like Eleanor Harding really learn to love a man for neglect a duty which he assume ! could she allow her affection to be purchase at the cost of his own self - respect ? 

 as regard the issue of his attempt at reformation in the hospital , Bold have no reason hitherto to be discontent with his success . all Barchester be by the ear about it . the bishop , the archdeacon , the warden , the steward , and several other clerical ally , have daily meeting , discuss their tactic , and prepare for the great attack . Sir Abraham Haphazard have be consult , but his opinion be not yet receive : copy of Hiram 's will , copy of warden ' journal , copy of lease , copy of account , copy of everything that could be copy , and of some that could not , have be send to he ; and the case be assume most creditable dimension . but , above all , it have be mention in the daily Jupiter . that all - powerful organ of the press in one of its lead thunderbolt launch at St Cross , have thus remark : " another case , of small dimension indeed , but of similar import , be now likely to come under public notice . we be inform that the warden or master of an old almshouse attach to Barchester Cathedral be in receipt of twenty - five time the annual income appoint for he by the will of the founder , while the sum yearly expend on the absolute purpose of the charity have always remain fix . in other word , the legatee under the founder 's will have receive no advantage from the increase in the value of the property during the last four century , such increase have be absorb by the so - call warden . it be impossible to conceive a case of great injustice . it be no answer to say that some six or nine or twelve old man receive as much of the good of this world as such old man require . on what foundation , moral or divine , traditional or legal , be ground the warden 's claim to the large income he receive for do nothing ? the contentment of these almsmen , if content they be , can give he no title to this wealth ! do he ever ask himself , when he stretch wide his clerical palm to receive the pay of some dozen of the working clergy , for what service he be so remunerated ? do his conscience ever entertain the question of his right to such subsidy ? or be it possible that the subject never so present itself to his mind ; that he have receive for many year , and intend , should God spare he , to receive for year to come these fruit of the industrious piety of past age , indifferent as to any right on his own part , or of any injustice to other ! we must express an opinion that nowhere but in the Church of England , and only there among its priest , could such a state of moral indifference be find . " 

 I must for the present leave my reader to imagine the state of Mr Harding 's mind after read the above article . they say that forty thousand copy of the Jupiter be daily sell , and that each copy be read by five person at the least . two hundred thousand reader then would hear this accusation against he ; two hundred thousand heart would swell with indignation at the grip injustice , the bareface robbery of the warden of Barchester Hospital ! and how be he to answer this ? how be he to open his inmost heart to this multitude , to these thousand , the educate , the polished , the pick man of his own country ; how show they that he be no robber , no avaricious , lazy priest scramble for gold , but a retire , humble - spirited man , who have innocently take what have innocently be offer to he ? 

 " write to the Jupiter , " suggest the bishop . 

 " yes , " say the archdeacon , more worldly wise than his father , " yes , and be smother with ridicule ; toss over and over again with scorn ; shake this way and that , as a rat in the mouth of a practised terrier . you will leave out some word or letter in your answer , and the ignorance of the cathedral clergy will be harp upon ; you will make some small mistake , which will be a falsehood , or some admission , which will be self - condemnation ; you will find yourself to have be vulgar , ill - temper , irreverend , and illiterate , and the chance be ten to one , but that be a clergyman , you will have be guilty of blasphemy ! a man may have the good of cause , the good of talent , and the good of temper ; he may write as well as Addison , or as strongly as Junius ; but even with all this he can not successfully answer , when attack by the Jupiter . in such matter it be omnipotent . what the Czar be in Russia , or the mob in America , that the Jupiter be in England . answer such an article ! no , warden ; whatever you do , do not   do that . we be to look for this sort of thing , you know ; but we need not draw down on our head more of it than be necessary . " 

 the article in the Jupiter , while it so greatly harass our poor warden , be an immense triumph to some of the opposite party . sorry as Bold be to see Mr Harding attack so personally , it still give he a feeling of elation to find his cause take up by so powerful an advocate : and as to Finney , the attorney , he be beside himself . what ! to be engage in the same cause and on the same side with the Jupiter ; to have the view he have recommend seconded , and further , and battle for by the Jupiter ! perhaps to have his own name mention as that of the learn gentleman whose effort have be so successful on behalf of the poor of Barchester ! he might be examine before committee of the House of Commons , with heaven know how much a day for his personal expense ; he might be engage for year on such a suit ! there be no end to the glorious golden dream which this leader in the Jupiter produce in the soar mind of Finney . 

 and the old bedesman , they also hear of this article , and have a glimmering , indistinct idea of the marvellous advocate which have now take up their cause . Abel Handy limp hither and thither through the room , repeat all that he understand to have be print , with some addition of his own which he think should have be add . he tell they how the Jupiter have declare that their warden be no well than a robber , and that what the Jupiter say be acknowledge by the world to be true . how the Jupiter have affirm that each one of they " each one of we , Jonathan Crumple , think of that ! " have a clear right to a hundred a year ; and that if the Jupiter have say so , it be well than a decision of the Lord Chancellor : and then he carry about the paper , supply by Mr Finney , which , though none of they could read it , still afford in its very touch and aspect positive corroboration of what be tell they ; and Jonathan Crumple ponder deeply over his return wealth ; and Job Skulpit see how right he have be in sign the petition , and say so many score of time ; and Spriggs leer fearfully with his one eye ; and Moody , as he more nearly approach the come golden age , hat more deeply than ever those who still keep possession of what he so coveted . even Billy Gazy and poor bed - ride Bell become active and uneasy , and the great Bunce stand apart with lower brow , with deep grief seat in his heart , for he perceive that evil day be come . 

 it have be decide , the archdeacon advising , that no remonstrance , explanation , or defence should be address from the Barchester conclave to the editor of the Jupiter ; but hitherto that be the only decision to which they have come . 

 Sir Abraham Haphazard be deeply engage in prepare a bill for the mortification of papist , to be call the " Convent Custody Bill , " the purport of which be to enable any protestant clergyman over fifty year of age to search any nun whom he suspect of be in possession of treasonable paper or jesuitical symbol ; and as there be to be a hundred and thirty - seven clause in the bill , each clause contain a separate thorn for the side of the papist , and as it be know the bill would be fight inch by inch , by fifty maddened Irishmen , the due construction and adequate dovetailing of it do consume much of Sir Abraham 's time . the bill have all its desire effect . of course it never pass into law ; but it so completely divide the rank of the irish member , who have bind themselves together to force on the ministry a bill for compel all man to drink irish whiskey , and all woman to wear irish poplin , that for the remainder of the session the Great Poplin and Whiskey League be utterly harmless . 

 thus it happen that Sir Abraham 's opinion be not at once forthcoming , and the uncertainty , the expectation , and suffering of the folk of Barchester be maintain at a high pitch . 

 

 

 Chapter VIII 

 Plumstead Episcopi 

 

 the reader must now be request to visit the rectory of Plumstead Episcopi ; and as it be as yet still early morning , to ascend again with we into the bedroom of the archdeacon . the mistress of the mansion be at her toilet ; on which we will not dwell with profane eye , but proceed into a small inner room , where the doctor dress and keep his boot and sermon ; and here we will take our stand , premise that the door of the room be so open as to admit of a conversation between our reverend Adam and his value Eve . 

 " it be all your own fault , archdeacon , " say the latter . " I tell you from the beginning how it would end , and papa have no one to thank but you . " 

 " good gracious , my dear , " say the doctor , appear at the door of his dressing - room , with his face and head envelop in the rough towel which he be violently use ; " how can you say so ? I be do my very well . " 

 " I wish you have never do so much , " say the lady , interrupt he . " if you would just have let John Bold come and go there , as he and papa like , he and Eleanor would have be marry by this time , and we should not have hear one word about all this affair . " 

 " but , my dear " 

 " oh , it be all very well , archdeacon ; and of course you be right ; I do not   for a moment think you will ever admit that you could be wrong ; but the fact be , you have   bring this young man down upon papa by huff he as you have do . " 

 " but , my love " 

 " and all because you do not   like John Bold for a brother - in - law . how be she ever to do well ? Papa have not   get a shilling ; and though Eleanor be well enough , she have not at all a taking style of beauty . I be sure I do not   know how she be to do well than marry John Bold ; or as well indeed , " add the anxious sister , give the last twist to her last shoe - string . 

 Dr Grantly feel keenly the injustice of this attack ; but what could he say ? he certainly have huff John Bold ; he certainly have object to he as a brother - in - law , and a very few month ago the very idea have excite his wrath : but now matter be change ; John Bold have show his power , and , though he be as odious as ever to the archdeacon , power be always respect , and the reverend dignitary begin to think that such an alliance might not have be imprudent . nevertheless , his motto be still " no surrender ; " he would still fight it out ; he believe confidently in Oxford , in the bench of bishop , in Sir Abraham Haphazard , and in himself ; and it be only when alone with his wife that doubt of defeat ever beset he . he once more try to communicate this confidence to Mrs Grantly , and for the twentieth time begin to tell she of Sir Abraham . 

 " oh , Sir Abraham ! " say she , collect all her house key into her basket before she descend ; " Sir Abraham will not   get Eleanor a husband ; Sir Abraham will not   get papa another income when he have be worrete out of the hospital . Mark what I tell you , archdeacon : while you and Sir Abraham be fight , papa will lose his preferment ; and what will you do then with he and Eleanor on your hand ? besides , who be to pay Sir Abraham ? I suppose he will not   take the case up for nothing ? " and so the lady descend to family worship among her child and servant , the pattern of a good and prudent wife . 

 Dr Grantly be bless with a happy , thrive family . there be , first , three boy , now at home from school for the holiday . they be call , respectively , Charles James , Henry , and Samuel . the two young   there be five in all   be girl ; the elder , Florinda , bear the name of the Archbishop of York 's wife , whose godchild she be : and the young have be christen Grizzel , after a sister of the Archbishop of Canterbury . the boy be all clever , and give good promise of be well able to meet the care and trial of the world ; and yet they be not alike in their disposition , and each have his individual character , and each his separate admirer among the doctor 's friend . 

 Charles James be an exact and careful boy ; he never commit himself ; he well know how much be expect from the eld son of the Archdeacon of Barchester , and be therefore mindful not to mix too freely with other boy . he have not the great talent of his young brother , but he exceed they in judgment and propriety of demeanour ; his fault , if he have one , be an over - attention to word instead of thing ; there be a thought too much finesse about he , and , as even his father sometimes tell he , he be too fond of a compromise . 

 the second be the archdeacon 's favourite son , and Henry be indeed a brilliant boy . the versatility of his genius be surprising , and the visitor at Plumstead Episcopi be often amazed at the marvellous manner in which he would , when call on , adapt his capacity to apparently most uncongenial pursuit . he appear once before a large circle as Luther the reformer , and delight they with the perfect manner in which he assume the character ; and within three day he again astonish they by act the part of a Capuchin friar to the very life . for this last exploit his father give he a golden guinea , and his brother say the reward have be promise beforehand in the event of the performance be successful . he be also send on a tour into Devonshire ; a treat which the lad be most anxious of enjoy . his father 's friend there , however , do not appreciate his talent , and sad account be send home of the perversity of his nature . he be a most courageous lad , game to the backbone . 

 it be soon know , both at home , where he live , and within some mile of Barchester Cathedral , and also at Westminster , where he be at school , that young Henry could box well and would never own himself beat ; other boy would fight while they have a leg to stand on , but he would fight with no leg at all . those back he would sometimes think he crush by the weight of blow and faint with loss of blood , and his friend would endeavour to withdraw he from the contest ; but no , Henry never give in , be never weary of the battle . the ring be the only element in which he seem to enjoy himself ; and while other boy be happy in the number of their friend , he rejoice most in the multitude of his foe . 

 his relation could not but admire his pluck , but they sometimes be force to regret that he be inclined to be a bully ; and those not so partial to he as his father be , observe with pain that , though he could fawn to the master and the archdeacon 's friend , he be imperious and masterful to the servant and the poor . 

 but perhaps Samuel be the general favourite ; and dear little Soapy , as he be familiarly call , be as engage a child as ever fond mother pet . he be soft and gentle in his manner , and attractive in his speech ; the tone of his voice be melody , and every action be a grace ; unlike his brother , he be courteous to all , he be affable to the lowly , and meek even to the very scullery - maid . he be a boy of great promise , mind his book and delight the heart of his master . his brother , however , be not particularly fond of he ; they would complain to their mother that Soapy 's civility all mean something ; they think that his voice be too often listen to at Plumstead Episcopi , and evidently fear that , as he grow up , he would have more weight in the house than either of they ; there be , therefore , a sort of agreement among they to put young Soapy down . this , however , be not so easy to be do ; Samuel , though young , be sharp ; he could not assume the stiff decorum of Charles James , nor could he fight like Henry ; but he be a perfect master of his own weapon , and contrive , in the tooth of both of they , to hold the place which he have assume . Henry declare that he be a false , cunning creature ; and Charles James , though he always speak of he as his dear brother Samuel , be not slow to say a word against he when opportunity offer . to speak the truth , Samuel be a cunning boy , and those even who love he well could not but own that for one so young , he be too adroit in choose his word , and too skilled in modulate his voice . 

 the two little girl Florinda and Grizzel be nice little girl enough , but they do not possess the strong sterling quality of their brother ; their voice be not often hear at Plumstead Episcopi ; they be bashful and timid by nature , slow to speak before company even when ask to do so ; and though they look very nice in their clean white muslin frock and pink sash , they be but little notice by the archdeacon 's visitor . 

 whatever of submissive humility may have appear in the gait and visage of the archdeacon during his colloquy with his wife in the sanctum of their dressing - room be dispel as he enter his breakfast - parlour with erect head and powerful step . in the presence of a third person he assume the lord and master ; and that wise and talented lady too well know the man to whom her lot for life be bind , to stretch her authority beyond the point at which it would be bear . stranger at Plumstead Episcopi , when they see the imperious brow with which he command silence from the large circle of visitor , child , and servant who come together in the morning to hear he read the word of God , and watch how meekly that wife seat herself behind her basket of key with a little girl on each side , as she catch that command glance ; stranger , I say , see this , could little guess that some fifteen minute since she have stoutly hold her ground against he , hardly allow he to open his mouth in his own defence . but such be the tact and talent of woman ! 

 and now let we observe the well - furnish breakfast - parlour at Plumstead Episcopi , and the comfortable air of all the belonging of the rectory . comfortable they certainly be , but neither gorgeous nor even grand ; indeed , consider the money that have be spend there , the eye and taste might have be well serve ; there be an air of heaviness about the room which might have be avoid without any sacrifice of propriety ; colour might have be well choose and light more perfectly diffused ; but perhaps in do so the thorough clerical aspect of the whole might have be somewhat marred ; at any rate , it be not without ample consideration that those thick , dark , costly carpet be put down ; those embossed , but sombre paper hang up ; those heavy curtain drape so as to half exclude the light of the sun : nor be these old - fashioned chair , buy at a price far exceed that now give for more modern good , without a purpose . the breakfast - service on the table be equally costly and equally plain ; the apparent object have be to spend money without obtain brilliancy or splendour . the urn be of thick and solid silver , as be also the tea - pot , coffee - pot , cream - ewer , and sugar - bowl ; the cup be old , dim dragon china , worth about a pound a piece , but very despicable in the eye of the uninitiated . the silver fork be so heavy as to be disagreeable to the hand , and the bread - basket be of a weight really formidable to any but robust person . the tea consume be the very good , the coffee the very black , the cream the very thick ; there be dry toast and butter toast , muffin and crumpet ; hot bread and cold bread , white bread and brown bread , home - make bread and baker ' bread , wheaten bread and oaten bread ; and if there be other bread than these , they be there ; there be egg in napkin , and crispy bit of bacon under silver cover ; and there be little fish in a little box , and devil kidney frizzle on a hot - water dish ; which , by the bye , be place closely contiguous to the plate of the worthy archdeacon himself . over and above this , on a snow - white napkin , spread upon the sideboard , be a huge ham and a huge sirloin ; the latter have lade the dinner table on the previous evening . such be the ordinary fare at Plumstead Episcopi . 

 and yet I have never find the rectory a pleasant house . the fact that man shall not live by bread alone seem to be somewhat forget ; and noble as be the appearance of the host , and sweet and good - natured as be the face of the hostess , talente as be the child , and excellent as be the viand and the wine , in spite of these attraction , I generally find the rectory somewhat dull . after breakfast the archdeacon would retire , of course to his clerical pursuit . Mrs Grantly , I presume , inspect her kitchen , though she have a first - rate housekeeper , with sixty pound a year ; and attend to the lesson of Florinda and Grizzel , though she have an excellent governess with thirty pound a year : but at any rate she disappear : and I never could make companion of the boy . Charles James , though he always look as though there be something in he , never seem to have much to say ; and what he do say he would always unsay the next minute . he tell I once that he consider cricket , on the whole , to be a gentleman - like game for boy , provide they would play without run about ; and that five , also , be a seemly game , so that those who play it never heat themselves . Henry once quarrel with I for take his sister Grizzel 's part in a contest between they as to the good mode of use a watering - pot for the garden flower ; and from that day to this he have not speak to I , though he speak at I often enough . for half an hour or so I certainly do like Sammy 's gentle speech ; but one get tired of honey , and I find that he prefer the more admiring listener whom he meet in the kitchen - garden and back precinct of the establishment ; besides , I think I once catch Sammy fibbing . 

 on the whole , therefore , I find the rectory a dull house , though it must be admit that everything there be of the very good . 

 after breakfast , on the morning of which we be write , the archdeacon , as usual , retire to his study , intimate that he be go to be very busy , but that he would see Mr Chadwick if he call . on enter this sacred room he carefully open the paper case on which he be will not to compose his favourite sermon , and spread on it a fair sheet of paper and one partly write on ; he then place his inkstand , look at his pen , and fold his blot paper ; have do so , he get up again from his seat , stand with his back to the fire - place , and yawn comfortably , stretch out vastly his huge arm and open his burly chest . he then walk across the room and lock the door ; and have so prepare himself , he throw himself into his easy - chair , take from a secret drawer beneath his table a volume of Rabelais , and begin to amuse himself with the witty mischief of Panurge ; and so pass the archdeacon 's morning on that day . 

 he be leave undisturbed at his study for an hour or two , when a knock come to the door , and Mr Chadwick be announce . Rabelais retire into the secret drawer , the easy - chair seem knowingly to betake itself off , and when the archdeacon quickly undo his bolt , he be discover by the steward working , as usual , for that church of which he be so useful a pillar . Mr Chadwick have just come from London , and be , therefore , know to be the bearer of important news . 

 " we have   get Sir Abraham 's opinion at last , " say Mr Chadwick , as he seat himself . 

 " well , well , well ! " exclaim the archdeacon impatiently . 

 " oh , it be as long as my arm , " say the other ; " it can not   be tell in a word , but you can read it ; " and he hand he a copy , in heaven know how many spin - out folio , of the opinion which the attorney - general have manage to cram on the back and side of the case as originally submit to he . 

 " the upshot be , " say Chadwick , " that there be a screw loose in their case , and we have well do nothing . they be proceed against Mr Harding and myself , and Sir Abraham hold that , under the wording of the will , and subsequent arrangement legally sanction , Mr Harding and I be only pay servant . the defendant should have be either the Corporation of Barchester , or possibly the chapter of your father . " 

 " W - hoo ! " say the archdeacon ; ' so Master Bold be on the wrong scent , be he ? " 

 " that be Sir Abraham 's opinion ; but any scent almost would be a wrong scent . Sir Abraham think that if they have take the corporation , or the chapter , we could have baffle they . the bishop , he think , would be the sure shot ; but even there we could plead that the bishop be only a visitor , and that he have never make himself a consent party to the performance of other duty . " 

 " that be quite clear , " say the archdeacon . 

 " not quite so clear , " say the other . " you see the will say , ' my lord , the bishop , be graciously pleased to see that due justice be do . ' now , it may be a question whether , in accept and administer the patronage , your father have not accept also the other duty assign . it be doubtful , however ; but even if they hit that nail , and they be far off from that yet , the point be so nice , as Sir Abraham say , that you would force they into fifteen thousand pound ' cost before they could bring it to an issue ! and where be that sum of money to come from ? " 

 the archdeacon rub his hand with delight ; he have never doubt the justice of his case , but he have begin to have some dread of unjust success on the part of his enemy . it be delightful to he thus to hear that their cause be surround with such rock and shoal ; such cause of shipwreck unseen by the landsman 's eye , but visible enough to the keen eye of practical law mariner . how wrong his wife be to wish that Bold should marry Eleanor ! bold ! why , if he should be ass enough to persevere , he would be a beggar before he know whom he be at law with ! 

 " that be excellent , Chadwick ; that be excellent ! I tell you Sir Abraham be the man for we ; " and he put down on the table the copy of the opinion , and pat it fondly . 

 " do not   you let that be see , though , archdeacon . " 

 " who ? I ! not for world , " say the doctor . 

 " People will talk , you know , archdeacon . " 

 " of course , of course , " say the doctor . 

 " because , if that get abroad , it would teach they how to fight their own battle . " 

 " quite true , " say the doctor . 

 " no one here in Barchester ought to see that but you and I , archdeacon . " 

 " no , no , certainly no one else , " say the archdeacon , please with the closeness of the confidence ; " no one else shall . " 

 " Mrs Grantly be very interested in the matter , I know , " say Mr Chadwick . 

 do the archdeacon wink , or do he not ? I be inclined to think he do not quite wink ; but that without such , perhaps , unseemly gesture he communicate to Mr Chadwick , with the corner of his eye , intimation that , deep as be Mrs Grantly 's interest in the matter , it should not procure for she a perusal of that document ; and at the same time he partly open the small drawer , above speak of , deposit the paper on the volume of Rabelais , and show to Mr Chadwick the nature of the key which guard these hide treasure . the careful steward then express himself content . ah ! vain man ! he could fasten up his Rabelais , and other thing secret , with all the skill of Bramah or of Chubb ; but where could he fasten up the key which solve these mechanical mystery ? it be probable to we that the content of no drawer in that house be unknown to its mistress , and we think , moreover , that she be entitle to all such knowledge . 

 " but , " say Mr Chadwick , " we must , of course , tell your father and Mr Harding so much of Sir Abraham 's opinion as will satisfy they that the matter be do well . " 

 " oh , certainly , yes , of course , " say the doctor . 

 " you have well let they know that Sir Abraham be of opinion that there be no case at any rate against Mr Harding ; and that as the action be word at present , it must fall to the ground ; they must be nonsuite , if they carry it on ; you have well tell Mr Harding , that Sir Abraham be clearly of opinion that he be only a servant , and as such not liable ; or if you like it , I will see Mr Harding myself . " 

 " oh , I must see he to - morrow , and my father too , and I will explain to they exactly so much ; you will not   go before lunch , Mr Chadwick : well , if you will , you must , for I know your time be precious ; " and he shake hand with the diocesan steward , and bow he out . 

 the archdeacon have again recourse to his drawer , and twice read through the essence of Sir Abraham Haphazard 's law - enlighten and law - bewilder brain . it be very clear that to Sir Abraham , the justice of the old man 's claim or the justice of Mr Harding 's defence be idea that have never present themselves . a legal victory over an oppose party be the service for which Sir Abraham be , as he imagine , to be pay ; and that he , accord to his light , have diligently labour to achieve , and with probable hope of success . of the intense desire which Mr Harding feel to be assure on fit authority that he be wrong no man , that he be entitle in true equity to his income , that he might sleep at night without pang of conscience , that he be no robber , no spoiler of the poor ; that he and all the world might be openly convince that he be not the man which the Jupiter have describe he to be ; of such longing on the part of Mr Harding , Sir Abraham be entirely ignorant ; nor , indeed , could it be look on as part of his business to gratify such desire . such be not the system on which his battle be fight , and victory gain . success be his object , and he be generally successful . he conquer his enemy by their weakness rather than by his own strength , and it have be find almost impossible to make up a case in which Sir Abraham , as an antagonist , would not find a flaw . 

 the archdeacon be delighted with the closeness of the reasoning . to do he justice , it be not a selfish triumph that he desire ; he would personally lose nothing by defeat , or at least what he might lose do not actuate he ; but neither be it love of justice which make he so anxious , nor even mainly solicitude for his father - in - law . he be fight a part of a never - end battle against a never - conquer foe that of the church against its enemy . 

 he know Mr Harding could not pay all the expense of these doing : for these long opinion of Sir Abraham 's , these cause to be plead , these speech to be make , these various court through which the case be , he presume , to be drag . he know that he and his father must at least bear the heavy portion of this tremendous cost ; but to do the archdeacon justice , he do not recoil from this . he be a man fond of obtain money , greedy of a large income , but open - handed enough in expend it , and it be a triumph to he to foresee the success of this measure , although he might be call on to pay so dearly for it himself . 

 

 

 chapter IX 

 the conference 

 

 on the following morning the archdeacon be with his father betime , and a note be send down to the warden beg his attendance at the palace . Dr Grantly , as he cogitate on the matter , lean back in his brougham as he journey into Barchester , feel that it would be difficult to communicate his own satisfaction either to his father or his father - in - law . he want success on his own side and discomfiture on that of his enemy . the bishop want peace on the subject ; a settle peace if possible , but peace at any rate till the short remainder of his own day have spin itself out . Mr Harding require not only success and peace , but he also demand that he might stand justify before the world . 

 the bishop , however , be comparatively easy to deal with ; and before the arrival of the other , the dutiful son have persuade his father that all be go on well , and then the warden arrive . 

 it be Mr Harding 's will not , whenever he spend a morning at the palace , to seat himself immediately at the bishop 's elbow , the bishop occupy a huge arm - chair fit up with candle - stick , a reading table , a drawer , and other paraphernalia , the position of which chair be never move , summer or winter ; and when , as be usual , the archdeacon be there also , he confront the two elder , who thus be enable to fight the battle against he together ; and together submit to defeat , for such be their constant fate . 

 our warden now take his accustomed place , have greet his son - in - law as he enter , and then affectionately inquire after his friend 's health . there be a gentleness about the bishop to which the soft womanly affection of Mr Harding particularly endear itself , and it be quaint to see how the two mild old priest press each other 's hand , and smile and make little sign of love . 

 " Sir Abraham 's opinion have come at last , " begin the archdeacon . Mr Harding have hear so much , and be most anxious to know the result . 

 " it be quite favourable , " say the bishop , press his friend 's arm . " I be so glad . " 

 Mr Harding look at the mighty bearer of the important news for confirmation of these glad tiding . 

 " yes , " say the archdeacon ; " Sir Abraham have give most minute attention to the case ; indeed , I know he would ; most minute attention ; and his opinion be , and as to his opinion on such a subject be correct , no one who know Sir Abraham 's character can doubt , his opinion be , that they hav'n't   get a leg to stand on . " 

 " but as how , archdeacon ? " 

 " why , in the first place : but you be no lawyer , warden , and I doubt you will not   understand it ; the gist of the matter be this : under Hiram 's will two pay guardian have be select for the hospital ; the law will say two pay servant , and you and I will not   quarrel with the name . " 

 " at any rate I will not if I be one of the servant , " say Mr Harding . " a rose , you know " 

 " yes , yes , " say the archdeacon , impatient of poetry at such a time . " well , two pay servant , we will say ; one to look after the man , and the other to look after the money . you and Chadwick be these two servant , and whether either of you be pay too much , or too little , more or less in fact than the founder will , it be as clear as daylight that no one can fall foul of either of you for receive an allotted stipend . " 

 " that do seem clear , " say the bishop , who have wince visibly at the word servant and stipend , which , however , appear to have cause no uneasiness to the archdeacon . 

 " quite clear , " say he , " and very satisfactory . in point of fact , it be necessary to select such servant for the use of the hospital , the pay to be give to they must depend on the rate of pay for such service , accord to their market value at the period in question ; and those who manage the hospital must be the only judge of this . " 

 " and who do manage the hospital ? " ask the warden . " oh , let they find that out ; that be another question : the action be bring against you and Chadwick ; that be your defence , and a perfect and full defence it be . now that I think very satisfactory . " 

 " well , " say the bishop , look inquiringly up into his friend 's face , who sit silent awhile , and apparently not so well satisfied . 

 " and conclusive , " continue the archdeacon ; " if they press it to a jury , which they will not   do , no twelve man in England will take five minute to decide against they . " 

 " but accord to that " say Mr Harding , " I might as well have sixteen hundred a year as eight , if the manager choose to allot it to I ; and as I be one of the manager , if not the chief manager , myself , that can hardly be a just arrangement . " 

 " oh , well ; all that be nothing to the question . the question be , whether this intrude fellow , and a lot of cheat attorney and pestilent dissenter , be to interfere with an arrangement which everyone know be essentially just and serviceable to the church . pray do not   let we be split hair , and that amongst ourselves , or there will never be an end of the cause or the cost . " 

 Mr Harding again sit silent for a while , during which the bishop once and again press his arm , and look in his face to see if he could catch a gleam of a contented and eased mind ; but there be no such gleam , and the poor warden continue play sad dirge on invisible string instrument in all manner of position ; he be ruminate in his mind on this opinion of Sir Abraham , look to it wearily and earnestly for satisfaction , but find none . at last he say , " do you see the opinion , archdeacon ? " 

 the archdeacon say he have not , that be to say , he have , that was , he have not see the opinion itself ; he have see what have be call a copy , but he could not say whether of a whole or part ; nor could he say that what he have see be the ipsissima verba of the great man himself ; but what he have see contain exactly the decision which he have announce , and which he again declare to be to his mind extremely satisfactory . 

 " I should like to see the opinion , " say the warden ; " that be , a copy of it . " 

 " well , I suppose you can if you make a point of it ; but I do not   see the use myself ; of course it be essential that the purport of it should not be know , and it be therefore unadvisable to multiply copy . " 

 " why should it not be know ? " ask the warden . 

 " what a question for a man to ask ! " say the archdeacon , throw up his hand in token of his surprise ; " but it be like you : a child be not more innocent than you be in matter of business . can not   you see that if we tell they that no action will lie against you , but that one may possibly lie against some other person or person , that we shall be put weapon into their hand , and be teach they how to cut our own throat ? " 

 the warden again sit silent , and the bishop again look at he wistfully . " the only thing we have now to do , " continue the archdeacon , " be to remain quiet , hold our peace , and let they play their own game as they please . " 

 " we be not to make known then , " say the warden , " that we have consult the attorney - general , and that we be advise by he that the founder 's will be fully and fairly carry out . " 

 " God bless my soul ! " say the archdeacon , " how odd it be that you will not see that all we be to do be to do nothing : why should we say anything about the founder 's will ? we be in possession ; and we know that they be not in a position to put we out ; surely that be enough for the present . " 

 Mr Harding rise from his seat and pace thoughtfully up and down the library , the bishop the while watch he painfully at every turn , and the archdeacon continue to pour forth his conviction that the affair be in a state to satisfy any prudent mind . 

 " and the Jupiter ? " say the warden , stop suddenly . 

 " oh ! the Jupiter , " answer the other . " the Jupiter can break no bone . you must bear with that ; there be much , of course , which it be our bounden duty to bear ; it can not be all rose for we here , " and the archdeacon look exceedingly moral ; " besides , the matter be too trivial , of too little general interest to be mention again in the Jupiter , unless we stir up the subject . " and the archdeacon again look exceedingly know and worldly wise . 

 the warden continue his walk ; the hard and stinging word of that newspaper article , each one of which have thrust a thorn as it be into his inmost soul , be fresh in his memory ; he have read it more than once , word by word , and what be bad , he fancy it be as well known to everyone as to himself . be he to be look on as the unjust grip priest he have be there describe ? be he to be point at as the consumer of the bread of the poor , and to be allow no mean of refute such charge , of clear his begrimed name , of stand innocent in the world , as hitherto he have stand ? be he to bear all this , to receive as usual his now hat income , and be know as one of those greedy priest who by their rapacity have bring disgrace on their church ? and why ? why should he bear all this ? why should he die , for he feel that he could not live , under such a weight of obloquy ? as he pace up and down the room he resolve in his misery and enthusiasm that he could with pleasure , if he be allow , give up his place , abandon his pleasant home , leave the hospital , and live poorly , happily , and with an unsullied name , on the small remainder of his mean . 

 he be a man somewhat shy of speak of himself , even before those who know he well , and whom he love the most ; but at last it burst forth from he , and with a somewhat jerk eloquence he declare that he could not , would not , bear this misery any long . 

 " if it can be prove , " say he at last , " that I have a just and honest right to this , as God well know I always deem I have ; if this salary or stipend be really my due , I be not less anxious than another to retain it . I have the well - being of my child to look to . I be too old to miss without some pain the comfort to which I have be use ; and I be , as other be , anxious to prove to the world that I have be right , and to uphold the place I have hold ; but I can not do it at such a cost as this . I can not bear this . could you tell I to do so ? " and he appeal , almost in tear , to the bishop , who have leave his chair , and be now lean on the warden 's arm as he stand on the further side of the table face the archdeacon . " could you tell I to sit there at ease , indifferent , and satisfy , while such thing as these be say loudly of I in the world ? " 

 the bishop could feel for he and sympathise with he , but he could not advise he ; he could only say , " no , no , you shall be ask to do nothing that be painful ; you shall do just what your heart tell you to be right ; you shall do whatever you think good yourself . Theophilus , do not   advise he , pray do not   advise the warden to do anything which be painful . " 

 but the archdeacon , though he could not sympathise , could advise ; and he see that the time have come when it behove he to do so in a somewhat peremptory manner . 

 " why , my lord , " he say , speak to his father ; and when he call his father " my lord , " the good old bishop shake in his shoe , for he know that an evil time be come . " why , my lord , there be two way of give advice : there be advice that may be good for the present day ; and there be advice that may be good for day to come : now I can not bring myself to give the former , if it be incompatible with the other . " 

 " no , no , no , I suppose not , " say the bishop , re - seat himself , and shade his face with his hand . Mr Harding sit down with his back to the further wall , play to himself some air fit for so calamitous an occasion , and the archdeacon say out his say standing , with his back to the empty fire - place . 

 " it be not to be suppose but that much pain will spring out of this unnecessarily raise question . we must all have foresee that , and the matter have in no wise go on bad than we expect ; but it will be weak , yes , and wicked also , to abandon the cause and own ourselves wrong , because the inquiry be painful . it be not only ourselves we have to look to ; to a certain extent the interest of the church be in our keeping . should it be find that one after another of those who hold preferment abandon it whenever it might be attack , be it not plain that such attack would be renew till nothing be leave we ? and , that if so deserted , the Church of England must fall to the ground altogether ? if this be true of many , it be true of one . be you , accuse as you now be , to throw up the wardenship , and to relinquish the preferment which be your property , with the vain object of prove yourself disintereste , you would fail in that object , you would inflict a desperate blow on your brother clergyman , you would encourage every cantankerous dissenter in England to make a similar charge against some source of clerical revenue , and you would do your good to dishearten those who be most anxious to defend you and uphold your position . I can fancy nothing more weak , or more wrong . it be not that you think that there be any justice in these charge , or that you doubt your own right to the wardenship : you be convinced of your own honesty , and yet would yield to they through cowardice . " 

 " Cowardice ! " say the bishop , expostulate . Mr Harding sit unmove , gaze on his son - in - law . 

 " well ; would it not be cowardice ? would he not do so because he be afraid to endure the evil thing which will be falsely speak of he ? would that not be cowardice ? and now let we see the extent of the evil which you dread . the Jupiter publish an article which a great many , no doubt , will read ; but of those who understand the subject how many will believe the Jupiter ? everyone know what its object be : it have take up the case against Lord Guildford and against the Dean of Rochester , and that against half a dozen bishop ; and do not everyone know that it would take up any case of the kind , right or wrong , false or true , with known justice or known injustice , if by do so it could further its own view ? do not all the world know this of the Jupiter ? who that really know you will think the bad of you for what the Jupiter say ? and why care for those who do not know you ? I will say nothing of your own comfort , but I do say that you could not be justify in throw up , in a fit of passion , for such it would be , the only maintenance that Eleanor have ; and if you do so , if you really do vacate the wardenship , and submit to ruin , what would that profit you ? if you have no future right to the income , you have have no past right to it ; and the very fact of your abandon your position would create a demand for repayment of that which you have already receive and spend . " 

 the poor warden groan as he sit perfectly still , look up at the hard - hearted orator who thus torment he , and the bishop echo the sound faintly from behind his hand ; but the archdeacon care little for such sign of weakness , and complete his exhortation . 

 " but let we suppose the office to be leave vacant , and that your own trouble concern it be over ; would that satisfy you ? be your only aspiration in the matter confine to yourself and family ? I know they be not . I know you be as anxious as any of we for the church to which we belong ; and what a grievous blow would such an act of apostasy give she ! you owe it to the church of which you be a member and a minister , to bear with this affliction , however severe it may be : you owe it to my father , who institute you , to support his right : you owe it to those who precede you to assert the legality of their position ; you owe it to those who be to come after you , to maintain uninjured for they that which you receive uninjured from other ; and you owe to we all the unflinche assistance of perfect brotherhood in this matter , so that uphold one another we may support our great cause without blush and without disgrace . " 

 and so the archdeacon cease , and stand self - satisfy , watch the effect of his speak wisdom . 

 the warden feel himself , to a certain extent , stifle ; he would have give the world to get himself out into the open air without speak to , or notice those who be in the room with he ; but this be impossible . he could not leave without say something , and he feel himself confound by the archdeacon 's eloquence . there be a heavy , unfeeling , unanswerable truth in what he have say ; there be so much practical , but odious common sense in it , that he neither know how to assent or to differ . if it be necessary for he to suffer , he feel that he could endure without complaint and without cowardice , provide that he be self - satisfied of the justice of his own cause . what he could not endure be , that he should be accuse by other , and not acquit by himself . doubt , as he have begin to doubt , the justice of his own position in the hospital , he know that his own self - confidence would not be restore because Mr Bold have be in error as to some legal form ; nor could he be satisfied to escape , because , through some legal fiction , he who receive the great benefit from the hospital might be consider only as one of its servant . 

 the archdeacon 's speech have silence he , stupefy he , annihilate he ; anything but satisfy he . with the bishop it fare not much well . he do not discern clearly how thing be , but he see enough to know that a battle be to be prepare for ; a battle that would destroy his few remain comfort , and bring he with sorrow to the grave . 

 the warden still sit , and still look at the archdeacon , till his thought fix themselves wholly on the mean of escape from his present position , and he feel like a bird fascinate by gaze on a snake . 

 " I hope you agree with I , " say the archdeacon at last , break the dread silence ; " my lord , I hope you agree with I . " 

 oh , what a sigh the bishop give ! " my lord , I hope you agree with I , " again repeat the merciless tyrant . 

 " yes , I suppose so , " groan the poor old man , slowly . 

 " and you , warden ? " 

 Mr Harding be now stir to action ; he must speak and move , so he get up and take one turn before he answer . 

 " do not press I for an answer just at present ; I will do nothing lightly in the matter , and of whatever I do I will give you and the bishop notice . " and so without another word he take his leave , escape quickly through the palace hall , and down the lofty step ; nor do he breathe freely till he find himself alone under the huge elm of the silent close . here he walk long and slowly , think on his case with a troubled air , and try in vain to confute the archdeacon 's argument . he then go home , resolve to bear it all , ignominy , suspense , disgrace , self - doubt , and heart - burning , and to do as those would have he , who he still believe be most fit and most able to counsel he aright . 

 

 

 Chapter X 

 Tribulation 

 

 Mr Harding be a sad man than he have ever yet be when he return to his own house . he have be wretche enough on that well - remember morning when he be force to expose before his son - in - law the publisher 's account for usher into the world his dear book of sacred music : when after make such payment as he could do unassiste , he find that he be a debtor of more than three hundred pound ; but his suffering then be as nothing to his present misery ; then he have do wrong , and he know it , and be able to resolve that he would not sin in like manner again ; but now he could make no resolution , and comfort himself by no promise of firmness . he have be force to think that his lot have place he in a false position , and he be about to maintain that position against the opinion of the world and against his own conviction . 

 he have read with pity , amount almost to horror , the stricture which have appear from time to time against the Earl of Guildford as master of St Cross , and the invective that have be heap on rich diocesan dignitary and overgrown sinecure pluralist . in judging of they , he judge leniently ; the whole bias of his profession have teach he to think that they be more sin against than sin , and that the animosity with which they have be pursue be venomous and unjust ; but he have not the less regard their plight as most miserable . his hair have stand on end and his flesh have creep as he read the thing which have be write ; he have wonder how man could live under such a load of disgrace ; how they could face their fellow - creature while their name be bandy about so injuriously and so publicly ; and now this lot be to be his , he , that shy , retire man , who have so comfort himself in the hide obscurity of his lot , who have so enjoy the unassuming warmth of his own little corner , he be now drag forth into the glare day , and gibbet before ferocious multitude . he enter his own house a crestfallen , humiliate man , without a hope of overcome the wretchedness which affect he . 

 he wander into the drawing - room where be his daughter ; but he could not speak to she now , so he leave it , and go into the book - room . he be not quick enough to escape Eleanor 's glance , or to prevent she from see that he be disturb ; and in a little while she follow he . she find he seat in his accustomed chair with no book open before he , no pen ready in his hand , no ill - shapen note of blot music lie before he as be usual , none of those hospital account with which he be so precise and yet so unmethodical : he be do nothing , think of nothing , look at nothing ; he be merely suffer . 

 " leave I , Eleanor , my dear , " he say ; " leave I , my darling , for a few minute , for I be busy . " 

 Eleanor see well how it be , but she do leave he , and glide silently back to her drawing - room . when he have sit a while , thus alone and unoccupied , he get up to walk again ; he could make more of his thought walk than sit , and be creep out into his garden , when he meet Bunce on the threshold . 

 " well , Bunce , " say he , in a tone that for he be sharp , " what be it ? do you want I ? " 

 " I be only come to ask after your reverence , " say the old bedesman , touch his hat ; " and to inquire about the news from London , " he add after a pause . 

 the warden wince , and put his hand to his forehead and feel bewildered . 

 " Attorney Finney have be there this morning , " continue Bunce , " and by his look I guess he be not so well pleased as he once be , and it have get abroad somehow that the archdeacon have have down great news from London , and Handy and Moody be both as black as devil . and I hope , " say the man , try to assume a cheery tone , " that thing be look up , and that there will be an end soon to all this stuff which bother your reverence so sorely . " 

 " well , I wish there may be , Bunce . " 

 " but about the news , your reverence ? " say the old man , almost whispering . 

 Mr Harding walk on , and shake his head impatiently . poor Bunce little know how he be torment his patron . 

 " if there be anything to cheer you , I should be so glad to know it , " say he , with a tone of affection which the warden in all his misery could not resist . 

 he stop , and take both the old man 's hand in his . " my friend , " say he , " my dear old friend , there be nothing ; there be no news to cheer I ; God 's will be do " : and two small hot tear break away from his eye and steal down his furrowed cheek . 

 " then God 's will be do , " say the other solemnly ; " but they tell I that there be good news from London , and I come to wish your reverence joy ; but God 's will be do ; " and so the warden again walk on , and the bedesman , look wistfully after he and receive no encouragement to follow , return sadly to his own abode . 

 for a couple of hour the warden remain thus in the garden , now walk , now stand motionless on the turf , and then , as his leg get weary , sit unconsciously on the garden seat , and then walk again . and Eleanor , hide behind the muslin curtain of the window , watch he through the tree as he now come in sight , and then again be conceal by the turning of the walk ; and thus the time pass away till five , when the warden creep back to the house and prepare for dinner . 

 it be but a sorry meal . the demure parlour - maid , as she hand the dish and change the plate , see that all be not right , and be more demure than ever : neither father nor daughter could eat , and the hateful food be soon clear away , and the bottle of port place upon the table . 

 " would you like Bunce to come in , papa ? " say Eleanor , think that the company of the old man might lighten his sorrow . 

 " no , my dear , thank you , not to - day ; but be not you go out , Eleanor , this lovely afternoon ? do not   stay in for I , my dear . " 

 " I think you seem so sad , papa . " 

 " sad , " say he , irritated ; " well , people must all have their share of sadness here ; I be not more exempt than another : but kiss I , dearest , and go now ; I will , if possible , be more sociable when you return . " 

 and Eleanor be again banish from her father 's sorrow . ah ! her desire now be not to find he happy , but to be allow to share his sorrow ; not to force he to be sociable , but to persuade he to be trustful . 

 she put on her bonnet as desire , and go up to Mary Bold ; this be now her daily haunt , for John Bold be up in London among lawyer and church reformer , diving deep into other question than that of the wardenship of Barchester ; supply information to one member of Parliament , and din with another ; subscribe to fund for the abolition of clerical income , and second at that great national meeting at the Crown and Anchor a resolution to the effect , that no clergyman of the Church of England , be he who he might , should have more than a thousand a year , and none less than two hundred and fifty . his speech on this occasion be short , for fifteen have to speak , and the room be hire for two hour only , at the expiration of which the Quakers and Mr Cobden be to make use of it for an appeal to the public in aid of the Emperor of Russia ; but it be sharp and effective ; at least he be tell so by a companion with whom he now live much , and on whom he greatly depend , one Tom Towers , a very leading genius , and suppose to have high employment on the staff of the Jupiter . 

 so Eleanor , as be now she will not , go up to Mary Bold , and Mary listen kindly , while the daughter speak much of her father , and , perhaps kinder still , find a listener in Eleanor , while she speak about her brother . in the meantime the warden sit alone , lean on the arm of his chair ; he have pour out a glass of wine , but have do so merely from habit , for he leave it untouched ; there he sit gaze at the open window , and think , if he can be say to have think , of the happiness of his past life . all manner of past delight come before his mind , which at the time he have enjoy without consider they ; his easy day , his absence of all kind of hard work , his pleasant shady home , those twelve old neighbour whose welfare till now have be the source of so much pleasant care , the excellence of his child , the friendship of the dear old bishop , the solemn grandeur of those vault aisle , through which he love to hear his own voice pealing ; and then that friend of friend , that choice ally that have never desert he , that eloquent companion that would always , when ask , discourse such pleasant music , that violoncello of his ; ah , how happy he have be ! but it be over now ; his easy day and absence of work have be the crime which bring on he his tribulation ; his shady home be pleasant no long ; maybe it be no long his ; the old neighbour , whose welfare have be so desire by he , be his enemy ; his daughter be as wretched as himself ; and even the bishop be make miserable by his position . he could never again lift up his voice boldly as he have hitherto do among his brother , for he feel that he be disgrace ; and he fear even to touch his bow , for he know how grievous a sound of wail , how piteous a lamentation , it would produce . 

 he be still sit in the same chair and the same posture , have hardly move a limb for two hour , when Eleanor come back to tea , and succeed in bring he with she into the drawing - room . 

 the tea seem as comfortless as the dinner , though the warden , who have hitherto eat nothing all day , devour the plateful of bread and butter , unconscious of what he be do . 

 Eleanor have make up her mind to force he to talk to she , but she hardly know how to commence : she must wait till the urn be go , till the servant would no long be come in and out . 

 at last everything be go , and the drawing - room door be permanently close ; then Eleanor , get up and go round to her father , put her arm round his neck , and say , " Papa , will not   you tell I what it be ? " 

 " what what be , my dear ? " 

 " this new sorrow that torment you ; I know you be unhappy , papa . " 

 " New sorrow ! it be no new sorrow , my dear ; we have all our care sometimes ; " and he try to smile , but it be a ghastly failure ; " but I should not   be so dull a companion ; come , we will have some music . " 

 " no , papa , not tonight , it would only trouble you tonight ; " and she sit upon his knee , as she sometimes would in their gay mood , and with her arm round his neck , she say : " Papa , I will not leave you till you talk to I ; oh , if you only know how much good it would do to you , to tell I of it all . " 

 the father kiss his daughter , and press she to his heart ; but still he say nothing : it be so hard to he to speak of his own sorrow ; he be so shy a man even with his own child ! 

 " oh , papa , do tell I what it be ; I know it be about the hospital , and what they be do up in London , and what that cruel newspaper have say ; but if there be such cause for sorrow , let we be sorrowful together ; we be all in all to each other now : dear , dear papa , do speak to I . " 

 Mr Harding could not well speak now , for the warm tear be run down his cheek like rain in May , but he hold his child close to his heart , and squeeze her hand as a lover might , and she kiss his forehead and his wet cheek , and lie upon his bosom , and comfort he as a woman only can do . 

 " my own child , " he say , as soon as his tear would let he speak , " my own , own child , why should you too be unhappy before it be necessary ? it may come to that , that we must leave this place , but till that time come , why should your young day be cloud ? " 

 " and be that all , papa ? if that be all , let we leave it , and have light heart elsewhere : if that be all , let we go . oh , papa , you and I could be happy if we have only bread to eat , so long as our heart be light . " 

 and Eleanor 's face be light up with enthusiasm as she tell her father how he might banish all his care ; and a gleam of joy shoot across his brow as this idea of escape again present itself , and he again fancy for a moment that he could spurn away from he the income which the world envy he ; that he could give the lie to that wielder of the tomahawk who have dare to write such thing of he in the Jupiter ; that he could leave Sir Abraham , and the archdeacon , and Bold , and the rest of they with their lawsuit among they , and wipe his hand altogether of so sorrow - stir a concern . ah , what happiness might there be in the distance , with Eleanor and he in some small cottage , and nothing leave of their former grandeur but their music ! yes , they would walk forth with their music book , and their instrument , and shake the dust from off their foot as they go , leave the ungrateful place . never do a poor clergyman sigh for a warm benefice more anxiously than our warden do now to be rid of his . 

 " give it up , papa , " she say again , jump from his knee and stand on her foot before he , look boldly into his face ; " give it up , papa . " 

 oh , it be sad to see how that momentary gleam of joy pass away ; how the look of hope be disperse from that sorrowful face , as the remembrance of the archdeacon come back upon our poor warden , and he reflect that he could not stir from his now hat post . he be as a man bind with iron , fetter with adamant : he be in no respect a free agent ; he have no choice . " give it up ! " oh if he only could : what an easy way that be out of all his trouble ! 

 " Papa , do not   doubt about it , " she continue , think that his hesitation arise from his unwillingness to abandon so comfortable a home ; " be it on my account that you would stay here ? do you think that I can not be happy without a pony - carriage and a fine drawing - room ? Papa , I never can be happy here , as long as there be a question as to your honour in stay here ; but I could be gay as the day be long in the small tiny little cottage , if I could see you come in and go out with a light heart . oh ! papa , your face tell so much ; though you will not   speak to I with your voice , I know how it be with you every time I look at you . " 

 how he press she to his heart again with almost a spasmodic pressure ! how he kiss she as the tear fall like rain from his old eye ! how he bless she , and call she by a hundred soft sweet name which now come new to his lip ! how he chide himself for ever have be unhappy with such a treasure in his house , such a jewel on his bosom , with so sweet a flower in the choice garden of his heart ! and then the floodgate of his tongue be loose , and , at length , with unsparing detail of circumstance , he tell she all that he wish , and all that he could not do . he repeat those argument of the archdeacon , not agree in their truth , but explain his inability to escape from they ; how it have be declare to he that he be bind to remain where he be by the interest of his order , by gratitude to the bishop , by the wish of his friend , by a sense of duty , which , though he could not understand it , he be fain to acknowledge . he tell she how he have be accuse of cowardice , and though he be not a man to make much of such a charge before the world , now in the full candour of his heart he explain to she that such an accusation be grievous to he ; that he do think it would be unmanly to desert his post , merely to escape his present suffering , and that , therefore , he must bear as good he might the misery which be prepare for he . 

 and do she find these detail tedious ? oh , no ; she encourage he to dilate on every feeling he express , till he lay bare the inmost corner of his heart to she . they speak together of the archdeacon , as two child might of a stern , unpopular , but still respect schoolmaster , and of the bishop as a parent kind as kind could be , but powerless against an omnipotent pedagogue . 

 and then when they have discuss all this , when the father have tell all to the child , she could not be less confiding than he have be ; and as John Bold 's name be mention between they , she own how well she have learn to love he , " have love he once , " she say , " but she would not , could not do so now no , even have she troth be plight to he , she would have take it back again ; have she swear to love he as his wife , she would have discard he , and not feel herself forsworn , when he prove himself the enemy of her father . " 

 but the warden declare that Bold be no enemy of his , and encourage her love ; and gently rebuke , as he kiss she , the stern resolve she have make to cast he off ; and then he speak to she of happy day when their trial would all be over ; and declare that her young heart should not be tear asunder to please either priest or prelate , dean or archdeacon . no , not if all Oxford be to convocate together , and agree as to the necessity of the sacrifice . 

 and so they greatly comfort each other ; and in what sorrow will not such mutual confidence give consolation ! and with a last expression of tender love they part , and go comparatively happy to their room . 

 

 

 Chapter XI 

 Iphigenia 

 

 when Eleanor lay her head on her pillow that night , her mind be anxiously intent on some plan by which she might extricate her father from his misery ; and , in her warm - hearted enthusiasm , self - sacrifice be decide on as the mean to be adopt . be not so good an Agamemnon worthy of an Iphigenia ? she would herself personally implore John Bold to desist from his undertaking ; she would explain to he her father 's sorrow , the cruel misery of his position ; she would tell he how her father would die if he be thus drag before the public and expose to such unmerited ignominy ; she would appeal to his old friendship , to his generosity , to his manliness , to his mercy ; if need be , she would kneel to he for the favour she would ask ; but before she do this the idea of love must be banish . there must be no bargain in the matter . to his mercy , to his generosity , she could appeal ; but as a pure maiden , hitherto even unsolicite , she could not appeal to his love , nor under such circumstance could she allow he to do so . of course , when so provoke he would declare his passion ; that be to be expect ; there have be enough between they to make such a fact sure ; but it be equally certain that he must be reject . she could not be understand as say , make my father free and I be the reward . there would be no sacrifice in that ; not so have Jephthah 's daughter save her father ; not so could she show to that kind , dearest of parent how much she be able to bear for his good . no ; to one resolve must her whole soul be bind ; and so resolve , she feel that she could make she great request to Bold with as much self - assure confidence as she could have do to his grandfather . 

 and now I own I have fear for my heroine ; not as to the upshot of her mission , not in the least as to that ; as to the full success of her generous scheme , and the ultimate result of such a project , no one conversant with human nature and novel can have a doubt ; but as to the amount of sympathy she may receive from those of her own sex . girl below twenty and old lady above sixty will do her justice ; for in the female heart the soft spring of sweet romance reopen after many year , and again gush out with water pure as in early day , and greatly refresh the path that lead downwards to the grave . but I fear that the majority of those between these two era will not approve of Eleanor 's plan . I fear that unmarried lady of thirty - five will declare that there can be no probability of so absurd a project be carry through ; that young woman on their knee before their lover be sure to get kiss , and that they would not put themselves in such a position do they not expect it ; that Eleanor be go to Bold only because circumstance prevent Bold from come to she ; that she be certainly a little fool , or a little schemer , but that in all probability she be think a good deal more about herself than her father . 

 dear lady , you be right as to your appreciation of the circumstance , but very wrong as to Miss Harding 's character . Miss Harding be much young than you be , and could not , therefore , know , as you may do , to what danger such an encounter might expose she . she may get kiss ; I think it very probable that she will ; but I give my solemn word and positive assurance , that the remotest idea of such a catastrophe never occur to she as she make the great resolve now allude to . 

 and then she sleep ; and then she rise refresh ; and meet her father with her kind embrace and most loving smile ; and on the whole their breakfast be by no mean so triste as have be their dinner the day before ; and then , make some excuse to her father for so soon leave he , she start on the commencement of her operation . 

 she know that John Bold be in London , and that , therefore , the scene itself could not be enact to - day ; but she also know that he be soon to be home , probably on the next day , and it be necessary that some little plan for meet he should be concert with his sister Mary . when she get up to the house , she go , as usual , into the morning sitting - room , and be startle by perceive , by a stick , a greatcoat , and sundry parcel which be lie about , that Bold must already have return . 

 " John have come back so suddenly , " say Mary , come into the room ; " he have be travel all night . " 

 " then I will come up again some other time , " say Eleanor , about to beat a retreat in her sudden dismay . 

 " he be out now , and will be for the next two hour , " say the other ; " he be with that horrid Finney ; he only come to see he , and he return by the mail train tonight . " 

 return by the mail train tonight , think Eleanor to herself , as she strove to screw up her courage ; away again tonight ; then it must be now or never ; and she again sit down , have rise to go . 

 she wish the ordeal could have be postpone : she have fully make up her mind to do the deed , but she have not make up her mind to do it this very day ; and now she feel ill at ease , astray , and in difficulty . 

 " Mary , " she begin , " I must see your brother before he go back . " 

 " oh yes , of course , " say the other ; " I know he will be delighted to see you ; " and she try to treat it as a matter of course , but she be not the less surprised ; for Mary and Eleanor have daily talk over John Bold and his conduct , and his love , and Mary would insist on call Eleanor her sister , and would scold she for not call Bold by his christian name ; and Eleanor would half confess her love , but like a modest maiden would protest against such familiarity even with the name of her lover ; and so they talk hour after hour , and Mary Bold , who be much the elder , look forward with happy confidence to the day when Eleanor would not be ashamed to call she her sister . she be , however , fully sure that just at present Eleanor would be much more likely to avoid her brother than to seek he . 

 " Mary , I must see your brother , now , to - day , and beg from he a great favour ; " and she speak with a solemn air , not at all usual to she ; and then she go on , and open to her friend all her plan , her well - weigh scheme for save her father from a sorrow which would , she say , if it last , bring he to his grave . " but , Mary , " she continue , " you must now , you know , cease any joking about I and Mr Bold ; you must now say no more about that ; I be not ashamed to beg this favour from your brother , but when I have do so , there can never be anything far between we ; " and this she say with a staid and solemn air , quite worthy of Jephthah 's daughter or of Iphigenia either . 

 it be quite clear that Mary Bold do not follow the argument . that Eleanor Harding should appeal , on behalf of her father , to Bold 's well feeling seem to Mary quite natural ; it seem quite natural that he should relent , overcome by such filial tear , and by so much beauty ; but , to her thinking , it be at any rate equally natural , that have relent , John should put his arm round his mistress 's waist , and say : " now have settle that , let we be man and wife , and all will end happily ! " why his good nature should not be reward , when such reward would operate to the disadvantage of none , Mary , who have more sense than romance , could not understand ; and she say as much . 

 Eleanor , however , be firm , and make quite an eloquent speech to support her own view of the question : she could not condescend , she say , to ask such a favour on any other term than those propose . Mary might , perhaps , think her high - fly , but she have her own idea , and she could not submit to sacrifice her self - respect . 

 " but I be sure you love he ; do not   you ? " plead Mary ; " and I be sure he love you well than anything in the world . " 

 Eleanor be go to make another speech , but a tear come to each eye , and she could not ; so she pretend to blow her nose , and walk to the window , and make a little inward call on her own courage , and find herself somewhat sustain , say sententiously : " Mary , this be nonsense . " 

 " but you do love he , " say Mary , who have follow her friend to the window , and now speak with her arm close wound round the other 's waist . " you do love he with all your heart , you know you do ; I defy you to deny it . " 

 " I " commence Eleanor , turn sharply round to refute the charge ; but the intend falsehood stick in her throat , and never come to utterance . she could not deny her love , so she take plentifully to tear , and leant upon her friend 's bosom and sob there , and protest that , love or no love , it would make no difference in her resolve , and call Mary , a thousand time , the most cruel of girl , and swear she to secrecy by a hundred oath , and end by declare that the girl who could betray her friend 's love , even to a brother , would be as black a traitor as a soldier in a garrison who should open the city gate to the enemy . while they be yet discuss the matter , Bold return , and Eleanor be force into sudden action : she have either to accomplish or abandon her plan ; and have slip into her friend 's bedroom , as the gentleman close the hall door , she wash the mark of tear from her eye , and resolve within herself to go through with it . " tell he I be here , " say she , " and come in ; and mind , whatever you do , do not   leave we . " so Mary inform her brother , with a somewhat sombre air , that Miss Harding be in the next room , and be come to speak to he . 

 Eleanor be certainly think more of her father than herself , as she arrange her hair before the glass , and remove the trace of sorrow from her face ; and yet I should be untrue if I say that she be not anxious to appear well before her lover : why else be she so sedulous with that stubborn curl that would rebel against her hand , and smooth so eagerly her ruffle riband ? why else do she damp her eye to dispel the redness , and bite her pretty lip to bring back the colour ? of course she be anxious to look she good , for she be but a mortal angel after all . but have she be immortal , have she flit back to the sitting - room on a cherub 's wing , she could not have have a more faithful heart , or a truer wish to save her father at any cost to herself . 

 John Bold have not meet she since the day when she leave he in dudgeon in the cathedral close . since then his whole time have be occupy in promote the cause against her father , and not unsuccessfully . he have often think of she , and turn over in his mind a hundred scheme for show she how disinterested be his love . he would write to she and beseech she not to allow the performance of a public duty to injure he in her estimation ; he would write to Mr Harding , explain all his view , and boldly claim the warden 's daughter , urge that the untoward circumstance between they need be no bar to their ancient friendship , or to a close tie ; he would throw himself on his knee before his mistress ; he would wait and marry the daughter when the father have lose his home and his income ; he would give up the lawsuit and go to Australia , with she of course , leave the Jupiter and Mr Finney to complete the case between they . sometimes as he wake in the morning fevere and impatient , he would blow out his brain and have do with all his care ; but this idea be generally consequent on an imprudent supper enjoy in company with Tom Towers . 

 how beautiful Eleanor appear to he as she slowly walk into the room ! not for nothing have all those little care be take . though her sister , the archdeacon 's wife , have speak slightingly of her charm , Eleanor be very beautiful when see aright . Hers be not of those impassive face , which have the beauty of a marble bust ; finely chisel feature , perfect in every line , true to the rule of symmetry , as lovely to a stranger as to a friend , unvarye unless in sickness , or as age affect they . she have no startling brilliancy of beauty , no pearly whiteness , no radiant carnation . she have not the majestic contour that rivet attention , demand instant wonder , and then disappoint by the coldness of its charm . you might pass Eleanor Harding in the street without notice , but you could hardly pass an evening with she and not lose your heart . 

 she have never appear more lovely to her lover than she now do . her face be animate though it be serious , and her full dark lustrous eye shine with anxious energy ; her hand tremble as she take his , and she could hardly pronounce his name , when she address he . Bold wish with all his heart that the australian scheme be in the act of realisation , and that he and Eleanor be away together , never to hear far of the lawsuit . 

 he begin to talk , ask after her health , say something about London be very stupid , and more about Barchester be very pleasant ; declare the weather to be very hot , and then inquire after Mr Harding . 

 " my father be not very well , " say Eleanor . 

 John Bold be very sorry , so sorry : he hop it be nothing serious , and put on the unmeaningly solemn face which people usually use on such occasion . 

 " I especially want to speak to you about my father , Mr Bold ; indeed , I be now here on purpose to do so . papa be very unhappy , very unhappy indeed , about this affair of the hospital : you would pity he , Mr Bold , if you could see how wretched it have make he . " 

 " oh , Miss Harding ! " 

 " indeed you would ; anyone would pity he ; but a friend , an old friend as you be , indeed you would . he be an altered man ; his cheerfulness have all go , and his sweet temper , and his kind happy tone of voice ; you would hardly know he if you see he , Mr Bold , he be so much alter ; and and if this go on , he will die . " here Eleanor have recourse to her handkerchief , and so also have her auditor ; but she pluck up her courage , and go on with her tale . " he will break his heart , and die . I be sure , Mr Bold , it be not you who write those cruel thing in the newspaper " 

 John Bold eagerly protest that it be not , but his heart smite he as to his intimate alliance with Tom Towers . 

 " no , I be sure it be not ; and papa have not for a moment thought so ; you would not be so cruel ; but it have nearly kill he . Papa can not bear to think that people should so speak of he , and that everybody should hear he so spoken of : they have call he avaricious , and dishonest , and they say he be rob the old man , and take the money of the hospital for nothing . " 

 " I have never say so , Miss Harding . I " 

 " no , " continue Eleanor , interrupt he , for she be now in the full flood - tide of her eloquence ; " no , I be sure you have not ; but other have say so ; and if this go on , if such thing be write again , it will kill papa . oh ! Mr Bold , if you only know the state he be in ! now papa do not care much about money . " 

 both her auditor , brother and sister , assent to this , and declare on their own knowledge that no man live less addicted to filthy lucre than the warden . 

 " oh ! it be so kind of you to say so , Mary , and of you too , Mr Bold . I could not   bear that people should think unjustly of papa . do you know he would give up the hospital altogether , only he can not . the archdeacon say it would be cowardly , and that he would be desert his order , and injure the church . whatever may happen , papa will not do that : he would leave the place to - morrow willingly , and give up his house , and the income and all , if the archdeacon " 

 Eleanor be go to say " would let he , " but she stop herself before she have compromise her father 's dignity ; and give a long sigh , she add " oh , I do so wish he would . " 

 " no one who know Mr Harding personally accuse he for a moment , " say Bold . 

 " it be he that have to bear the punishment ; it be he that suffer , " say eleanor ; " and what for ? what have he do wrong ? how have he deserve this persecution ? he that never have an unkind thought in his life , he that never say an unkind word ! " and here she break down , and the violence of her sob stop her utterance . 

 bold , for the fifth or sixth time , declare that neither he nor any of his friend impute any blame personally to Mr Harding . 

 " then why should he be persecute ? " ejaculate Eleanor through her tear , forget in her eagerness that her intention have be to humble herself as a suppliant before John Bold ; " why should he be single out for scorn and disgrace ? why should he be make so wretched ? oh ! Mr Bold , " and she turn towards he as though the kneeling scene be about to be commence , " oh ! Mr Bold , why do you begin all this ? you , whom we all so so value ! " 

 to speak the truth , the reformer 's punishment be certainly come upon he , for his present plight be not enviable ; he have nothing for it but to excuse himself by platitude about public duty , which it be by no mean worth while to repeat , and to reiterate his eulogy on Mr Harding 's character . his position be certainly a cruel one : have any gentleman call upon he on behalf of Mr Harding he could of course have decline to enter upon the subject ; but how could he do so with a beautiful girl , with the daughter of the man whom he have injure , with his own love ? 

 in the meantime Eleanor recollect herself , and again summon up her energy . " Mr Bold , " say she , " I have come here to implore you to abandon this proceeding . " he stand up from his seat , and look beyond measure distressed . " to implore you to abandon it , to implore you to spare my father , to spare either his life or his reason , for one or the other will pay the forfeit if this go on . I know how much I be ask , and how little right I have to ask anything ; but I think you will listen to I as it be for my father . oh , Mr Bold , pray , pray do this for we ; pray do not drive to distraction a man who have love you so well . " 

 she do not absolutely kneel to he , but she follow he as he move from his chair , and lay her soft hand imploringly upon his arm . ah ! at any other time how exquisitely valuable would have be that touch ! but now he be distraught , dumbfound , and unmanned . what could he say to that sweet suppliant ; how explain to she that the matter now be probably beyond his control ; how tell she that he could not quell the storm which he have raise ? 

 " surely , surely , John , you can not refuse she , " say his sister . 

 " I would give she my soul , " say he , " if it would serve she . " 

 " oh , Mr Bold , " say Eleanor , " do not speak so ; I ask nothing for myself ; and what I ask for my father , it can not harm you to grant . " 

 " I would give she my soul , if it would serve she , " say Bold , still address his sister ; " everything I have be her , if she will accept it ; my house , my heart , my all ; every hope of my breast be centre in she ; her smile be sweet to I than the sun , and when I see she in sorrow as she now be , every nerve in my body suffer . no man can love well than I love she . " 

 " no , no , no , " ejaculated Eleanor ; " there can be no talk of love between we . will you protect my father from the evil you have bring upon he ? " 

 " oh , Eleanor , I will do anything ; let I tell you how I love you ! " 

 " no , no , no ! " she almost scream . " this be unmanly of you , Mr Bold . will you , will you , will you leave my father to die in peace in his quiet home ? " and seize he by his arm and hand , she follow he across the room towards the door . " I will not leave you till you promise I ; I will cling to you in the street ; I will kneel to you before all the people . you shall promise I this , you shall promise I this , you shall " and she cling to he with fix tenacity , and reiterate her resolve with hysterical passion . 

 " speak to she , John ; answer she , " say Mary , bewilder by the unexpected vehemence of Eleanor 's manner ; " you can not have the cruelty to refuse she . " 

 " promise I , promise I , " say eleanor ; ' say that my father be safe ; one word will do . I know how true you be ; say one word , and I will let you go . " 

 she still hold he , and look eagerly into his face , with her hair dishevel and her eye all bloodshot . she have no thought now of herself , no care now for her appearance ; and yet he think he have never see she half so lovely ; he be amazed at the intensity of her beauty , and could hardly believe that it be she whom he have dare to love . " promise I , " say she ; " I will not leave you till you have promise I . " 

 " I will , " say he at length ; " I do all I can do , I will do . " 

 " then may God Almighty bless you for ever and ever ! " say Eleanor ; and fall on her knee with her face in Mary 's lap , she weep and sob like a child : her strength have carry she through her allotted task , but now it be well nigh exhaust . 

 in a while she be partly recover , and get up to go , and would have go , have not Bold make she understand that it be necessary for he to explain to she how far it be in his power to put an end to the proceeding which have be take against Mr Harding . have he speak on any other subject , she would have vanish , but on that she be bind to hear he ; and now the danger of her position commence . while she have an active part to play , while she cling to he as a suppliant , it be easy enough for she to reject his proffered love , and cast from she his caress word ; but now now that he have yield , and be talk to she calmly and kindly as to her father 's welfare , it be hard enough for she to do so . then Mary Bold assist she ; but now she be quite on her brother 's side . Mary say but little , but every word she do say give some direct and deadly blow . the first thing she do be to make room for her brother between herself and Eleanor on the sofa : as the sofa be full large for three , Eleanor could not resent this , nor could she show suspicion by take another seat ; but she feel it to be a most unkind proceeding . and then Mary would talk as though they three be join in some close peculiar bond together ; as though they be in future always to wish together , contrive together , and act together ; and Eleanor could not gainsay this ; she could not make another speech , and say , " Mr Bold and I be stranger , Mary , and be always to remain so ! " 

 he explain to she that , though undoubtedly the proceeding against the hospital have commence solely with himself , many other be now interested in the matter , some of whom be much more influential than himself ; that it be to he alone , however , that the lawyer look for instruction as to their doing , and , more important still , for the payment of their bill ; and he promise that he would at once give they notice that it be his intention to abandon the cause . he think , he say , that it be not probable that any active step would be take after he have secede from the matter , though it be possible that some pass allusion might still be make to the hospital in the daily Jupiter . he promise , however , that he would use his good influence to prevent any further personal allusion be make to Mr Harding . he then suggest that he would on that afternoon ride over himself to Dr Grantly , and inform he of his altered intention on the subject , and with this view , he postpone his immediate return to London . 

 this be all very pleasant , and Eleanor do enjoy a sort of triumph in the feeling that she have attain the object for which she have seek this interview ; but still the part of Iphigenia be to be play out . the god have hear her prayer , grant her request , and be they not to have their promise sacrifice ? Eleanor be not a girl to defraud they wilfully ; so , as soon as she decently could , she get up for her bonnet . 

 " be you go so soon ? " say Bold , who half an hour since would have give a hundred pound that he be in London , and she still at Barchester . 

 " oh yes ! " say she . " I be so much oblige to you ; papa will feel this to be so kind . " she do not quite appreciate all her father 's feeling . " of course I must tell he , and I will say that you will see the archdeacon . " 

 " but may I not say one word for myself ? " say Bold . 

 " I will fetch you your bonnet , Eleanor , " say Mary , in the act of leave the room . 

 " Mary , Mary , " say she , get up and catch she by her dress ; " do not   go , I will get my bonnet myself . " but Mary , the traitress , stand fast by the door , and permit no such retreat . Poor Iphigenia ! 

 and with a volley of impassioned love , John Bold pour forth the feeling of his heart , swearing , as man do , some truth and many falsehood ; and Eleanor repeat with every shade of vehemence the " no , no , no , " which have have a short time since so much effect ; but now , alas ! its strength be go . let she be never so vehement , her vehemence be not respect ; all her " no , no , no 's " be meet with counter - asseveration , and at last be overpower . the ground be cut from under she on every side . she be press to say whether her father would object ; whether she herself have any aversion   aversion ! God help she , poor girl ! the word nearly make her jump into his arm ; any other preference   this she loudly disclaim ; whether it be impossible that she should love he   Eleanor could not say that it be impossible : and so at last all her defence demolish , all her maiden barrier sweep away , she capitulate , or rather march out with the honour of war , vanquish evidently , palpably vanquish , but still not reduce to the necessity of confess it . 

 and so the altar on the shore of the modern Aulis reek with no sacrifice . 

 

 

 Chapter XII 

 Mr Bold 's visit to plumstead 

 

 whether or no the ill - natured prediction make by certain lady in the beginning of the last chapter be or be not carry out to the letter , I be not in a position to state . Eleanor , however , certainly do feel herself to have be baffle as she return home with all her news to her father . certainly she have be victorious , certainly she have achieve her object , certainly she be not unhappy , and yet she do not feel herself triumphant . everything would run smooth now . Eleanor be not at all addict to the lydian school of romance ; she by no mean object to her lover because he come in at the door under the name of Absolute , instead of pull she out of a window under the name of Beverley ; and yet she feel that she have be impose upon , and could hardly think of Mary Bold with sisterly charity . " I do think I could have trust Mary , " she say to herself over and over again . " oh that she should have dare to keep I in the room when I try to get out ! " Eleanor , however , feel that the game be up , and that she have now nothing furth to do but to add to the budget of news which be prepare for her father , that John Bold be her accept lover . 

 we will , however , now leave she on her way , and go with John Bold to Plumstead Episcopi , merely premise that Eleanor on reach home will not find thing so smooth as she fondly expect ; two messenger have come , one to her father and the other to the archdeacon , and each of they much oppose to her quiet mode of solve all their difficulty ; the one in the shape of a number of the Jupiter , and the other in that of a further opinion from Sir Abraham Haphazard . 

 John Bold get on his horse and ride off to Plumstead Episcopi ; not briskly and with eager spur , as man do ride when self - satisfied with their own intention ; but slowly , modestly , thoughtfully , and somewhat in dread of the come interview . now and again he would recur to the scene which be just over , support himself by the remembrance of the silence that give consent , and exult as a happy lover . but even this feeling be not without a shade of remorse . have he not show himself childishly weak thus to yield up the resolve of many hour of thought to the tear of a pretty girl ? how be he to meet his lawyer ? how be he to back out of a matter in which his name be already so publicly concerned ? what , oh what ! be he to say to Tom Towers ? while meditate these painful thing he reach the lodge lead up to the archdeacon 's glebe , and for the first time in his life find himself within the sacred precinct . 

 all the doctor 's child be together on the slope of the lawn , close to the road , as Bold ride up to the hall door . they be there hold high debate on matter evidently of deep interest at Plumstead Episcopi , and the voice of the boy have be hear before the lodge gate be close . 

 Florinda and Grizzel , frighten at the sight of so well - know an enemy to the family , flee on the first appearance of the horseman , and run in terror to their mother 's arm ; not for they be it , tender branch , to resent injury , or as member of a church militant to put on armour against its enemy . but the boy stand their ground like hero , and boldly demand the business of the intruder . 

 " do you want to see anybody here , sir ? " say Henry , with a defiant eye and a hostile tone , which plainly say that at any rate no one there want to see the person so address ; and as he speak he brandish aloft his garden water - pot , hold it by the spout , ready for the braining of anyone . 

 " Henry , " say Charles James slowly , and with a certain dignity of diction , " Mr Bold of course would not have come without want to see someone ; if Mr Bold have a proper ground for want to see some person here , of course he have a right to come . " 

 but Samuel step lightly up to the horse 's head , and offer his service . " oh , Mr Bold , " say he , " papa , I be sure , will be glad to see you ; I suppose you want to see papa . shall I hold your horse for you ? oh what a very pretty horse ! " and he turn his head and wink funnily at his brother . " Papa have hear such good news about the old hospital to - day . we know you will be glad to hear it , because you be such a friend of grandpapa Harding , and so much in love with Aunt Nelly ! " 

 " how d'ye do , lad ? " say Bold , dismounting . " I want to see your father if he be at home . " 

 " lad ! " say Henry , turn on his heel and address himself to his brother , but loud enough to be hear by Bold ; " lad , indeed ! if we be lad , what do he call himself ? " 

 Charles James condescend to say nothing far , but cock his hat with much precision , and leave the visitor to the care of his young brother . 

 Samuel stay till the servant come , chat and pat the horse ; but as soon as Bold have disappear through the front door , he stick a switch under the animal 's tail to make he kick if possible . 

 the church reformer soon find himself tete - a - tete with the archdeacon in that same room , in that sanctum sanctorum of the rectory , to which we have already be introduce . as he enter he hear the click of a certain patent lock , but it strike he with no surprise ; the worthy clergyman be no doubt hide from eye profane his last much - study sermon ; for the archdeacon , though he preach but seldom , be famous for his sermon . no room , Bold thought , could have be more become for a dignitary of the church ; each wall be load with theology ; over each separate bookcase be print in small gold letter the name of those great divine whose work be range beneath : begin from the early father in due chronological order , there be to be find the precious labour of the choose servant of the church down to the last pamphlet write in opposition to the consecration of Dr Hampden ; and raise above this be to be see the bust of the great among the great : Chrysostom , St Augustine , Thomas a Becket , Cardinal Wolsey , Archbishop Laud , and Dr Philpotts . 

 every appliance that could make study pleasant and give ease to the overtoiled brain be there ; chair make to relieve each limb and muscle ; reading - desk and writing - desk to suit every attitude ; lamp and candle mechanically contrive to throw their light on any favour spot , as the student might desire ; a shoal of newspaper to amuse the few leisure moment which might be steal from the labour of the day ; and then from the window a view right through a bosky vista along which run a broad green path from the rectory to the church , at the end of which the tawny - tint fine old tower be see with all its variegate pinnacle and parapet . few parish church in England be in well repair , or well worth keep so , than that at Plumstead Episcopi ; and yet it be build in a faulty style : the body of the church be low , so low , that the nearly flat leaden roof would be visible from the churchyard , be it not for the carve parapet with which it be surround . it be cruciform , though the transept be irregular , one be large than the other ; and the tower be much too high in proportion to the church . but the colour of the building be perfect ; it be that rich yellow gray which one find nowhere but in the south and west of England , and which be so strong a characteristic of most of our old house of Tudor architecture . the stone work also be beautiful ; the mullion of the window and the thick tracery of the Gothic workmanship be as rich as fancy can desire ; and though in gaze on such a structure one know by rule that the old priest who build it , build it wrong , one can not bring oneself to wish that they should have make it other than it be . 

 when Bold be usher into the book - room , he find its owner stand with his back to the empty fire - place ready to receive he , and he could not but perceive that that expansive brow be elated with triumph , and that those full heavy lip bear more prominently than usual an appearance of arrogant success . 

 " well , Mr Bold , " say he ; " well , what can I do for you ? very happy , I can assure you , to do anything for such a friend of my father - in - law . " 

 " I hope you will excuse my calling , Dr Grantly . " 

 " certainly , certainly , " say the archdeacon ; " I can assure you , no apology be necessary from Mr Bold ; only let I know what I can do for he . " 

 Dr Grantly be stand himself , and he do not ask Bold to sit , and therefore he have to tell his tale standing , lean on the table , with his hat in his hand . he do , however , manage to tell it ; and as the archdeacon never once interrupt he , or even encourage he by a single word , he be not long in come to the end of it . 

 " and so , Mr Bold , I be to understand , I believe , that you be desirous of abandon this attack upon Mr Harding . " 

 " oh , Dr Grantly , there have be no attack , I can assure you " 

 " well , well , we will not   quarrel about word ; I should call it an attack ; most man would so call an endeavour to take away from a man every shilling of income that he have to live upon ; but it sha'n't   be an attack , if you do not   like it ; you wish to abandon this this little game of backgammon you have   begin to play . " 

 " I intend to put an end to the legal proceeding which I have commence . " 

 " I understand , " say the archdeacon . " you have   already have enough of it ; well , I can not   say that I be surprised ; carry on a lose lawsuit where one have nothing to gain , but everything to pay , be not pleasant . " 

 Bold turn very red in the face . " you misinterpret my motif , " say he ; " but , however , that be of little consequence . I do not come to trouble you with my motif , but to tell you a matter of fact . good - morning , Dr Grantly . " 

 " one moment , one moment , " say the other . " I do not   exactly appreciate the taste which induce you to make any personal communication to I on the subject ; but I dare say I be wrong , I dare say your judgment be the well of the two ; but as you have do I the honour , as you have , as it be , force I into a certain amount of conversation on a subject which have well , perhaps , have be leave to our lawyer , you will excuse I if I ask you to hear my reply to your communication . " 

 " I be in no hurry , Dr Grantly . " 

 " well , I be , Mr Bold ; my time be not exactly leisure time , and , therefore , if you please , we will go to the point at once : you be go to abandon this lawsuit ? " and he pause for a reply . 

 " yes , Dr Grantly , I be . " 

 " have expose a gentleman who be one of your father 's warm friend to all the ignominy and insolence which the press could heap upon his name , have somewhat ostentatiously declare that it be your duty as a man of high public virtue to protect those poor old fool whom you have humbug there at the hospital , you now find that the game cost more than it be worth , and so you make up your mind to have do with it . a prudent resolution , Mr Bold ; but it be a pity you should have be so long come to it . have it strike you that we may not now choose to give over ? that we may find it necessary to punish the injury you have do to we ? be you aware , sir , that we have go to enormous expense to resist this iniquitous attempt of your ? " 

 Bold 's face be now furiously red , and he nearly crush his hat between his hand ; but he say nothing . 

 " we have find it necessary to employ the good advice that money could procure . be you aware , sir , what may be the probable cost of secure the service of the attorney - general ? " 

 " not in the least , Dr Grantly . " 

 " I dare say not , sir . when you recklessly put this affair into the hand of your friend Mr Finney , whose six - and - eightpence and thirteen - and - fourpence may , probably , not amount to a large sum , you be indifferent as to the cost and suffering which such a proceeding might entail on other ; but be you aware , sir , that these crush cost must now come out of your own pocket ? " 

 " any demand of such a nature which Mr Harding 's lawyer may have to make will doubtless be make to my lawyer . " 

 " ' Mr Harding 's lawyer and my lawyer ! ' do you come here merely to refer I to the lawyer ? upon my word I think the honour of your visit might have be spar ! and now , sir , I will tell you what my opinion be : my opinion be , that we shall not allow you to withdraw this matter from the court . " 

 " you can do as you please , Dr Grantly ; good - morning . " 

 " hear I out , sir , " say the archdeacon ; " I have here in my hand the last opinion give in this matter by Sir Abraham Haphazard . I dare say you have already hear of this ; I dare say it have have something to do with your visit here to - day . " 

 " I know nothing whatever of Sir Abraham Haphazard or his opinion . " 

 " be that as it may , here it be ; he declare most explicitly that under no phasis of the affair whatever have you a leg to stand upon ; that Mr Harding be as safe in his hospital as I be here in my rectory ; that a more futile attempt to destroy a man be never make , than this which you have make to ruin Mr Harding . here , " and he slap the paper on the table , " I have this opinion from the very first lawyer in the land ; and under these circumstance you expect I to make you a low bow for your kind offer to release Mr Harding from the toil of your net ! Sir , your net be not strong enough to hold he ; sir , your net have fall to piece , and you know that well enough before I tell you ; and now , sir , I will wish you good - morning , for I be busy . " 

 Bold be now choke with passion . he have let the archdeacon run on because he know not with what word to interrupt he ; but now that he have be so defied and insult , he could not leave the room without some reply . 

 " Dr Grantly , " he commence . 

 " I have nothing further to say or to hear , " say the archdeacon . " I will do myself the honour to order your horse . " and he ring the bell . 

 " I come here , Dr Grantly , with the warm , kind feeling " 

 " oh , of course you do ; nobody doubt it . " 

 " with the kind feeling ; and they have be most grossly outrage by your treatment . " 

 " of course they have ; I have not choose to see my father - in - law ruin ; what an outrage that have be to your feeling ! " 

 " the time will come , Dr Grantly , when you will understand why I call upon you to - day . " 

 " no doubt , no doubt . be Mr Bold 's horse there ? that be right ; open the front door . good - morning , Mr Bold ; " and the doctor stalk into his own drawing - room , close the door behind he , and make it quite impossible that John Bold should speak another word . 

 as he get on his horse , which he be fain to do feel like a dog turn out of a kitchen , he be again greet by little Sammy . 

 " good - bye , Mr Bold ; I hope we may have the pleasure of see you again before long ; I be sure papa will always be glad to see you . " 

 that be certainly the bitter moment in John Bold 's life . not even the remembrance of his successful love could comfort he ; nay , when he think of Eleanor he feel that it be that very love which have bring he to such a pass . that he should have be so insulted , and be unable to reply ! that he should have give up so much to the request of a girl , and then have have his motif so misunderstood ! that he should have make so gross a mistake as this visit of his to the archdeacon 's ! he bite the top of his whip , till he penetrate the horn of which it be make : he strike the poor animal in his anger , and then be doubly angry with himself at his futile passion . he have be so completely checkmate , so palpably overcome ! and what be he to do ? he could not continue his action after pledge himself to abandon it ; nor be there any revenge in that ; it be the very step to which his enemy have endeavour to goad he ! 

 he throw the rein to the servant who come to take his horse , and rush upstairs into his drawing - room , where his sister Mary be sit . 

 " if there be a devil , " say he , " a real devil here on earth , it be Dr Grantly . " he vouchsafe she no further intelligence , but again seize his hat , he rush out , and take his departure for London without another word to anyone . 

 

 

 Chapter XIII 

 the Warden 's decision 

 

 the meeting between Eleanor and her father be not so stormy as that describe in the last chapter , but it be hardly more successful . on her return from Bold 's house she find her father in a strange state . he be not sorrowful and silent as he have be on that memorable day when his son - in - law lecture he as to all that he owe to his order ; nor be he in his usual quiet mood . when Eleanor reach the hospital , he be walk to and fro upon the lawn , and she soon see that he be much excited . 

 " I be go to London , my dear , " he say as soon as he see she . 

 " London , papa ! " 

 " yes , my dear , to London ; I will have this matter settle some way ; there be some thing , Eleanor , which I can not bear . " 

 " oh , papa , what be it ? " say she , lead he by the arm into the house . " I have such good news for you , and now you make I fear I be too late . " and then , before he could let she know what have cause this sudden resolve , or could point to the fatal paper which lie on the table , she tell he that the lawsuit be over , that Bold have commission she to assure her father in his name that it would be abandon , that there be no further cause for misery , that the whole matter might be look on as though it have never be discuss . she do not tell he with what determined vehemence she have obtain this concession in his favour , nor do she mention the price she be to pay for it . 

 the warden do not express himself peculiarly gratify at this intelligence , and Eleanor , though she have not work for thank , and be by no mean dispose to magnify her own good office , feel hurt at the manner in which her news be receive . " Mr Bold can act as he think proper , my love , " say he ; " if Mr Bold think he have be wrong , of course he will discontinue what he be do ; but that can not change my purpose . " 

 " oh , papa ! " she exclaim , all but cry with vexation ; " I think you would have be so happy ; I think all would have be right now . " 

 " Mr Bold , " continue he , " have set great people to work , so great that I doubt they be now beyond his control . read that , my dear . " the warden , double up a number of the Jupiter , point to the peculiar article which she be to read . it be to the last of the three leader , which be generally furnish daily for the support of the nation , that Mr Harding direct her attention . it deal some heavy blow on various clerical delinquent ; on family who receive their ten of thousand yearly for do nothing ; on man who , as the article state , roll in wealth which they have neither earn nor inherit , and which be in fact steal from the poor clergy . it name some son of bishop , and grandson of archbishop ; man great in their way , who have redeem their disgrace in the eye of many by the enormity of their plunder ; and then , have dispose of these leviathan , it descend to Mr Harding . 
 

 we allude some week since to an instance of similar injustice , though in a more humble scale , in which the warden of an almshouse at Barchester have become possess of the income of the great part of the whole institution . why an almshouse should have a warden we can not pretend to explain , nor can we say what special need twelve old man can have for the service of a separate clergyman , see that they have twelve reserve seat for themselves in Barchester Cathedral . but be this as it may , let the gentleman call himself warden or precentor , or what he will , let he be never so scrupulous in exact religious duty from his twelve dependent , or never so negligent as regard the service of the cathedral , it appear palpably clear that he can be entitle to no portion of the revenue of the hospital , except that which the founder set apart for he ; and it be equally clear that the founder do not intend that three - fifth of his charity should be so consume . 

 the case be certainly a paltry one after the ten of thousand with which we have be deal , for the warden 's income be after all but a poor eight hundred a year : eight hundred a year be not magnificent preferment of itself , and the warden may , for anything we know , be worth much more to the church ; but if so , let the church pay he out of fund justly at its own disposal . 

 we allude to the question of the Barchester almshouse at the present moment , because we understand that a plea have be set up which will be peculiarly revolt to the mind of english churchman . an action have be take against Mr Warden Harding , on behalf of the almsmen , by a gentleman act solely on public ground , and it be to be argue that Mr Harding take nothing but what he receive as a servant of the hospital , and that he be not himself responsible for the amount of stipend give to he for his work . such a plea would doubtless be fair , if anyone question the daily wage of a bricklayer employ on the building , or the fee of the charwoman who clean it ; but we can not envy the feeling of a clergyman of the Church of England who could allow such an argument to be put in his mouth . 

 if this plea be put forward we trust Mr Harding will be force as a witness to state the nature of his employment ; the amount of work that he do ; the income which he receive ; and the source from whence he obtain his appointment . we do not think he will receive much public sympathy to atone for the annoyance of such an examination . 
 

 as Eleanor read the article her face flush with indignation , and when she have finish it , she almost fear to look up at her father . 

 " well , my dear , " say he , " what do you think of that ; be it worth while to be a warden at that price ? " 

 " oh , papa ; dear papa ! " 

 " Mr Bold can not   un - write that , my dear ; Mr Bold can not   say that that sha'n't   be read by every clergyman at Oxford ; nay , by every gentleman in the land ; " and then he walk up and down the room , while Eleanor in mute despair follow he with her eye . " and I will tell you what , my dear , " he continue , speak now very calmly , and in a force manner very unlike himself ; " Mr Bold can not   dispute the truth of every word in that article you have just read nor can I. " Eleanor star at he , as though she scarcely understand the word he be speak . " nor can I , eleanor : that be the bad of all , or would be so if there be no remedy . I have think much of all this since we be together last night ; " and he come and sit beside she , and put his arm round her waist as he have do then . " I have think much of what the archdeacon have say , and of what this paper say ; and I do believe I have no right to be here . " 

 " no right to be warden of the hospital , papa ? " 

 " no right to be warden with eight hundred a year ; no right to be warden with such a house as this ; no right to spend in luxury money that be intend for charity . Mr Bold may do as he please about his suit , but I hope he will not abandon it for my sake . " 

 Poor Eleanor ! this be hard upon she . be it for this she have make she great resolve ! for this that she have lay aside her quiet demeanour , and take upon she the rant of a tragedy heroine ! one may work and not for thank , but yet feel hurt at not receive they ; and so it be with Eleanor : one may be disintereste in one 's good action , and yet feel discontented that they be not recognise . charity may be give with the left hand so privily that the right hand do not know it , and yet the left hand may regret to feel that it have no immediate reward . Eleanor have have no wish to burden her father with a weight of obligation , and yet she have look forward to much delight from the knowledge that she have free he from his sorrow : now such hope be entirely over : all that she have do be of no avail ; she have humble herself to Bold in vain ; the evil be utterly beyond her power to cure ! 

 she have think also how gently she would whisper to her father all that her lover have say to she about herself , and how impossible she have find it to reject he : and then she have anticipate her father 's kindly kiss and close embrace as he give his sanction to her love . alas ! she could say nothing of this now . in speaking of Mr Bold , her father put he aside as one whose thought and saying and act could be of no moment . gentle reader , do you ever feel yourself snub ? do you ever , when think much of your own importance , find yourself suddenly reduce to a nonentity ? such be Eleanor 's feeling now . 

 " they shall not put forward this plea on my behalf , " continue the warden . " whatever may be the truth of the matter , that at any rate be not true ; and the man who write that article be right in say that such a plea be revolt to an honest mind . I will go up to London , my dear , and see these lawyer myself , and if no well excuse can be make for I than that , I and the hospital will part . " 

 " but the archdeacon , papa ? " 

 " I can not   help it , my dear ; there be some thing which a man can not bear : I can not bear that ; " and he put his hand upon the newspaper . 

 " but will the archdeacon go with you ? " 

 to tell the truth , Mr Harding have make up his mind to steal a march upon the archdeacon . he be aware that he could take no step without inform his dread son - in - law , but he have resolve that he would send out a note to Plumstead Episcopi detail his plan , but that the messenger should not leave Barchester till he himself have start for London ; so that he might be a day before the doctor , who , he have no doubt , would follow he . in that day , if he have luck , he might arrange it all ; he might explain to Sir Abraham that he , as warden , would have nothing furth to do with the defence about to be set up ; he might send in his official resignation to his friend the bishop , and so make public the whole transaction , that even the doctor would not be able to undo what he have do . he know too well the doctor 's strength and his own weakness to suppose he could do this , if they both reach London together ; indeed , he would never be able to get to London , if the doctor know of his intended journey in time to prevent it . 

 " no , I think not , " say he . " I think I shall start before the archdeacon could be ready ; I shall go early to - morrow morning . " 

 " that will be good , papa , " say Eleanor , show that her father 's ruse be appreciate . 

 " why yes , my love . the fact be , I wish to do all this before the archdeacon can can interfere . there be a great deal of truth in all he say ; he argue very well , and I can not   always answer he ; but there be an old saying , nelly : ' everyone know where his own shoe pinch ! ' he will say that I want moral courage , and strength of character , and power of endurance , and it be all true ; but I be sure I ought not to remain here , if I have nothing well to put forward than a quibble : so , Nelly , we shall have to leave this pretty place . " 

 Eleanor 's face brighten up , as she assure her father how cordially she agree with he . 

 " true , my love , " say he , now again quite happy and at ease in his manner . " what good to we be this place or all the money , if we be to be ill - speak of ? " 

 " oh , papa , I be so glad ! " 

 " my darling child ! it do cost I a pang at first , nelly , to think that you should lose your pretty drawing - room , and your pony , and your garden : the garden will be the bad of all ; but there be a garden at Crabtree , a very pretty garden . " 

 Crabtree Parva be the name of the small living which Mr Harding have hold as a minor canon , and which still belong to he . it be only worth some eighty pound a year , and a small house and glebe , all of which be now hand over to Mr Harding 's curate ; but it be to Crabtree glebe that Mr Harding think of retire . this parish must not be mistake for that other living , Crabtree Canonicorum , as it be call . Crabtree Canonicorum be a very nice thing ; there be only two hundred parishioner ; there be four hundred acre of glebe ; and the great and small tithe , which both go to the rector , be worth four hundred pound a year more . Crabtree Canonicorum be in the gift of the dean and chapter , and be at this time possess by the honourable and Reverend Dr Vesey Stanhope , who also fill the prebendal stall of Goosegorge in Barchester Chapter , and hold the united rectory of Eiderdown and Stogpingum , or Stoke Pinquium , as it should be write . this be the same Dr Vesey Stanhope whose hospitable villa on the Lake of Como be so well known to the ťlite of english traveller , and whose collection of Lombard butterfly be suppose to be unique . 

 " yes , " say the warden , musing , " there be a very pretty garden at Crabtree ; but I shall be sorry to disturb poor Smith . " Smith be the curate of Crabtree , a gentleman who be maintain a wife and half a dozen child on the income arise from his profession . 

 Eleanor assure her father that , as far as she be concern , she could leave her house and her pony without a single regret . she be only so happy that he be go go where he would escape all this dreadful turmoil . 

 " but we will take the music , my dear . " 

 and so they go on plan their future happiness , and plot how they would arrange it all without the interposition of the archdeacon , and at last they again become confidential , and then the warden do thank she for what she have do , and Eleanor , lie on her father 's shoulder , do find an opportunity to tell her secret : and the father give his blessing to his child , and say that the man whom she love be honest , good , and kind - hearte , and right - thinking in the main , one who want only a good wife to put he quite upright , " a man , my love , " he end by say , " to whom I firmly believe that I can trust my treasure with safety . " 

 " but what will Dr Grantly say ? " 

 " well , my dear , it can not   be help ; we shall be out at Crabtree then . " 

 and Eleanor run upstairs to prepare her father 's clothe for his journey ; and the warden return to his garden to make his last adieux to every tree , and shrub , and shady nook that he know so well . 

 

 

 Chapter XIV 

 Mount Olympus 

 

 Wretched in spirit , groan under the feeling of insult , self - condemn , and ill - satisfied in every way , Bold return to his London lodging . Ill as he have fare in his interview with the archdeacon , he be not the less under the necessity of carry out his pledge to Eleanor ; and he go about his ungracious task with a heavy heart . 

 the attorney whom he have employ in London receive his instruction with surprise and evident misgiving ; however , they could only obey , and mutter something of their sorrow that such heavy cost should only fall upon their own employer , especially as nothing be want but perseverance to throw they on the opposite party . Bold leave the office which he have latterly so much frequent , shake the dust from off his foot ; and before he be down the stair , an edict have already go forth for the preparation of the bill . 

 he next thought of the newspaper . the case have be take up by more than one ; and he be well aware that the keynote have be sound by the Jupiter . he have be very intimate with Tom Towers , and have often discuss with he the affair of the hospital . Bold could not say that the article in that paper have be write at his own instigation . he do not even know , as a fact , that they have be write by his friend . Tom Towers have never say that such a view of the case , or such a side in the dispute , would be take by the paper with which he be connect . very discreet in such matter be Tom Towers , and altogether indispose to talk loosely of the concern of that mighty engine of which it be his high privilege to move in secret some portion . nevertheless Bold believe that to he be owe those dreadful word which have cause such panic at Barchester , and he conceive himself bind to prevent their repetition . with this view he betake himself from the attorney ' office to that laboratory where , with amazing chemistry , Tom Towers compound thunderbolt for the destruction of all that be evil , and for the furtherance of all that be good , in this and other hemisphere . 

 who have not hear of Mount Olympus , that high abode of all the power of type , that favour seat of the great goddess Pica , that wondrous habitation of god and devil , from whence , with ceaseless hum of steam and never - end flow of castalian ink , issue forth fifty thousand nightly edict for the governance of a subject nation ? 

 Velvet and gilding do not make a throne , nor gold and jewel a sceptre . it be a throne because the most exalted one sit there , and a sceptre because the most mighty one wield it . so it be with Mount Olympus . should a stranger make his way thither at dull noonday , or during the sleepy hour of the silent afternoon , he would find no acknowledge temple of power and beauty , no fitting fane for the great Thunderer , no proud faáade and pillare roof to support the dignity of this great of earthly potentate . to the outward and uninitiated eye , Mount Olympus be a somewhat humble spot , undistinguished , unadorned , nay , almost mean . it stand alone , as it be , in a mighty city , close to the dense throng of man , but partake neither of the noise nor the crowd ; a small seclude , dreary spot , tenant , one would say , by quite unambitious people at the easy rent . " be this Mount Olympus ? " ask the unbelieve stranger . " be it from these small , dark , dingy building that those infallible law proceed which cabinet be call upon to obey ; by which bishop be to be guide , lord and common control , judge instruct in law , general in strategy , admiral in naval tactic , and orange - woman in the management of their barrow ? " " yes , my friend from these wall . from here issue the only know infallible bull for the guidance of british soul and body . this little court be the Vatican of England . here reign a pope , self - nominate , self - consecrate , ay , and much strange too , self - believe ! a pope whom , if you can not obey he , I would advise you to disobey as silently as possible ; a pope hitherto afraid of no Luther ; a pope who manage his own inquisition , who punish unbeliever as no most skilful inquisitor of Spain ever dream of do ; one who can excommunicate thoroughly , fearfully , radically ; put you beyond the pale of man 's charity ; make you odious to your dearest friend , and turn you into a monster to be point at by the finger ! " oh heavens ! and this be Mount Olympus ! 

 it be a fact amazing to ordinary mortal that the Jupiter be never wrong . with what endless care , with what unspare labour , do we not strive to get together for our great national council the man most fitting to compose it . and how we fail ! Parliament be always wrong : look at the Jupiter , and see how futile be their meeting , how vain their council , how needless all their trouble ! with what pride do we regard our chief minister , the great servant of state , the oligarch of the nation on whose wisdom we lean , to whom we look for guidance in our difficulty ! but what be they to the writer of the Jupiter ? they hold council together and with anxious thought painfully elaborate their country 's good ; but when all be do , the Jupiter declare that all be naught . why should we look to Lord John Russell ; why should we regard Palmerston and Gladstone , when Tom Towers without a struggle can put we right ? look at our general , what fault they make ; at our admiral , how inactive they be . what money , honesty , and science can do , be do ; and yet how badly be our troop bring together , fed , convey , clothe , armed , and manage . the most excellent of our good man do their good to man our ship , with the assistance of all possible external appliance ; but in vain . all , all be wrong alas ! alas ! Tom Towers , and he alone , know all about it . why , oh why , ye earthly minister , why have ye not follow more closely this heaven - send messenger that be among we ? 

 be it not well for we in our ignorance that we confide all thing to the Jupiter ? would it not be wise in we to abandon useless talking , idle thinking , and profitless labour ? away with majority in the House of Commons , with verdict from judicial bench give after much delay , with doubtful law , and the fallible attempt of humanity ! do not the Jupiter , come forth daily with fifty thousand impression full of unerre decision on every mortal subject , set all matter sufficiently at rest ? be not Tom Towers here , able to guide we and willing ? 

 yes indeed , able and willing to guide all man in all thing , so long as he be obey as autocrat should be obey , with undoubting submission : only let not ungrateful minister seek other colleague than those whom Tom Towers may approve ; let church and state , law and physic , commerce and agriculture , the art of war , and the art of peace , all listen and obey , and all will be make perfect . have not Tom Towers an all - see eye ? from the digging of Australia to those of California , right round the habitable globe , do he not know , watch , and chronicle the doing of everyone ? from a bishopric in New Zealand to an unfortunate director of a north - west passage , be he not the only fit judge of capability ? from the sewer of London to the Central Railway of India , from the palace of St Petersburg to the cabin of Connaught , nothing can escape he . briton have but to read , to obey , and be bless . none but the fool doubt the wisdom of the Jupiter ; none but the mad dispute its fact . 

 no established religion have ever be without its unbeliever , even in the country where it be the most firmly fix ; no creed have be without scoffer ; no church have so prosper as to free itself entirely from dissent . there be those who doubt the Jupiter ! they live and breathe the upper air , walk here unscathed , though scorn , man , bear of british mother and nurse on english milk , who scruple not to say that Mount Olympus have its price , that Tom Towers can be buy for gold ! 

 such be Mount Olympus , the mouthpiece of all the wisdom of this great country . it may probably be say that no place in this 19th century be more worthy of notice . no treasury mandate arm with the signature of all the government have half the power of one of those broad sheet , which fly forth from hence so abundantly , arm with no signature at all . 

 some great man , some mighty peer , we will say a noble duke , retire to rest fear and honour by all his countryman , fearless himself ; if not a good man , at any rate a mighty man , too mighty to care much what man may say about his want of virtue . he rise in the morning degrade , mean , and miserable ; an object of man 's scorn , anxious only to retire as quickly as may be to some german obscurity , some unseen italian privacy , or indeed , anywhere out of sight . what have make this awful change ? what have so afflict he ? an article have appear in the Jupiter ; some fifty line of a narrow column have destroy all his grace 's equanimity , and banish he for ever from the world . no man know who write the bitter word ; the club talk confusedly of the matter , whisper to each other this and that name ; while Tom Towers walk quietly along Pall Mall , with his coat button close against the east wind , as though he be a mortal man , and not a god dispense thunderbolt from Mount Olympus . 

 it be not to Mount Olympus that our friend Bold betook himself . he have before now wander round that lonely spot , think how grand a thing it be to write article for the Jupiter ; consider within himself whether by any stretch of the power within he he could ever come to such distinction ; wonder how Tom Towers would take any little humble offering of his talent ; calculate that Tom Towers himself must have once have a beginning , have once doubt as to his own success . tower could not have be bear a writer in the Jupiter . with such idea , half ambitious and half awe - strike , have Bold regard the silent - look workshop of the god ; but he have never yet by word or sign attempt to influence the slight word of his unerre friend . on such a course be he now intent ; and not without much inward palpitation do he betake himself to the quiet abode of wisdom , where Tom Towers be to be find o ' morning inhale ambrosia and sip nectar in the shape of toast and tea . 

 not far remove from Mount Olympus , but somewhat near to the blessed region of the West , be the most favour abode of Themis . wash by the rich tide which now pass from the tower of Casar to Barry 's hall of eloquence ; and again back , with new offering of a city 's tribute , from the palace of peer to the mart of merchant , stand those quiet wall which Law have delight to honour by its presence . what a world within a world be the Temple ! how quiet be its " entangled walk , " as someone lately have call they , and yet how close to the dense concourse of humanity ! how gravely respectable its sober alley , though remove but by a single step from the profanity of the Strand and the low iniquity of Fleet Street ! Old St Dunstan , with its bell - smite bludgeoner , have be remove ; the ancient shop with their face full of pleasant history be pass away one by one ; the bar itself be to go its doom have be pronounce by the Jupiter ; rumour tell we of some huge building that be to appear in these latitude dedicate to law , subversive of the court of Westminster , and antagonistic to the Rolls and Lincoln 's Inn ; but nothing yet threaten the silent beauty of the Temple : it be the mediaval court of the metropolis . 

 here , on the choice spot of this choice ground , stand a lofty row of chamber , look obliquely upon the sully Thames ; before the window , the lawn of the Temple Gardens stretch with that dim yet delicious verdure so refreshing to the eye of Londoners . if doom to live within the thickest of London smoke you would surely say that that would be your choose spot . yes , you , you whom I now address , my dear , middle - aged bachelor friend , can nowhere be so well domicile as here . no one here will ask whether you be out or at home ; alone or with friend ; here no Sabbatarian will investigate your Sundays , no censorious landlady will scrutinise your empty bottle , no valetudinarian neighbour will complain of late hour . if you love book , to what place be book so suitable ? the whole spot be redolent of typography . would you worship the paphian goddess , the grove of Cyprus be not more taciturn than those of the Temple . wit and wine be always here , and always together ; the revel of the Temple be as those of polished Greece , where the wild worshipper of Bacchus never forget the dignity of the god whom he adore . where can retirement be so complete as here ? where can you be so sure of all the pleasure of society ? 

 it be here that Tom Towers live , and cultivate with eminent success the tenth Muse who now govern the periodical press . but let it not be suppose that his chamber be such , or so comfortless , as be frequently the gaunt abode of legal aspirant . four chair , a half - fill deal book - case with hanging of dingy green baize , an old office table cover with dusty paper , which be not move once in six month , and an old Pembroke brother with rickety leg , for all daily us ; a despatcher for the preparation of lobster and coffee , and an apparatus for the cooking of toast and mutton chop ; such utensil and luxury as these do not suffice for the well - being of Tom Towers . he indulge in four room on the first floor , each of which be furnish , if not with the splendour , with probably more than the comfort of Stafford House . every addition that science and art have lately make to the luxury of modern life be to be find there . the room in which he usually sit be surround by book - shelf carefully fill ; nor be there a volume there which be not entitle to its place in such a collection , both by its intrinsic worth and exterior splendour : a pretty portable set of step in one corner of the room show that those even on the high shelf be intend for use . the chamber contain but two work of art : the one , an admirable bust of Sir Robert Peel , by Power , declare the individual politic of our friend ; and the other , a singularly long figure of a female devotee , by Millais , tell equally plainly the school of art to which he be addict . this picture be not hung , as picture usually be , against the wall ; there be no inch of wall vacant for such a purpose : it have a stand or desk erect for its own accommodation ; and there on her pedestal , frame and glaze , stand the devotional lady look intently at a lily as no lady ever look before . 

 our modern artist , whom we style Pre - Raphaelites , have delight to go back , not only to the finish and peculiar manner , but also to the subject of the early painter . it be impossible to give they too much praise for the elaborate perseverance with which they have equal the minute perfection of the master from whom they take their inspiration : nothing probably can exceed the painting of some of these latter - day picture . it be , however , singular into what fault they fall as regard their subject : they be not quite content to take the old stock group , a Sebastian with his arrow , a Lucia with her eye in a dish , a Lorenzo with a gridiron , or the Virgin with two child . but they be anything but happy in their change . as a rule , no figure should be draw in a position which it be impossible to suppose any figure should maintain . the patient endurance of St Sebastian , the wild ecstasy of St John in the Wilderness , the maternal love of the Virgin , be feeling naturally portray by a fix posture ; but the lady with the stiff back and bent neck , who look at her flower , and be still look from hour to hour , give we an idea of pain without grace , and abstraction without a cause . 

 it be easy , from his room , to see that Tom Towers be a sybarite , though by no mean an idle one . he be linger over his last cup of tea , surround by an ocean of newspaper , through which he have be swim , when John Bold 's card be bring in by his tiger . this tiger never know that his master be at home , though he often know that he be not , and thus Tom Towers be never invade but by his own consent . on this occasion , after twist the card twice in his finger , he signify to his attendant imp that he be visible ; and the inner door be unbolt , and our friend announce . 

 I have before say that he of the Jupiter and John Bold be intimate . there be no very great difference in their age , for tower be still considerably under forty ; and when Bold have be attend the London hospital , Towers , who be not then the great man that he have since become , have be much with he . then they have often discuss together the object of their ambition and future prospect ; then Tom Towers be struggle hard to maintain himself , as a briefless barrister , by shorthand report for any of the paper that would engage he ; then he have not dare to dream of write leader for the Jupiter , or canvass the conduct of Cabinet minister . thing have alter since that time : the briefless barrister be still briefless , but he now despise brief : could he have be sure of a judge 's seat , he would hardly have leave his present career . it be true he wear no ermine , bear no outward mark of a world 's respect ; but with what a load of inward importance be he charge ! it be true his name appear in no large capital ; on no wall be chalk up " Tom Towers for ever ; " " Freedom of the Press and Tom Towers ; " but what member of Parliament have half his power ? it be true that in far - off province man do not talk daily of Tom Towers but they read the Jupiter , and acknowledge that without the Jupiter life be not worth have . this kind of hidden but still conscious glory suit the nature of the man . he love to sit silent in a corner of his club and listen to the loud chattering of politician , and to think how they all be in his power ; how he could smite the loud of they , be it worth his while to raise his pen for such a purpose . he love to watch the great man of whom he daily write , and flatter himself that he be great than any of they . each of they be responsible to his country , each of they must answer if inquire into , each of they must endure abuse with good humour , and insolence without anger . but to whom be he , Tom Towers , responsible ? no one could insult he ; no one could inquire into he . he could speak out wither word , and no one could answer he : minister court he , though perhaps they know not his name ; bishop fear he ; judge doubt their own verdict unless he confirm they ; and general , in their council of war , do not consider more deeply what the enemy would do , than what the Jupiter would say . Tom Towers never boast of the Jupiter ; he scarcely ever name the paper even to the most intimate of his friend ; he do not even wish to be speak of as connect with it ; but he do not the less value his privilege , or think the less of his own importance . it be probable that Tom Towers consider himself the most powerful man in Europe ; and so he walk on from day to day , studiously strive to look a man , but know within his breast that he be a god . 

 

 

 Chapter XV 

 Tom Towers , Dr Anticant , and Mr Sentiment 

 

 " ah , Bold ! how be you ? you have not   breakfast ? " 

 " oh yes , hour ago . and how be you ? " 

 when one Esquimau meet another , do the two , as an invariable rule , ask after each other 's health ? be it inherent in all human nature to make this oblige inquiry ? do any reader of this tale ever meet any friend or acquaintance without ask some such question , and do anyone ever listen to the reply ? sometimes a studiously courteous questioner will show so much thought in the matter as to answer it himself , by declare that have he look at you he need not   have ask ; mean thereby to signify that you be an absolute personification of health : but such person be only those who premeditate small effect . 

 " I suppose you be busy ? " inquire Bold . 

 " why , yes , rather ; or I should say rather not . if I have a leisure hour in the day , this be it . " 

 " I want to ask you if you can oblige I in a certain matter . " 

 tower understand in a moment , from the tone of his friend 's voice , that the certain matter refer to the newspaper . he smile , and nod his head , but make no promise . 

 " you know this lawsuit that I have   be engage in , " say Bold . 

 Tom Towers intimate that he be aware of the action which be pende about the hospital . 

 " well , I have   abandon it . " 

 Tom Towers merely raise his eyebrow , thrust his hand into his trowser pocket , and wait for his friend to proceed . 

 " yes , I have   give it up . I need not   trouble you with all the history ; but the fact be that the conduct of Mr Harding Mr Harding be the " 

 " oh yes , the master of the place ; the man who take all the money and do nothing , " say Tom Towers , interrupt he . 

 " well , I do not   know about that ; but his conduct in the matter have be so excellent , so little selfish , so open , that I can not proceed in the matter to his detriment . " Bold 's heart misgave he as to Eleanor as he say this ; and yet he feel that what he say be not untrue . " I think nothing should now be do till the wardenship be vacant . " 

 " and be again fill , " say Towers , " as it certainly would , before anyone hear of the vacancy ; and the same objection would again exist . it be an old story , that of the vested right of the incumbent ; but suppose the incumbent have only a vested wrong , and that the poor of the town have a vested right , if they only know how to get at it : be not that something the case here ? " 

 Bold could not   deny it , but think it be one of those case which require a good deal of management before any real good could be do . it be a pity that he have not consider this before he creep into the lion 's mouth , in the shape of an attorney 's office . 

 " it will cost you a good deal , I fear , " say tower . 

 " a few hundred , " say Bold " perhaps three hundred ; I can not   help that , and be prepare for it . " 

 " that be philosophical . it be quite refreshing to hear a man talk of his hundred in so purely indifferent a manner . but I be sorry you be give the matter up . it injure a man to commence a thing of this kind , and not carry it through . have you see that ? " and he throw a small pamphlet across the table , which be all but damp from the press . 

 Bold have not see it nor hear of it ; but he be well acquainted with the author of it , a gentleman whose pamphlet , condemnatory of all thing in these modern day , have be a good deal talk about of late . 

 Dr Pessimist Anticant be a Scotchman , who have pass a great portion of his early day in Germany ; he have study there with much effect , and have learn to look with german subtilty into the root of thing , and to examine for himself their intrinsic worth and worthlessness . no man ever resolve more bravely than he to accept as good nothing that be evil ; to banish from he as evil nothing that be good . ' tis a pity that he should not have recognise the fact , that in this world no good be unalloye , and that there be but little evil that have not in it some seed of what be goodly . 

 return from Germany , he have astonish the reading public by the vigour of his thought , put forth in the quaint language . he can not write English , say the critic . no matter , say the public ; we can read what he do write , and that without yawn . and so Dr Pessimist Anticant become popular . popularity spoil he for all further real use , as it have do many another . while , with some diffidence , he confine his objurgation to the occasional folly or shortcoming of mankind ; while he ridicule the energy of the squire devote to the slaughter of partridge , or the mistake of some noble patron who turn a poet into a gauger of beer - barrel , it be all well ; we be glad to be tell our fault and to look forward to the come millennium , when all man , have sufficiently study the work of Dr Anticant , would become truthful and energetic . but the doctor mistake the sign of the time and the mind of man , institute himself censor of thing in general , and begin the great task of reprobate everything and everybody , without further promise of any millennium at all . this be not so well ; and , to tell the truth , our author do not succeed in his undertaking . his theory be all beautiful , and the code of moral that he teach we certainly an improvement on the practice of the age . we all of we could , and many of we do , learn much from the doctor while he choose to remain vague , mysterious , and cloudy : but when he become practical , the charm be go . 

 his allusion to the poet and the partridge be receive very well . " oh , my poor brother , " say he , ' slaughter partridge a score of brace to each gun , and poet gauge ale - barrel , with sixty pound a year , at dumfrie , be not the sign of a great era ! perhaps of the small possible era yet write of . whatever economy we pursue , political or other , let we see at once that this be the maddest of the uneconomic : partridge kill by our land magnate at , shall we say , a guinea a head , to be retail in Leadenhall at one shilling and ninepence , with one poacher in limbo for every fifty bird ! our poet , maker , creator , gauge ale , and that badly , with no leisure for make or create , only a little leisure for drinking , and such like beer - barrel avocation ! truly , a cutting of block with fine razor while we scrape our chin so uncomfortably with rusty knife ! oh , my political economist , master of supply and demand , division of labour and high pressure , oh , my loud - speak friend , tell I , if so much be in you , what be the demand for poet in these kingdom of Queen Victoria , and what the vouchsafed supply ? " 

 this be all very well : this give we some hope . we might do well with our next poet , when we get one ; and though the partridge might not be abandon , something could perhaps be do as to the poacher . we be unwilling , however , to take lesson in politic from so misty a professor ; and when he come to tell we that the hero of Westminster be naught , we begin to think that he have write enough . his attack upon despatch box be not think to have much in it ; but as it be short , the doctor shall again be allow to speak his sentiment . 
 

 could utmost ingenuity in the management of red tape avail anything to man lie gasp , we may say , all but dead ; could despatch box with never - so - much velvet lining and Chubb 's patent be of comfort to a people in extremis , I also , with so many other , would , with parch tongue , call on the name of Lord John Russell ; or , my brother , at your advice , on Lord Aberdeen ; or , my cousin , on Lord Derby , at your ; be , with my parch tongue , indifferent to such matter . ' tis all one . oh , Derby ! oh , Gladstone ! oh , Palmerston ! oh , Lord John ! each come run with serene face and despatch box . vain physician ! though there be host of such , no despatch box will cure this disorder ! what ! be there other doctor ' new name , disciple who have not burden their soul with tape ? well , let we call again . oh , Disraeli , great oppositionist , man of the bitter brow ! or , oh , Molesworth , great reformer , thou who promisest Utopia . they come ; each with that serene face , and each , alas , I ! alas , my country ! each with a despatch box ! 

 oh , the serenity of Downing Street ! 

 my brother , when hope be over on the battle - field , when no dim chance of victory remain , the ancient Roman could hide his face within his toga , and die gracefully . can you and I do so now ? if so , ' twere good for we ; if not , oh my brother , we must die disgracefully , for hope of life and victory I see none leave to we in this world below . I for one can not trust much to serene face and despatch box ! 
 

 there might be truth in this , there might be depth of reasoning ; but englishman do not see enough in the argument to induce they to withdraw their confidence from the present arrangement of the government , and Dr Anticant 's monthly pamphlet on the decay of the world do not receive so much attention as his early work . he do not confine himself to politic in these publication , but roam at large over all matter of public interest , and find everything bad . accord to he nobody be true , and not only nobody , but nothing ; a man could not take off his hat to a lady without tell a lie ; the lady would lie again in smile . the ruffle of the gentleman 's shirt would be fraught with deceit , and the lady 's flounce full of falsehood . be ever anything more severe than that attack of his on chip bonnet , or the anathema with which he endeavour to dust the powder out of the bishop ' wig ? 

 the pamphlet which Tom Towers now push across the table be entitle " Modern Charity , " and be write with the view of prove how much in the way of charity be do by our predecessor , how little by the present age ; and it end by a comparison between ancient and modern time , very little to the credit of the latter . 

 " look at this , " say Towers , get up and turn over the page of the pamphlet , and point to a passage near the end . " your friend the warden , who be so little selfish , will not   like that , I fear . " bold read as follow 
 

 Heavens , what a sight ! let we with eye wide open see the godly man of four century since , the man of the dark age ; let we see how he do his godlike work , and , again , how the godly man of these latter day do his . 

 shall we say that the former be one walk painfully through the world , regard , as a prudent man , his worldly work , prosper in it as a diligent man will prosper , but always with an eye to that well treasure to which thief do not creep in ? be there not much nobility in that old man , as , lean on his oaken staff , he walk down the High Street of his native town , and receive from all courteous salutation and acknowledgment of his worth ? a noble old man , my august inhabitant of Belgrave Square and such like vicinity , a very noble old man , though employ no well than in the wholesale carding of wool . 

 this carding of wool , however , do in those day bring with it much profit , so that our ancient friend , when die , be declare , in whatever slang then prevail , to cut up exceed well . for son and daughter there be ample sustenance with assistance of due industry ; for friend and relative some relief for grief at this great loss ; for aged dependent comfort in decline year . this be much for one old man to get do in that dark fifteenth century . but this be not all : come generation of poor wool - carder should bless the name of this rich one ; and a hospital should be found and endow with his wealth for the feeding of such of the trade as could not , by diligent carding , any long duly feed themselves . 

 ' twas thus that an old man in the fifteenth century do his godlike work to the good of his power , and not ignobly , as appear to I . 

 we will now take our godly man of latter day . he shall no long be a wool - carder , for such be not now man of mark . we will suppose he to be one of the good of the good , one who have lack no opportunity . our old friend be , after all , but illiterate ; our modern friend shall be a man educate in all seemly knowledge ; he shall , in short , be that blessed being , a clergyman of the Church of England ! 

 and now , in what perfect manner do he in this low world get his godlike work do and put out of hand ? Heavens ! in the strange of manner . oh , my brother ! in a manner not at all to be believe , but by the most minute testimony of eyesight . he do it by the magnitude of his appetite , by the power of his gorge ; his only occupation be to swallow the bread prepare with so much anxious care for these impoverished carder of wool , that , and to sing indifferently through his nose once in the week some psalm more or less long , the short the well , we should be incline to say . 

 oh , my civilised friend ! great Britons that never will be slave , man advance to infinite state of freedom and knowledge of good and evil ; tell I , will you , what become monument you will erect to an highly - educate clergyman of the Church of England ? 
 

 Bold certainly think that his friend would not like that : he could not conceive anything that he would like less than this . to what a world of toil and trouble have he , Bold , give rise by his indiscreet attack upon the hospital ! 

 " you see , " say Towers , " that this affair have be much talk of , and the public be with you . I be sorry you should give the matter up . have you see the first number of ' the Almshouse ' ? " 

 no ; Bold have not see " the Almshouse . " he have see advertisement of Mr Popular Sentiment 's new novel of that name , but have in no way connect it with Barchester Hospital , and have never think a moment on the subject . 

 " it be a direct attack on the whole system , " say tower . " it will go a long way to put down Rochester , and Barchester , and Dulwich , and St Cross , and all such hotbed of peculation . it be very clear that Sentiment have be down to Barchester , and get up the whole story there ; indeed , I think he must have have it all from you ; it be very well do , as you will see : his first number always be . " 

 Bold declare that Mr Sentiment have get nothing from he , and that he be deeply grieve to find that the case have become so notorious . 

 " the fire have go too far to be quench , " say tower ; " the building must go now ; and as the timber be all rotten , why , I should be incline to say , the soon the well . I expect to see you get some ťclat in the matter . " 

 this be all wormwood to Bold . he have do enough to make his friend the warden miserable for life , and have then back out just when the success of his project be sufficient to make the question one of real interest . how weakly he have manage his business ! he have already do the harm , and then stay his hand when the good which he have in view be to be commence . how delightful would it have be to have employ all his energy in such a cause , to have be back by the Jupiter , and write up to by two of the most popular author of the day ! the idea open a view into the very world in which he wish to live . to what might it not have give rise ? what delightful intimacy , what public praise , to what athenian banquet and rich flavour of attic salt ? 

 this , however , be now past hope . he have pledge himself to abandon the cause ; and could he have forget the pledge , he have go too far to retreat . he be now , this moment , sit in Tom Towers ' room with the object of deprecate any further article in the Jupiter , and , greatly as he dislike the job , his petition to that effect must be make . 

 " I could not   continue it , " say he , " because I find I be in the wrong . " 

 Tom Towers shrug his shoulder . how could a successful man be in the wrong ! " in that case , " say he , " of course you must abandon it . " 

 " and I call this morning to ask you also to abandon it , " say Bold . 

 " to ask I , " say Tom Towers , with the most placid of smile , and a consummate look of gentle surprise , as though Tom Towers be well aware that he of all man be the last to meddle in such matter . 

 " yes , " say Bold , almost tremble with hesitation . " the Jupiter , you know , have take the matter up very strongly . Mr Harding have feel what it have say deeply ; and I think that if I could explain to you that he personally have not be to blame , these article might be discontinue . " 

 how calmly impassive be Tom Towers ' face , as this innocent little proposition be make ! have Bold address himself to the doorpost in Mount Olympus , they would have show as much outward sign of assent or dissent . his quiescence be quite admirable ; his discretion certainly more than human . 

 " my dear fellow , " say he , when Bold have quite do speak , " I really can not answer for the Jupiter . " 

 " but if you see that these article be unjust , I think that you would endeavour to put a stop to they . of course nobody doubt that you could , if you choose . " 

 " nobody and everybody be always very kind , but unfortunately be generally very wrong . " 

 " come , come , tower , " say Bold , pluck up his courage , and remember that for Eleanor 's sake he be bind to make his good exertion ; " I have no doubt in my own mind but that you write the article yourself , and very well write they be : it will be a great favour if you will in future abstain from any personal allusion to poor Harding . " 

 " my dear Bold , " say Tom Towers , " I have a sincere regard for you . I have know you for many year , and value your friendship ; I hope you will let I explain to you , without offence , that none who be connect with the public press can with propriety listen to interference . " 

 " interference ! " say Bold , " I do not   want to interfere . " 

 " ah , but , my dear fellow , you do ; what else be it ? you think that I be able to keep certain remark out of a newspaper . your information be probably incorrect , as most public gossip on such subject be ; but , at any rate , you think I have such power , and you ask I to use it : now that be interference . " 

 " well , if you choose to call it so . " 

 " and now suppose for a moment that I have this power , and use it as you wish : be not   it clear that it would be a great abuse ? certain man be employ in write for the public press ; and if they be induce either to write or to abstain from write by private motif , surely the public press would soon be of little value . look at the recognise worth of different newspaper , and see if it do not mainly depend on the assurance which the public feel that such a paper be , or be not , independent . you allude to the Jupiter : surely you can not but see that the weight of the Jupiter be too great to be move by any private request , even though it should be make to a much more influential person than myself : you have   only to think of this , and you will see that I be right . " 

 the discretion of Tom Towers be boundless : there be no contradict what he say , no arguing against such proposition . he take such high ground that there be no getting on to it . " the public be defraud , " say he , " whenever private consideration be allow to have weight . " quite true , thou great oracle of the middle of the nineteenth century , thou sententious proclaimer of the purity of the press ; the public be defraud when it be purposely mislead . poor public ! how often be it mislead ! against what a world of fraud have it to contend ! 

 Bold take his leave , and get out of the room as quickly as he could , inwardly denounce his friend Tom Towers as a prig and a humbug . " I know he write those article , " say Bold to himself . " I know he get his information from I . he be ready enough to take my word for gospel when it suit his own view , and to set Mr Harding up before the public as an impostor on no other testimony than my chance conversation ; but when I offer he real evidence oppose to his own view , he tell I that private motif be detrimental to public justice ! confound his arrogance ! what be any public question but a conglomeration of private interest ? what be any newspaper article but an expression of the view take by one side ? truth ! it take an age to ascertain the truth of any question ! the idea of Tom Towers talk of public motif and purity of purpose ! why , it would not   give he a moment 's uneasiness to change his politic to - morrow , if the paper require it . " 

 such be John Bold 's inward exclamation as he make his way out of the quiet labyrinth of the Temple ; and yet there be no position of worldly power so coveted in Bold 's ambition as that hold by the man of whom he be think . it be the impregnability of the place which make Bold so angry with the possessor of it , and it be the same quality which make it appear so desirable . 

 pass into the Strand , he see in a bookseller 's window an announcement of the first number of " the Almshouse ; " so he purchase a copy , and hurry back to his lodging , proceed to ascertain what Mr Popular Sentiment have to say to the public on the subject which have lately occupy so much of his own attention . 

 in former time great object be attain by great work . when evil be to be reform , reformer set about their heavy task with grave decorum and laborious argument . an age be occupy in prove a grievance , and philosophical research be print in folio page , which it take a life to write , and an eternity to read . we get on now with a light step , and quick : ridicule be find to be more convincing than argument , imaginary agony touch more than true sorrow , and monthly novel convince , when learn quarto fail to do so . if the world be to be set right , the work will be do by shill number . 

 of all such reformer Mr Sentiment be the most powerful . it be incredible the number of evil practice he have put down : it be to be fear he will soon lack subject , and that when he have make the working class comfortable , and get bitter beer put into proper - sized pint bottle , there will be nothing further for he leave to do . Mr Sentiment be certainly a very powerful man , and perhaps not the less so that his good poor people be so very good ; his hard rich people so very hard ; and the genuinely honest so very honest . namby - pamby in these day be not throw away if it be introduce in the proper quarter . divine peeress be no long interesting , though possess of every virtue ; but a pattern peasant or an immaculate manufacture hero may talk as much twaddle as one of Mrs Ratcliffe 's heroine , and still be listen to . perhaps , however , Mr Sentiment 's great attraction be in his second - rate character . if his hero and heroine walk upon stilt , as hero and heroine , I fear , ever must , their attendant satellite be as natural as though one meet they in the street : they walk and talk like man and woman , and live among our friend a rattle , lively life ; yes , live , and will live till the name of their calling shall be forget in their own , and Buckett and Mrs Gamp will be the only word leave to we to signify a detective police officer or a monthly nurse . 

 " the Almshouse " open with a scene in a clergyman 's house . every luxury to be purchase by wealth be describe as be there : all the appearance of household indulgence generally find amongst the most self - indulgent of the rich be crowd into this abode . here the reader be introduce to the demon of the book , the Mephistopheles of the drama . what story be ever write without a demon ? what novel , what history , what work of any sort , what world , would be perfect without exist principle both of good and evil ? the demon of " the Almshouse " be the clerical owner of this comfortable abode . he be a man well stricken in year , but still strong to do evil : he be one who look cruelly out of a hot , passionate , bloodshot eye ; who have a huge red nose with a carbuncle , thick lip , and a great double , flabby chin , which swell out into solid substance , like a turkey - cock 's comb , when sudden anger inspire he : he have a hot , furrowed , low brow , from which a few grizzle hair be not yet rub off by the friction of his handkerchief : he wear a loose unstarched white handkerchief , black loose ill - make clothe , and huge loose shoe , adapt to many corn and various bunion : his husky voice tell tale of much daily port wine , and his language be not so decorous as become a clergyman . such be the master of Mr Sentiment 's " Almshouse . " he be a widower , but at present accompany by two daughter , and a thin and somewhat insipid curate . one of the young lady be devoted to her father and the fashionable world , and she of course be the favourite ; the other be equally addicted to Puseyism and the curate . 

 the second chapter of course introduce the reader to the more especial inmate of the hospital . here be discover eight old man ; and it be give to be understand that four vacancy remain unfilled , through the perverse ill - nature of the clerical gentleman with the double chin . the state of these eight pauper be touchingly dreadful : sixpence - farthe a day have be sufficient for their diet when the almshouse be found ; and on sixpence - farthe a day be they still doom to starve , though food be four time as dear , and money four time as plentiful . it be shocking to find how the conversation of these eight starve old man in their dormitory sham that of the clergyman 's family in his rich drawing - room . the absolute word they utter be not perhaps speak in the pure English , and it might be difficult to distinguish from their dialect to what part of the country they belong ; the beauty of the sentiment , however , amply atone for the imperfection of the language ; and it be really a pity that these eight old man could not be send through the country as moral missionary , instead of be immure and starve in that wretched almshouse . 

 Bold finish the number ; and as he throw it aside , he think that that at least have no direct appliance to Mr Harding , and that the absurdly strong colouring of the picture would disenable the work from do either good or harm . he be wrong . the artist who paint for the million must use glare colour , as no one know well than Mr Sentiment when he describe the inhabitant of his almshouse ; and the radical reform which have now sweep over such establishment have owe more to the twenty number of Mr Sentiment 's novel , than to all the true complaint which have escape from the public for the last half century . 

 

 

 Chapter XVI 

 a long day in London 

 

 the warden have to make use of all his very moderate power of intrigue to give his son - in - law the slip , and get out of Barchester without be stop on his road . no schoolboy ever run away from school with more precaution and more dread of detection ; no convict , slip down from a prison wall , ever fear to see the gaoler more entirely than Mr Harding do to see his son - in - law as he drive up in the pony carriage to the railway station , on the morning of his escape to London . 

 the evening before he go he write a note to the archdeacon , explain that he should start on the morrow on his journey ; that it be his intention to see the attorney - general if possible , and to decide on his future plan in accordance with what he hear from that gentleman ; he excuse himself for give Dr Grantly no early notice , by state that his resolve be very sudden ; and have entrust this note to Eleanor , with the perfect , though not express , understand that it be to be send over to Plumstead Episcopi without haste , he take his departure . 

 he also prepare and carry with he a note for Sir Abraham Haphazard , in which he state his name , explain that he be the defendant in the case of " the queen on behalf of the Wool - carder of Barchester v. Trustees under the will of the late John Hiram , " for so be the suit denominate , and beg the illustrious and learn gentleman to vouchsafe to he ten minute ' audience at any hour on the next day . Mr Harding calculate that for that one day he be safe ; his son - in - law , he have no doubt , would arrive in town by an early train , but not early enough to reach the truant till he should have escape from his hotel after breakfast ; and could he thus manage to see the lawyer on that very day , the deed might be do before the archdeacon could interfere . 

 on his arrival in town the warden drove , as be his will not , to the Chapter Hotel and Coffee House , near St Paul 's . his visit to London of late have not be frequent ; but in those happy day when " Harding 's Church Music " be go through the press , he have be often there ; and as the publisher 's house be in Paternoster Row , and the printer 's press in Fleet Street , the Chapter Hotel and Coffee House have be convenient . it be a quiet , sombre , clerical house , beseem such a man as the warden , and thus he afterwards frequent it . have he dare , he would on this occasion have go elsewhere to throw the archdeacon far off the scent ; but he do not know what violent step his son - in - law might take for his recovery if he be not find at his usual haunt , and he deem it not prudent to make himself the object of a hunt through London . 

 arrive at his inn , he order dinner , and go forth to the attorney - general 's chamber . there he learn that Sir Abraham be in Court , and would not probably return that day . he would go direct from Court to the House ; all appointment be , as a rule , make at the chamber ; the clerk could by no mean promise an interview for the next day ; be able , on the other hand , to say that such interview be , he think , impossible ; but that Sir Abraham would certainly be at the House in the course of the night , where an answer from himself might possibly be elicit . 

 to the House Mr Harding go , and leave his note , not find Sir Abraham there . he add a most piteous entreaty that he might be favour with an answer that evening , for which he would return . he then journey back sadly to the Chapter Coffee House , digest his great thought , as good he might , in a clattering omnibus , wedge in between a wet old lady and a journeyman glazier return from his work with his tool in his lap . in melancholy solitude he discuss his mutton chop and pint of port . what be there in this world more melancholy than such a dinner ? a dinner , though eat alone , in a country hotel may be worthy of some energy ; the waiter , if you be know , will make much of you ; the landlord will make you a bow and perhaps put the fish on the table ; if you ring you be attend to , and there be some life about it . a dinner at a London eating - house be also lively enough , if it have no other attraction . there be plenty of noise and stir about it , and the rapid whirl of voice and rattle of dish disperse sadness . but a solitary dinner in an old , respectable , sombre , solid London inn , where nothing make any noise but the old waiter 's creaking shoe ; where one plate slowly go and another slowly come without a sound ; where the two or three guest would as soon think of knock each other down as of speak ; where the servant whisper , and the whole household be disturb if an order be give above the voice , what can be more melancholy than a mutton chop and a pint of port in such a place ? 

 have go through this Mr Harding get into another omnibus , and again return to the House . yes , Sir Abraham be there , and be that moment on his leg , fight eagerly for the hundred and seventh clause of the Convent Custody Bill . Mr Harding 's note have be deliver to he ; and if Mr Harding would wait some two or three hour , Sir Abraham could be ask whether there be any answer . the House be not full , and perhaps Mr Harding might get admittance into the Strangers ' Gallery , which admission , with the help of five shilling , Mr Harding be able to effect . 

 this bill of Sir Abraham 's have be read a second time and pass into committee . a hundred and six clause have already be discuss and have occupy only four morning and five evening sitting ; nine of the hundred and six clause be pass , fifty - five be withdraw by consent , fourteen have be alter so as to mean the reverse of the original proposition , eleven have be postpone for further consideration , and seventeen have be directly negative . the hundred and seventh order the bodily searching of nun for jesuitical symbol by aged clergyman , and be consider to be the real mainstay of the whole bill . no intention have ever exist to pass such a law as that propose , but the government do not intend to abandon it till their object be fully attain by the discussion of this clause . it be know that it would be insist on with terrible vehemence by protestant irish member , and as vehemently denounce by the Roman Catholic ; and it be justly consider that no further union between the party would be possible after such a battle . the innocent Irish fall into the trap as they always do , and whiskey and poplin become a drug in the market . 

 a florid - face gentleman with a nice head of hair , from the south of Ireland , have succeed in catch the speaker 's eye by the time that Mr Harding have get into the gallery , and be denounce the propose sacrilege , his whole face glow with a fine theatrical frenzy . 

 " and this be a christian country ? " say he .   loud cheer ; counter cheer from the ministerial bench . " some doubt as to that , " from a voice below the gangway .   " no , it can be no christian country , in which the head of the bar , the lagal adviser   loud laughter and cheer   yes , I say the lagal adviser of the crown   great cheer and laughter   can stand up in his seat in this house   prolong cheer and laughter , and attempt to lagalise indacent assault on the body of religious lady . "   deafen cheer and laughter , which be prolong till the honourable member resume his seat . 

 when Mr Harding have listen to this and much more of the same kind for about three hour , he return to the door of the House , and receive back from the messenger his own note , with the follow word scrawl in pencil on the back of it : " to - morrow , 10 p.m. my chamber . A. H. " 

 he be so far successful ; but 10 p.m. : what an hour Sir Abraham have name for a legal interview ! Mr Harding feel perfectly sure that long before that Dr Grantly would be in London . Dr Grantly could not , however , know that this interview have be arrange , nor could he learn it unless he manage to get hold of Sir Abraham before that hour ; and as this be very improbable , Mr Harding determine to start from his hotel early , merely leave word that he should dine out , and unless luck be much against he , he might still escape the archdeacon till his return from the attorney - general 's chamber . 

 he be at breakfast at nine , and for the twentieth time consult his Bradshaw , to see at what early hour Dr Grantly could arrive from Barchester . as he examine the column , he be nearly petrify by the reflection that perhaps the archdeacon might come up by the night - mail train ! his heart sink within he at the horrid idea , and for a moment he feel himself drag back to Barchester without accomplish any portion of his object . then he remember that have Dr Grantly do so , he would have be in the hotel , look for he long since . 

 " Waiter , " say he , timidly . 

 the waiter approach , creak in his shoe , but voiceless . 

 " do any gentleman , a clergyman , arrive here by the night - mail train ? " 

 " no , sir , not one , " whisper the waiter , put his mouth nearly close to the warden 's ear . 

 Mr Harding be reassure . 

 " Waiter , " say he again , and the waiter again creak up . " if anyone call for I , I be go to dine out , and shall return about eleven o'clock . " 

 the waiter nod , but do not this time vouchsafe any reply ; and Mr Harding , take up his hat , proceed out to pass a long day in the good way he could , somewhere out of sight of the archdeacon . 

 Bradshaw have tell he twenty time that Dr Grantly could not be at Paddington station till 2 p.m. , and our poor friend might therefore have trust to the shelter of the hotel for some hour long with perfect safety ; but he be nervous . there be no know what step the archdeacon might take for his apprehension : a message by electric telegraph might desire the landlord of the hotel to set a watch upon he ; some letter might come which he might find himself unable to disobey ; at any rate , he could not feel himself secure in any place at which the archdeacon could expect to find he ; and at 10 a.m. he start forth to spend twelve hour in London . 

 Mr Harding have friend in town have he choose to seek they ; but he feel that he be in no humour for ordinary call , and he do not now wish to consult with anyone as to the great step which he have determine to take . as he have say to his daughter , no one know where the shoe pinch but the wearer . there be some point on which no man can be content to follow the advice of another , some subject on which a man can consult his own conscience only . our warden have make up his mind that it be good for he at any cost to get rid of this grievance ; his daughter be the only person whose concurrence appear necessary to he , and she do concur with he most heartily . under such circumstance he would not , if he could help it , consult anyone far , till advice would be useless . should the archdeacon catch he , indeed , there would be much advice , and much consultation of a kind not to be avoid ; but he hop well thing ; and as he feel that he could not now converse on indifferent subject , he resolve to see no one till after his interview with the attorney - general . 

 he determine to take sanctuary in Westminster Abbey , so he again go thither in an omnibus , and find that the door be not open for morning service , he pay his twopence , and go in as a sightseer . it occur to he that he have no definite place of rest for the day , and that he should be absolutely wear out before his interview if he attempt to walk about from 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. , so he sit himself down on a stone step , and gaze up at the figure of William Pitt , who look as though he have just enter the church for the first time in his life and be anything but pleased at find himself there . 

 he have be sit unmoleste about twenty minute when the verger ask he whether he would not   like to walk round . Mr Harding do not   want to walk anywhere , and decline , merely observe that he be wait for the morning service . the verger , see that he be a clergyman , tell he that the door of the choir be now open , and show he into a seat . this be a great point gain ; the archdeacon would certainly not come to morning service at Westminster Abbey , even though he be in London ; and here the warden could rest quietly , and , when the time come , duly say his prayer . 

 he long to get up from his seat , and examine the music - book of the chorister , and the copy of the litany from which the service be chant , to see how far the little detail at Westminster correspond with those at Barchester , and whether he think his own voice would fill the church well from the Westminster precentor 's seat . there would , however , be impropriety in such meddling , and he sit perfectly still , look up at the noble roof , and guard against the come fatigue of the day . 

 by degree two or three people enter ; the very same damp old woman who have nearly obliterate he in the omnibus , or some other just like she ; a couple of young lady with their veil down , and gilt cross conspicuous on their prayer - book ; an old man on crutch ; a party who be see the abbey , and think they might as well hear the service for their twopence , as opportunity serve ; and a young woman with her prayer - book do up in her handkerchief , who rush in late , and , in her hurried entry , tumble over one of the form , and make such a noise that everyone , even the officiating minor canon , be startle , and she herself be so frightened by the echo of her own catastrophe that she be nearly throw into fit by the panic . 

 Mr Harding be not much edify by the manner of the service . the minor canon in question hurry in , somewhat late , in a surplice not in the neat order , and be follow by a dozen chorister , who be also not as trim as they might have be : they all jostle into their place with a quick hurried step , and the service be soon commence . soon commence and soon over , for there be no music , and time be not unnecessarily lose in the chanting . on the whole Mr Harding be of opinion that thing be manage well at Barchester , though even there he know that there be room for improvement . 

 it appear to we a question whether any clergyman can go through our church service with decorum , morning after morning , in an immense building , surround by not more than a dozen listener . the good actor can not act well before empty bench , and though there be , of course , a high motive in one case than the other , still even the good of clergyman can not but be influence by their audience ; and to expect that a duty should be well do under such circumstance , would be to require from human nature more than human power . 

 when the two lady with the gilt cross , the old man with his crutch , and the still palpitating housemaid be go , Mr Harding find himself oblige to go too . the verger stand in his way , and look at he and look at the door , and so he go . but he return again in a few minute , and re - enter with another twopence . there be no other sanctuary so good for he . 

 as he walk slowly down the nave , and then up one aisle , and then again down the nave and up the other aisle , he try to think gravely of the step he be about to take . he be go to give up eight hundred a year voluntarily ; and doom himself to live for the rest of his life on about a hundred and fifty . he know that he have hitherto fail to realise this fact as he ought to do . could he maintain his own independence and support his daughter on a hundred and fifty pound a year without be a burden on anyone ? his son - in - law be rich , but nothing could induce he to lean on his son - in - law after act , as he intend to do , in direct opposition to his son - in - law 's counsel . the bishop be rich , but he be about to throw away the bishop 's good gift , and that in a manner to injure materially the patronage of the giver : he could neither expect nor accept anything far from the bishop . there would be not only no merit , but positive disgrace , in give up his wardenship , if he be not prepared to meet the world without it . yes , he must from this time forward bind all his human wish for himself and his daughter to the poor extent of so limit an income . he know he have not think sufficiently of this , that he have be carry away by enthusiasm , and have hitherto not bring home to himself the full reality of his position . 

 he think most about his daughter , naturally . it be true that she be engage , and he know enough of his propose son - in - law to be sure that his own altered circumstance would make no obstacle to such a marriage ; nay , he be sure that the very fact of his poverty would induce Bold more anxiously to press the matter ; but he dislike count on Bold in this emergency , bring on , as it have be , by his doing . he do not like say to himself , Bold have turn I out of my house and income , and , therefore , he must relieve I of my daughter ; he prefer reckon on Eleanor as the companion of his poverty and exile , as the sharer of his small income . 

 some modest provision for his daughter have be long since make . his life be insure for three thousand pound , and this sum be to go to Eleanor . the archdeacon , for some year past , have pay the premium , and have secure himself by the immediate possession of a small property which be to have go to Mrs Grantly after her father 's death . this matter , therefore , have be take out of the warden 's hand long since , as , indeed , have all the business transaction of his family , and his anxiety be , therefore , confine to his own life income . 

 yes . a hundred and fifty per annum be very small , but still it might suffice ; but how be he to chant the litany at the cathedral on Sunday morning , and get the service do at Crabtree Parva ? true , Crabtree Church be not quite a mile and a half from the cathedral ; but he could not be in two place at once . Crabtree be a small village , and afternoon service might suffice , but still this go against his conscience ; it be not right that his parishioner should be rob of any of their privilege on account of his poverty . he might , to be sure , make some arrangement for do week - day service at the cathedral ; but he have chant the litany at Barchester so long , and have a conscious feeling that he do it so well , that he be unwilling to give up the duty . 

 think of such thing , turn over in his own mind together small desire and grave duty , but never hesitate for a moment as to the necessity of leave the hospital , Mr Harding walk up and down the abbey , or sit still meditate on the same stone step , hour after hour . one verger go and another come , but they do not disturb he ; every now and then they creep up and look at he , but they do so with a reverential stare , and , on the whole , Mr Harding find his retreat well choose . about four o'clock his comfort be disturb by an enemy in the shape of hunger . it be necessary that he should dine , and it be clear that he could not dine in the abbey : so he leave his sanctuary not willingly , and betook himself to the neighbourhood of the Strand to look for food . 

 his eye have become so accustomed to the gloom of the church , that they be daze when he get out into the full light of day , and he feel confused and ashamed of himself , as though people be star at he . he hurry along , still in dread of the archdeacon , till he come to Charing Cross , and then remember that in one of his passage through the Strand he have see the word " chop and steak " on a placard in a shop window . he remember the shop distinctly ; it be next door to a trunk - seller 's , and there be a cigar shop on the other side . he could not   go to his hotel for dinner , which to he hitherto be the only know mode of dining in London at his own expense ; and , therefore , he would get a steak at the shop in the Strand . Archdeacon Grantly would certainly not come to such a place for his dinner . 

 he find the house easily , just as he have observe it , between the trunk and the cigar . he be rather daunt by the huge quantity of fish which he see in the window . there be barrel of oyster , hecatomb of lobster , a few tremendous - look crab , and a tub full of pickle salmon ; not , however , be aware of any connection between shell - fish and iniquity , he enter , and modestly ask a slatternly woman , who be pick oyster out of a great watery reservoir , whether he could have a mutton chop and a potato . 

 the woman look somewhat surprised , but answer in the affirmative , and a slipshod girl usher he into a long back room , fill with box for the accommodation of party , in one of which he take his seat . in a more miserably forlorn place he could not have find himself : the room smell of fish , and sawdust , and stale tobacco smoke , with a slight taint of escape gas ; everything be rough and dirty , and disreputable ; the cloth which they put before he be abominable ; the knife and fork be bruise , and hack , and filthy ; and everything be impregnate with fish . he have one comfort , however : he be quite alone ; there be no one there to look on his dismay ; nor be it probable that anyone would come to do so . it be a London supper - house . about one o'clock at night the place would be lively enough , but at the present time his seclusion be as deep as it have be in the abbey . 

 in about half an hour the untidy girl , not yet dress for her evening labour , bring he his chop and potato , and Mr Harding beg for a pint of sherry . he be impressed with an idea , which be generally prevalent a few year since , and be not yet wholly remove from the mind of man , that to order a dinner at any kind of inn , without also order a pint of wine for the benefit of the landlord , be a kind of fraud , not punishable , indeed , by law , but not the less abominable on that account . Mr Harding remember his come poverty , and would willingly have save his half - crown , but he think he have no alternative ; and he be soon put in possession of some horrid mixture procure from the neighbour public - house . 

 his chop and potato , however , be eatable , and have get over as good he might the disgust create by the knife and fork , he contrive to swallow his dinner . he be not much disturbed : one young man , with pale face and watery fishlike eye , wear his hat ominously on one side , do come in and stare at he , and ask the girl , audibly enough , " who that old cock be ; " but the annoyance go no far , and the warden be leave seat on his wooden bench in peace , endeavour to distinguish the different scent arise from lobster , oyster , and salmon . 

 unknowing as Mr Harding be in the way of London , he feel that he have somehow select an ineligible dining - house , and that he have well leave it . it be hardly five o'clock ; how be he to pass the time till ten ? five miserable hour ! he be already tired , and it be impossible that he should continue walk so long . he think of get into an omnibus , and go out to Fulham for the sake of come back in another : this , however , would be weary work , and as he pay his bill to the woman in the shop , he ask she if there be any place near where he could get a cup of coffee . though she do keep a shellfish supper - house , she be very civil , and direct he to the cigar divan on the other side of the street . 

 Mr Harding have not a much correcter notion of a cigar divan than he have of a London dinner - house , but he be desperately in want of rest , and go as he be direct . he think he must have make some mistake when he find himself in a cigar shop , but the man behind the counter see immediately that he be a stranger , and understand what he want . " one shilling , sir , thank ye , sir , cigar , sir ? ticket for coffee , sir ; you will only have to call the waiter . up those stair , if you please , sir . well take the cigar , sir , you can always give it to a friend , you know . well , sir , thank ye , sir ; as you be so good , I will smoke it myself . " and so Mr Harding ascend to the divan , with his ticket for coffee , but minus the cigar . 

 the place seem much more suitable to his requirement than the room in which he have din : there be , to be sure , a strong smell of tobacco , to which he be not accustom ; but after the shell - fish , the tobacco do not seem disagreeable . there be quantity of book , and long row of sofas . what on earth could be more luxurious than a sofa , a book , and a cup of coffee ? an old waiter come up to he , with a couple of magazine and an evening paper . be ever anything so civil ? would he have a cup of coffee , or would he prefer sherbet ? sherbet ! be he absolutely in an eastern divan , with the slight addition of all the London periodical ? he have , however , an idea that sherbet should be drunk sit cross - legged , and as he be not quite up to this , he order the coffee . 

 the coffee come , and be unexceptionable . why , this divan be a paradise ! the civil old waiter suggest to he a game of chess : though a chess player he be not equal to this , so he decline , and , put up his weary leg on the sofa , leisurely sip his coffee , and turn over the page of his Blackwood . he might have be so engaged for about an hour , for the old waiter entice he to a second cup of coffee , when a musical clock begin to play . Mr Harding then close his magazine , keep his place with his finger , and lay , listen with closed eye to the clock . soon the clock seem to turn into a violoncello , with piano accompaniment , and Mr Harding begin to fancy the old waiter be the Bishop of Barchester ; he be inexpressibly shock that the bishop should have bring he his coffee with his own hand ; then Dr Grantly come in , with a basket full of lobster , which he would not be induce to leave downstairs in the kitchen ; and then the warden could not   quite understand why so many people would smoke in the bishop 's drawing - room ; and so he fall fast asleep , and his dream wander away to his accustomed stall in Barchester Cathedral , and the twelve old man he be so soon about to leave for ever . 

 he be fatigue , and sleep soundly for some time . some sudden stop in the musical clock wake he at length , and he jump up with a start , surprised to find the room quite full : it have be nearly empty when his nap begin . with nervous anxiety he pull out his watch , and find that it be half - past nine . he seize his hat , and , hurry downstairs , start at a rapid pace for Lincoln 's Inn . 

 it still want twenty minute to ten when the warden find himself at the bottom of Sir Abraham 's stair , so he walk leisurely up and down the quiet inn to cool himself . it be a beautiful evening at the end of August . he have recover from his fatigue ; his sleep and the coffee have refresh he , and he be surprised to find that he be absolutely enjoy himself , when the inn clock strike ten . the sound be hardly over before he knock at Sir Abraham 's door , and be inform by the clerk who receive he that the great man would be with he immediately . 

 

 

 chapter XVII 

 Sir Abraham Haphazard 

 

 Mr Harding be show into a comfortable inner sitting - room , look more like a gentleman 's book - room than a lawyer 's chamber , and there wait for Sir Abraham . nor be he keep wait long : in ten or fifteen minute he hear a clatter of voice speak quickly in the passage , and then the attorney - general enter . 

 " very sorry to keep you wait , Mr Warden , " say Sir Abraham , shake hand with he ; " and sorry , too , to name so disagreeable an hour ; but your notice be short , and as you say to - day , I name the very early hour that be not disposed of . " 

 Mr Harding assure he that he be aware that it be he that should apologise . 

 Sir Abraham be a tall thin man , with hair prematurely gray , but bear no other sign of age ; he have a slight stoop , in his neck rather than his back , acquire by his constant habit of lean forward as he address his various audience . he might be fifty year old , and would have look young for his age , have not constant work harden his feature , and give he the appearance of a machine with a mind . his face be full of intellect , but devoid of natural expression . you would say he be a man to use , and then have do with ; a man to be seek for on great emergency , but ill - adapt for ordinary service ; a man whom you would ask to defend your property , but to whom you would be sorry to confide your love . he be bright as a diamond , and as cut , and also as unimpressionable . he know everyone whom to know be an honour , but he be without a friend ; he want none , however , and know not the meaning of the word in other than its parliamentary sense . a friend ! have he not always be sufficient to himself , and now , at fifty , be it likely that he should trust another ? he be marry , indeed , and have child , but what time have he for the soft idleness of conjugal felicity ? his work day or term time be occupy from his time of rise to the late hour at which he go to rest , and even his vacation be more full of labour than the busy day of other man . he never quarrel with his wife , but he never talk to she ; he never have time to talk , he be so take up with speaking . she , poor lady , be not unhappy ; she have all that money could give she , she would probably live to be a peeress , and she really think Sir Abraham the good of husband . 

 Sir Abraham be a man of wit , and sparkle among the bright at the dinner - table of political grandee : indeed , he always sparkle ; whether in society , in the House of Commons , or the court of law , coruscation fly from he ; glitter sparkle , as from hot steel , but no heat ; no cold heart be ever cheer by warmth from he , no unhappy soul ever drop a portion of its burden at his door . 

 with he success alone be praiseworthy , and he know none so successful as himself . no one have thrust he forward ; no powerful friend have push he along on his road to power . no ; he be attorney - general , and would , in all human probability , be lord chancellor by sheer dint of his own industry and his own talent . who else in all the world rise so high with so little help ? a premier , indeed ! who have ever be premier without mighty friend ? an archbishop ! yes , the son or grandson of a great noble , or else , probably , his tutor . but he , Sir Abraham , have have no mighty lord at his back ; his father have be a country apothecary , his mother a farmer 's daughter . why should he respect any but himself ? and so he glitter along through the world , the bright among the bright ; and when his glitter be go , and he be gather to his father , no eye will be dim with a tear , no heart will mourn for its lose friend . 

 " and so , Mr Warden , " say Sir Abraham , " all our trouble about this lawsuit be at an end . " 

 Mr Harding say he hop so , but he do not   at all understand what Sir Abraham mean . Sir Abraham , with all his sharpness , could not have look into his heart and read his intention . 

 " all over . you need trouble yourself no far about it ; of course they must pay the cost , and the absolute expense to you and Dr Grantly will be trifle , that is , compare with what it might have be if it have be continue . " 

 " I fear I do not   quite understand you , Sir Abraham . " 

 " do not   you know that their attorney have notice we that they have withdraw the suit ? " 

 Mr Harding explain to the lawyer that he know nothing of this , although he have hear in a roundabout way that such an intention have be talk of ; and he also at length succeed in make Sir Abraham understand that even this do not satisfy he . the attorney - general stand up , put his hand into his breech ' pocket , and raise his eyebrow , as Mr Harding proceed to detail the grievance from which he now wish to rid himself . 

 " I know I have no right to trouble you personally with this matter , but as it be of most vital importance to I , as all my happiness be concern in it , I think I might venture to seek your advice . " 

 Sir Abraham bow , and declare his client be entitle to the good advice he could give they ; particularly a client so respectable in every way as the Warden of Barchester Hospital . 

 " a speak word , Sir Abraham , be often of more value than volume of write advice . the truth be , I be ill - satisfied with this matter as it stand at present . I do see I can not help see , that the affair of the hospital be not arrange accord to the will of the founder . " 

 " none of such institution be , Mr Harding , nor can they be ; the altered circumstance in which we live do not admit of it . " 

 " quite true that be quite true ; but I can not   see that those altered circumstance give I a right to eight hundred a year . I do not   know whether I ever read John Hiram 's will , but be I to read it now I could not understand it . what I want you , Sir Abraham , to tell I , be this : be I , as warden , legally and distinctly entitle to the proceed of the property , after the due maintenance of the twelve bedesman ? " 

 Sir Abraham declare that he could not   exactly say in so many word that Mr Harding be legally entitle to ,   c. ,   c. ,   c. , and end in express a strong opinion that it would be madness to raise any further question on the matter , as the suit be to be , nay , be , abandon . 

 Mr Harding , seat in his chair , begin to play a slow tune on an imaginary violoncello . 

 " Nay , my dear sir , " continue the attorney - general , " there be no further ground for any question ; I do not   see that you have the power of raise it . " 

 " I can resign , " say Mr Harding , slowly play away with his right hand , as though the bow be beneath the chair in which he be sit . 

 " what ! throw it up altogether ? " say the attorney - general , gaze with utter astonishment at his client . 

 " do you see those article in the Jupiter ? " say Mr Harding , piteously , appeal to the sympathy of the lawyer . 

 Sir Abraham say he have see they . this poor little clergyman , cow into such an act of extreme weakness by a newspaper article , be to Sir Abraham so contemptible an object , that he hardly know how to talk to he as to a rational being . 

 " had not   you well wait , " say he , " till Dr Grantly be in town with you ? would not   it be well to postpone any serious step till you can consult with he ? " 

 Mr Harding declare vehemently that he could not wait , and Sir Abraham begin seriously to doubt his sanity . 

 " of course , " say the latter , " if you have private mean sufficient for your want , and if this " 

 " I have not   a sixpence , Sir Abraham , " say the warden . 

 " God bless I ! why , Mr Harding , how do you mean to live ? " 

 Mr Harding proceed to explain to the man of law that he mean to keep his precentorship , that be eighty pound a year ; and , also , that he mean to fall back upon his own little living of Crabtree , which be another eighty pound . that , to be sure , the duty of the two be hardly compatible ; but perhaps he might effect an exchange . and then , recollect that the attorney - general would hardly care to hear how the service of a cathedral church be divide among the minor canon , stop short in his explanation . 

 Sir Abraham listen in pity wonder . " I really think , Mr Harding , you have well wait for the archdeacon . this be a most serious step , one for which , in my opinion , there be not the slight necessity ; and , as you have do I the honour of ask my advice , I must implore you to do nothing without the approval of your friend . a man be never the good judge of his own position . " 

 " a man be the good judge of what he feel himself . I would soon beg my bread till my death than read such another article as those two that have appear , and feel , as I do , that the writer have truth on his side . " 

 " have you not a daughter , Mr Harding , an unmarried daughter ? " 

 " I have , " say he , now stand also , but still play away on his fiddle with his hand behind his back . " I have , Sir Abraham ; and she and I be completely agree on this subject . " 

 " pray excuse I , Mr Harding , if what I say seem impertinent ; but surely it be you that should be prudent on her behalf . she be young , and do not know the meaning of live on an income of a hundred and sixty pound a year . on her account give up this idea . believe I , it be sheer quixotism . " 

 the warden walk away to the window , and then back to his chair ; and then , irresolute what to say , take another turn to the window . the attorney - general be really extremely patient , but he be begin to think that the interview have be long enough . 

 " but if this income be not justly mine , what if she and I have both to beg ? " say the warden at last , sharply , and in a voice so different from that he have hitherto use , that Sir Abraham be startle . " if so , it would be well to beg . " 

 " my dear sir , nobody now question its justness . " 

 " yes , Sir Abraham , one do question it , the most important of all witness against I ; I question it myself . my God know whether or no I love my daughter ; but I would soon that she and I should both beg , than that she should live in comfort on money which be truly the property of the poor . it may seem strange to you , Sir Abraham , it be strange to myself , that I should have be ten year in that happy home , and not have think of these thing till they be so roughly din into my ear . I can not boast of my conscience , when it require the violence of a public newspaper to awaken it ; but , now that it be awake , I must obey it . when I come here , I do not know that the suit be withdraw by Mr Bold , and my object be to beg you to abandon my defence . as there be no action , there can be no defence ; but it be , at any rate , as well that you should know that from to - morrow I shall cease to be the warden of the hospital . my friend and I differ on this subject , Sir Abraham , and that add much to my sorrow ; but it can not be help . " and , as he finish what he have to say , he play up such a tune as never before have grace the chamber of any attorney - general . he be stand up , gallantly front Sir Abraham , and his right arm pass with bold and rapid sweep before he , as though he be embrace some huge instrument , which allow he to stand thus erect ; and with the finger of his left hand he stop , with preternatural velocity , a multitude of string , which range from the top of his collar to the bottom of the lappet of his coat . Sir Abraham listen and look in wonder . as he have never before see Mr Harding , the meaning of these wild gesticulation be lose upon he ; but he perceive that the gentleman who have a few minute since be so subdued as to be unable to speak without hesitation , be now impassione , nay , almost violent . 

 " you will sleep on this , Mr Harding , and to - morrow " 

 " I have do more than sleep upon it , " say the warden ; " I have lie awake upon it , and that night after night . I find I could not sleep upon it : now I hope to do so . " 

 the attorney - general have no answer to make to this ; so he express a quiet hope that whatever settlement be finally make would be satisfactory ; and Mr Harding withdraw , thank the great man for his kind attention . 

 Mr Harding be sufficiently satisfied with the interview to feel a glow of comfort as he descend into the small old square of Lincoln 's Inn . it be a calm , bright , beautiful night , and by the light of the moon , even the chapel of Lincoln 's Inn , and the sombre row of chamber , which surround the quadrangle , look well . he stand still a moment to collect his thought , and reflect on what he have do , and be about to do . he know that the attorney - general regard he as little well than a fool , but that he do not mind ; he and the attorney - general have not much in common between they ; he know also that other , whom he do care about , would think so too ; but Eleanor , he be sure , would exult in what he have do , and the bishop , he trust , would sympathise with he . 

 in the meantime he have to meet the archdeacon , and so he walk slowly down Chancery Lane and along Fleet Street , feel sure that his work for the night be not yet over . when he reach the hotel he ring the bell quietly , and with a palpitating heart ; he almost long to escape round the corner , and delay the come storm by a further walk round St Paul 's Churchyard , but he hear the slow creaking shoe of the old waiter approach , and he stand his ground manfully . 

 

 

 Chapter xviii 

 the Warden be very Obstinate 

 

 " Dr Grantly be here , sir , " greet his ear before the door be well open , " and Mrs Grantly . they have a sitting - room above , and be wait up for you . " 

 there be something in the tone of the man 's voice which seem to indicate that even he look upon the warden as a runaway schoolboy , just recapture by his guardian , and that he pity the culprit , though he could not but be horrify at the crime . 

 the warden endeavour to appear unconcerned , as he say , " oh , indeed ! I will go upstairs at once ; " but he fail signally . there be , perhaps , a ray of comfort in the presence of his married daughter ; that be to say , of comparative comfort , see that his son - in - law be there ; but how much would he have prefer that they should both have be safe at Plumstead Episcopi ! however , upstairs he go , the waiter slowly precede he ; and on the door be open the archdeacon be discover stand in the middle of the room , erect , indeed , as usual , but oh ! how sorrowful ! and on the dingy sofa behind he recline his patient wife . 

 " Papa , I think you be never come back , " say the lady ; " it be twelve o'clock . " 

 " yes , my dear , " say the warden . " the attorney - general name ten for my meeting ; to be sure ten be late , but what could I do , you know ? great man will have their own way . " 

 and he give his daughter a kiss , and shake hand with the doctor , and again try to look unconcerned . 

 " and you have absolutely be with the attorney - general ? " ask the archdeacon . 

 Mr Harding signify that he have . 

 " good heaven , how unfortunate ! " and the archdeacon raise his huge hand in the manner in which his friend be so accustomed to see he express disapprobation and astonishment . " what will Sir Abraham think of it ? do you not know that it be not customary for client to go direct to their counsel ? " 

 " be not   it ? " ask the warden , innocently . " well , at any rate , I have   do it now . Sir Abraham do not   seem to think it so very strange . " 

 the archdeacon give a sigh that would have move a man - of - war . 

 " but , papa , what do you say to Sir Abraham ? " ask the lady . 

 " I ask he , my dear , to explain John Hiram 's will to I . he could not   explain it in the only way which would have satisfy I , and so I resign the wardenship . " 

 " resign it ! " say the archdeacon , in a solemn voice , sad and low , but yet sufficiently audible , a sort of whisper that Macready would have envy , and the gallery have applaud with a couple of round . " resign it ! good heaven ! " and the dignitary of the church sink back horrified into a horsehair arm - chair . 

 " at least I tell Sir Abraham that I would resign ; and of course I must now do so . " 

 " not at all , " say the archdeacon , catch a ray of hope . " nothing that you say in such a way to your own counsel can be in any way bind on you ; of course you be there to ask his advice . I be sure Sir Abraham do not advise any such step . " 

 Mr Harding could not say that he have . 

 " I be sure he disadvise you from it , " continue the reverend cross - examiner . 

 Mr Harding could not deny this . 

 " I be sure Sir Abraham must have advise you to consult your friend . " 

 to this proposition also Mr Harding be oblige to assent . 

 " then your threat of resignation amount to nothing , and we be just where we be before . " 

 Mr Harding be now stand on the rug , move uneasily from one foot to the other . he make no distinct answer to the archdeacon 's last proposition , for his mind be chiefly engage on think how he could escape to bed . that his resignation be a thing finally fix on , a fact all but complete , be not in his mind a matter of any doubt ; he know his own weakness ; he know how prone he be to be lead ; but he be not weak enough to give way now , to go back from the position to which his conscience have drive he , after have purposely come to London to declare his determination : he do not in the least doubt his resolution , but he greatly doubt his power of defend it against his son - in - law . 

 " you must be very tired , Susan , " say he : " would not   you like to go to bed ? " 

 but Susan do not   want to go till her husband go . she have an idea that her papa might be bully if she be away : she be not   tired at all , or at least she say so . 

 the archdeacon be pace the room , express , by certain nod of his head , his opinion of the utter fatuity of his father - in - law . 

 " why , " at last he say , and angel might have blush at the rebuke express in his tone and emphasis , " why do you go off from Barchester so suddenly ? why do you take such a step without give we notice , after what have pass at the palace ? " 

 the warden hang his head , and make no reply : he could not condescend to say that he have not intend to give his son - in - law the slip ; and as he have not the courage to avow it , he say nothing . 

 " Papa have be too much for you , " say the lady . 

 the archdeacon take another turn , and again ejaculate , " good heaven ! " this time in a very low whisper , but still audible . 

 " I think I will go to bed , " say the warden , take up a side candle . 

 " at any rate , you will promise I to take no further step without consultation , " say the archdeacon . Mr Harding make no answer , but slowly proceed to light his candle . 

 " of course , " continue the other , ' such a declaration as that you make to Sir Abraham mean nothing . come , warden , promise I this . the whole affair , you see , be already settle , and that with very little trouble or expense . Bold have be compel to abandon his action , and all you have to do be to remain quiet at the hospital . " Mr Harding still make no reply , but look meekly into his son - in - law 's face . the archdeacon think he know his father - in - law , but he be mistaken ; he think that he have already talk over a vacillate man to resign his promise . " come , " say he , " promise Susan to give up this idea of resign the wardenship . " 

 the warden look at his daughter , think probably at the moment that if Eleanor be content with he , he need not so much regard his other child , and say , " I be sure Susan will not ask I to break my word , or to do what I know to be wrong . " 

 " Papa , " say she , " it would be madness in you to throw up your preferment . what be you to live on ? " 

 " God , that feed the young raven , will take care of I also , " say Mr Harding , with a smile , as though afraid of give offence by make his reference to scripture too solemn . 

 " Pish ! " say the archdeacon , turn away rapidly . " if the raven persist in refuse the food prepare for they , they would not   be feed . " a clergyman generally dislike to be meet in argument by any scriptural quotation ; he feel as affront as a doctor do , when recommend by an old woman to take some favourite dose , or as a lawyer when an unprofessional man attempt to put he down by a quibble . 

 " I shall have the living of Crabtree , " modestly suggest the warden . 

 " eighty pound a year ! " sneer the archdeacon . 

 " and the precentorship , " say the father - in - law . 

 " it go with the wardenship , " say the son - in - law . Mr Harding be prepared to argue this point , and begin to do so , but Dr Grantly stop he . " my dear warden , " say he , " this be all nonsense . eighty pound or a hundred and sixty make very little difference . you can not   live on it , you can not   ruin Eleanor 's prospect for ever . in point of fact , you can not   resign ; the bishop would not   accept it ; the whole thing be settle . what I now want to do be to prevent any inconvenient tittle - tattle , any more newspaper article . " 

 " that be what I want , too , " say the warden . 

 " and to prevent that , " continue the other , " we must not   let any talk of resignation get abroad . " 

 " but I shall resign , " say the warden , very , very meekly . 

 " good heaven ! Susan , my dear , what can I say to he ? " 

 " but , papa , " say Mrs Grantly , get up , and put her arm through that of her father , " what be Eleanor to do if you throw away your income ? " 

 a hot tear stand in each of the warden 's eye as he look round upon his married daughter . why should one sister who be so rich predict poverty for another ? some such idea as this be on his mind , but he give no utterance to it . then he think of the pelican feed its young with blood from its own breast , but he give no utterance to that either ; and then of Eleanor wait for he at home , wait to congratulate he on the end of all his trouble . 

 " think of Eleanor , papa , " say Mrs Grantly . 

 " I do think of she , " say her father . 

 " and you will not do this rash thing ? " the lady be really move beyond her usual calm composure . 

 " it can never be rash to do right , " say he . " I shall certainly resign this wardenship . " 

 " then , Mr Harding , there be nothing before you but ruin , " say the archdeacon , now move beyond all endurance . " ruin both for you and Eleanor . how do you mean to pay the monstrous expense of this action ? " 

 Mrs Grantly suggest that , as the action be abandon , the cost would not be heavy . 

 " indeed they will , my dear , " continue he . " one can not have the attorney - general up at twelve o'clock at night for nothing ; but of course your father have not think of this . " 

 " I will sell my furniture , " say the warden . 

 " furniture ! " ejaculate the other , with a most powerful sneer . 

 " come , archdeacon , " say the lady , " we need not   mind that at present . you know you never expect papa to pay the cost . " 

 " such absurdity be enough to provoke Job , " say the archdeacon , march quickly up and down the room . " your father be like a child . eight hundred pound a year ! eight hundred and eighty with the house , with nothing to do . the very place for he . and to throw that up because some scoundrel write an article in a newspaper ! well ; I have do my duty . if he choose to ruin his child I can not help it ; " and he stand still at the fire - place , and look at himself in a dingy mirror which stand on the chimney - piece . 

 there be a pause for about a minute , and then the warden , find that nothing else be come , light his candle , and quietly say , " good - night . " 

 " good - night , papa , " say the lady . 

 and so the warden retire ; but , as he close the door behind he , he hear the well - know ejaculation , slow , low , more solemn , more ponderous than ever , " good heaven ! " 

 

 

 Chapter XIX 

 the Warden Resigns 

 

 the party meet the next morning at breakfast ; and a very sombre affair it be , very unlike the breakfast at Plumstead Episcopi . 

 there be three thin , small , dry bit of bacon , each an inch long , serve up under a huge old plat cover ; there be four three - cornered bit of dry toast , and four square bit of butter toast ; there be a loaf of bread , and some oily - look butter ; and on the sideboard there be the remain of a cold shoulder of mutton . the archdeacon , however , have not come up from his rectory to St Paul 's Churchyard to enjoy himself , and therefore nothing be say of the scanty fare . 

 the guest be as sorry as the viand ; hardly anything be say over the breakfast - table . the archdeacon munch his toast in ominous silence , turn over bitter thought in his deep mind . the warden try to talk to his daughter , and she try to answer he ; but they both fail . there be no feeling at present in common between they . the warden be think only of get back to Barchester , and calculate whether the archdeacon would expect he to wait for he ; and Mrs Grantly be prepare herself for a grand attack which she be to make on her father , as agree upon between herself and her husband during their curtain confabulation of that morning . 

 when the waiter have creak out of the room with the last of the teacup , the archdeacon get up and go to the window as though to admire the view . the room look out on a narrow passage which run from St Paul 's Churchyard to Paternoster row ; and Dr Grantly patiently peruse the name of the three shopkeeper whose door be in view . the warden still keep his seat at the table , and examine the pattern of the tablecloth ; and Mrs Grantly , seat herself on the sofa , begin to knit . 

 after a while the warden pull his Bradshaw out of his pocket , and begin laboriously to consult it . there be a train for Barchester at 10 a.m. that be out of the question , for it be nearly ten already . another at 3 p.m. ; another , the night - mail train , at 9 p.m. the three o'clock train would take he home to tea , and would suit very well . 

 " my dear , " say he , " I think I shall go back home at three o'clock to - day . I shall get home at half - past eight . I do not   think there be anything to keep I in London . " 

 " the archdeacon and I return by the early train to - morrow , papa ; will not   you wait and go back with we ? " 

 " why , Eleanor will expect I tonight ; and I have   so much to do ; and " 

 " much to do ! " say the archdeacon sotto voce ; but the warden hear he . 

 " you would well wait for we , papa . " 

 " thank ye , my dear ! I think I will go this afternoon . " the tamest animal will turn when drive too hard , and even Mr Harding be begin to fight for his own way . 

 " I suppose you will not   be back before three ? " say the lady , address her husband . 

 " I must leave this at two , " say the warden . 

 " quite out of the question , " say the archdeacon , answer his wife , and still read the shopkeeper ' name ; " I do not   suppose I shall be back till five . " 

 there be another long pause , during which Mr Harding continue to study his Bradshaw . 

 " I must go to Cox and Cummins , " say the archdeacon at last . 

 " oh , to Cox and Cummins , " say the warden . it be quite a matter of indifference to he where his son - in - law go . the name of Cox and Cummins have now no interest in his ear . what have he to do with Cox and Cummins far , have already have his suit finally adjudicate upon in a court of conscience , a judgment without power of appeal fully register , and the matter settle so that all the lawyer in London could not disturb it . the archdeacon could go to Cox and Cummins , could remain there all day in anxious discussion ; but what might be say there be no long matter of interest to he , who be so soon to lay aside the name of warden of Barchester Hospital . 

 the archdeacon take up his shin new clerical hat , and put on his black new clerical glove , and look heavy , respectable , decorous , and opulent , a decide clergyman of the Church of England , every inch of he . " I suppose I shall see you at Barchester the day after to - morrow , " say he . 

 the warden suppose he would . 

 " I must once more beseech you to take no further step till you see my father ; if you owe I nothing , " and the archdeacon look as though he think a great deal be due to he , " at least you owe so much to my father ; " and , without wait for a reply , Dr Grantly wend his way to Cox and Cummins . 

 Mrs Grantly wait till the last fall of her husband 's foot be hear , as he turn out of the court into St Paul 's Churchyard , and then commence her task of talk her father over . 

 " Papa , " she begin , " this be a most serious business . " 

 " indeed it be , " say the warden , ring the bell . 

 " I greatly feel the distress of mind you must have endure . " 

 " I be sure you do , my dear ; " and he order the waiter to bring he pen , ink , and paper . 

 " be you go to write , papa ? " 

 " yes , my dear ; I be go to write my resignation to the bishop . " 

 " pray , pray , papa , put it off till our return ; pray put it off till you have see the bishop ; dear papa ! for my sake , for Eleanor 's ! " 

 " it be for your sake and Eleanor 's that I do this . I hope , at least , that my child may never have to be ashamed of their father . " 

 " how can you talk about shame , papa ? " and she stop while the waiter creak in with the paper , and then slowly creak out again ; " how can you talk about shame ? you know what all your friend think about this question . " 

 the warden spread his paper on the table , place it on the meagre blot - book which the hotel afford , and sit himself down to write . 

 " you will not   refuse I one request , papa ? " continue his daughter ; " you will not   refuse to delay your letter for two short day ? two day can make no possible difference . " 

 " my dear , " say he naively , " if I wait till I get to Barchester , I might , perhaps , be prevent . " 

 " but surely you would not wish to offend the bishop ? " say she . 

 " God forbid ! the bishop be not apt to take offence , and know I too well to take in bad part anything that I may be call on to do . " 

 " but , papa " 

 " Susan , " say he , " my mind on this subject be make up ; it be not without much repugnance that I act in opposition to the advice of such man as Sir Abraham Haphazard and the archdeacon ; but in this matter I can take no advice , I can not alter the resolution to which I have come . " 

 " but two day , papa " 

 " no ; nor can I delay it . you may add to my present unhappiness by press I , but you can not change my purpose ; it will be a comfort to I if you will let the matter rest " : and , dip his pen into the inkstand , he fix his eye intently on the paper . 

 there be something in his manner which teach his daughter to perceive that he be in earnest ; she have at one time rule supreme in her father 's house , but she know that there be moment when , mild and meek as he be , he would have his way , and the present be an occasion of the sort . she return , therefore , to her knitting , and very shortly after leave the room . 

 the warden be now at liberty to compose his letter , and , as it be characteristic of the man , it shall be give at full length . the official letter , which , when write , seem to he to be too formally cold to be send alone to so dear a friend , be accompany by a private note ; and both be here insert . 

 the letter of resignation run as follow : 
 

 Chapter Hotel , St. Paul 's , 
 London , 
 August , 18 - - 
 my Lord Bishop , 

 it be with the great pain that I feel myself constrain to resign into your Lordship 's hand the wardenship of the hospital at Barchester , which you so kindly confer upon I , now nearly twelve year since . 

 I need not explain the circumstance which have make this step appear necessary to I . you be aware that a question have arise as to the right of the warden to the income which have be allot to the wardenship ; it have seem to I that this right be not well make out , and I hesitate to incur the risk of take an income to which my legal claim appear doubtful . 

 the office of precentor of the cathedral be , as your Lordship be aware , join to that of the warden ; that be to say , the precentor have for many year be the warden of the hospital ; there be , however , nothing to make the junction of the two office necessary , and , unless you or the dean and chapter object to such an arrangement , I would wish to keep the precentorship . the income of this office will now be necessary to I ; indeed , I do not know why I should be ashamed to say that I should have difficulty in support myself without it . 

 your Lordship , and such other as you may please to consult on the matter , will at once see that my resignation of the wardenship need offer not the slight bar to its occupation by another person . I be think in the wrong by all those whom I have consult in the matter ; I have very little but an inward and an unguided conviction of my own to bring I to this step , and I shall , indeed , be hurt to find that any slur be throw on the preferment which your kindness bestow on I , by my resignation of it . I , at any rate for one , shall look on any successor whom you may appoint as enjoy a clerical situation of the high respectability , and one to which your Lordship 's nomination give an indefeasible right . 

 I can not finish this official letter without again thank your lordship for all your great kindness , and I beg to subscribe myself 

 your Lordship 's most obedient servant , 

 Septimus Harding , 
 
 Warden of Barchester Hospital , 
 and Precentor of the Cathedral 
 
 he then write the follow private note : 
 

 my dear Bishop , 

 I can not send you the accompany official letter without a warm expression of thank for all your kindness than would befit a document which may to a certain degree be make public . you , I know , will understand the feeling , and , perhaps , pity the weakness which make I resign the hospital . I be not make of calibre strong enough to withstand public attack . be I convinced that I stand on ground perfectly firm , that I be certainly justify in take eight hundred a year under Hiram 's will , I should feel bind by duty to retain the position , however unendurable might be the nature of the assault ; but , as I do not feel this conviction , I can not believe that you will think I wrong in what I be do . 

 I have at one time an idea of keep only some moderate portion of the income ; perhaps three hundred a year , and of remit the remainder to the trustee ; but it occur to I , and I think with reason , that by so do I should place my successor in an invidious position , and greatly damage your patronage . 

 my dear friend , let I have a line from you to say that you do not blame I for what I be do , and that the officiating vicar of Crabtree Parva will be the same to you as the warden of the hospital . 

 I be very anxious about the precentorship : the archdeacon think it must go with the wardenship ; I think not , and , that , have it , I can not be oust . I will , however , be guide by you and the dean . no other duty will suit I so well , or come so much within my power of adequate performance . 

 I thank you from my heart for the preferment which I be now give up , and for all your kindness , and be , dear bishop , now as always 

 your most sincerely , 
 Septimus Harding 
 London , August , 18 - - 
 

 have write these letter and make a copy of the former one for the benefit of the archdeacon , Mr Harding , whom we must now cease to call the warden , he have designate himself so for the last time , find that it be nearly two o'clock , and that he must prepare for his journey . yes , from this time he never again admit the name by which he have be so familiarly know , and in which , to tell the truth , he have rejoice . the love of title be common to all man , and a vicar or fellow be as pleased at become Mr Archdeacon or Mr Provost , as a lieutenant at get his captaincy , or a city tallow - chandler in become Sir John on the occasion of a Queen 's visit to a new bridge . but warden he be no long , and the name of precentor , though the office be to he so dear , confer in itself no sufficient distinction ; our friend , therefore , again become Mr Harding . 

 Mrs Grantly have go out ; he have , therefore , no one to delay he by further entreaty to postpone his journey ; he have soon arrange his bag , and pay his bill , and , leave a note for his daughter , in which he put the copy of his official letter , he get into a cab and drive away to the station with something of triumph in his heart . 

 have he not cause for triumph ? have he not be supremely successful ? have he not for the first time in his life hold his own purpose against that of his son - in - law , and manfully combat against great odd , against the archdeacon 's wife as well as the archdeacon ? have he not gain a great victory , and be it not fit that he should step into his cab with triumph ? 

 he have not tell Eleanor when he would return , but she be on the look - out for he by every train by which he could arrive , and the pony - carriage be at the Barchester station when the train draw up at the platform . 

 " my dear , " say he , sit beside she , as she steer her little vessel to one side of the road to make room for the clattering omnibus as they pass from the station into the town , " I hope you will be able to feel a proper degree of respect for the vicar of Crabtree . " 

 " dear papa , " say she , " I be so glad . " 

 there be great comfort in return home to that pleasant house , though he be to leave it so soon , and in discuss with his daughter all that he have do , and all that he have to do . it must take some time to get out of one house into another ; the curate at Crabtree could not be abolish under six month , that be , unless other provision could be make for he ; and then the furniture : the most of that must be sell to pay Sir Abraham Haphazard for sit up till twelve at night . Mr Harding be strangely ignorant as to lawyer ' bill ; he have no idea , from twenty pound to two thousand , as to the sum in which he be indebted for legal assistance . true , he have call in no lawyer himself ; true , he have be no consent party to the employment of either Cox and Cummins , or Sir Abraham ; he have never be consult on such matter ; the archdeacon have manage all this himself , never for a moment suspecting that Mr Harding would take upon he to end the matter in a way of his own . have the lawyer ' bill be ten thousand pound , Mr Harding could not have help it ; but he be not on that account disposed to dispute his own liability . the question never occur to he ; but it do occur to he that he have very little money at his banker 's , that he could receive nothing far from the hospital , and that the sale of the furniture be his only resource . 

 " not all , papa , " say Eleanor pleadingly . 

 " not quite all , my dear , " say he ; " that be , if we can help it . we must have a little at Crabtree , but it can only be a little ; we must put a bold front on it , nelly ; it be not   easy to come down from affluence to poverty . " 

 and so they plan their future mode of life ; the father take comfort from the reflection that his daughter would soon be free from it , and she resolve that her father would soon have in her own house a ready mean of escape from the solitude of the Crabtree vicarage . 

 when the archdeacon leave his wife and father - in - law at the Chapter Coffee House to go to Messrs Cox and Cummins , he have no very define idea of what he have to do when he get there . gentleman when at law , or in any way engage in matter require legal assistance , be very apt to go to their lawyer without much absolute necessity ; gentleman when do so , be apt to describe such attendance as quite compulsory , and very disagreeable . the lawyer , on the other hand , do not at all see the necessity , though they quite agree as to the disagreeable nature of the visit ; gentleman when so engaged be usually somewhat gravelled at find nothing to say to their learn friend ; they generally talk a little politic , a little weather , ask some few foolish question about their suit , and then withdraw , have pass half an hour in a small dingy waiting - room , in company with some junior assistant - clerk , and ten minute with the member of the firm ; the business be then over for which the gentleman have come up to London , probably a distance of a hundred and fifty mile . to be sure he go to the play , and dine at his friend 's club , and have a bachelor 's liberty and bachelor 's recreation for three or four day ; and he could not probably plead the desire of such gratification as a reason to his wife for a trip to London . 

 married lady , when your husband find they be positively oblige to attend their legal adviser , the nature of the duty to be perform be generally of this description . 

 the archdeacon would not have dream of leave London without go to Cox and Cummins ; and yet he have nothing to say to they . the game be up ; he plainly see that Mr Harding in this matter be not to be move ; his only remain business on this head be to pay the bill and have do with it ; and I think it may be take for grant , that whatever the cause may be that take a gentleman to a lawyer 's chamber , he never go there to pay his bill . 

 Dr Grantly , however , in the eye of Messrs Cox and Cummins , represent the spirituality of the diocese of Barchester , as Mr Chadwick do the temporality , and be , therefore , too great a man to undergo the half - hour in the clerk 's room . it will not be necessary that we should listen to the note of sorrow in which the archdeacon bewail to Mr Cox the weakness of his father - in - law , and the end of all their hope of triumph ; nor need we repeat the various exclamation of surprise with which the mournful intelligence be receive . no tragedy occur , though Mr Cox , a short and somewhat bull - neck man , be very near a fit of apoplexy when he first attempt to ejaculate that fatal word resign ! 

 over and over again do Mr Cox attempt to enforce on the archdeacon the propriety of urge on Mr Warden the madness of the deed he be about to do . 

 " eight hundred a year ! " say Mr Cox . 

 " and nothing whatever to do ! " say Mr Cummins , who have join the conference . 

 " no private fortune , I believe , " say Mr Cox . 

 " not a shilling , " say Mr Cummins , in a very low voice , shake his head . 

 " I never hear of such a case in all my experience , " say Mr Cox . 

 " eight hundred a year , and as nice a house as any gentleman could wish to hang up his hat in , " say Mr Cummins . 

 " and an unmarried daughter , I believe , " say Mr Cox , with much moral seriousness in his tone . the archdeacon only sigh as each separate wail be utter , and shake his head , signify that the fatuity of some people be past belief . 

 " I will tell you what he might do , " say Mr Cummins , brighten up . " I will tell you how you might save it : let he exchange . " 

 " exchange where ? " say the archdeacon . 

 " exchange for a living . there be Quiverful , of Puddingdale ; he have twelve child , and would be delighted to get the hospital . to be sure Puddingdale be only four hundred , but that would be save something out of the fire : Mr Harding would have a curate , and still keep three hundred or three hundred and fifty . " 

 the archdeacon open his ear and listen ; he really think the scheme might do . 

 " the newspaper , " continue Mr Cummins , " might hammer away at Quiverful every day for the next six month without his mind they . " 

 the archdeacon take up his hat , and return to his hotel , think the matter over deeply . at any rate he would sound quiverful . a man with twelve child would do much to double his income . 

 

 

 Chapter XX 

 Farewell 

 

 on the morning after Mr Harding 's return home he receive a note from the bishop full of affection , condolence , and praise . " pray come to I at once , " write the bishop , " that we may see what have well be do ; as to the hospital , I will not say a word to dissuade you ; but I do not   like your go to Crabtree : at any rate , come to I at once . " 

 Mr Harding do go to he at once ; and long and confidential be the consultation between the two old friend . there they sit together the whole long day , plot to get the well of the archdeacon , and to carry out little scheme of their own , which they know would be oppose by the whole weight of his authority . 

 the bishop 's first idea be , that Mr Harding , if leave to himself , would certainly starve , not in the figurative sense in which so many of our lady and gentleman do starve on income from one to five hundred a year ; not that he would be starve as regard dress coat , port wine , and pocket - money ; but that he would positively perish of inanition for want of bread . 

 " how be a man to live , when he give up all his income ? " say the bishop to himself . and then the good - natured little man begin to consider how his friend might be well rescue from a death so horrid and painful . 

 his first proposition to Mr Harding be , that they should live together at the palace . he , the bishop , positively assure Mr Harding that he want another resident chaplain , not a young work chaplain , but a steady , middle - aged chaplain ; one who would dine and drink a glass of wine with he , talk about the archdeacon , and poke the fire . the bishop do not positively name all these duty , but he give Mr Harding to understand that such would be the nature of the service require . 

 it be not without much difficulty that Mr Harding make his friend see that this would not suit he ; that he could not throw up the bishop 's preferment , and then come and hang on at the bishop 's table ; that he could not allow people to say of he that it be an easy matter to abandon his own income , as he be able to sponge on that of another person . he succeed , however , in explain that the plan would not do , and then the bishop bring forward another which he have in his sleeve . he , the bishop , have in his will leave certain money to Mr Harding 's two daughter , imagine that Mr Harding would himself want no such assistance during his own lifetime . this legacy amount to three thousand pound each , duty free ; and he now press it as a gift on his friend . 

 " the girl , you know , " say he , " will have it just the same when you be go , and they will not   want it soon ; and as for the interest during my lifetime , it be not   worth talk about . I have more than enough . " 

 with much difficulty and heartfelt sorrow , Mr Harding refuse also this offer . no ; his wish be to support himself , however poorly , not to be support on the charity of anyone . it be hard to make the bishop understand this ; it be hard to make he comprehend that the only real favour he could confer be the continuation of his independent friendship ; but at last even this be do . at any rate , think the bishop , he will come and dine with I from time to time , and if he be absolutely starve I shall see it . 

 touch the precentorship , the bishop be clearly of opinion that it could be hold without the other situation , an opinion from which no one differ ; and it be therefore soon settle among all the party concern , that Mr Harding should still be the precentor of the cathedral . 

 on the day follow Mr Harding 's return , the archdeacon reach Plumstead full of Mr Cummins 's scheme regard Puddingdale and Mr Quiverful . on the very next morning he drive over to Puddingdale , and obtain the full consent of the wretched clerical Priam , who be endeavour to feed his poor Hecuba and a dozen of Hectors on the small proceed of his ecclesiastical kingdom . Mr Quiverful have no doubt as to the legal right of the warden ; his conscience would be quite clear as to accept the income ; and as to the Jupiter , he beg to assure the archdeacon that he be quite indifferent to any emanation from the profane portion of the periodical press . 

 have so far succeed , he next sound the bishop ; but here he be astonish by most unexpected resistance . the bishop do not think it would do . " not do , why not ? " and see that his father be not shake , he repeat the question in a severer form : " why not do , my lord ? " 

 his lordship look very unhappy , and shuffle about in his chair , but still do not   give way ; he think Puddingdale would not   do for Mr Harding ; it be too far from Barchester . 

 " oh ! of course he will have a curate . " 

 the bishop also think that Mr Quiverful would not   do for the hospital ; such an exchange would not   look well at such a time ; and , when press hard , he declare he do not   think Mr Harding would accept of Puddingdale under any circumstance . 

 " how be he to live ? " demand the archdeacon . 

 the bishop , with tear in his eye , declare that he have not the slight conception how life be to be sustain within he at all . 

 the archdeacon then leave his father , and go down to the hospital ; but Mr Harding would not   listen at all to the Puddingdale scheme . to his eye it have no attraction ; it savour of simony , and be likely to bring down upon he hard and more deserved stricture than any he have yet receive : he positively decline to become vicar of Puddingdale under any circumstance . 

 the archdeacon wax wroth , talk big , and look big ; he say something about dependence and beggary , speak of the duty every man be under to earn his bread , make pass allusion to the folly of youth and waywardness of age , as though Mr Harding be afflict by both , and end by declare that he have do . he feel that he have leave no stone unturned to arrange matter on the good and easy footing ; that he have , in fact , so arrange they , that he have so manage that there be no further need of any anxiety in the matter . and how have he be pay ? his advice have be systematically reject ; he have be not only slight , but distrust and avoid ; he and his measure have be utterly throw over , as have be Sir Abraham , who , he have reason to know , be much pained at what have occur . he now find it be useless to interfere any far , and he should retire . if any further assistance be require from he , he would probably be call on , and should be again happy to come forward . and so he leave the hospital , and have not since enter it from that day to this . 

 and here we must take leave of Archdeacon Grantly . we fear that he be represent in these page as be bad than he be ; but we have have to do with his foible , and not with his virtue . we have see only the weak side of the man , and have lack the opportunity of bring he forward on his strong ground . that he be a man somewhat too fond of his own way , and not sufficiently scrupulous in his manner of achieve it , his good friend can not deny . that he be bigote in favour , not so much of his doctrine as of his cloth , be also true : and it be true that the possession of a large income be a desire that sit near his heart . nevertheless , the archdeacon be a gentleman and a man of conscience ; he spend his money liberally , and do the work he have to do with the good of his ability ; he improve the tone of society of those among whom he live . his aspiration be of a healthy , if not of the high , kind . though never an austere man , he uphold propriety of conduct both by example and precept . he be generous to the poor , and hospitable to the rich ; in matter of religion he be sincere , and yet no Pharisee ; he be in earnest , and yet no fanatic . on the whole , the Archdeacon of Barchester be a man do more good than harm , a man to be further and support , though perhaps also to be control ; and it be matter of regret to we that the course of our narrative have require that we should see more of his weakness than his strength . 

 Mr Harding allow himself no rest till everything be prepare for his departure from the hospital . it may be as well to mention that he be not drive to the stern necessity of sell all his furniture : he have be quite in earnest in his intention to do so , but it be soon make known to he that the claim of Messrs Cox and Cummins make no such step obligatory . the archdeacon have think it wise to make use of the threat of the lawyer 's bill , to frighten his father - in - law into compliance ; but he have no intention to saddle Mr Harding with cost , which have be incur by no mean exclusively for his benefit . the amount of the bill be add to the diocesan account , and be , in fact , pay out of the bishop 's pocket , without any consciousness on the part of his lordship . a great part of his furniture he do resolve to sell , have no other mean to dispose of it ; and the pony and carriage be transfer , by private contract , to the use of an old maiden lady in the city . 

 for his present use Mr Harding take a lodging in Barchester , and thither be convey such article as he want for daily use : his music , book , and instrument , his own arm - chair , and Eleanor 's pet sofa ; her teapoy and his cellaret , and also the slender but still sufficient content of his wine - cellar . Mrs Grantly have much wish that her sister would reside at Plumstead , till her father 's house at Crabtree should be ready for she ; but Eleanor herself strongly resist this proposal . it be in vain urge upon she , that a lady in lodging cost more than a gentleman ; and that , under her father 's present circumstance , such an expense should be avoid . Eleanor have not press her father to give up the hospital in order that she might live at Plumstead Rectory and he alone in his Barchester lodging ; nor do Eleanor think that she would be treat a certain gentleman very fairly , if she betook herself to the house which he would be the least desirous of enter of any in the county . so she get a little bedroom for herself behind the sitting - room , and just over the little back parlour of the chemist , with whom they be to lodge . there be somewhat of a savour of senna soften by peppermint about the place ; but , on the whole , the lodging be clean and comfortable . 

 the day have be fix for the migration of the ex - warden , and all Barchester be in a state of excitement on the subject . opinion be much divide as to the propriety of Mr Harding 's conduct . the mercantile part of the community , the mayor and corporation , and council , also most of the lady , be loud in his praise . nothing could be more noble , nothing more generous , nothing more upright . but the gentry be of a different way of thinking , especially the lawyer and the clergyman . they say such conduct be very weak and undignified ; that Mr Harding evince a lamentable want of esprit de corps , as well as courage ; and that such an abdication must do much harm , and could do but little good . 

 on the evening before he leave , he summon all the bedesman into his parlour to wish they good - bye . with Bunce he have be in frequent communication since his return from London , and have be at much pain to explain to the old man the cause of his resignation , without in any way prejudice the position of his successor . the other , also , he have see more or less frequently ; and have hear from most of they separately some expression of regret at his departure ; but he have postpone his farewell till the last evening . 

 he now bid the maid put wine and glass on the table ; and have the chair arrange around the room ; and send Bunce to each of the man to request they would come and say farewell to their late warden . soon the noise of aged scuffle foot be hear upon the gravel and in the little hall , and the eleven man who be enable to leave their room be assemble . 

 " come in , my friend , come in , " say the warden ; he be still warden then . " come in , and sit down ; " and he take the hand of Abel Handy , who be the near to he , and lead the limp grumbler to a chair . the other follow slowly and bashfully ; the infirm , the lame , and the blind : poor wretch ! who have be so happy , have they but know it ! now their aged face be cover with shame , and every kind word from their master be a coal of fire burn on their head . 

 when first the news have reach they that Mr Harding be go to leave the hospital , it have be receive with a kind of triumph ; his departure be , as it be , a prelude to success . he have admit his want of right to the money about which they be dispute ; and as it do not belong to he , of course , it do to they . the one hundred a year to each of they be actually become a reality ; and Abel Handy be a hero , and Bunce a faint - hearted sycophant , worthy neither honour nor fellowship . but other tiding soon make their way into the old man 's room . it be first notify to they that the income abandon by Mr Harding would not come to they ; and these account be confirm by attorney Finney . they be then inform that Mr Harding 's place would be at once fill by another . that the new warden could not be a kind man they all know ; that he would be a less friendly one most suspect ; and then come the bitter information that , from the moment of Mr Harding 's departure , the twopence a day , his own peculiar gift , must of necessity be withdraw . 

 and this be to be the end of all their mighty struggle , of their fight for their right , of their petition , and their debate , and their hope ! they be to change the good of master for a possible bad one , and to lose twopence a day each man ! no ; unfortunate as this be , it be not the bad , or nearly the bad , as will just now be see . 

 " sit down , sit down , my friend , " say the warden ; " I want to say a word to you and to drink your health , before I leave you . come up here , Moody , here be a chair for you ; come , Jonathan Crumple ; " and by degree he get the man to be seat . it be not surprising that they should hang back with faint heart , have return so much kindness with such deep ingratitude . last of all of they come Bunce , and with sorrowful mien and slow step get into his accustomed seat near the fire - place . 

 when they be all in their place , Mr Harding rise to address they ; and then find himself not quite at home on his leg , he sit down again . " my dear old friend , " say he , " you all know that I be go to leave you . " 

 there be a sort of murmur run round the room , intended , perhaps , to express regret at his departure ; but it be but a murmur , and might have mean that or anything else . 

 " there have be lately some misunderstanding between we . you have think , I believe , that you do not get all that you be entitle to , and that the fund of the hospital have not be properly dispose of . as for I , I can not say what should be the disposition of these money , or how they should be manage , and I have therefore think it well to go . " 

 " we never want to drive your reverence out of it , " say Handy . 

 " no , indeed , your reverence , " say Skulpit . " we never think it would come to this . when I sign the petition , that is , I do not   sign it , because " 

 " let his reverence speak , can not   you ? " say Moody . 

 " no , " continue Mr Harding ; " I be sure you do not wish to turn I out ; but I think it well to leave you . I be not a very good hand at a lawsuit , as you may all guess ; and when it seem necessary that our ordinary quiet mode of living should be disturb , I think it well to go . I be neither angry nor offend with any man in the hospital . " 

 here Bunce utter a kind of groan , very clearly expressive of disagreement . 

 " I be neither angry nor displease with any man in the hospital , " repeat Mr Harding , emphatically . " if any man have be wrong , and I do not   say any man have , he have err through wrong advice . in this country all be entitle to look for their own right , and you have do no more . as long as your interest and my interest be at variance , I could give you no counsel on this subject ; but the connection between we have cease ; my income can no long depend on your doing , and therefore , as I leave you , I venture to offer to you my advice . " 

 the man all declare that they would from henceforth be entirely guide by Mr Harding 's opinion in their affair . 

 " some gentleman will probably take my place here very soon , and I strongly advise you to be prepare to receive he in a kindly spirit and to raise no further question among yourself as to the amount of his income . be you to succeed in lessen what he have to receive , you would not increase your own allowance . the surplus would not go to you ; your want be adequately provide for , and your position could hardly be improve . " 

 " God bless your reverence , we know it , " say Spriggs . 

 " it be all true , your reverence , " say Skulpit . " we see it all now . " 

 " yes , Mr Harding , " say Bunce , open his mouth for the first time ; " I believe they do understand it now , now that they have   drive from under the same roof with they such a master as not one of they will ever know again , now that they be like to be in sore want of a friend . " 

 " come , come , Bunce , " say Mr Harding , blow his nose and manouvre to wipe his eye at the same time . 

 " oh , as to that , " say Handy , " we none of we never want to do Mr Harding no harm ; if he be go now , it be not along of we ; and I do not   see for what Mr Bunce speak up agen we that way . " 

 " you have   ruin yourself , and you have   ruin I too , and that be why , " say Bunce . 

 " Nonsense , Bunce , " say Mr Harding ; " there be nobody ruin at all . I hope you will let I leave you all friend ; I hope you will all drink a glass of wine in friendly feeling with I and with one another . you will have a good friend , I do not   doubt , in your new warden ; and if ever you want any other , why after all I be not go so far off but that I shall sometimes see you ; " and then , have finish his speech , Mr Harding fill all the glass , and himself hand each a glass to the man round he , and raise his own say : 

 " God bless you all ! you have my heartfelt wish for your welfare . I hope you may live content , and die trust in the Lord Jesus Christ , and thankful to Almighty God for the good thing he have give you . God bless you , my friend ! " and Mr Harding drink his wine . 

 another murmur , somewhat more articulate than the first , pass round the circle , and this time it be intend to imply a blessing on Mr Harding . it have , however , but little cordiality in it . poor old man ! how could they be cordial with their sore conscience and sham face ? how could they bid God bless he with hearty voice and a true benison , know , as they do , that their vile cabal have drive he from his happy home , and send he in his old age to seek shelter under a strange roof - tree ? they do their good , however ; they drink their wine , and withdraw . 

 as they leave the hall - door , Mr Harding shake hand with each of the man , and speak a kind word to they about their individual case and ailment ; and so they depart , answer his question in the few word , and retreat to their den , a sorrowful repentant crew . 

 all but Bunce , who still remain to make his own farewell . " there be poor old Bell , " say Mr Harding ; " I must not   go without say a word to he ; come through with I , Bunce , and bring the wine with you ; " and so they go through to the man 's cottage , and find the old man prop up as usual in his bed . 

 " I have   come to say good - bye to you , Bell , " say Mr Harding , speak loud , for the old man be deaf . 

 " and be you go away , then , really ? " ask Bell . 

 " indeed I be , and I have   bring you a glass of wine ; so that we may part friend , as we live , you know . " 

 the old man take the proffered glass in his shake hand , and drink it eagerly . " God bless you , Bell ! " say Mr Harding ; " good - bye , my old friend . " 

 " and so you be really go ? " the man again ask . 

 " indeed I be , Bell . " 

 the poor old bed - ride creature still keep Mr Harding 's hand in his own , and the warden think that he have meet with something like warmth of feeling in the one of all his subject from whom it be the least likely to be expect ; for poor old Bell have nearly outlive all human feeling . " and your reverence , " say he , and then he pause , while his old palsied head shake horribly , and his shrivelled cheek sink lower within his jaw , and his glazy eye gleam with a momentary light ; " and your reverence , shall we get the hundred a year , then ? " 

 how gently do Mr Harding try to extinguish the false hope of money which have be so wretchedly raise to disturb the quiet of the die man ! one other week and his mortal coil would be shuffle off ; in one short week would God resume his soul , and set it apart for its irrevocable doom ; seven more tedious day and night of senseless inactivity , and all would be over for poor Bell in this world ; and yet , with his last audible word , he be demand his moneyed right , and assert himself to be the proper heir of John Hiram 's bounty ! not on he , poor sinner as he be , be the load of such sin ! 

 Mr Harding return to his parlour , meditate with a sick heart on what he have see , and Bunce with he . we will not describe the parting of these two good man , for good man they be . it be in vain that the late warden endeavour to comfort the heart of the old bedesman ; poor old Bunce feel that his day of comfort be go . the hospital have to he be a happy home , but it could be so no long . he have have honour there , and friendship ; he have recognise his master , and be recognise ; all his want , both of soul and body , have be supply , and he have be a happy man . he weep grievously as he part from his friend , and the tear of an old man be bitter . " it be all over for I in this world , " say he , as he give the last squeeze to Mr Harding 's hand ; " I have now to forgive those who have injure I ; and to die . " 

 and so the old man go out , and then Mr Harding give way to his grief and he too weep aloud . 

 

 

 Chapter XXI 

 Conclusion 

 

 our tale be now do , and it only remain to we to collect the scatter thread of our little story , and to tie they into a seemly knot . this will not be a work of labour , either to the author or to his reader ; we have not to deal with many personage , or with stir event , and be it not for the custom of the thing , we might leave it to the imagination of all concerned to conceive how affair at Barchester arrange themselves . 

 on the morning after the day last allude to , Mr Harding , at an early hour , walk out of the hospital , with his daughter under his arm , and sit down quietly to breakfast at his lodging over the chemist 's shop . there be no parade about his departure ; no one , not even Bunce , be there to witness it ; have he walk to the apothecary 's thus early to get a piece of court plaster , or a box of lozenge , he could not have do it with less appearance of an important movement . there be a tear in Eleanor 's eye as she pass through the big gateway and over the bridge ; but Mr Harding walk with an elastic step , and enter his new abode with a pleasant face . 

 " now , my dear , " say he , " you have everything ready , and you can make tea here just as nicely as in the parlour at the hospital . " so Eleanor take off her bonnet and make the tea . after this manner do the late Warden of Barchester Hospital accomplish his flitting , and change his residence . 

 it be not long before the archdeacon bring his father to discuss the subject of a new warden . of course he look upon the nomination as his own , and he have in his eye three or four fitting candidate , see that Mr Cummins 's plan as to the living of Puddingdale could not be bring to bear . how can I describe the astonishment which confound he , when his father declare that he would appoint no successor to Mr Harding ? " if we can get the matter set to right , Mr Harding will return , " say the bishop ; " and if we can not , it will be wrong to put any other gentleman into so cruel a position . " 

 it be in vain that the archdeacon argue and lecture , and even threaten ; in vain he my - lord his poor father in his stern manner ; in vain his " good heaven ! " be ejaculate in a tone that might have move a whole synod , let alone one weak and aged bishop . nothing could induce his father to fill up the vacancy cause by Mr Harding 's retirement . 

 even John Bold would have pity the feeling with which the archdeacon return to Plumstead : the church be fall , nay , already in ruin ; its dignitary be yield without a struggle before the blow of its antagonist ; and one of its most respected bishop , his own father , the man consider by all the world as be in such matter under his , Dr Grantly 's , control , have positively resolve to capitulate , and own himself vanquish ! 

 and how fare the hospital under this resolve of its visitor ? badly indeed . it be now some year since Mr Harding leave it , and the warden 's house be still tenantless . Old Bell have die , and Billy Gazy ; the one - eyed Spriggs have drink himself to death , and three other of the twelve have be gather into the churchyard mould . six have go , and the six vacancy remain unfilled ! yes , six have die , with no kind friend to solace their last moment , with no wealthy neighbour to administer comfort and ease the sting of death . Mr Harding , indeed , do not desert they ; from he they have such consolation as a die man may receive from his christian pastor ; but it be the occasional kindness of a stranger which minister to they , and not the constant presence of a master , a neighbour , and a friend . 

 nor be those who remain well off than those who die . dissension rise among they , and contest for pre - eminence ; and then they begin to understand that soon one among they would be the last , some one wretched being would be alone there in that now comfortless hospital , the miserable relic of what have once be so good and so comfortable . 

 the building of the hospital itself have not be allow to go to ruin . Mr Chadwick , who still hold his stewardship , and pay the accruing rent into an account open at a bank for the purpose , see to that ; but the whole place have become disorder and ugly . the warden 's garden be a wretched wilderness , the drive and path be cover with weed , the flower - bed be bare , and the unshorn lawn be now a mass of long damp grass and unwholesome moss . the beauty of the place be go ; its attraction have wither . alas ! a very few year since it be the prettiest spot in Barchester , and now it be a disgrace to the city . 

 Mr Harding do not go out to Crabtree Parva . an arrangement be make which respect the homestead of Mr Smith and his happy family , and put Mr Harding into possession of a small living within the wall of the city . it be the small possible parish , contain a part of the Cathedral Close and a few old house adjoining . the church be a singular little Gothic building , perch over a gateway , through which the Close be enter , and be approach by a flight of stone step which lead down under the archway of the gate . it be no big than an ordinary room , perhaps twenty - seven foot long by eighteen wide , but still it be a perfect church . it contain an old carve pulpit and reading - desk , a tiny altar under a window fill with dark old - coloured glass , a font , some half - dozen pew , and perhaps a dozen seat for the poor ; and also a vestry . the roof be high pitch , and of black old oak , and the three large beam which support it run down to the side wall , and terminate in grotesquely carve face , two devil and an angel on one side , two angel and a devil on the other . such be the church of St Cuthbert at Barchester , of which Mr Harding become rector , with a clear income of seventy - five pound a year . 

 here he perform afternoon service every Sunday , and administer the Sacrament once in every three month . his audience be not large ; and , have they be so , he could not have accommodate they : but enough come to fill his six pew , and on the front seat of those devote to the poor be always to be see our old friend Mr Bunce , decently array in his bedesman 's gown . 

 Mr Harding be still precentor of Barchester ; and it be very rarely the case that those who attend the Sunday morning service miss the gratification of hear he chant the Litany , as no other man in England can do it . he be neither a discontented nor an unhappy man ; he still inhabit the lodging to which he go on leave the hospital , but he now have they to himself . three month after that time Eleanor become Mrs Bold , and of course remove to her husband 's house . 

 there be some difficulty to be get over on the occasion of the marriage . the archdeacon , who could not so soon overcome his grief , would not be persuade to grace the ceremony with his presence , but he allow his wife and child to be there . the marriage take place in the cathedral , and the bishop himself officiate . it be the last occasion on which he ever do so ; and , though he still live , it be not probable that he will ever do so again . 

 not long after the marriage , perhaps six month , when Eleanor 's bridal - honours be fade , and person be begin to call she Mrs Bold without twitter , the archdeacon consent to meet John Bold at a dinner - party , and since that time they have become almost friend . the archdeacon firmly believe that his brother - in - law be , as a bachelor , an infidel , an unbeliever in the great truth of our religion ; but that matrimony have open his eye , as it have those of other . and Bold be equally inclined to think that time have soften the asperity of the archdeacon 's character . friend though they be , they do not often revert to the feud of the hospital . 

 Mr Harding , we say , be not an unhappy man : he keep his lodging , but they be of little use to he , except as be the one spot on earth which he call his own . his time be spend chiefly at his daughter 's or at the palace ; he be never leave alone , even should he wish to be so ; and within a twelvemonth of Eleanor 's marriage his determination to live at his own lodging have be so far break through and abandon , that he consent to have his violoncello permanently remove to his daughter 's house . 

 every other day a message be bring to he from the bishop . " the bishop 's compliment , and his lordship be not very well to - day , and he hop Mr Harding will dine with he . " this bulletin as to the old man 's health be a myth ; for though he be over eighty he be never ill , and will probably die some day , as a spark go out , gradually and without a struggle . Mr Harding do dine with he very often , which mean go to the palace at three and remain till ten ; and whenever he do not the bishop whine , and say that the port wine be cork , and complain that nobody attend to he , and fret himself off to bed an hour before his time . 

 it be long before the people of Barchester forget to call Mr Harding by his long well - know name of Warden . it have become so customary to say Mr Warden , that it be not easily drop . " no , no , " he always say when so address , " not warden now , only precentor . " 

 

 