PHINEAS FINN 
 the Irish Member 
 by 
 ANTHONY TROLLOPE 
 first publish in serial form in St. Paul 's Magazine begin in 
 1867 and in book form in 1869 
 content 
 volume I 
 I. Phineas Finn propose to stand for Loughshane 
 II . Phineas Finn be elect for Loughshane 
 III . Phineas Finn take his Seat 
 IV . Lady Laura Standish 
 V. Mr. and Mrs. Low 
 VI . Lord Brentford 's Dinner 
 VII . Mr. and Mrs. Bunce 
 VIII . the News about Mr. Mildmay and Sir Everard 
 IX . the New Government 
 X. Violet Effingham 
 XI . Lord Chiltern 
 XII . Autumnal prospect 
 xiii . Saulsby Wood 
 XIV . Loughlinter 
 XV . Donald Bean 's Pony 
 XVI . Phineas Finn return to Killaloe 
 XVII . Phineas Finn return to London 
 xviii . Mr. Turnbull 
 XIX . Lord Chiltern rid his Horse Bonebreaker 
 XX . the Debate on the Ballot 
 XXI . " do be punctual " 
 XXII . Lady Baldock at home 
 XXIII . Sunday in Grosvenor Place 
 XXIV . the Willingford Bull 
 XXV . Mr. Turnbull 's Carriage Stops the Way 
 XXVI . " the First Speech " 
 XXVII . Phineas discuss 
 xxviii . the second reading be carry 
 XXIX . a Cabinet Meeting 
 XXX . Mr. Kennedy 's Luck 
 xxxi . Finn for Loughton 
 XXXII . Lady Laura Kennedy 's Headache 
 XXXIII . Mr. Slide 's Grievance 
 XXXIV . be he Honest ? 
 XXXV . Mr. Monk upon reform 
 xxxvi . Phineas Finn make Progress 
 XXXVII . a Rough Encounter 
 VOLUME II 
 xxxviii . the Duel 
 XXXIX . Lady Laura be tell 
 XL . Madame Max Goesler 
 XLI . Lord Fawn 
 XLII . Lady Baldock do not send a card to Phineas Finn 
 XLIII . promotion 
 XLIV . Phineas and his friend 
 XLV . Miss Effingham 's four Lovers 
 XLVI . the Mousetrap 
 XLVII . Mr. Mildmay 's Bill 
 XLVIII . " the Duke " 
 XLIX . the Duellists Meet 
 L. Again Successful 
 LI . trouble at Loughlinter 
 LII . the First Blow 
 liii . show how Phineas Bore the Blow 
 LIV . consolation 
 LV . Lord Chiltern at Saulsby 
 LVI . what the People in Marylebone Thought 
 LVII . the Top Brick of the Chimney 
 LVIII . Rara Avis in Terris 
 LIX . the Earl 's wrath 
 LX . Madame Goesler 's Politics 
 LXI . another Duel 
 LXII . the Letter that be send to Brighton 
 LXIII . show how the Duke stand his ground 
 LXIV . the Horns 
 LXV . the Cabinet Minister at Killaloe 
 LXVI . Victrix 
 LXVII . Job 's Comforters 
 LXVIII . the Joint Attack 
 LXIX . the Temptress 
 LXX . the Prime Minister 's House 
 LXXI . compare Notes 
 LXXII . Madame Goesler 's Generosity 
 LXXIII . amantium Irae 
 LXXIV . the beginning of the End 
 LXXV . P. P. C. 
 LXXVI . conclusion 
 volume I 
 CHAPTER I 
 Phineas Finn propose to stand for Loughshane 
 Dr. Finn , of Killaloe , in county Clare , be as well know in those 
 part , - the confine , that be , of the county Clare , Limerick , 
 Tipperary , and Galway , - as be the bishop himself who live in the 
 same town , and be as much respect . many say that the doctor be 
 the rich man of the two , and the practice of his profession be 
 extend over almost as wide a district . indeed the bishop whom he 
 be privileged to attend , although a roman Catholic , always speak of 
 their diocese be conterminate . it will therefore be understand 
 that Dr. Finn , - Malachi Finn be his full name , - have obtain a wide 
 reputation as a country practitioner in the west of Ireland . and he 
 be a man sufficiently well to do , though that boast make by his 
 friend , that he be as warm a man as the bishop , have but little 
 truth to support it . bishop in Ireland , if they live at home , even 
 in these day , be very warm man ; and Dr. Finn have not a penny in the 
 world for which he have not work hard . he have , moreover , a costly 
 family , five daughter and one son , and , at the time of which we 
 be speak , no provision in the way of marriage or profession have 
 be make for any of they . of the one son , Phineas , the hero of the 
 follow page , the mother and five sister be very proud . the 
 doctor be accustom to say that his goose be as good as any other 
 man 's goose , as far as he could see as yet ; but that he should like 
 some very strong evidence before he allow himself to express an 
 opinion that the young bird partook , in any degree , of the quality 
 of a swan . from which it may be gather that Dr. Finn be a man of 
 common - sense . 
 Phineas have come to be a swan in the estimation of his mother and 
 sister by reason of certain early success at college . his father , 
 whose religion be not of that bitter kind in which we in England 
 be apt to suppose that all the Irish Roman Catholics indulge , have 
 send his son to Trinity ; and there be some in the neighbourhood of 
 Killaloe , - patient , probably , of Dr. Duggin , of Castle Connell , a 
 learn physician who have spend a fruitless life in endeavour to 
 make head against Dr. Finn , - who declare that old Finn would not be 
 sorry if his son be to turn protestant and go in for a fellowship . 
 Mrs. Finn be a protestant , and the five Miss Finns be Protestants , 
 and the doctor himself be very much give to din out among his 
 protestant friend on a Friday . our Phineas , however , do not turn 
 protestant up in Dublin , whatever his father 's secret wish on that 
 subject may have be . he do join a debating society , to success 
 in which his religion be no bar ; and he there achieve a sort of 
 distinction which be both easy and pleasant , and which , make 
 its way down to Killaloe , assist in engender those idea as 
 to swanhood of which maternal and sisterly mind be so sweetly 
 susceptible . " I know half a dozen old windbag at the present 
 moment , " say the doctor , " who be great fellow at debate club 
 when they be boy . " " Phineas be not a boy any long , " say Mrs. 
 Finn . " and windbag do not   get college scholarship , " say Matilda 
 Finn , the second daughter . " but papa always snub Phinny , " say 
 Barbara , the young . " I will snub you , if you do not   take care , " say 
 the doctor , take Barbara tenderly by the ear ; - for his young 
 daughter be the doctor 's pet . 
 the doctor certainly do not snub his son , for he allow he to go 
 over to London when he be twenty - two year of age , in order that he 
 might read with an english barrister . it be the doctor 's wish that 
 his son might be call to the Irish Bar , and the young man 's desire 
 that he might go to the English Bar . the doctor so far give way , 
 under the influence of Phineas himself , and of all the young woman of 
 the family , as to pay the usual fee to a very competent and learn 
 gentleman in the Middle Temple , and to allow his son one hundred and 
 fifty pound per annum for three year . Dr. Finn , however , be still 
 firm in his intention that his son should settle in Dublin , and take 
 the Munster Circuit , - believe that Phineas might come to want home 
 influence and home connection , in spite of the swanhood which be 
 attribute to he . 
 Phineas sit his term for three year , and be duly call to 
 the Bar ; but no evidence come home as to the acquirement of any 
 considerable amount of law lore , or even as to much law study , on 
 the part of the young aspirant . the learn pundit at whose foot he 
 have be sit be not especially loud in praise of his pupil 's 
 industry , though he do say a pleasant word or two as to his pupil 's 
 intelligence . Phineas himself do not boast much of his own hard 
 work when at home during the long vacation . no rumour of expect 
 success , - of expect professional success , - reach the ear of 
 any of the Finn family at Killaloe . but , nevertheless , there come 
 tiding which maintain those high idea in the maternal bosom of 
 which mention have be make , and which be of sufficient strength to 
 induce the doctor , in opposition to his own judgment , to consent to 
 the continued residence of his son in London . Phineas belong to an 
 excellent club , - the Reform Club , - and go into very good society . 
 he be hand in glove with the Hon . Laurence Fitzgibbon , the young 
 son of Lord Claddagh . he be intimate with Barrington Erle , who have 
 be private secretary , - one of the private secretary , - to the 
 great Whig Prime Minister who be lately in but be now out . he have 
 din three or four time with that great Whig nobleman , the Earl of 
 Brentford . and he have be assure that if he stick to the English 
 Bar he would certainly do well . though he might fail to succeed in 
 court or in chamber , he would doubtless have give to he some 
 one of those numerous appointment for which none but clever young 
 barrister be suppose to be fitting candidate . the old doctor 
 yield for another year , although at the end of the second year he 
 be call upon to pay a sum of three hundred pound , which be then 
 due by Phineas to creditor in London . when the doctor 's male friend 
 in and about Killaloe hear that he have do so , they say that he 
 be dot . not one of the Miss Finns be as yet marry ; and , after 
 all that have be say about the doctor 's wealth , it be suppose 
 that there would not be above five hundred pound a year among they 
 all , be he to give up his profession . but the doctor , when he pay 
 that three hundred pound for his son , buckle to his work again , 
 though he have for twelve month talk of give up the midwifery . 
 he buckle to again , to the great disgust of Dr. Duggin , who at this 
 time say very ill - natured thing about young Phineas . 
 at the end of the three year Phineas be call to the Bar , and 
 immediately receive a letter from his father ask minutely as to 
 his professional intention . his father recommend he to settle 
 in Dublin , and promise the one hundred and fifty pound for three 
 more year , on condition that this advice be follow . he do not 
 absolutely say that the allowance would be stop if the advice be 
 not follow , but that be plainly to be imply . that letter come 
 at the moment of a dissolution of Parliament . Lord de Terrier , the 
 conservative Prime Minister , who have now be in office for the 
 almost unprecedentedly long period of fifteen month , have find that 
 he could not face continue majority against he in the House of 
 Commons , and have dissolve the House . Rumour declare that he would 
 have much prefer to resign , and betake himself once again to the 
 easy glory of opposition ; but his party have naturally be obdurate 
 with he , and he have resolve to appeal to the country . when Phineas 
 receive his father 's letter , it have just be suggest to he at 
 the Reform Club that he should stand for the irish borough of 
 Loughshane . 
 this proposition have take Phineas Finn so much by surprise that when 
 first make to he by Barrington Erle it take his breath away . what ! 
 he stand for Parliament , twenty - four year old , with no vestige 
 of property belong to he , without a penny in his purse , as 
 completely dependent on his father as he be when he first go to 
 school at eleven year of age ! and for Loughshane , a little borough 
 in the county Galway , for which a brother of that fine old irish 
 peer , the Earl of Tulla , have be sit for the last twenty 
 year , - a fine , high - minded representative of the thorough - go 
 Orange protestant feeling of Ireland ! and the Earl of Tulla , to 
 whom almost all Loughshane belong , - or at any rate the land about 
 Loughshane , - be one of his father 's staunch friend ! loughshane 
 be in county Galway , but the Earl of Tulla usually live at his seat 
 in county Clare , not more than ten mile from Killaloe , and always 
 confide his gouty foot , and the weak nerve of the old countess , and 
 the stomach of all his domestic , to the care of Dr. Finn . how be 
 it possible that Phineas should stand for Loughshane ? from whence 
 be the money to come for such a contest ? it be a beautiful dream , 
 a grand idea , lift Phineas almost off the earth by its glory . 
 when the proposition be first make to he in the smoking - room at 
 the Reform Club by his friend Erle , he be aware that he blush 
 like a girl , and that he be unable at the moment to express 
 himself plainly , - so great be his astonishment and so great his 
 gratification . but before ten minute have pass by , while Barrington 
 Erle be still sit over his shoulder on the club sofa , and before 
 the blush have altogether vanish , he have see the improbability of 
 the scheme , and have explain to his friend that the thing could not 
 be do . but to his increase astonishment , his friend make nothing 
 of the difficulty . loughshane , accord to Barrington Erle , be 
 so small a place , that the expense would be very little . there be 
 altogether no more than 307 register elector . the inhabitant be 
 so far remove from the world , and be so ignorant of the world 's 
 good thing , that they know nothing about bribery . the Hon . George 
 Morris , who have sit for the last twenty year , be very unpopular . he 
 have not be near the borough since the last election , he have hardly 
 do more than show himself in Parliament , and have neither give a 
 shilling in the town nor get a place under Government for a single 
 son of Loughshane . " and he have quarrel with his brother , " say 
 Barrington Erle . " the devil he have ! " say Phineas . " I think they 
 always swear by each other . " " it be at each other they swear now , " 
 say Barrington ; " George have ask the Earl for more money , and the 
 Earl have cut up rusty . " then the negotiator go on to explain that 
 the expense of the election would be defray out of a certain fund 
 collect for such purpose , that Loughshane have be choose as a 
 cheap place , and that Phineas Finn have be choose as a safe and 
 promise young man . as for qualification , if any question be 
 raise , that should be make all right . an irish candidate be want , 
 and a roman Catholic . so much the Loughshaners would require on 
 their own account when instigate to dismiss from their service 
 that thorough - go protestant , the Hon . George Morris . then " the 
 party , " - by which Barrington Erle probably mean the great man in 
 whose service he himself have become a politician , - require that 
 the candidate should be a safe man , one who would support " the 
 party , " - not a cantankerous , red - hot semi - fenian , run about to 
 meeting at the Rotunda , and such - like , with view of his own about 
 tenant - right and the Irish Church . " but I have view of my own , " say 
 Phineas , blush again . " of course you have , my dear boy , " say 
 Barrington , clap he on the back . " I should not   come to you unless 
 you have view . but your view and our be the same , and you be 
 just the lad for Galway . you might not   have such an opening again 
 in your life , and of course you will stand for Loughshane . " then the 
 conversation be over , the private secretary go away to arrange 
 some other little matter of the kind , and Phineas Finn be leave alone 
 to consider the proposition that have be make to he . 
 to become a member of the British Parliament ! in all those hot 
 contest at the two debating club to which he have belong , this 
 have be the ambition which have move he . for , after all , to what 
 purpose of their own have those empty debate ever tend ? he and 
 three or four other who have call themselves Liberals have be 
 pit against four or five who have call themselves Conservatives , 
 and night after night they have discuss some ponderous subject 
 without any idea that one would ever persuade another , or that their 
 talking would ever conduce to any action or to any result . but each 
 of these combatant have feel , - without dare to announce a hope on 
 the subject among themselves , - that the present arena be only a 
 trial - ground for some possible great amphitheatre , for some future 
 debate club in which debate would lead to action , and in which 
 eloquence would have power , even though persuasion might be out of 
 the question . 
 Phineas certainly have never dare to speak , even to himself , of such 
 a hope . the labour of the Bar have to be encounter before the dawn 
 of such a hope could come to he . and he have gradually learn to 
 feel that his prospect at the Bar be not as yet very promising . as 
 regard professional work he have be idle , and how then could he 
 have a hope ? 
 and now this thing , which he regard as be of all thing in the 
 world the most honourable , have come to he all at once , and be 
 possibly within his reach ! if he could believe Barrington Erle , he 
 have only to lift up his hand , and he might be in Parliament within 
 two month . and who be to be believe on such a subject if not 
 Barrington Erle ? this be Erle 's special business , and such a man 
 would not have come to he on such a subject have he not be in 
 earnest , and have he not himself believe in success . there be an 
 opening ready , an opening to this great glory , - if only it might be 
 possible for he to fill it ! 
 what would his father say ? his father would of course oppose the 
 plan . and if he oppose his father , his father would of course stop 
 his income . and such an income as it be ! could it be that a man 
 should sit in Parliament and live upon a hundred and fifty pound 
 a year ? since that payment of his debt he have become again 
 embarrassed , - to a slight amount . he owe a tailor a trifle , and a 
 bootmak a trifle , - and something to the man who sell glove and 
 shirt ; and yet he have do his good to keep out of debt with more 
 than irish pertinacity , live very closely , breakfast upon tea 
 and a roll , and din frequently for a shilling at a luncheon - house 
 up a court near Lincoln 's Inn . where should he dine if the 
 Loughshaners elect he to Parliament ? and then he paint to 
 himself a not untrue picture of the probable misery of a man who 
 begin life too high up on the ladder , - who succeed in mount 
 before he have learn how to hold on when he be aloft . for our 
 Phineas Finn be a young man not without sense , - not entirely a 
 windbag . if he do this thing the probability be that he might 
 become utterly a castaway , and go entirely to the dog before he be 
 thirty . he have hear of penniless man who have get into Parliament , 
 and to whom have come such a fate . he be able to name to himself a 
 man or two whose bark , carry more sail than they could bear , have 
 go to piece among early breaker in this way . but then , would 
 it not be well to go to piece early than never to carry any 
 sail at all ? and there be , at any rate , the chance of success . he 
 be already a barrister , and there be so many thing open to a 
 barrister with a seat in Parliament ! and as he know of man who have 
 be utterly ruin by such early mounting , so also do he know of 
 other whose fortune have be make by happy audacity when they be 
 young . he almost think that he could die happy if he have once take 
 his seat in Parliament , - if he have receive one letter with those 
 grand initial write after his name on the address . young man in 
 battle be call upon to lead forlorn hope . three fall , perhaps , 
 to one who get through ; but the one who get through will have 
 the Victoria Cross to carry for the rest of his life . this be his 
 forlorn hope ; and as he have be invite to undertake the work , he 
 would not turn from the danger . on the follow morning he again see 
 Barrington Erle by appointment , and then write the following letter 
 to his father : - 
 Reform Club , Feb. , 186 - . 
 MY DEAR FATHER , 
 I be afraid that the purport of this letter will startle 
 you , but I hope that when you have finish it you will 
 think that I be right in my decision as to what I be go 
 to do . you be no doubt aware that the dissolution of 
 Parliament will take place at once , and that we shall be 
 in all the turmoil of a general election by the middle of 
 March . I have be invite to stand for Loughshane , and 
 have consent . the proposition have be make to I by my 
 friend Barrington Erle , Mr. Mildmay 's private secretary , 
 and have be make on behalf of the Political Committee of 
 the Reform Club . I need hardly say that I should not have 
 thought of such a thing with a less thorough promise of 
 support than this give I , nor should I think of it now 
 have I not be assure that none of the expense of the 
 election would fall upon I . of course I could not have 
 ask you to pay for it . 
 but to such a proposition , so make , I have feel that it 
 would be cowardly to give a refusal . I can not but regard 
 such a selection as a great honour . I own that I be fond 
 of politic , and have take great delight in their study 
  -   " stupid young fool ! " his father say to himself as he 
 read this   - and it have be my dream for year past to 
 have a seat in Parliament at some future time .   " Dream ! 
 yes ; I wonder whether he have ever dream what he be to 
 live upon . "   the chance have now come to I much early 
 than I have look for it , but I do not think that it 
 should on that account be throw away . look to my 
 profession , I find that many thing be open to a 
 barrister with a seat in Parliament , and that the House 
 need not interfere much with a man 's practice .   " not if 
 he have get to the top of his tree , " say the doctor . 
 my chief doubt arise from the fact of your old friendship 
 with Lord Tulla , whose brother have fill the seat for I 
 do not   know how many year . but it seem that George Morris 
 must go ; or , at least , that he must be oppose by a 
 liberal candidate . if I do not stand , some one else will , 
 and I should think that Lord Tulla will be too much of a 
 man to make any personal quarrel on such a subject . if he 
 be to lose the borough , why should not I have it as well 
 as another ? 
 I can fancy , my dear father , all that you will say as to 
 my imprudence , and I quite confess that I have not a word 
 to answer . I have tell myself more than once , since last 
 night , that I shall probably ruin myself .   " I wonder 
 whether he have ever tell himself that he will probably 
 ruin I also , " say the doctor .   but I be prepared to ruin 
 myself in such a cause . I have no one dependent on I ; 
 and , as long as I do nothing to disgrace my name , I may 
 dispose of myself as I please . if you decide on stop 
 my allowance , I shall have no feeling of anger against 
 you .   " how very considerate ! " say the doctor .   and in 
 that case I shall endeavour to support myself by my pen . 
 I have already do a little for the magazine . 
 give my good love to my mother and sister . if you will 
 receive I during the time of the election , I shall see 
 they soon . perhaps it will be good for I to say that I 
 have positively decide on make the attempt ; that be to 
 say , if the Club Committee be as good as its promise . I 
 have weigh the matter all round , and I regard the prize 
 as be so great , that I be prepared to run any risk to 
 obtain it . indeed , to I , with my view about politic , 
 the running of such a risk be no more than a duty . I 
 can not keep my hand from the work now that the work have 
 come in the way of my hand . I shall be most anxious to get 
 a line from you in answer to this . 
 your most affectionate son , 
 phinea FINN . 
 I question whether Dr. Finn , when he read this letter , do not feel 
 more of pride than of anger , - whether he be not rather gratify 
 than displeased , in spite of all that his common - sense tell he on 
 the subject . his wife and daughter , when they hear the news , be 
 clearly on the side of the young man . Mrs. Finn immediately express 
 an opinion that Parliament would be the making of her son , and that 
 everybody would be sure to employ so distinguish a barrister . the 
 girl declare that Phineas ought , at any rate , to have his chance , 
 and almost assert that it would be brutal in their father to stand 
 in their brother 's way . it be in vain that the doctor try to 
 explain that go into Parliament could not help a young barrister , 
 whatever it might do for one thoroughly establish in his 
 profession ; that Phineas , if successful at Loughshane , would at once 
 abandon all idea of earn any income , - that the proposition , come 
 from so poor a man , be a monstrosity , - that such an opposition 
 to the Morris family , come from a son of his , would be gross 
 ingratitude to Lord Tulla . Mrs. Finn and the girl talk he down , 
 and the doctor himself be almost carry away by something like 
 vanity in regard to his son 's future position . 
 nevertheless he write a letter strongly advise Phineas to abandon 
 the project . but he himself be aware that the letter which he write 
 be not one from which any success could be expect . he advise 
 his son , but do not command he . he make no threat as to stop 
 his income . he do not tell Phineas , in so many word , that he be 
 propose to make an ass of himself . he argue very prudently against 
 the plan , and Phineas , when he receive his father 's letter , of 
 course feel that it be tantamount to a paternal permission to 
 proceed with the matter . on the next day he get a letter from his 
 mother full of affection , full of pride , - not exactly tell he to 
 stand for Loughshane by all mean , for Mrs. Finn be not the woman to 
 run openly counter to her husband in any advice give by she to their 
 son , - but give he every encouragement which motherly affection and 
 motherly pride could bestow . " of course you will come to we , " she 
 say , " if you do make up your mind to be member for Loughshane . we 
 shall all of we be so delighted to have you ! " Phineas , who have fall 
 into a sea of doubt after write to his father , and who have demand 
 a week from Barrington Erle to consider the matter , be elated to 
 positive certainty by the joint effect of the two letter from home . 
 he understand it all . his mother and sister be altogether in 
 favour of his audacity , and even his father be not dispose to 
 quarrel with he on the subject . 
 " I shall take you at your word , " he say to Barrington Erle at the 
 club that evening . 
 " what word ? " say Erle , who have too many iron in the fire to be 
 think always of Loughshane and Phineas Finn , - or who at any rate 
 do not choose to let his anxiety on the subject be see . 
 " About Loughshane . " 
 " all right , old fellow ; we shall be sure to carry you through . the 
 irish writ will be out on the third of March , and the soon you be 
 there the well . " 
 CHAPTER II 
 Phineas Finn be elect for Loughshane 
 one great difficulty about the borough vanish in a very wonderful 
 way at the first touch . Dr. Finn , who be a man stout at heart , 
 and by no mean afraid of his great friend , drive himself over to 
 Castlemorris to tell his news to the Earl , as soon as he get a second 
 letter from his son declare his intention of proceed with the 
 business , let the result be what they might . Lord Tulla be a 
 passionate old man , and the doctor expect that there would be a 
 quarrel ; - but he be prepared to face that . he be under no special 
 debt of gratitude to the lord , have give as much as he have take 
 in the long intercourse which have exist between they ; - and he 
 agree with his son in think that if there be to be a liberal 
 candidate at Loughshane , no consideration of old pill - box and 
 gallipot should deter his son Phineas from stand . other 
 consideration might very probably deter he , but not that . the Earl 
 probably would be of a different opinion , and the doctor feel it to 
 be incumbent on he to break the news to Lord Tulla . 
 " the devil he be ! " say the Earl , when the doctor have tell his story . 
 " then I will tell you what , Finn , I will support he . " 
 " you support he , Lord Tulla ! " 
 " yes ; - why should not   I support he ? I suppose it be not so bad with I 
 in the country that my support will rob he of his chance ! I will tell 
 you one thing for certain , I will not   support George Morris . " 
 " but , my lord - " 
 " well ; go on . " 
 " I have   never take much part in politic myself , as you know ; but my 
 boy Phineas be on the other side . " 
 " I do not   care a - - for side . what have my party do for I ? 
 look at my cousin , Dick Morris . there be not a clergyman in Ireland 
 stauncher to they than he have be , and now they have   give the deanery 
 of Kilfenora to a man that never have a father , though I condescend 
 to ask for it for my cousin . let they wait till I ask for anything 
 again . " Dr. Finn , who know all about Dick Morris 's debt , and who have 
 hear of his mode of preach , be not surprised at the decision 
 of the conservative bestower of Irish Church patronage ; but on this 
 subject he say nothing . " and as for George , " continue the Earl , " I 
 will never lift my hand again for he . his standing for Loughshane 
 would be quite out of the question . my own tenant would not   vote for 
 he if I be to ask they myself . Peter Blake " - Mr. Peter Blake be 
 the lord 's agent - " tell I only a week ago that it would be useless . 
 the whole thing be go , and for my part I wish they would disenfranchise 
 the borough . I wish they would disenfranchise the whole country , and send 
 we a military governor . what be the use of such member as we send ? 
 there be not   one gentleman among ten of they . your son be welcome for 
 I . what support I can give he he shall have , but it be not   much . I 
 suppose he have well come and see I . " 
 the doctor promise that his son should ride over to Castlemorris , 
 and then take his leave , - not specially flatter , as he feel that 
 be his son to be return , the Earl would not regard he as the 
 one gentleman among ten whom the county might send to leaven the 
 remainder of its member , - but aware that the great impediment 
 in his son 's way be already remove . he certainly have not go to 
 Castlemorris with any idea of canvass for his son , and yet he have 
 canvass for he most satisfactorily . when he get home he do not 
 know how to speak of the matter otherwise than triumphantly to his 
 wife and daughter . though he desire to curse , his mouth would speak 
 blessing . before that evening be over the prospect of Phineas at 
 Loughshane be speak of with open enthusiasm before the doctor , 
 and by the next day 's post a letter be write to he by Matilda , 
 inform he that the Earl be prepared to receive he with open 
 arm . " Papa have be over there and manage it all , " say Matilda . 
 " I be tell George Morris be not   go to stand , " say Barrington Erle 
 to Phineas the night before his departure . 
 " his brother will not   support he . his brother mean to support I , " 
 say Phineas . 
 " that can hardly be so . " 
 " but I tell you it be . my father have know the Earl these twenty 
 year , and have manage it . " 
 " I say , Finn , you be not go to play we a trick , be you ? " say Mr. 
 Erle , with something like dismay in his voice . 
 " what sort of trick ? " 
 " you be not come out on the other side ? " 
 " not if I know it , " say Phineas , proudly . " let I assure you I 
 would not   change my view in politic either for you or for the Earl , 
 though each of you carry seat in your breech pocket . if I go 
 into Parliament , I shall go there as a sound liberal , - not to support 
 a party , but to do the good I can for the country . I tell you so , and 
 I shall tell the Earl the same . " 
 Barrington Erle turn away in disgust . such language be to he 
 simply disgusting . it fall upon his ear as false maudlin sentiment 
 fall on the ear of the ordinary honest man of the world . Barrington 
 Erle be a man ordinarily honest . he would not have be untrue to 
 his mother 's brother , William Mildmay , the great Whig Minister of the 
 day , for any earthly consideration . he be ready to work with wage 
 or without wage . he be really zealous in the cause , not ask 
 very much for himself . he have some undefined belief that it be much 
 well for the country that Mr. Mildmay should be in power than 
 that Lord de Terrier should be there . he be convince that Liberal 
 politic be good for Englishmen , and that Liberal politic and the 
 Mildmay party be one and the same thing . it would be unfair to 
 Barrington Erle to deny to he some praise for patriotism . but he 
 hat the very name of independence in Parliament , and when he be 
 tell of any man , that that man intend to look to measure and not 
 to man , he regard that man as be both unstable as water and 
 dishonest as the wind . no good could possibly come from such a one , 
 and much evil might and probably would come . such a politician be a 
 Greek to Barrington Erle , from whose hand he fear to accept even 
 the gift of a vote . parliamentary hermit be distasteful to he , 
 and dweller in political cave be regard by he with aversion 
 as be either knavish or impractical . with a good conservative 
 opponent he could shake hand almost as readily as with a good Whig 
 ally ; but the man who be neither flesh nor fowl be odious to he . 
 accord to his theory of parliamentary government , the House of 
 Commons should be divide by a marked line , and every member should 
 be require to stand on one side of it or on the other . " if not 
 with I , at any rate be against I , " he would have say to every 
 representative of the people in the name of the great leader whom he 
 follow . he think that debate be good , because of the people 
 outside , - because they serve to create that public opinion which be 
 hereafter to be use in create some future House of Commons ; but he 
 do not think it possible that any vote should be give on a great 
 question , either this way or that , as the result of a debate ; and he 
 be certainly assure in his own opinion that any such change of 
 vote would be dangerous , revolutionary , and almost unparliamentary . 
 a member 's vote , - except on some small crotchety open question throw 
 out for the amusement of crotchety member , - be due to the leader of 
 that member 's party . such be Mr. Erle 's idea of the english system 
 of Parliament , and , lend semi - official assistance as he do 
 frequently to the introduction of candidate into the House , he be 
 naturally anxious that his candidate should be candidate after his 
 own heart . when , therefore , Phineas Finn talk of measure and not 
 man , Barrington Erle turn away in open disgust . but he remember 
 the youth and extreme rawness of the lad , and he remember also the 
 career of other man . 
 Barrington Erle be forty , and experience have teach he something . 
 after a few second , he bring himself to think mildly of the young 
 man 's vanity , - as of the vanity of a plunge colt who resent the 
 liberty even of a touch . " by the end of the first session the thong 
 will be crack over his head , as he patiently assist in pull the 
 coach up hill , without produce from he even a flick of his tail , " 
 say Barrington Erle to an old parliamentary friend . 
 " if he be to come out after all on the wrong side , " say the 
 parliamentary friend . 
 Erle admit that such a trick as that would be unpleasant , but 
 he think that old Lord Tulia be hardly equal to so clever a 
 stratagem . 
 Phineas go to Ireland , and walk over the course at Loughshane . 
 he call upon Lord Tulla , and hear that venerable nobleman talk a 
 great deal of nonsense . to tell the truth of Phineas , I must confess 
 that he wish to talk the nonsense himself ; but the Earl would not 
 hear he , and put he down very quickly . " we will not   discuss politic , 
 if you please , Mr. Finn ; because , as I have already say , I be 
 throw aside all political consideration . " Phineas , therefore , be 
 not allow to express his view on the government of the country in 
 the Earl 's sitting - room at Castlemorris . there be , however , a good 
 time come ; and so , for the present , he allow the Earl to ramble 
 on about the sin of his brother George , and the want of all proper 
 pedigree on the part of the new Dean of Kilfenora . the conference 
 end with an assurance on the part of Lord Tulla that if the 
 Loughshaners choose to elect Mr. Phineas Finn he would not be in the 
 least offend . the elector do elect Mr. Phineas Finn , - perhaps 
 for the reason give by one of the Dublin Conservative paper , which 
 declare that it be all the fault of the Carlton Club in not send 
 a proper candidate . there be a great deal say about the matter , 
 both in London and Dublin , and the blame be suppose to fall on 
 the joint shoulder of George Morris and his eld brother . in the 
 meantime , our hero , Phineas Finn , have be duly elect member of 
 Parliament for the borough of Loughshane . 
 the Finn family could not restrain their triumphing at Killaloe , and 
 I do not know that it would have be natural have they do so . a 
 gosling from such a flock do become something of a real swan by 
 get into Parliament . the doctor have his misgiving , - have great 
 misgiving , fearful foreboding ; but there be the young man elect , 
 and he could not help it . he could not refuse his right hand to his 
 son or withdraw his paternal assistance because that son have be 
 specially honour among the young man of his country . so he pull 
 out of his hoard what suffice to pay off outstanding debt , - they 
 be not heavy , - and undertake to allow Phineas two hundred and fifty 
 pound a year as long as the session should last . 
 there be a widow lady live at Killaloe who be name Mrs. Flood 
 Jones , and she have a daughter . she have a son also , bear to inherit 
 the property of the late Floscabel Flood Jones of Floodborough , as 
 soon as that property should have disembarrass itself ; but with 
 he , now serve with his regiment in India , we shall have no 
 concern . Mrs. Flood Jones be live modestly at Killaloe on her 
 widow 's jointure , - Floodborough have , to tell the truth , pretty 
 nearly fall into absolute ruin , - and with her one daughter , Mary . 
 now on the evening before the return of Phineas Finn , Esq . , M.P. , to 
 London , Mrs. and Miss Flood Jones drink tea at the doctor 's house . 
 " it will not   make a bit of change in he , " Barbara Finn say to her 
 friend Mary , up in some bedroom privacy before the tea - drinking 
 ceremony have altogether commence . 
 " oh , it must , " say Mary . 
 " I tell you it will not , my dear ; he be so good and so true . " 
 " I know he be good , Barbara ; and as for truth , there be no question 
 about it , because he have never say a word to I that he might not 
 say to any girl . " 
 " that be nonsense , Mary . " 
 " he never have , then , as sure as the bless Virgin watch over 
 we ; - only you do not   believe she do . " 
 " never mind about the Virgin now , Mary . " 
 " but he never have . your brother be nothing to I , Barbara . " 
 " then I hope he will be before the evening be over . he be walk 
 with you all yesterday and the day before . " 
 " why should not   he , - and we that have know each other all our life ? 
 but , Barbara , pray , pray never say a word of this to any one ! " 
 " be it I ? would not   I cut out my tongue first ? " 
 " I do not   know why I let you talk to I in this way . there have never 
 be anything between I and Phineas , - your brother I mean . " 
 " I know whom you mean very well . " 
 " and I feel quite sure that there never will be . why should there ? 
 he will go out among great people and be a great man ; and I have   already 
 find out that there be a certain Lady Laura Standish whom he admire 
 very much . " 
 " Lady Laura Fiddlestick ! " 
 " a man in Parliament , you know , may look up to anybody , " say Miss 
 Mary Flood Jones . 
 " I want Phin to look up to you , my dear . " 
 " that would not   be look up . place as he be now , that would be 
 look down ; and he be so proud that he will never do that . but come 
 down , dear , else they will wonder where we be . " 
 Mary Flood Jones be a little girl about twenty year of age , with 
 the soft hair in the world , of a colour varying between brown and 
 auburn , - for sometimes you would swear it be the one and sometimes 
 the other ; and she be as pretty as ever she could be . she be one 
 of those girl , so common in Ireland , whom man , with taste that way 
 give , feel inclined to take up and devour on the spur of the moment ; 
 and when she like her lion , she have a look about she which seem to 
 ask to be devour . there be girl so cold - look , - pretty girl , 
 too , ladylike , discreet , and arm with all accomplishment , - whom to 
 attack seem to require the same sort of courage , and the same sort 
 of preparation , as a journey in quest of the north - west passage . one 
 think of a pedestal near the Athenaeum as the most appropriate and 
 most honourable reward of such courage . but , again , there be other 
 girl to abstain from attack whom be , to a man of any warmth 
 of temperament , quite impossible . they be like water when one be 
 athirst , like plover ' egg in March , like cigar when one be out 
 in the autumn . no one ever dream of deny himself when such 
 temptation come in the way . it often happen , however , that in spite 
 of appearance , the water will not come from the well , nor the egg 
 from its shell , nor will the cigar allow itself to be light . a girl of 
 such appearance , so charming , be Mary Flood Jones of Killaloe , and 
 our hero Phineas be not allow to thirst in vain for a drop from 
 the cool spring . 
 when the girl go down into the drawing - room Mary be careful to 
 go to a part of the room quite remote from Phineas , so as to seat 
 herself between Mrs. Finn and Dr. Finn 's young partner , Mr. Elias 
 Bodkin , from Ballinasloe . but Mrs. Finn and the Miss Finns and all 
 Killaloe know that Mary have no love for Mr. Bodkin , and when Mr. 
 Bodkin hand she the hot cake she hardly so much as smile at he . 
 but in two minute Phineas be behind her chair , and then she smile ; 
 and in five minute more she have get herself so twisted round that 
 she be sit in a corner with Phineas and his sister Barbara ; and 
 in two more minute Barbara have return to Mr. Elias Bodkin , so that 
 Phineas and Mary be uninterrupte . they manage these thing very 
 quickly and very cleverly in Killaloe . 
 " I shall be off to - morrow morning by the early train , " say Phineas . 
 " so soon ; - and when will you have to begin , - in Parliament , I mean ? " 
 " I shall have to take my seat on Friday . I be go back just in 
 time . " 
 " but when shall we hear of your say something ? " 
 " never , probably . not one in ten who go into Parliament ever do say 
 anything . " 
 " but you will ; will not   you ? I hope you will . I do so hope you will 
 distinguish yourself ; - because of your sister , and for the sake of 
 the town , you know . " 
 " and be that all , Mary ? " 
 " be not   that enough ? " 
 " you do not   care a bit about myself , then ? " 
 " you know that I do . have not   we be friend ever since we be 
 child ? of course it will be a great pride to I that a person whom 
 I have know so intimately should come to be talk about as a great 
 man . " 
 " I shall never be talk about as a great man . " 
 " you be a great man to I already , be in Parliament . only 
 think ; - I never see a member of Parliament in my life before . " 
 " you have   see the bishop score of time . " 
 " be he in Parliament ? ah , but not like you . he could not   come to be 
 a Cabinet Minister , and one never read anything about he in the 
 newspaper . I shall expect to see your name , very often , and I shall 
 always look for it . ' Mr. Phineas Finn pair off with Mr. Mildmay . ' 
 what be the meaning of pair off ? " 
 " I will explain it all to you when I come back , after learn my 
 lesson . " 
 " mind you do come back . but I do not   suppose you ever will . you will 
 be go somewhere to see Lady Laura Standish when you be not want 
 in Parliament . " 
 " Lady Laura Standish ! " 
 " and why should not   you ? of course , with your prospect , you should 
 go as much as possible among people of that sort . be Lady Laura very 
 pretty ? " 
 " she be about six foot high . " 
 " Nonsense . I do not   believe that . " 
 " she would look as though she be , stand by you . " 
 " because I be so insignificant and small . " 
 " because your figure be perfect , and because she be straggle . she 
 be as unlike you as possible in everything . she have thick lumpy red 
 hair , while yours be all silk and softness . she have large hand and 
 foot , and - " 
 " why , Phineas , you be make she out to be an ogress , and yet I know 
 that you admire she . " 
 " so I do , because she possess such an appearance of power . and 
 after all , in spite of the lumpy hair , and in spite of large hand 
 and straggle figure , she be handsome . one can not   tell what it be . 
 one can see that she be quite content with herself , and intend to 
 make other content with she . and so she do . " 
 " I see you be in love with she , Phineas . " 
 " no ; not in love , - not with she at least . of all man in the world , I 
 suppose that I be the last that have a right to be in love . I daresay 
 I shall marry some day . " 
 " I be sure I hope you will . " 
 " but not till I be forty or perhaps fifty year old . if I be not fool 
 enough to have what man call a high ambition I might venture to be in 
 love now . " 
 " I be sure I be very glad that you have   get a high ambition . it be what 
 every man ought to have ; and I have   no doubt that we shall hear of your 
 marriage soon , - very soon . and then , - if she can help you in your 
 ambition , we - shall - all - be so - glad . " 
 Phineas do not say a word far then . perhaps some commotion among 
 the party break up the little private conversation in the corner . and 
 he be not alone with Mary again till there come a moment for he 
 to put her cloak over her shoulder in the back parlour , while Mrs. 
 Flood Jones be finish some important narrative to his mother . it 
 be Barbara , I think , who stand in some doorway , and prevent people 
 from pass , and so give he the opportunity which he abuse . 
 " Mary , " say he , take she in his arm , without a single word of 
 love - making beyond what the reader have hear , - " one kiss before we 
 part . " 
 " no , Phineas , no ! " but the kiss have be take and give before she 
 have even answer he . " oh , Phineas , you should not ! " 
 " I should . why should not   I ? and , Mary , I will have one morsel of your 
 hair . " 
 " you shall not ; indeed you shall not ! " but the scissor be at hand , 
 and the ringlet be cut and in his pocket before she be ready with 
 her resistance . there be nothing far ; - not a word more , and Mary 
 go away with her veil down , under her mother 's wing , weep sweet 
 silent tear which no one see . 
 " you do love she ; do not   you , Phineas ? " ask Barbara . 
 " Bother ! do you go to bed , and do not   trouble yourself about such 
 trifle . but mind you be up , old girl , to see I off in the morning . " 
 everybody be up to see he off in the morning , to give he coffee 
 and good advice , and kiss , and to throw all manner of old shoe 
 after he as he start on his great expedition to Parliament . his 
 father give he an extra twenty - pound note , and beg he for God 's 
 sake to be careful about his money . his mother tell he always to 
 have an orange in his pocket when he intend to speak long than 
 usual . and Barbara in a last whisper beg he never to forget dear 
 Mary Flood Jones . 
 CHAPTER III 
 Phineas Finn take his Seat 
 Phineas have many serious , almost solemn thought on his journey 
 towards London . I be sorry I must assure my female reader that very 
 few of they have reference to Mary Flood Jones . he have , however , very 
 carefully pack up the tress , and could bring that out for proper 
 act of erotic worship at season in which his mind might be less 
 engage with affair of state than it be at present . would he make a 
 failure of this great matter which he have take in hand ? he could not 
 but tell himself that the chance be twenty to one against he . now 
 that he look near at it all , the difficulty loom large than 
 ever , and the reward seem to be less , more difficult of approach , 
 and more evanescent . how many member be there who could never get 
 a hearing ! how many who only speak to fail ! how many , who speak well , 
 who could speak to no effect as far as their own worldly prospect 
 be concern ! he have already know many member of Parliament to 
 whom no outward respect or sign of honour be ever give by any one ; 
 and it seem to he , as he think over it , that irish member of 
 Parliament be generally treat with more indifference than any 
 other . there be o'b - - and O'C - - and O'D - - , for whom no one 
 care a straw , who could hardly get man to dine with they at the 
 club , and yet they be genuine member of Parliament . why should he 
 ever be well than O'B - - , or O'C - - , or O'D - - ? and in what way 
 should he begin to be well ? he have an idea of the fashion after 
 which it would be his duty to strive that he might excel those 
 gentleman . he do not give any of they credit for much earnestness 
 in their country 's behalf , and he be minded to be very earnest . he 
 would go to his work honestly and conscientiously , determine to do 
 his duty as good he might , let the result to himself be what they 
 would . this be a noble resolution , and might have be pleasant to 
 he , - have he not remember that smile of derision which have come 
 over his friend Erle 's face when he declare his intention of do 
 his duty to his country as a Liberal , and not of support a party . 
 o'b - - and O'C - - and O'D - - be keen enough to support their 
 party , only they be sometimes a little astray at know which 
 be their party for the nonce . he know that Erle and such man would 
 despise he if he do not fall into the regular groove , - and if the 
 Barrington Erles despise he , what would then be leave for he ? 
 his moody thought be somewhat dissipate when he find one 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon , - the Honourable Laurence Fitzgibbon , - a special 
 friend of his own , and a very clever fellow , on board the boat as it 
 steam out of Kingston harbour . Laurence Fitzgibbon have also just 
 be over about his election , and have be return as a matter of 
 course for his father 's county . Laurence Fitzgibbon have sit in the 
 House for the last fifteen year , and be yet well - nigh as young a 
 man as any in it . and he be a man altogether different from the 
 O'B - - s , O'C - - s , and O'D - - s. Laurence Fitzgibbon could always 
 get the ear of the House if he choose to speak , and his friend 
 declare that he might have be high up in office long since if he 
 would have take the trouble to work . he be a welcome guest at the 
 house of the very good people , and be a friend of whom any one 
 might be proud . it have for two year be a feather in the cap of 
 Phineas that he know Laurence Fitzgibbon . and yet people say that 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon have nothing of his own , and man wonder how he 
 live . he be the young son of Lord Claddagh , an irish peer with a 
 large family , who could do nothing for Laurence , his favourite child , 
 beyond find he a seat in Parliament . 
 " well , Finn , my boy , " say Laurence , shake hand with the young 
 member on board the steamer , ' so you have   make it all right at 
 Loughshane . " then Phineas be begin to tell all the story , 
 the wonderful story , of George Morris and the Earl of Tulla , - how 
 the man of Loughshane have elect he without opposition ; how he 
 have be support by conservative as well as Liberals ; - how 
 unanimous Loughshane have be in elect he , Phineas Finn , as its 
 representative . but Mr. Fitzgibbon seem to care very little about 
 all this , and go so far as to declare that those thing be 
 accident which fall out sometimes one way and sometimes another , 
 and be altogether independent of any merit or demerit on the part 
 of the candidate himself . and it be marvellous and almost painful 
 to Phineas that his friend Fitzgibbon should accept the fact of his 
 membership with so little of congratulation , - with absolutely no 
 blowing of trumpet whatever . have he be elect a member of the 
 municipal corporation of Loughshane , instead of its representative in 
 the British Parliament , Laurence Fitzgibbon could not have make less 
 fuss about it . Phineas be disappoint , but he take the cue from his 
 friend too quickly to show his disappointment . and when , half an hour 
 after their meeting , Fitzgibbon have to be remind that his companion 
 be not in the House during the last session , Phineas be able to 
 make the remark as though he think as little about the House as do 
 the old - accustomed member himself . 
 " as far as I can see as yet , " say Fitzgibbon , " we be sure to have 
 seventeen . " 
 " Seventeen ? " say Phineas , not quite understand the meaning of the 
 number quote . 
 " a majority of seventeen . there be four irish county and three 
 Scotch which have not   return as yet ; but we know pretty well what 
 they will do . there be a doubt about Tipperary , of course , but whichever 
 get in of the seven who be stand , it will be a vote on our side . 
 now the Government can not   live against that . the uphill strain be too 
 much for they . " 
 " accord to my idea , nothing can justify they in try to live 
 against a majority . " 
 " that be gammon . when the thing be so equal , anything be fair . but you 
 see they do not   like it . of course there be some among they as hungry 
 as we be ; and Dubby would give his toe and finger to remain in . " 
 Dubby be the ordinary name by which , among friend and foe , Mr. 
 Daubeny be know : Mr. Daubeny , who at that time be the leader of 
 the conservative party in the House of Commons . " but most of they , " 
 continue Mr. Fitzgibbon , " prefer the other game , and if you do not 
 care about money , upon my word it be the pleasanter game of the two . " 
 " but the country get nothing do by a Tory Government . " 
 " as to that , it be six of one and half a dozen of the other . I never 
 know a government yet that want to do anything . give a government 
 a real strong majority , as the Tories use to have half a century 
 since , and as a matter of course it will do nothing . why should 
 it ? do thing , as you call it , be only bid for power , - for 
 patronage and pay . " 
 " and be the country to have no service do ? " 
 " the country get quite as much service as it pay for , - and perhaps 
 a little more . the clerk in the office work for the country . and 
 the Ministers work too , if they have   get anything to manage . there be 
 plenty of work do ; - but of work in Parliament , the less the well , 
 accord to my idea . it be very little that ever be do , and that 
 little be generally too much . " 
 " but the people - " 
 " come down and have a glass of brandy - and - water , and leave the people 
 alone for the present . the people can take care of themselves a great 
 deal well than we can take care of they . " Mr. Fitzgibbon 's doctrine 
 as to the commonwealth be very different from that of Barrington 
 Erle , and be still less to the taste of the new member . Barrington 
 Erle consider that his leader , Mr. Mildmay , should be intrust to 
 make all necessary change in the law , and that an obedient House of 
 Commons should implicitly obey that leader in authorise all change 
 propose by he ; - but accord to Barrington Erle , such change 
 should be numerous and of great importance , and would , if duly pass 
 into law at his lord 's behest , gradually produce such a Whig Utopia 
 in England as have never yet be see on the face of the earth . 
 now , accord to Mr. Fitzgibbon , the present Utopia would be good 
 enough , - if only he himself might be once more put into possession 
 of a certain semi - political place about the Court , from which he have 
 heretofore draw L1,000 per annum , without any work , much to his 
 comfort . he make no secret of his ambition , and be chagrin simply 
 at the prospect of have to return to his elector before he could 
 enjoy those good thing which he expect to receive from the 
 undoubted majority of seventeen , which have be , or would be , 
 achieve . 
 " I hate all change as a rule , " say Fitzgibbon ; " but , upon my word , 
 we ought to alter that . when a fellow have get a crumb of comfort , 
 after wait for it year and year , and perhaps spend thousand 
 in election , he have to go back and try his hand again at the last 
 moment , merely in obedience to some antiquated prejudice . look at 
 poor Jack Bond , - the good friend I ever have in the world . he be 
 wreck upon that rock for ever . he spend every shilling he have in 
 contest Romford three time run , - and three time run 
 he get in . then they make he Vice - Comptroller of the Granaries , 
 and I be shoot if he do not   get spilt at Romford on stand for his 
 re - election ! " 
 " and what become of he ? " 
 " God know . I think I hear that he marry an old woman and settle 
 down somewhere . I know he never come up again . now , I call that a 
 confound shame . I suppose I be safe down in Mayo , but there be no 
 know what may happen in these day . " 
 as they part at Euston Square , Phineas ask his friend some little 
 nervous question as to the good mode of make a first entrance into 
 the House . would Laurence Fitzgibbon see he through the difficulty 
 of the oath - taking ? but Laurence Fitzgibbon make very little of the 
 difficulty . " oh ; - you just come down , and there will be a rush of 
 fellow , and you will know everybody . you will have to hang about for an 
 hour or so , and then you will get push through . there be not   time for 
 much ceremony after a general election . " 
 Phineas reach London early in the morning , and go home to bed 
 for an hour or so . the House be to meet on that very day , and he 
 intend to begin his parliamentary duty at once if he should find 
 it possible to get some one to accompany he ; he feel that he should 
 lack courage to go down to Westminster Hall alone , and explain to 
 the policeman and door - keeper that he be the man who have just be 
 elect member for Loughshane . so about noon he go into the Reform 
 Club , and there he find a great crowd of man , among whom there be a 
 plentiful sprinkling of member . Erle see he in a moment , and come 
 to he with congratulation . 
 " so you be all right , Finn , " say he . 
 " yes ; I be all right , - I do not   have much doubt about it when I go 
 over . " 
 " I never hear of a fellow with such a run of luck , " say Erle . " it be 
 just one of those fluke that occur once in a dozen election . any 
 one on earth might have get in without spend a shilling . " 
 Phineas do not   at all like this . " I do not   think any one could have 
 get in , " say he , " without know Lord Tulla . " 
 " Lord Tulla be nowhere , my dear boy , and could have nothing to say 
 to it . but never mind that . you meet I in the lobby at two . there will 
 be a lot of we there , and we will go in together . have you see 
 Fitzgibbon ? " then Barrington Erle go off to other business , and 
 Finn be congratulate by other man . but it seem to he that the 
 congratulation of his friend be not hearty . he speak to some man , 
 of whom he think that he know they would have give their eye 
 to be in Parliament ; - and yet they speak of his success as be a 
 very ordinary thing . " well , my boy , I hope you like it , " say one 
 middle - aged gentleman whom he have know ever since he come up to 
 London . " the difference be between work for nothing and work 
 for money . you will have to work for nothing now . " 
 " that be about it , I suppose , " say Phineas . 
 " they say the House be a comfortable club , " say the middle - aged 
 friend , " but I confess that I should not   like be ring away from my 
 dinner myself . " 
 at two punctually Phineas be in the lobby at Westminster , and then 
 he find himself take into the House with a crowd of other man . the 
 old and young , and they who be neither old nor young , be mingle 
 together , and there seem to be very little respect of person . on 
 three or four occasion there be some cheer when a popular man or 
 a great leader come in ; but the work of the day leave but little clear 
 impression on the mind of the young member . he be confused , half 
 elated , half disappointed , and have not his wit about he . he find 
 himself constantly regret that he be there ; and as constantly 
 tell himself that he , hardly yet twenty - five , without a shilling 
 of his own , have achieve an entrance into that assembly which by the 
 consent of all man be the great in the world , and which many of 
 the rich magnate of the country have in vain spend heap of treasure 
 in their endeavour to open to their own footstep . he try hard to 
 realise what he have gain , but the dust and the noise and the crowd 
 and the want of something august to the eye be almost too strong 
 for he . he manage , however , to take the oath early among those who 
 take it , and hear the Queen s speech read and the Address move and 
 seconded . he be seat very uncomfortably , high up on a back seat , 
 between two man whom he do not know ; and he find the speech to be 
 very long . he have be in the habit of see such speech report 
 in about a column , and he think that these speech must take at 
 least four column each . he sit out the debate on the Address till 
 the House be adjourn , and then he go away to dine at his club . 
 he do go into the dining - room of the House , but there be a crowd 
 there , and he find himself alone , - and to tell the truth , he be 
 afraid to order his dinner . 
 the near approach to a triumph which he have in London come to he 
 from the glory which his election reflect upon his landlady . she 
 be a kindly good motherly soul , whose husband be a journeyman 
 law - stationer , and who keep a very decent house in Great Marlborough 
 Street . here Phineas have lodge since he have be in London , and be 
 a great favourite . " God bless my soul , Mr. Phineas , " say she , " only 
 think of your be a member of Parliament ! " 
 " yes , I be a member of Parliament , Mrs. Bunce . " 
 " and you will go on with the room the same as ever ? well , I never 
 think to have a member of Parliament in them . " 
 Mrs. Bunce really have realise the magnitude of the step which her 
 lodger have take , and Phineas be grateful to she . 
 CHAPTER IV 
 Lady Laura Standish 
 Phineas , in describe Lady Laura Standish to Mary Flood Jones at 
 Killaloe , have not paint she in very glowing colour . nevertheless 
 he admire Lady Laura very much , and she be worthy of admiration . it 
 be probably the great pride of our hero 's life that Lady Laura 
 Standish be his friend , and that she have instigate he to undertake 
 the risk of parliamentary life . Lady Laura be intimate also with 
 Barrington Erle , who be , in some distant degree , her cousin ; 
 and Phineas be not without a suspicion that his selection for 
 Loughshane , from out of all the young liberal candidate , may have 
 be in some degree owe to Lady Laura 's influence with Barrington 
 Erle . he be not unwilling that it should be so ; for though , 
 as he have repeatedly tell himself , he be by no mean in love 
 with Lady Laura , - who be , as he imagine , somewhat old than 
 himself , - nevertheless , he would feel gratified at accept anything 
 from her hand , and he feel a keen desire for some increase to those 
 tie of friendship which bind they together . no ; - he be not in love 
 with Lady Laura Standish . he have not the remotest idea of ask she 
 to be his wife . so he tell himself , both before he go over for his 
 election , and after his return . when he have find himself in a corner 
 with poor little Mary Flood Jones , he have kiss she as a matter of 
 course ; but he do not think that he could , in any circumstance , be 
 tempt to kiss Lady Laura . he suppose that he be in love with his 
 darling little Mary , - after a fashion . of course , it could never come 
 to anything , because of the circumstance of his life , which be 
 so imperious to he . he be not in love with Lady Laura , and yet he 
 hop that his intimacy with she might come to much . he have more than 
 once ask himself how he would feel when somebody else come to be 
 really in love with Lady Laura , - for she be by no mean a woman to 
 lack lover , - when some one else should be in love with she , and be 
 receive by she as a lover ; but this question he have never be able 
 to answer . there be many question about himself which he usually 
 answer by tell himself that it be his fate to walk over 
 volcano . " of course , I shall be blow into atom some fine day , " he 
 would say ; " but after all , that be well than be slowly boil 
 down into pulp . " 
 the House have meet on a Friday , again on the Saturday morning , and 
 the debate on the Address have be adjourn till the Monday . on 
 the Sunday , Phineas determine that he would see Lady Laura . she 
 profess to be always at home on Sunday , and from three to four in 
 the afternoon her drawing - room would probably be half full of people . 
 there would , at any rate , be comer and goer , who would prevent 
 anything like real conversation between himself and she . but for a 
 few minute before that he might probably find she alone , and he be 
 most anxious to see whether her reception of he , as a member of 
 Parliament , would be in any degree warm than that of his other 
 friend . Hitherto he have find no such warmth since he come to 
 London , except that which have glow in the bosom of Mrs. Bunce . 
 Lady Laura Standish be the daughter of the Earl of Brentford , and 
 be the only remain lady of the Earl 's family . the Countess have 
 be long dead ; and Lady Emily , the young daughter , who have be 
 the great beauty of her day , be now the wife of a russian nobleman 
 whom she have persist in prefer to any of her english suitor , 
 and live at St. Petersburg . there be an aunt , old Lady Laura , who 
 come up to town about the middle of May ; but she be always in the 
 country except for some six week in the season . there be a certain 
 Lord Chiltern , the Earl 's son and heir , who do indeed live at the 
 family town house in Portman Square ; but Lord Chiltern be a man of 
 whom Lady Laura 's set do not often speak , and Phineas , frequently 
 as he have be at the house , have never see Lord Chiltern there . he 
 be a young nobleman of whom various account be give by various 
 people ; but I fear that the account most readily accept in London 
 attribute to he a great intimacy with the affair at Newmarket , 
 and a partiality for convivial pleasure . respect Lord Chiltern 
 Phineas have never as yet exchange a word with Lady Laura . with her 
 father he be acquaint , as he have din perhaps half a dozen time 
 at the house . the point in Lord Brentford 's character which have more 
 than any other strike our hero , be the unlimited confidence which he 
 seem to place in his daughter . Lady Laura seem to have perfect 
 power of do what she please . she be much more mistress of 
 herself than if she have be the wife instead of the daughter of the 
 Earl of Brentford , - and she seem to be quite as much mistress of 
 the house . 
 Phineas have declare at Killaloe that Lady Laura be six foot high , 
 that she have red hair , that her figure be straggle , and that her 
 hand and foot be large . she be in fact about five foot seven 
 in height , and she carry her height well . there be something of 
 nobility in her gait , and she seem thus to be tall than her 
 inch . her hair be in truth red , - of a deep thorough redness . her 
 brother 's hair be the same ; and so have be that of her father , 
 before it have become sandy with age . her sister 's have be of a soft 
 auburn hue , and hers have be say to be the prettiest head of hair 
 in Europe at the time of her marriage . but in these day we have get 
 to like red hair , and Lady Laura 's be not suppose to stand in the 
 way of she be consider a beauty . her face be very fair , though 
 it lack that softness which we all love in woman . her eye , which 
 be large and bright , and very clear , never seem to quail , never 
 rise and sink or show themselves to be afraid of their own power . 
 indeed , Lady Laura Standish have nothing of fear about she . her 
 nose be perfectly cut , but be rather large , have the slight 
 possible tendency to be aquiline . her mouth also be large , but be 
 full of expression , and her tooth be perfect . her complexion be 
 very bright , but in spite of its brightness she never blush . the 
 shade of her complexion be set and steady . those who know she say 
 that her heart be so fully under command that nothing could stir she 
 blood to any sudden motion . as to that accusation of straggling which 
 have be make against she , it have spring from ill - natured observation 
 of her mode of sit . she never straggle when she stand or 
 walk ; but she would lean forward when sit , as a man do , and 
 would use her arm in talk , and would put her hand over her face , 
 and pass her finger through her hair , - after the fashion of man 
 rather than of woman ; - and she seem to despise that soft quiescence 
 of her sex in which be generally find so many charm . her hand 
 and foot be large , - as be her whole frame . such be Lady Laura 
 Standish ; and Phineas Finn have be untrue to himself and to his own 
 appreciation of the lady when he have describe she in disparaging 
 term to Mary Flood Jones . but , though he have speak of Lady Laura 
 in disparage term , he have so speak of she as to make Miss Flood 
 Jones quite understand that he think a great deal about Lady Laura . 
 and now , early on the Sunday , he make his way to Portman Square in 
 order that he might learn whether there might be any sympathy for he 
 there . Hitherto he have find none . everything have be terribly dry 
 and hard , and he have gather as yet none of the fruit which he have 
 expect that his good fortune would bear for he . it be true that he 
 have not as yet go among any friend , except those of his club , and 
 man who be in the House along with he ; - and at the club it might 
 be that there be some who envy he his good fortune , and other 
 who think nothing of it because it have be theirs for year . now 
 he would try a friend who , he hop , could sympathise ; and therefore 
 he call in Portman Square at about half - past two on the Sunday 
 morning . yes , - Lady Laura be in the drawing - room . the hall - porter 
 admit as much , but evidently seem to think that he have be 
 disturb from his dinner before his time . Phineas do not care a 
 straw for the hall - porter . if Lady Laura be not kind to he , he 
 would never trouble that hall - porter again . he be especially sore at 
 this moment because a value friend , the barrister with whom he have 
 be read for the last three year , have spend the good part of 
 an hour that Sunday morning in prove to he that he have as good 
 as ruin himself . " when I first hear it , of course I think you 
 have inherit a fortune , " say Mr. Low . " I have inherit nothing , " 
 Phineas reply ; - " not a penny ; and I never shall . " then Mr. Low have 
 open his eye very wide , and shake his head very sadly , and have 
 whistle . 
 " I be so glad you have come , Mr. Finn , " say Lady Laura , meet 
 Phineas half - way across the large room . 
 " thank , " say he , as he take her hand . 
 " I think that perhaps you would manage to see I before any one 
 else be here . " 
 " well ; - to tell the truth , I have wish it ; though I can hardly tell 
 why . " 
 " I can tell you why , Mr. Finn . but never mind ; - come and sit down . 
 I be so very glad that you have be successful ; - so very glad . you 
 know I tell you that I should never think much of you if you do not 
 at least try it . " 
 " and therefore I do try . " 
 " and have succeed . faint heart , you know , never do any good . I 
 think it be a man 's duty to make his way into the House ; - that be , if 
 he ever mean to be anybody . of course it be not every man who can 
 get there by the time that he be five - and - twenty . " 
 " every friend that I have in the world say that I have ruin 
 myself . " 
 " no ; - I do not   say so , " say Lady Laura . 
 " and you be worth all the other put together . it be such a comfort 
 to have some one to say a cheery word to one . " 
 " you shall hear nothing but cheery word here . papa shall say cheery 
 word to you that shall be well than mine , because they shall be 
 weight with the wisdom of age . I have hear he say twenty time 
 that the early a man go into the House the well . there be much 
 to learn . " 
 " but your father be think of man of fortune . " 
 " not at all ; - of young brother , and barrister , and of man who 
 have their way to make , as you have . let I see , - can you dine here 
 on Wednesday ? there will be no party , of course , but papa will want 
 to shake hand with you ; and you legislator of the Lower House be 
 more easily reach on Wednesdays than on any other day . " 
 " I shall be delighted , " say Phineas , feel , however , that he do 
 not expect much sympathy from Lord Brentford . 
 " Mr. Kennedy din here ; - you know Mr. Kennedy , of Loughlinter ; and 
 we will ask your friend Mr. Fitzgibbon . there will be nobody else . as 
 for catch Barrington Erle , that be out of the question at such a 
 time as this . " 
 " but go back to my being ruin - " say Phineas , after a pause . 
 " do not   think of anything so disagreeable . " 
 " you must not suppose that I be afraid of it . I be go to say that 
 there be bad thing than ruin , - or , at any rate , than the chance 
 of ruin . suppose that I have to emigrate and skin sheep , what 
 do it matter ? I myself , be unencumbered , have myself as my own 
 property to do what I like with . with Nelson it be Westminster Abbey 
 or a peerage . with I it be parliamentary success or sheep - skinning . " 
 " there shall be no sheep - skin , Mr. Finn . I will guarantee you . " 
 " then I shall be safe . " 
 at that moment the door of the room be open , and a man enter 
 with quick step , come a few yard in , and then retreat , slam 
 the door after he . he be a man with thick short red hair , and an 
 abundance of very red beard . and his face be red , - and , as it seem 
 to Phineas , his very eye . there be something in the countenance of 
 the man which strike he almost with dread , - something approach to 
 ferocity . 
 there be a pause a moment after the door be close , and then Lady 
 Laura speak . " it be my brother Chiltern . I do not think that you 
 have ever meet he . " 
 CHAPTER V 
 Mr. and Mrs. Low 
 that terrible apparition of the red Lord Chiltern have disturb 
 Phineas in the moment of his happiness as he sit listen to the 
 kind flattery of Lady Laura ; and though Lord Chiltern have vanish 
 as quickly as he have appear , there have come no return of his joy . 
 Lady Laura have say some word about her brother , and Phineas have 
 reply that he have never chance to see Lord Chiltern . then there 
 have be an awkward silence , and almost immediately other person have 
 come in . after greet one or two old acquaintance , among whom an 
 eld sister of Laurence Fitzgibbon be one , he take his leave and 
 escape out into the square . " Miss Fitzgibbon be go to dine with 
 we on Wednesday , " say Lady Laura . " she say she will not   answer for her 
 brother , but she will bring he if she can . " 
 " and you be a member of Parliament now too , they tell I , " say Miss 
 Fitzgibbon , hold up her hand . " I think everybody will be in 
 Parliament before long . I wish I know some man who be not , that I 
 might think of change my condition . " 
 but Phineas care very little what Miss Fitzgibbon say to he . 
 everybody know Aspasia Fitzgibbon , and all who know she be 
 accustom to put up with the violence of her joke and the 
 bitterness of her remark . she be an old maid , over forty , very 
 plain , who , have reconcile herself to the fact that she be an old 
 maid , choose to take advantage of such poor privilege as the position 
 give she . within the last few year a considerable fortune have fall 
 into her hand , some twenty - five thousand pound , which have come to 
 she unexpectedly , - a wonderful windfall . and now she be the only one 
 of her family who have money at command . she live in a small house by 
 herself , in one of the small street of May Fair , and walk about 
 sturdily by herself , and speak her mind about everything . she be 
 greatly devoted to her brother Laurence , - so devoted that there be 
 nothing she would not do for he , short of lend he money . 
 but Phineas when he find himself out in the square thought nothing 
 of Aspasia Fitzgibbon . he have go to Lady Laura Standish for 
 sympathy , and she have give it to he in full measure . she understand 
 he and his aspiration if no one else do so on the face of the 
 earth . she rejoice in his triumph , and be not too hard to tell he 
 that she look forward to his success . and in what delightful 
 language she have do so ! " faint heart never win fair lady . " it be 
 thus , or almost thus , that she have encourage he . he know well that 
 she have in truth mean nothing more than her word have seem to 
 signify . he do not for a moment attribute to her aught else . but 
 might not he get another lesson from they ? he have often tell himself 
 that he be not in love with Laura Standish ; - but why should he not 
 how tell himself that he be in love with she ? of course there would 
 be difficulty . but be it not the business of his life to overcome 
 difficulty ? have he not already overcome one difficulty almost as 
 great ; and why should he be afraid of this other ? faint heart never 
 win fair lady ! and this fair lady , - for at this moment he be ready 
 to swear that she be very fair , - be already half win . she could not 
 have take he by the hand so warmly , and look into his face so 
 keenly , have she not feel for he something strong than common 
 friendship . 
 he have turn down Baker Street from the square , and be now walk 
 towards the Regent 's Park . he would go and see the beast in the 
 Zoological Gardens , and make up his mind as to his future mode of 
 life in that delightful Sunday solitude . there be very much as to 
 which it be necessary that he should make up his mind . if he 
 resolve that he would ask Lady Laura Standish to be his wife , when 
 should he ask she , and in what manner might he propose to she that 
 they should live ? it would hardly suit he to postpone his courtship 
 indefinitely , know , as he do know , that he would be one among 
 many suitor . he could not expect she to wait for he if he do not 
 declare himself . and yet he could hardly ask she to come and share 
 with he the allowance make to he by his father ! whether she have 
 much fortune of her own , or little , or none at all , he do not in the 
 least know . he do know that the Earl have be distress by his 
 son 's extravagance , and that there have be some money difficulty 
 arise from this source . 
 but his great desire would be to support his own wife by his own 
 labour . at present he be hardly in a fair way to do that , unless he 
 could get pay for his parliamentary work . those fortunate gentleman 
 who form " the government " be so pay . yes ; - there be the Treasury 
 Bench open to he , and he must resolve that he would seat himself 
 there . he would make Lady Laura understand this , and then he would 
 ask his question . it be true that at present his political opponent 
 have possession of the Treasury Bench ; - but all government be 
 mortal , and conservative government in this country be especially 
 prone to die . it be true that he could not hold even a Treasury 
 lordship with a poor thousand a year for his salary without have to 
 face the elector of Loughshane again before he enter upon the 
 enjoyment of his place ; - but if he could only do something to give a 
 grace to his name , to show that he be a rise man , the elector of 
 Loughshane , who have once be so easy with he , would surely not be 
 cruel to he when he show himself a second time among they . Lord 
 Tulla be his friend , and he have those point of law in his favour 
 which possession bestow . and then he remember that Lady Laura be 
 relate to almost everybody who be anybody among the high whig . she 
 be , he know , second cousin to Mr. Mildmay , who for year have be 
 the leader of the Whigs , and be third cousin to Barrington Erle . the 
 late President of the Council , the Duke of St. Bungay , and Lord 
 Brentford have married sister , and the St. Bungay people , and the 
 Mildmay people , and the Brentford people have all some sort of 
 connection with the Palliser people , of whom the heir and come 
 chief , Plantagenet Palliser , would certainly be Chancellor of the 
 Exchequer in the next government . simply as an introduction into 
 official life nothing could be more conducive to chance of success 
 than a matrimonial alliance with Lady Laura . not that he would have 
 thought of such a thing on that account ! no ; - he think of it 
 because he love she ; honestly because he love she . he swear to that 
 half a dozen time , for his own satisfaction . but , love she as he 
 do , and resolve that in spite of all difficulty she should 
 become his wife , there could be no reason why he should not , - on her 
 account as well as on his own , - take advantage of any circumstance 
 that there might be in his favour . 
 as he wander among the unsavoury beast , elbow on every side by 
 the Sunday visitor to the garden , he make up his mind that he would 
 first let Lady Laura understand what be his intention with regard 
 to his future career , and then he would ask she to join her lot to 
 his . at every turn the chance would of course be very much against 
 he ; - ten to one against he , perhaps , on every point ; but it be his 
 lot in life to have to face such odd . twelve month since it have 
 be much more than ten to one against his get into Parliament ; 
 and yet he be there . he expect to be blow into fragment , - to 
 sheep - skin in Australia , or pack preserve meat on the plain 
 of Paraguay ; but when the blowing into atom should come , he be 
 resolve that courage to bear the ruin should not be want . then he 
 quote a line or two of a latin poet , and feel himself to be 
 comfortable . 
 " so , here you be again , Mr. Finn , " say a voice in his ear . 
 " yes , Miss Fitzgibbon ; here I be again . " 
 " I fancy you member of Parliament have something else to do besides 
 look at wild beast . I think you always spend Sunday in 
 arrange how you might most effectually badger each other on 
 Monday . " 
 " we get through all that early this morning , Miss Fitzgibbon , while 
 you be say your prayer . " 
 " here be Mr. Kennedy too ; - you know he I daresay . he also be a 
 member ; but then he can afford to be idle . " but it so happen that 
 Phineas do not know Mr. Kennedy , and consequently there be some 
 slight form of introduction . 
 " I believe I be to meet you at dinner on Wednesday , " - say 
 Phineas , - " at Lord Brentford 's . " 
 " and I too , " say Miss Fitzgibbon . 
 " which will be the great possible addition to our pleasure , " say 
 Phineas . 
 Mr. Kennedy , who seem to be afflict with some difficulty in 
 speaking , and whose bow to our hero have hardly do more than produce 
 the slight possible motion to the top of his hat , hereupon 
 mutter something which be take to mean an assent to the 
 proposition as to Wednesday 's dinner . then he stand perfectly still , 
 with his two hand fix on the top of his umbrella , and gaze at the 
 great monkey ' cage . but it be clear that he be not look at any 
 special monkey , for his eye never wander . 
 " do you ever see such a contrast in your life ? " say Miss Fitzgibbon 
 to Phineas , - hardly in a whisper . 
 " between what ? " say Phineas . 
 " between Mr. Kennedy and a monkey . the monkey have so much to say for 
 himself , and be so delightfully wicked ! I do not   suppose that Mr. 
 Kennedy ever do anything wrong in his life . " 
 Mr. Kennedy be a man who have very little temptation to do anything 
 wrong . he be possess of over a million and a half of money , which 
 he be mistaken enough to suppose he have make himself ; whereas it may 
 be doubt whether he have ever earn a penny . his father and his 
 uncle have create a business in Glasgow , and that business now 
 belong to he . but his father and his uncle , who have toil through 
 their long life , have leave behind they servant who understand the 
 work , and the business now go on prosper almost by its own 
 momentum . the Mr. Kennedy of the present day , the sole owner of the 
 business , though he do occasionally go to Glasgow , certainly do 
 nothing towards maintain it . he have a magnificent place in 
 Perthshire , call Loughlinter , and he sit for a Scotch group of 
 borough , and he have a house in London , and a stud of horse in 
 Leicestershire , which he rarely visit , and be unmarried . he never 
 speak much to any one , although he be constantly in society . he 
 rarely do anything , although he have the mean of do everything . 
 he have very seldom be on his leg in the House of Commons , though 
 he have sit there for ten year . he be see about everywhere , 
 sometimes with one acquaintance and sometimes with another ; - but it 
 may be doubt whether he have any friend . it may be doubt whether 
 he have ever talk enough to any man to make that man his friend . 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon try he for one season , and after a month or 
 two ask for a loan of a few hundred pound . " I never lend money to 
 any one under any circumstance , " say Mr. Kennedy , and it be the 
 long speech which have ever fall from his mouth in the hearing of 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon . but though he would not lend money , he give a 
 great deal , - and he would give it for almost every object . " Mr. 
 Robert Kennedy , M.P. , Loughlinter , L105 , " appear on almost every 
 charitable list that be advertise . no one ever speak to he as to 
 this expenditure , nor do he ever speak to any one . circular come to 
 he and the cheque be return . the duty be a very easy one to 
 he , and he perform it willingly . have any amount of inquiry be 
 necessary , it be possible that the labour would have be too much 
 for he . such be Mr. Robert Kennedy , as to whom Phineas have hear 
 that he have during the last winter entertain Lord Brentford and 
 Lady Laura , with very many other people of note , at his place in 
 Perthshire . 
 " I very much prefer the monkey , " say Phineas to Miss Fitzgibbon . 
 " I think you would , " say she . " like to like , you know . you have 
 both of you the same aptitude for climb . but the monkey never 
 fall , they tell I . " 
 Phineas , know that he could gain nothing by spar with Miss 
 Fitzgibbon , raise his hat and take his leave . go out of a narrow 
 gate he find himself again bring into contact with Mr. Kennedy . 
 " what a crowd there be here , " he say , find himself bind to say 
 something . Mr. Kennedy , who be behind he , answer he not a word . 
 then Phineas make up his mind that Mr. Kennedy be insolent with the 
 insolence of rich , and that he would hate Mr. Kennedy . 
 he be engage to dine on this Sunday with Mr. Low , the barrister , 
 with whom he have be read for the last three year . Mr. Low have 
 take a strong liking to Phineas , as have also Mrs. Low , and the tutor 
 have more than once tell his pupil that success in his profession be 
 certainly open to he if he would only stick to his work . Mr. Low be 
 himself an ambitious man , look forward to enter Parliament at 
 some future time , when the exigency of his life of labour might 
 enable he to do so ; but he be prudent , give to close calculation , 
 and resolve to make the ground sure beneath his foot in every step 
 that he take forward . when he first hear that Finn intend to stand 
 for loughshane he be stricken with dismay , and strongly dissuade 
 he . " the elector may probably reject he . that be his only chance 
 now , " Mr. Low have say to his wife , when he find that Phineas be , 
 as he think , foolhardy . but the elector of Loughshane have not 
 reject Mr. Low 's pupil , and Mr. Low be now call upon to advise 
 what Phineas should do in his present circumstance . there be nothing 
 to prevent the work of a Chancery barrister be do by a member of 
 Parliament . indeed , the most successful barrister be member of 
 Parliament . but Phineas Finn be begin at the wrong end , and Mr. 
 Low know that no good would come of it . 
 " only think of your be in Parliament , Mr. Finn , " say Mrs. Low . 
 " it be wonderful , be not   it ? " say Phineas . 
 " it take we so much by surprise ! " say Mrs. Low . " as a rule one never 
 hear of a barrister go into Parliament till after he be forty . " 
 " and I be only twenty - five . I do feel that I have   disgrace myself . I 
 do , indeed , Mrs. Low . " 
 " no ; - you have   not disgrace yourself , Mr. Finn . the only question be , 
 whether it be prudent . I hope it will all turn out for the good , most 
 heartily . " Mrs. Low be a very matter - of - fact lady , four or five 
 year old than her husband , who have have a little money of her own , 
 and be possess of every virtue under the sun . nevertheless she do 
 not quite like the idea of her husband 's pupil have get into 
 Parliament . if her husband and Phineas Finn be din anywhere 
 together , Phineas , who have come to they quite a boy , would walk out 
 of the room before her husband . this could hardly be right ! 
 nevertheless she help Phineas to the nice bit of fish she could 
 find , and have he be ill , would have nurse he with the great 
 care . 
 after dinner , when Mrs. Low have go up - stair , there come the great 
 discussion between the tutor and the pupil , for the sake of which 
 this little dinner have be give . when Phineas have last be with 
 Mr. Low , - on the occasion of his show himself at his tutor 's 
 chamber after his return from Ireland , - he have not make up his mind 
 so thoroughly on certain point as he have do since he have see Lady 
 Laura . the discussion could hardly be of any avail now , - but it could 
 not be avoid . 
 " well , Phineas , and what do you mean to do ? " say Mr. Low . everybody 
 who know our hero , or nearly everybody , call he by his Christian 
 name . there be man who seem to be so treat by general consent in 
 all society . even Mrs. Low , who be very prosaic , and unlikely to 
 be familiar in her mode of address , have fall into the way of do 
 it before the election . but she have drop it , when the Phineas whom 
 she use to know become a member of Parliament . 
 " that be the question ; - be not   it ? " say Phineas . 
 " of course you will stick to your work ? " 
 " what ; - to the Bar ? " 
 " yes ; - to the Bar . " 
 " I be not think of give it up permanently . " 
 " give it up , " say Mr. Low , raise his hand in surprise . " if you 
 give it up , how do you intend to live ? man be not pay for be 
 member of Parliament . " 
 " not exactly . but , as I say before , I be not think of give it 
 up , - permanently . " 
 " you must not   give it up at all , - not for a day ; that be , if you ever 
 mean to do any good . " 
 " there I think that perhaps you may be wrong , Low ! " 
 " how can I be wrong ? do a period of idleness ever help a man in any 
 profession ? and be it not acknowledge by all who know anything about 
 it , that continuous labour be more necessary in our profession than 
 in any other ? " 
 " I do not mean to be idle . " 
 " what be it you do mean , Phineas ? " 
 " why simply this . here I be in Parliament . we must take that as a 
 fact . " 
 " I do not   doubt the fact . " 
 " and if it be a misfortune , we must make the good of it . even you 
 would not   advise I to apply for the Chiltern Hundreds at once . " 
 " I would ; - to - morrow . my dear fellow , though I do not like to give 
 you pain , if you come to I I can only tell you what I think . my 
 advice to you be to give it up to - morrow . man would laugh at you for 
 a few week , but that be well than be ruin for life . " 
 " I can not   do that , " say Phineas , sadly . 
 " very well ; - then let we go on , " say Mr. Low . " if you will not   give up 
 your seat , the next good thing will be to take care that it shall 
 interfere as little as possible with your work . I suppose you must 
 sit upon some Committees . " 
 " my idea be this , - that I will give up one year to learn the 
 practice of the House . " 
 " and do nothing ? " 
 " nothing but that . why , the thing be a study in itself . as for 
 learn it in a year , that be out of the question . but I be 
 convince that if a man intend to be a useful member of Parliament , 
 he should make a study of it . " 
 " and how do you mean to live in the meantime ? " Mr. Low , who be an 
 energetic man , have assume almost an angry tone of voice . phinea for 
 awhile sit silent ; - not that he feel himself to be without word for 
 a reply , but that he be think in what few word he might well 
 convey his idea . " you have a very modest allowance from your father , 
 on which you have never be able to keep yourself free from debt , " 
 continue Mr. Low . 
 " he have increase it . " 
 " and will it satisfy you to live here , in what will turn out to be 
 parliamentary club idleness , on the saving of his industrious life ? 
 I think you will find yourself unhappy if you do that . Phineas , my 
 dear fellow , as far as I have as yet be able to see the world , man 
 do not   begin either very good or very bad . they have generally good 
 aspiration with infirm purpose ; - or , as we may say , strong body 
 with weak leg to carry they . then , because their leg be weak , they 
 drift into idleness and ruin . during all this drift they be 
 wretched , and when they have thoroughly drift they be still 
 wretched . the agony of their old disappointment still cling to they . 
 in nine case out of ten it be some one small unfortunate event that 
 put a man astray at first . he see some woman and lose himself with 
 she ; - or he be take to a racecourse and unluckily win money ; - or 
 some devil in the shape of a friend lure he to tobacco and brandy . 
 your temptation have come in the shape of this accurse seat in 
 Parliament . " Mr. Low have never say a soft word in his life to any 
 woman but the wife of his bosom , have never see a racehorse , always 
 confine himself to two glass of port after dinner , and look upon 
 smoking as the darkest of all the vice . 
 " you have make up your mind , then , that I mean to be idle ? " 
 " I have make up my mind that your time will be wholly 
 unprofitable , - if you do as you say you intend to do . " 
 " but you do not know my plan ; - just listen to I . " then Mr. Low do 
 listen , and Phineas explain his plan , - say , of course , nothing 
 of his love for Lady Laura , but give Mr. Low to understand that he 
 intend to assist in turn out the exist government and to 
 mount up to some seat , - a humble seat at first , - on the Treasury 
 bench , by the help of his exalt friend and by the use of his own 
 gift of eloquence . Mr. Low hear he without a word . " of course , " 
 say Phineas , " after the first year my time will not be fully 
 employ , unless I succeed . and if I fail totally , - for , of course , I 
 may fail altogether - " 
 " it be possible , " say Mr. Low . 
 " if you be resolve to turn yourself against I , I must not say 
 another word , " say Phineas , with anger . 
 " turn myself against you ! I would turn myself any way so that I might 
 save you from the sort of life which you be prepare for yourself . 
 I see nothing in it that can satisfy any manly heart . even if you be 
 successful , what be you to become ? you will be the creature of some 
 minister , not his colleague . you be to make your way up the ladder 
 by pretend to agree whenever agreement be demand from you , and 
 by vote whether you agree or do not . and what be to be your reward ? 
 some few precarious hundred a year , last just so long as a party 
 may remain in power and you can retain a seat in Parliament ! it be at 
 the good slavery and degradation , - even if you be lucky enough to 
 achieve the slavery . " 
 " you yourself hope to go into Parliament and join a ministry some 
 day , " say Phineas . 
 Mr. Low be not quick to answer , but he do answer at last . " that be 
 true , though I have never tell you so . indeed , it be hardly true to 
 say that I hope it . I have my dream , and sometimes dare to tell 
 myself that they may possibly become wake fact . but if ever I sit 
 on a Treasury bench I shall sit there by special invitation , have 
 be summon to take a high place because of my professional 
 success . it be but a dream after all , and I would not have you repeat 
 what I have say to any one . I have no intention to talk about 
 myself . " 
 " I be sure that you will succeed , " say Phineas . 
 " yes ; - I shall succeed . I be succeed . I live upon what I earn , 
 like a gentleman , and can already afford to be indifferent to work 
 that I dislike . after all , the other part of it , - that of which I 
 dream , - be but an unnecessary adjunct ; the gilding on the 
 gingerbread . I be inclined to think that the cake be more wholesome 
 without it . " 
 Phineas do not go up - stair into Mrs. Low 's drawing - room on that 
 evening , nor do he stay very late with Mr. Low . he have hear enough 
 of counsel to make he very unhappy , - to shake from he much of the 
 audacity which he have acquire for himself during his morning 's 
 walk , - and to make he almost doubt whether , after all , the Chiltern 
 hundred would not be for he the safe escape from his 
 difficulty . but in that case he must never venture to see Lady 
 Laura Standish again . 
 CHAPTER VI 
 Lord Brentford 's Dinner 
 no ; - in such case as that , - should he resolve upon take the advice 
 of his old friend Mr. Low , Phineas Finn must make up his mind never 
 to see Lady Laura standish again ! and he be in love with Lady Laura 
 Standish ; - and , for aught he know , Lady Laura Standish might be in 
 love with he . as he walk home from Mr. Low 's house in Bedford 
 Square , he be by no mean a triumphant man . there have be much more 
 say between he and Mr. Low than could be lay before the reader 
 in the last chapter . Mr. Low have urge he again and again , and have 
 prevail so far that Phineas , before he leave the house , have promise 
 to consider that suicidal expedient of the Chiltern Hundreds . what a 
 by - word he would become if he be to give up Parliament , have sit 
 there for about a week ! but such immediate giving up be one of the 
 necessity of Mr. Low 's programme . accord to Mr. Low 's teaching , 
 a single year pass amidst the miasma of the House of Commons would 
 be altogether fatal to any chance of professional success . and Mr. 
 Low have at any rate succeed in make Phineas believe that he 
 be right in this lesson . there be his profession , as to which Mr. 
 Low assure he that success be within his reach ; and there be 
 Parliament on the other side , as to which he know that the chance 
 be all against he , in spite of his advantage of a seat . that he 
 could not combine the two , begin with Parliament , he do believe . 
 which should it be ? that be the question which he try to decide 
 as he walk home from Bedford Square to Great Marlborough Street . 
 he could not answer the question satisfactorily , and go to bed an 
 unhappy man . 
 he must at any rate go to Lord Brentford 's dinner on Wednesday , and , 
 to enable he to join in the conversation there , must attend the 
 debate on Monday and Tuesday . the reader may perhaps be well make to 
 understand how terrible be our hero 's state of doubt by be tell 
 that for awhile he think of absent himself from these debate , 
 as be likely to weaken his purpose of withdraw altogether from 
 the House . it be not very often that so strong a fury rage between 
 party and party at the commencement of the session that a division 
 be take upon the Address . it be customary for the leader of the 
 opposition on such occasion to express his opinion in the most 
 courteous language , that his right honourable friend , sit 
 opposite to he on the Treasury bench , have be , be , and will be 
 wrong in everything that he think , say , or do in public life ; but 
 that , as anything like factious opposition be never adopt on that 
 side of the House , the Address to the Queen , in answer to that most 
 fatuous speech which have be put into her Majesty 's gracious mouth , 
 shall be allow to pass unquestione . then the leader of the House 
 thank his adversary for his consideration , explain to all man how 
 happy the country ought to be that the Government have not fall into 
 the disgracefully incapable hand of his right honourable friend 
 opposite ; and after that the Address be carry amidst universal 
 serenity . but such be not the order of the day on the present 
 occasion . Mr. Mildmay , the veteran leader of the liberal side of the 
 House , have move an amendment to the Address , and have urge upon the 
 House , in very strong language , the expediency of show , at the 
 very commencement of the session , that the country have return 
 to Parliament a strong majority determine not to put up with 
 conservative inactivity . " I conceive it to be my duty , " Mr. Mildmay 
 have say , " at once to assume that the country be unwilling that the 
 right honourable gentleman opposite should keep their seat on the 
 bench upon which they sit , and in the performance of that duty I be 
 call upon to divide the House upon the Address to her Majesty . " and 
 if Mr. Mildmay use strong language , the reader may be sure that Mr. 
 Mildmay 's follower use language much strong . and Mr. Daubeny , who 
 be the present leader of the House , and representative there of the 
 Ministry , - Lord de Terrier , the Premier , sit in the House of 
 Lords , - be not the man to allow these amenity to pass by without 
 adequate reply . he and his friend be very strong in sarcasm , 
 if they fail in argument , and lack nothing for word , though 
 it might perhaps be prove that they be short in number . it be 
 consider that the speech in which Mr. Daubeny review the long 
 political life of Mr. Mildmay , and show that Mr. Mildmay have be 
 at one time a bugbear , and then a nightmare , and latterly simply a 
 fungus , be one of the severest attack , if not the most severe , that 
 have be hear in that House since the Reform Bill . Mr. Mildmay , the 
 while , be sit with his hat low down over his eye , and many man 
 say that he do not like it . but this speech be not make till after 
 that dinner at Lord Brentford 's , of which a short account must be 
 give . 
 have it not be for the overwhelming interest of the doing in 
 Parliament at the commencement of the session , Phineas might have 
 perhaps abstain from attend , in spite of the charm of novelty . 
 for , in truth , Mr. Low 's word have move he much . but if it be to 
 be his fate to be a member of Parliament only for ten day , surely it 
 would be well that he should take advantage of the time to hear such 
 a debate as this . it would be a thing to talk of to his child in 
 twenty year ' time , or to his grandchild in fifty ; - and it would 
 be essentially necessary that he should be able to talk of it to Lady 
 Laura Standish . he do , therefore , sit in the House till one on the 
 Monday night , and till two on the Tuesday night , and hear the debate 
 adjourn till the Thursday . on the Thursday Mr. Daubeny be to make 
 his great speech , and then the division would come . 
 when Phineas enter Lady Laura 's drawing - room on the Wednesday 
 before dinner , he find the other guest all assemble . why man 
 should have be early in keep their dinner engagement on that 
 day than on any other he do not understand ; but it be the fact , 
 probably , that the great anxiety of the time make those who be at 
 all concerned in the matter very keen to hear and to be hear . during 
 these day everybody be in a hurry , - everybody be eager ; and there 
 be a common feeling that not a minute be to be lose . there be 
 three lady in the room , - Lady Laura , Miss Fitzgibbon , and Mrs. 
 Bonteen . the latter be the wife of a gentleman who have be a junior 
 Lord of the Admiralty in the late government , and who live in the 
 expectation of filling , perhaps , some high office in the Government 
 which , as he hop , be soon to be call into existence . there 
 be five gentleman besides Phineas Finn himself , - Mr. Bonteen , Mr. 
 Kennedy , Mr. Fitzgibbon , Barrington Erle , who have be catch in 
 spite of all that Lady Laura have say as to the difficulty of such 
 an operation , and Lord Brentford . Phineas be quick to observe that 
 every male guest be in Parliament , and to tell himself that he would 
 not have be there unless he also have have a seat . 
 " we be all here now , " say the Earl , ring the bell . 
 " I hope I have   not keep you wait , " say Phineas . 
 " not at all , " say Lady Laura . " I do not know why we be in such a 
 hurry . and how many do you say it will be , Mr. Finn ? " 
 " Seventeen , I suppose , " say Phineas . 
 " more likely twenty - two , " say Mr. Bonteen . " there be Colcleugh so 
 ill they can not   possibly bring he up , and young Rochester be at 
 Vienna , and Gunning be sulk about something , and Moody have lose 
 his eld son . by George ! they press he to come up , although 
 Frank Moody will not   be bury till Friday . " 
 " I do not   believe it , " say Lord Brentford . 
 " you ask some of the Carlton fellow , and they will own it . " 
 " if I have lose every relation I have in the world , " say Fitzgibbon , 
 " I would vote on such a question as this . stay away will not   bring poor 
 Frank Moody back to life . " 
 " but there be a decency in these matter , be there not , Mr. 
 Fitzgibbon ? " say Lady Laura . 
 " I think they have throw all that kind of thing overboard long 
 ago , " say Miss Fitzgibbon . " it would be well that they should have 
 no veil , than squabble about the thickness of it . " 
 then dinner be announce . the Earl walk off with Miss Fitzgibbon , 
 Barrington Erle take Mrs. Bonteen , and Mr. Fitzgibbon take Lady 
 Laura . 
 " I will bet four pound to two it be over nineteen , " say Mr. Bonteen , 
 as he pass through the drawing - room door . the remark seem to have 
 be address to Mr. Kennedy , and Phineas therefore make no reply . 
 " I daresay it will , " say Kennedy , " but I never bet . " 
 " but you vote - sometimes , I hope , " say Bonteen . 
 " sometimes , " say Mr. Kennedy . 
 " I think he be the most odious man that ever I set my eye on , " say 
 Phineas to himself as he follow Mr. Kennedy into the dining - room . 
 he have observe that Mr. Kennedy have be stand very near to Lady 
 Laura in the drawing - room , and that Lady Laura have say a few word 
 to he . he be more determined than ever that he would hate Mr. 
 Kennedy , and would probably have be moody and unhappy throughout 
 the whole dinner have not Lady Laura call he to a chair at her left 
 hand . it be very generous of she ; and the more so , as Mr. Kennedy 
 have , in a half - hesitating manner , prepare to seat himself in that 
 very place . as it be , Phineas and Mr. Kennedy be neighbour , but 
 Phineas have the place of honour . 
 " I suppose you will not speak during the debate ? " say Lady Laura . 
 " who ? I ? certainly not . in the first place , I could not get a 
 hearing , and , in the next place , I should not think of commence on 
 such an occasion . I do not know that I shall ever speak at all . " 
 " indeed you will . you be just the sort of man who will succeed with 
 the House . what I doubt be , whether you will do as well in office . " 
 " I wish I might have the chance . " 
 " of course you can have the chance if you try for it . begin so 
 early , and be on the right side , - and , if you will allow I to say 
 so , among the right set , - there can be no doubt that you may take 
 office if you will . but I be not sure that you will be tractable . you 
 can not begin , you know , by be Prime Minister . " 
 " I have see enough to realise that already , " say Phineas . 
 " if you will only keep that little fact steadily before your eye , 
 there be nothing you may not reach in official life . but Pitt be 
 Prime Minister at four - and - twenty , and that precedent have ruin half 
 our young politician . " 
 " it have not affect I , Lady Laura . " 
 " as far as I can see , there be no great difficulty in government . a 
 man must learn to have word at command when he be on his leg in 
 the House of Commons , in the same way as he would if he be talk 
 to his own servant . he must keep his temper ; and he must be very 
 patient . as far as I have see Cabinet Ministers , they be not more 
 clever than other people . " 
 " I think there be generally one or two man of ability in the 
 Cabinet . " 
 " yes , of fair ability . Mr. Mildmay be a good speciman . there be not , 
 and never be , anything brilliant in he . he be not eloquent , nor , 
 as far as I be aware , do he ever create anything . but he have always 
 be a steady , honest , persevere man , and circumstance have make 
 politic come easy to he . " 
 " think of the momentous question which he have be call upon to 
 decide , " say Phineas . 
 " every question so handle by he have be decide rightly accord 
 to his own party , and wrongly accord to the party opposite . a 
 political leader be so sure of support and so sure of attack , that 
 it be hardly necessary for he to be even anxious to be right . for 
 the country 's sake , he should have official under he who know the 
 routine of business . " 
 " you think very badly then of politic as a profession . " 
 " no ; I think of they very highly . it must be well to deal with 
 the repeal of law than the defending of criminal . but all this be 
 papa 's wisdom , not mine . Papa have never be in the Cabinet yet , and 
 therefore of course he be a little caustic . " 
 " I think he be quite right , " say Barrington Erle stoutly . he speak 
 so stoutly that everybody at the table listen to he . 
 " I do not   exactly see the necessity for such internecine war just at 
 present , " say Lord Brentford . 
 " I must say I do , " say the other . " Lord de Terrier take office 
 know that he be in a minority . we have a fair majority of nearly 
 thirty when he come in . " 
 " then how very soft you must have be to go out , " say Miss 
 Fitzgibbon . 
 " not in the least soft , " continue Barrington Erle . " we could not 
 command our man , and be bind to go out . for aught we know , some 
 score of they might have choose to support Lord de Terrier , and then 
 we should have own ourselves beat for the time . " 
 " you be beat , - hollow , " say Miss Fitzgibbon . 
 " then why do Lord de Terrier dissolve ? " 
 " a Prime Minister be quite right to dissolve in such a position , " 
 say Lord Brentford . " he must do so for the Queen 's sake . it be his 
 only chance . " 
 " just so . it be , as you say , his only chance , and it be his right . 
 his very possession of power will give he near a score of vote , and 
 if he think that he have a chance , let he try it . we maintain that 
 he have no chance , and that he must have know that he have none ; - that 
 if he could not get on with the late House , he certainly could not 
 get on with a new House . we let he have his own way as far as we 
 could in February . we have fail last summer , and if he could get 
 along he be welcome . but he could not get along . " 
 " I must say I think he be right to dissolve , " say Lady Laura . 
 " and we be right to force the consequence upon he as quickly as 
 we can . he practically lose nine seat by his dissolution . look at 
 Loughshane . " 
 " yes ; look at Loughshane , " say Miss Fitzgibbon . " the country at any 
 rate have gain something there . " 
 " it be an ill wind that blow nobody any good , Mr. Finn , " say the 
 Earl . 
 " what on earth be to become of poor George ? " say Mr. Fitzgibbon . " I 
 wonder whether any one know where he be . George be not   a bad sort of 
 fellow . " 
 " Roby use to think that he be a very bad fellow , " say Mr. Bonteen . 
 " Roby use to swear that it be hopeless try to catch he . " it may 
 be as well to explain that Mr. Roby be a conservative gentleman of 
 great fame who have for year act as Whip under Mr. Daubeny , and who 
 now fill the high office of Patronage Secretary to the Treasury . " I 
 believe in my heart , " continue Mr. Bonteen , " that Roby be rejoice 
 that poor George Morris should be out in the cold . " 
 " if seat be halveable , he should share mine , for the sake of auld 
 lang syne , " say Laurence Fitzgibbon . 
 " but not to - morrow night , " say Barrington Erle ; " the division 
 to - morrow will be a thing not to be joke with . upon my word I think 
 they be right about old Moody . all private consideration should give 
 way . and as for Gunning , I would have he up or I would know the reason why . " 
 " and shall we have no defaulter , Barrington ? " ask Lady Laura . 
 " I be not go to boast , but I do not   know of one for whom we need 
 blush . Sir Everard Powell be so bad with gout that he can not   even bear 
 any one to look at he , but Ratler say that he will bring he up . " Mr. 
 Ratler be in those day the Whip on the liberal side of the House . 
 " unfortunate wretch ! " say Miss Fitzgibbon . 
 " the bad of it be that he scream in his paroxysm , " say Mr. 
 Bonteen . 
 " and you mean to say that you will take he into the lobby , " say Lady 
 Laura . 
 " undoubtedly , " say Barrington Erle . " why not ? he have no business 
 with a seat if he can not   vote . but Sir Everard be a good man , and 
 he will be there if laudanum and bath - chair make it possible . " 
 the same kind of conversation go on during the whole of dinner , and 
 become , if anything , more animate when the three lady have leave the 
 room . Mr. Kennedy make but one remark , and then he observe that as 
 far as he could see a majority of nineteen would be as serviceable 
 as a majority of twenty . this he say in a very mild voice , and in 
 a tone that be intend to be expressive of doubt ; but in spite of 
 his humility Barrington Erle fly at he almost savagely , - as though 
 a liberal member of the House of Commons be disgrace by so mean a 
 spirit ; and Phineas find himself despise the man for his want of 
 zeal . 
 " if we be to beat they , let we beat they well , " say Phineas . 
 " let there be no doubt about it , " say Barrington Erle . 
 " I should like to see every man with a seat poll , " say Bonteen . 
 " Poor Sir Everard ! " say Lord Brentford . " it will kill he , no doubt , 
 but I suppose the seat be safe . " 
 " oh , yes ; Llanwrwsth be quite safe , " say Barrington , in his 
 eagerness omit to catch Lord Brentford 's grim joke . 
 Phineas go up into the drawing - room for a few minute after dinner , 
 and be eagerly desirous of say a few more word , - he know not 
 what word , - to Lady Laura . Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Bonteen have leave 
 the dining - room first , and Phineas again find Mr. Kennedy stand 
 close to Lady Laura 's shoulder . could it be possible that there be 
 anything in it ? Mr. Kennedy be an unmarried man , with an immense 
 fortune , a magnificent place , a seat in Parliament , and be not 
 perhaps above forty year of age . there could be no reason why he 
 should not ask Lady Laura to be his wife , - except , indeed , that he 
 do not seem to have sufficient word at command to ask anybody for 
 anything . but could it be that such a woman as Lady Laura could 
 accept such a man as Mr. Kennedy because of his wealth , and because 
 of his fine place , - a man who have not a word to throw to a dog , who 
 do not seem to be possess of an idea , who hardly look like a 
 gentleman ; - so Phineas tell himself . but in truth Mr. Kennedy , though 
 he be a plain , unattractive man , with nothing in his personal 
 appearance to call for remark , be not unlike a gentleman in his 
 usual demeanour . Phineas himself , it may be here say , be six foot 
 high , and very handsome , with bright blue eye , and brown wavy hair , 
 and light silken beard . Mrs. Low have tell her husband more than once 
 that he be much too handsome to do any good . Mr. Low , however , have 
 reply that young Finn have never show himself to be conscious of 
 his own personal advantage . " he will learn it soon enough , " say Mrs. 
 Low . " some woman will tell he , and then he will be spoil . " I do not 
 think that Phineas depend much as yet on his own good look , but 
 he feel that Mr. Kennedy ought to be despise by such a one as Lady 
 Laura Standish , because his look be not good . and she must despise 
 he ! it could not be that a woman so full of life should be willing 
 to put up with a man who absolutely seem to have no life within 
 he . and yet why be he there , and why be he allow to hang about 
 just over her shoulder ? Phineas Finn begin to feel himself to be an 
 injure man . 
 but Lady Laura have the power of dispel instantly this sense of 
 injury . she have do it effectually in the dining - room by call he 
 to the seat by her side , to the express exclusion of the millionaire , 
 and she do it again now by walk away from Mr. Kennedy to the spot 
 on which Phineas have place himself somewhat sulkily . 
 " of course you will be at the club on Friday morning after the 
 division , " she say . 
 " no doubt . " 
 " when you leave it , come and tell I what be your impression , and 
 what you think of Mr. Daubeny 's speech . there will be nothing do in 
 the House before four , and you will be able to run up to I . " 
 " certainly I will . " 
 " I have ask Mr. Kennedy to come , and Mr. Fitzgibbon . I be so 
 anxious about it , that I want to hear what different people say . 
 you know , perhaps , that papa be to be in the Cabinet if there be a 
 change . " 
 " be he indeed ? " 
 " oh yes ; - and you will come up ? " 
 " of course I will . do you expect to hear much of an opinion from Mr. 
 Kennedy ? " 
 " yes , I do . you do not   quite know Mr. Kennedy yet . and you must 
 remember that he will say more to I than he will to you . he be 
 not quick , you know , as you be , and he have no enthusiasm on any 
 subject ; - but he have opinion , and sound opinion too . " Phineas 
 feel that Lady Laura be in a slight degree scold he for the 
 disrespectful manner in which he have speak of Mr. Kennedy ; and he 
 feel also that he have commit himself , - that he have show himself 
 to be sore , and that she have see and understand his soreness . 
 " the truth be I do not know he , " say he , try to correct his 
 blunder . 
 " no ; - not as yet . but I hope that you may some day , as he be one of 
 those man who be both useful and estimable . " 
 " I do not know that I can use he , " say Phineas ; " but if you wish 
 it , I will endeavour to esteem he . " 
 " I wish you to do both ; - but that will all come in due time . I think 
 it probable that in the early autumn there will be a great gathering 
 of the real Whig Liberals at Loughlinter ; - of those , I mean , who have 
 their heart in it , and be at the same time gentleman . if it be so , 
 I should be sorry that you should not be there . you need not mention 
 it , but Mr. Kennedy have just say a word about it to papa , and a 
 word from he always mean so much ! well ; - good - night ; and mind you 
 come up on Friday . you be go to the club , now , of course . I envy 
 you men your club more than I do the House ; - though I feel that 
 a woman 's life be only half a life , as she can not have a seat in 
 Parliament . " 
 then Phineas go away , and walk down to Pall Mall with Laurence 
 Fitzgibbon . he would have prefer to take his walk alone , but he 
 could not get rid of his affectionate countryman . he want to think 
 over what have take place during the evening ; and , indeed , he do so 
 in spite of his friend 's conversation . Lady Laura , when she first see 
 he after his return to London , have tell he how anxious her father 
 be to congratulate he on his seat , but the Earl have not speak a 
 word to he on the subject . the Earl have be courteous , as host 
 customarily be , but have be in no way specially kind to he . and 
 then Mr. Kennedy ! as to go to Loughlinter , he would not do such a 
 thing , - not though the success of the liberal party be to depend on 
 it . he declare to himself that there be some thing which a man 
 could not do . but although he be not altogether satisfied with what 
 have occur in Portman Square , he feel as he walk down arm - in - arm 
 with Fitzgibbon that Mr. Low and Mr. Low 's counsel must be scatter 
 to the wind . he have throw the die in consent to stand for 
 Loughshane , and must stand the hazard of the cast . 
 " Bedad , Phin , my boy , I do not   think you be listen to I at all , " 
 say Laurence Fitzgibbon . 
 " I be listen to every word you say , " say Phineas . 
 " and if I have to go down to the ould country again this session , 
 you will go with I ? " 
 " if I can I will . " 
 " that be my boy ! and it be I that hope you will have the chance . what be 
 the good of turn these fellow out if one be not   to get something 
 for one 's trouble ? " 
 CHAPTER VII 
 Mr. and Mrs. Bunce 
 it be three o'clock on the Thursday night before Mr. Daubeny 's 
 speech be finish . I do not think that there be any truth in the 
 allegation make at the time , that he continue on his leg an hour 
 long than the necessity of his speech require , in order that 
 five or six very ancient whig might be weary out and shrink to 
 their bed . let a Whig have be ever so ancient and ever so weary , 
 he would not have be allow to depart from Westminster Hall that 
 night . Sir Everard Powell be there in his bath - chair at twelve , 
 with a doctor on one side of he and a friend on the other , in some 
 purlieu of the House , and do his duty like a fine old Briton as he 
 be . that speech of Mr. Daubeny 's will never be forget by any one 
 who hear it . its studied bitterness have perhaps never be equal , 
 and yet not a word be utter for the saying of which he could be 
 accuse of go beyond the limit of parliamentary antagonism . it be 
 true that personality could not have be close , that accusation 
 of political dishonesty and of almost bad than political cowardice 
 and falsehood could not have be clear , that no word in the 
 language could have attribute mean motif or more unscrupulous 
 conduct . but , nevertheless , Mr. Daubeny in all that he say be 
 parliamentary , and show himself to be a gladiator thoroughly well 
 train for the arena in which he have descend to the combat . his 
 arrow be poison , and his lance be barb , and his shot be 
 heated red , - because such thing be allow . he do not poison 
 his enemy ' well or use greek fire , because those thing be not 
 allow . he know exactly the rule of the combat . Mr. Mildmay sit and 
 hear he without once raise his hat from his brow , or speak 
 a word to his neighbour . man on both side of the House say that 
 Mr. Mildmay suffer terribly ; but as Mr. Mildmay utter no word of 
 complaint to any one , and be quite ready to take Mr. Daubeny by the 
 hand the next time they meet in company , I do not know that any one 
 be able to form a true idea of Mr. Mildmay 's feeling . Mr. Mildmay 
 be an impassive man who rarely speak of his own feeling , and no 
 doubt sit with his hat low down over his eye in order that no 
 man might judge of they on that occasion by the impression on his 
 feature . " if he could have leave off half an hour early it would 
 have be perfect as an attack , " say Barrington Erle in criticise 
 Mr. Daubeny 's speech , " but he allow himself to sink into 
 comparative weakness , and the glory of it be over before the 
 end . " - then come the division . the Liberals have 333 vote to 314 for 
 the Conservatives , and therefore count a majority of 19 . it be 
 say that so large a number of member have never before vote at any 
 division . 
 " I own I be disappointed , " say Barrington Erle to Mr. Ratler . 
 " I think there would be twenty , " say Mr. Ratler . " I never go 
 beyond that . I know they would have old Moody up , but I think 
 Gunning would have be too hard for they . " 
 " they say they have   promise they both peerage . " 
 " yes ; - if they remain in . but they know they be go out . " 
 " they must go , with such a majority against they , " say Barrington 
 Erle . 
 " of course they must , " say Mr. Ratler . " Lord de Terrier want 
 nothing well , but it be rather hard upon poor Daubeny . I never see 
 such an unfortunate old Tantalus . " 
 " he get a good drop of real water now and again , and I do not   pity 
 he in the least . he be clever of course , and have make his own way , 
 but I have   always a feeling that he have no business where he be . 
 I suppose we shall know all about it at Brooks 's by one o'clock 
 to - morrow . " 
 Phineas , though it have be past five before he go to bed , - for 
 there have be much triumphant talk to be do among liberal 
 member after the division , - be up at his breakfast at Mrs. Bunce 's 
 lodging by nine . there be a matter which he be call upon to 
 settle immediately in which Mrs. Bunce herself be much interested , 
 and respect which he have promise to give an answer on this very 
 morning . a set of very dingy chamber up two pair of stair at No . 
 9 , Old Square , Lincoln 's Inn , to which Mr. Low have recommend he to 
 transfer himself and all his belonging , be wait his occupation , 
 should he resolve upon occupy they . if he intend to commence 
 operation as a barrister , it would be necessary that he should have 
 chamber and a clerk ; and before he have leave Mr. Low 's house on 
 Sunday evening he have almost give that gentleman authority to secure 
 for he these room at no . 9 . " whether you remain in Parliament or 
 no , you must make a beginning , " Mr. Low have say ; " and how be you 
 even to pretend to begin if you do not   have chamber ? " Mr. Low hop 
 that he might be able to wean Phineas away from his Parliament 
 bauble ; - that he might induce the young barrister to give up his 
 madness , if not this session or the next , at any rate before a third 
 year have commence . Mr. Low be a persistent man , like very much 
 when he do like , and love very strongly when he do love . he would 
 have many a tug for Phineas Finn before he would allow that false 
 Westminster Satan to carry off the prey as altogether his own . if he 
 could only get Phineas into the dingy chamber he might do much ! 
 but Phineas have now become so imbued with the atmosphere of politic , 
 have be so breathe upon by Lady Laura and Barrington Erle , that 
 he could no long endure the thought of any other life than that 
 of a life spend among the lobby . a desire to help to beat the 
 conservative have fasten on his very soul , and almost make Mr. Low 
 odious in his eye . he be afraid of Mr. Low , and for the nonce would 
 not go to he any more ; - but he must see the porter at Lincoln 's Inn , 
 he must write a line to Mr. Low , and he must tell Mrs. Bunce that for 
 the present he would still keep on her room . his letter to Mr. Low 
 be as follow : - 
 Great Marlborough Street , May , 186 - . 
 MY DEAR LOW , 
 I have make up my mind against take the chamber , and be 
 now off to the Inn to say that I shall not want they . of 
 course , I know what you will think of I , and it be very 
 grievous to I to have to bear the hard judgment of a man 
 whose opinion I value so highly ; but , in the tooth of your 
 terribly strong argument , I think that there be something 
 to be say on my side of the question . this seat in 
 Parliament have come in my way by chance , and I think it 
 would be pusillanimous in I to reject it , feel , as I 
 do , that a seat in Parliament confer very great honour . I 
 be , too , very fond of politic , and regard legislation as 
 the fine profession go . have I any one dependent on 
 I , I probably might not be justify in follow the 
 bent of my inclination . but I be all alone in the world , 
 and therefore have a right to make the attempt . if , after 
 a trial of one or two session , I should fail in that 
 which I be attempt , it will not even then be too late 
 to go back to the well way . I can assure you that at any 
 rate it be not my intention to be idle . 
 I know very well how you will fret and fume over what I 
 say , and how utterly I shall fail in bring you round to 
 my way of thinking ; but as I must write to tell you of my 
 decision , I can not refrain from defend myself to the 
 good of my ability . 
 your always faithfully , 
 phinea FINN . 
 Mr. Low receive this letter at his chamber , and when he have read 
 it , he simply press his lip closely together , place the sheet 
 of paper back in its envelope , and put it into a drawer at his left 
 hand . have do this , he go on with what work he have before he , 
 as though his friend 's decision be a matter of no consequence to 
 he . as far as he be concern the thing be do , and there should 
 be an end of it . so he tell himself ; but nevertheless his mind be 
 full of it all day ; and , though he write not a word of answer to 
 Phineas , he make a reply within his own mind to every one of the 
 argument use in the letter . " great honour ! how can there be honour 
 in what come , as he say , by chance ? he have not   sense enough to 
 understand that the honour come from the mode of win it , and 
 from the mode of wear it ; and that the very fact of his being 
 member for Loughshane at this instant simply prove that Loughshane 
 should have have no privilege to return a member ! no one dependent on 
 he ! be not his father and his mother and his sister dependent on 
 he as long as he must eat their bread till he can earn bread of his 
 own ? he will never earn bread of his own . he will always be eat 
 bread that other have earn . " in this way , before the day be 
 over , Mr. Low become very angry , and swear to himself that he would 
 have nothing more to say to Phineas Finn . but yet he find himself 
 create plan for encounter and conquer the parliamentary 
 fiend who be at present so cruelly potent with his pupil . it be not 
 till the third evening that he tell his wife that Finn have make up 
 his mind not to take chamber . " then I would have nothing more to say 
 to he , " say Mrs. Low , savagely . " for the present I can have nothing 
 more to say to he . " " but neither now nor ever , " say Mrs. Low , with 
 great emphasis ; " he have be false to you . " " no , " say Mr. Low , who 
 be a man thoroughly and thoughtfully just at all point ; " he have not 
 be false to I . he have always mean what he have say , when he be 
 say it . but he be weak and blind , and fly like a moth to the 
 candle ; one pity the poor moth , and would save he a stump of his 
 wing if it be possible . " 
 Phineas , when he have write his letter to Mr. Low , start off for 
 Lincoln 's Inn , make his way through the well - know dreary street 
 of Soho , and through St. Giles 's , to Long Acre . he know every corner 
 well , for he have walk the same road almost daily for the last three 
 year . he have conceive a liking for the route , which he might easily 
 have change without much addition to the distance , by pass 
 through Oxford Street and Holborn ; but there be an air of business 
 on which he pride himself in go by the most direct passage , and 
 he declare to himself very often that thing dreary and dingy to the 
 eye might be good in themselves . Lincoln 's inn itself be dingy , and 
 the Law Courts therein be perhaps the mean in which Equity ever 
 disclose herself . Mr. Low 's three room in the Old Square , each of 
 they brown with the binding of law book and with the dust collect 
 on law paper , and with furniture that have be brown always , and have 
 become browner with year , be perhaps as unattractive to the eye of 
 a young pupil as any room which be ever enter . and the study of 
 the Chancery law itself be not an alluring pursuit till the mind have 
 come to have some insight into the beauty of its ultimate object . 
 Phineas , during his three year ' course of reasoning on these thing , 
 have teach himself to believe that thing ugly on the outside might 
 be very beautiful within ; and have therefore come to prefer cross 
 Poland Street and Soho Square , and so continue his travel by the 
 Seven Dials and Long Acre . his morning walk be of a piece with his 
 morning study , and he take pleasure in the gloom of both . but now 
 the taste of his palate have be already change by the glare of 
 the lamp in and about palatial Westminster , and he find that St. 
 Giles 's be disagreeable . the way about Pall Mall and across the 
 Park to Parliament Street , or to the Treasury , be much pleasanter , 
 and the new office in Downing Street , already half build , absorb 
 all that interest which he have hitherto be able to take in 
 the suggest but uncommenced erection of new Law Courts in the 
 neighbourhood of Lincoln 's Inn . as he make his way to the porter 's 
 lodge under the great gateway of Lincoln 's Inn , he tell himself that 
 he be glad that he have escape , at any rate for a while , from a life 
 so dull and dreary . if he could only sit in chamber at the Treasury 
 instead of chamber in that old court , how much pleasanter it would 
 be ! after all , as regard that question of income , it might well be 
 that the Treasury chamber should be the more remunerative , and the 
 more quickly remunerative , of the two . and , as he think , Lady Laura 
 might be compatible with the Treasury chamber and Parliament , but 
 could not possibly be make compatible with Old Square , Lincoln 's Inn . 
 but nevertheless there come upon he a feeling of sorrow when the 
 old man at the lodge seem to be rather glad than otherwise that 
 he do not want the chamber . " then Mr. Green can have they , " say 
 the porter ; " that will be good news for Mr. Green . I do not   know what 
 the gen'leman will do for chamber if thing go on as they be 
 go . " Mr. Green be welcome to the chamber as far as Phineas be 
 concern ; but Phineas feel nevertheless a certain amount of regret 
 that he should have be compel to abandon a thing which be 
 regard both by the porter and by Mr. Green as be so desirable . 
 he have however write his letter to Mr. Low , and make his promise to 
 Barrington Erle , and be bind to Lady Laura Standish ; and he walk 
 out through the old gateway into Chancery Lane , resolve that he 
 would not even visit Lincoln 's inn again for a year . there be 
 certain book , - law book , - which he would read at such interval of 
 leisure as politic might give he ; but within the precinct of the 
 Inns of Court he would not again put his foot for twelve month , let 
 learn pundit of the law , - such for instance as Mr. and Mrs. 
 Low , - say what they might . 
 he have tell Mrs. Bunce , before he leave his home after breakfast , that 
 he should for the present remain under her roof . she have be much 
 gratify , not simply because lodging in Great Marlborough Street 
 be less readily let than chamber in Lincoln 's Inn , but also because 
 it be a great honour to she to have a member of Parliament in her 
 house . member of Parliament be not so common about Oxford Street as 
 they be in the neighbourhood of Pall Mall and St. James 's Square . 
 but Mr. Bunce , when he come home to his dinner , do not join as 
 heartily as he should have do in his wife 's rejoicing . Mr. Bunce 
 be in the employment of certain copying law - stationer in Carey 
 Street , and have a strong belief in the law as a profession ; - but he 
 have none whatever in the House of Commons . " and he be give up go 
 into chamber ? " say Mr. Bunce to his wife . 
 " give it up altogether for the present , " say Mrs. Bunce . 
 " and he do not   mean to have no clerk ? " say Mr. Bunce . 
 " not unless it be for his Parliament work . " 
 " there be not   no clerk want for that , and what be bad , there be not 
 no fee to pay them . I will tell you what it be , Jane ; - if you do not 
 look sharp there will not   be nothing to pay you before long . " 
 " and he in Parliament , Jacob ! " 
 " there be not   no salary for be in Parliament . there be score of 
 they Parliament gent be not   get so much as'll pay their dinner for 
 them . and then if anybody do trust them , there be no getting at them 
 to make them pay as there be at other folk . " 
 " I do not   know that our Mr. Phineas will ever be like that , Jacob . " 
 " that be gammon , Jane . that be the way as woman get themselves take in 
 always . our Mr. Phineas ! why should our Mr. Phineas be well than 
 anybody else ? " 
 " he be always act handsome , Jacob . " 
 " there be one time he could not pay his lodging for wellnigh nine 
 month , till his governor come down with the money . I do not   know 
 whether that be handsome . it knock I about terrible , I know . " 
 " he always mean honest , Jacob . " 
 " I do not   know that I care much for a man 's meaning when he run 
 short of money . how be he go to see his way , with his seat in 
 Parliament , and this give up of his profession ? he owe we near a 
 quarter now . " 
 " he pay I two month this morning , Jacob ; so he do not   owe a 
 farthing . " 
 " very well ; - so much the well for we . I shall just have a few word 
 with Mr. Low , and see what he say to it . for myself I do not   think 
 half so much of Parliament folk as some do . they be for promise 
 everything before they be elect ; but not one in twenty of them be as 
 good as his word when he get there . " 
 Mr. Bunce be a copying journeyman , who spend ten hour a day in 
 Carey Street with a pen between his finger ; and after that he would 
 often spend two or three hour of the night with a pen between his 
 finger in Marlborough Street . he be a thoroughly hard - work man , 
 do pretty well in the world , for he have a good house over his 
 head , and always could find raiment and bread for his wife and 
 eight child ; but , nevertheless , he be an unhappy man because he 
 suffer from political grievance , or , I should more correctly say , 
 that his grievance be semi - political and semi - social . he have no 
 vote , not be himself the tenant of the house in Great Marlborough 
 Street . the tenant be a tailor who occupy the shop , whereas Bunce 
 occupy the whole of the remainder of the premise . he be a lodger , 
 and lodger be not as yet trust with the franchise . and he have 
 idea , which he himself admit to be very raw , as to the injustice 
 of the manner in which he be pay for his work . so much a folio , 
 without reference to the way in which his work be do , without 
 regard to the success of his work , with no question ask of 
 himself , be , as he think , no proper way of remunerate a man for 
 his labour . he have long since join a Trade Union , and for two 
 year past have pay a subscription of a shilling a week towards its 
 fund . he long to be do some battle against his superior , and 
 to be put himself in opposition to his employer ; - not that he 
 object personally to Messrs. Foolscap , Margin , and Vellum , who 
 always make much of he as a useful man ; - but because some such 
 antagonism would be manly , and the fighting of some battle would 
 be the right thing to do . " if Labour do not   mean to go to the wall 
 himself , " Bunce would say to his wife , " labour must look alive , and 
 put somebody else there . " 
 Mrs. Bunce be a comfortable motherly woman , who love her husband 
 but hat politic . as he have an aversion to his superior in the 
 world because they be superior , so have she a liking for they for 
 the same reason . she despise people poor than herself , and think 
 it a fair subject for boast that her child always have meat for 
 dinner . if it be ever so small a morsel , she take care that they have 
 it , in order that the boast might be maintain . the world have once 
 or twice be almost too much for she , - when , for instance , her 
 husband have be ill ; and again , to tell the truth , for the last 
 three month of that long period in which Phineas have omit to pay 
 his bill ; but she have keep a fine brave heart during those trouble , 
 and could honestly swear that the child always have a bit of 
 meat , though she herself have be occasionally without it for day 
 together . at such time she would be more than ordinarily meek to 
 Mr. Margin , and especially courteous to the old lady who lodge in 
 her first - floor drawing - room , - for Phineas live up two pair of 
 stair , - and she would excuse such servility by declare that there 
 be no know how soon she might want assistance . but her husband , 
 in such emergency , would become furious and quarrelsome , and would 
 declare that Labour be go to the wall , and that something very 
 strong must be do at once . that shilling which Bunce pay weekly to 
 the Union she regard as be absolutely throw away , - as much so 
 as though he cast it weekly into the Thames . and she have tell he so , 
 over and over again , make heart - pierce allusion to the eight 
 child and to the bit of meat . he would always endeavour to explain 
 to she that there be no other way under the sun for keep Labour 
 from be send to the wall ; - but he would do so hopelessly and 
 altogether ineffectually , and she have come to regard he as a lunatic 
 to the extent of that one weekly shilling . 
 she have a woman 's instinctive partiality for comeliness in a man , and 
 be very fond of Phineas Finn because he be handsome . and now she 
 be very proud of he because he be a member of Parliament . she 
 have hear , - from her husband , who have tell she the fact with much 
 disgust , - that the son of Dukes and Earls go into Parliament , and 
 she like to think that the fine young man to whom she talk more 
 or less every day should sit with the son of Dukes and Earls . when 
 Phineas have really bring distress upon she by owe she some thirty 
 or forty pound , she could never bring herself to be angry with 
 he , - because he be handsome and because he din out with Lords . 
 and she have triumph greatly over her husband , who have desire to be 
 severe upon his aristocratic debtor , when the money have all be pay 
 in a lump . 
 " I do not   know that he be any great catch , " Bunce have say , when the 
 prospect of their lodger 's departure have be debate between they . 
 " Jacob , " say his wife , " I do not   think you feel it when you have   get 
 people respectable about you . " 
 " the only respectable man I know , " say Jacob , " be the man as earn 
 his bread ; and Mr. Finn , as I take it , be a long way from that yet . " 
 Phineas return to his lodging before he go down to his club , and 
 again tell Mrs. Bunce that he have altogether make up his mind about 
 the chamber . " if you will keep I I shall stay here for the first 
 session I daresay . " 
 " of course we shall be only too proud , Mr. Finn ; and though it may not 
 perhaps be quite the place for a member of Parliament - " 
 " but I think it be quite the place . " 
 " it be very good of you to say so , Mr. Finn , and we will do our very 
 good to make you comfortable . respectable we be , I may say ; and 
 though Bunce be a bit rough sometimes - " 
 " never to I , Mrs. Bunce . " 
 " but he be rough , - and silly , too , with his radical nonsense , pay 
 a shilling a week to a nasty Union just for nothing . still he mean 
 well , and there be not   a man who work hard for his wife and 
 child ; - that I will say of he . and if he do talk politic - " 
 " but I like a man to talk politic , Mrs. Bunce . " 
 " for a gentleman in Parliament of course it be proper ; but I never 
 could see what good it could do to a law - stationer ; and when he talk 
 of Labour go to the wall , I always ask he whether he do not   get 
 his wage regular last Saturday . but , Lord love you , Mr. Finn , when a 
 man as be a journeyman have take up politic and join a Trade Union , 
 he be not   no well than a milestone for his wife to take and talk to 
 he . " 
 after that Phineas go down to the Reform Club , and make one of 
 those who be buzz there in little crowd and utter their 
 prophecy as to future event . Lord de Terrier be to go out . that 
 be certain . whether Mr. Mildmay be to come in be uncertain . that 
 he would go to Windsor to - morrow morning be not to be doubt ; but 
 it be think very probable that he might plead his age , and decline 
 to undertake the responsibility of form a Ministry . 
 " and what then ? " say Phineas to his friend Fitzgibbon . 
 " why , then there will be a choice out of three . there be the Duke , 
 who be the most incompetent man in England ; there be Monk , who be the 
 most unfit ; and there be Gresham , who be the most unpopular . I can not 
 conceive it possible to find a bad Prime Minister than either of 
 the three ; - but the country afford no other . " 
 " and which would Mildmay name ? " 
 " all of they , - one after the other , so as to make the embarrassment 
 the great . " that be Mr. Fitzgibbon 's description of the crisis ; 
 but then it be understand that Mr. Fitzgibbon be give to 
 romance . 
 CHAPTER VIII 
 the News about Mr. Mildmay and Sir Everard 
 Fitzgibbon and Phineas start together from Pall Mall for Portman 
 Square , - as both of they have promise to call on Lady Laura , - but 
 Fitzgibbon turn in at Brooks 's as they walk up St. James 's 
 Square , and Phineas go on by himself in a cab . " you should belong 
 here , " say Fitzgibbon as his friend enter the cab , and Phineas 
 immediately begin to feel that he would have do nothing till he 
 could get into Brooks 's . it might be very well to begin by talk 
 politic at the Reform Club . such talking have procure for he his 
 seat at Loughshane . but that be do now , and something more than 
 talk be want for any further progress . nothing , as he tell 
 himself , of political import be manage at the Reform Club . no 
 influence from thence be ever bring to bear upon the adjustment of 
 place under the Government , or upon the arrangement of cabinet . it 
 might be very well to count vote at the Reform Club ; but after the 
 vote have be count , - have be count successfully , - Brooks 's be 
 the place , as Phineas believe , to learn at the early moment what 
 would be the exact result of the success . he must get into Brooks 's , 
 if it might be possible for he . Fitzgibbon be not exactly the man 
 to propose he . perhaps the Earl of Brentford would do it . 
 Lady Laura be at home , and with she be sit - Mr. Kennedy . 
 Phineas have intend to be triumphant as he enter Lady Laura 's 
 room . he be there with the express purpose of triumphing in the 
 success of their great party , and of sing a pleasant paean in 
 conjunction with Lady Laura . but his trumpet be put out of tune at 
 once when he see Mr. Kennedy . he say hardly a word as he give his 
 hand to Lady Laura , - and then afterwards to Mr. Kennedy , who choose 
 to greet he with this show of cordiality . 
 " I hope you be satisfied , Mr. Finn , " say Lady Laura , laugh . 
 " oh yes . " 
 " and be that all ? I think to have find your joy quite 
 irrepressible . " 
 " a bottle of soda - water , though it be a very lively thing when 
 open , will not   maintain its vivacity beyond a certain period , Lady 
 Laura . " 
 " and you have have your gas let off already ? " 
 " well , - yes ; at any rate , the sputtering part of it . nineteen be very 
 well , but the question be whether we might not have have twenty - one . " 
 " Mr. Kennedy have just be say that not a single available vote 
 have be miss on our side . he have just come from Brooks 's , and that 
 seem to be what they say there . " 
 so Mr. Kennedy also be a member of Brooks 's ! at the Reform Club 
 there certainly have be an idea that the number might have be 
 swell to twenty - one ; but then , as Phineas begin to understand , 
 nothing be correctly know at the Reform Club . for an accurate 
 appreciation of the political balance of the day , you must go to 
 Brooks 's . 
 " Mr. Kennedy must of course be right , " say Phineas . " I do not 
 belong to Brooks 's myself . but I be only joke , Lady Laura . there 
 be , I suppose , no doubt that Lord de Terrier be out , and that be 
 everything . " 
 " he have probably tender his resignation , " say Mr. Kennedy . 
 " that be the same thing , " say Phineas , roughly . 
 " not exactly , " say Lady Laura . " should there be any difficulty about 
 Mr. Mildmay , he might , at the Queen 's request , make another attempt . " 
 " with a majority of nineteen against he ! " say Phineas . " surely Mr. 
 Mildmay be not the only man in the country . there be the Duke , and 
 there be Mr. Gresham , - and there be Mr. Monk . " Phineas have at his 
 tongue 's end all the lesson that he have be able to learn at the 
 Reform Club . 
 " I should hardly think the Duke would venture , " say Mr. Kennedy . 
 " nothing venture , nothing have , " say Phineas . " it be all very well 
 to say that the Duke be incompetent , but I do not know that anything 
 very wonderful be require in the way of genius . the Duke have hold 
 his own in both Houses successfully , and he be both honest and 
 popular . I quite agree that a Prime Minister at the present day 
 should be commonly honest , and more than commonly popular . " 
 " so you be all for the Duke , be you ? " say Lady Laura , again 
 smile as she speak to he . 
 " certainly ; - if we be desert by Mr. Mildmay . do not   you think so ? " 
 " I do not   find it quite so easy to make up my mind as you do . I be 
 inclined to think that Mr. Mildmay will form a government ; and as 
 long as there be that prospect , I need hardly commit myself to an 
 opinion as to his probable successor . " then the objectionable Mr. 
 Kennedy take his leave , and Phineas be leave alone with Lady Laura . 
 " it be glorious ; - be it not ? " he begin , as soon as he find the field 
 to be open for himself and his own manoeuvring . but he be very 
 young , and have not as yet learn the manner in which he might well 
 advance his cause with such a woman as Lady Laura Standish . he be 
 tell she too clearly that he could have no gratification in 
 talk with she unless he could be allow to have she all to 
 himself . that might be very well if Lady Laura be in love with he , 
 but would hardly be the way to reduce she to that condition . 
 " Mr. Finn , " say she , smile as she speak , " I be sure that you do 
 not mean it , but you be uncourteous to my friend Mr. Kennedy . " 
 " who ? I ? be I ? upon my word , I do not   intend to be uncourteous . " 
 " if I have think you have intend it , of course I could not tell you 
 of it . and now I take the liberty ; - for it be a liberty - " 
 " oh no . " 
 " because I feel so anxious that you should do nothing to mar your 
 chance as a rise man . " 
 " you be only too kind to I , - always . " 
 " I know how clever you be , and how excellent be all your instinct ; 
 but I see that you be a little impetuous . I wonder whether you will 
 be angry if I take upon myself the task of mentor . " 
 " nothing you could say would make I angry , - though you might make I 
 very unhappy . " 
 " I will not do that if I can help it . a mentor ought to be very old , 
 you know , and I be infinitely old than you be . " 
 " I should have think it be the reverse ; - indeed , I may say that I 
 know that it be , " say Phineas . 
 " I be not talk of year . year have very little to do with the 
 comparative age of man and woman . a woman at forty be quite old , 
 whereas a man at forty be young . " Phineas , remember that he have 
 put down Mr. Kennedy 's age as forty in his own mind , frown when 
 he hear this , and walk about the room in displeasure . " and 
 therefore , " continue Lady Laura , " I talk to you as though I be a 
 kind of grandmother . " 
 " you shall be my great - grandmother if you will only be kind enough to 
 I to say what you really think . " 
 " you must not then be so impetuous , and you must be a little 
 more careful to be civil to person to whom you may not take any 
 particular fancy . now Mr. Kennedy be a man who may be very useful to 
 you . " 
 " I do not want Mr. Kennedy to be of use to I . " 
 " that be what I call be impetuous , - be young , - be a boy . why 
 should not Mr. Kennedy be of use to you as well as any one else ? you 
 do not mean to conquer the world all by yourself . " 
 " no ; - but there be something mean to I in the express idea that 
 I should make use of any man , - and more especially of a man whom I 
 do not   like . " 
 " and why do you not like he , Mr. Finn ? " 
 " because he be one of my Dr. Fells . " 
 " you do not   like he simply because he do not talk much . that 
 may be a good reason why you should not make of he an intimate 
 companion , - because you like talkative people ; but it should be no 
 ground for dislike . " 
 Phineas pause for a moment before he answer she , think whether 
 or not it would be well to ask she some question which might produce 
 from she a truth which he would not like to hear . then he do ask it . 
 " and do you like he ? " he say . 
 she too pause , but only for a second . " yes , - I think I may say that 
 I do like he . " 
 " no more than that ? " 
 " certainly no more than that ; - but that I think be a great deal . " 
 " I wonder what you would say if any one ask you whether you like 
 I , " say Phineas , look away from she through the window . 
 " just the same ; - but without the doubt , if the person who question 
 I have any right to ask the question . there be not above one or two 
 who could have such a right . " 
 " and I be wrong , of course , to ask it about Mr. Kennedy , " say 
 Phineas , look out into the Square . 
 " I do not say so . " 
 " but I see you think it . " 
 " you see nothing of the kind . I be quite willing to be ask the 
 question by you , and quite willing to answer it . Mr. Kennedy be a man 
 of great wealth . " 
 " what can that have to do with it ? " 
 " wait a moment , you impetuous irish boy , and hear I out . " Phineas 
 like be call an impetuous irish boy , and come close to she , 
 sit where he could look up into her face ; and there come a smile 
 upon his own , and he be very handsome . " I say that he be a man of 
 great wealth , " continue Lady Laura ; " and as wealth give influence , 
 he be of great use , - politically , - to the party to which he belong . " 
 " oh , politically ! " 
 " be I to suppose you care nothing for politic ? to such man , to man 
 who think as you think , who be to sit on the same bench with 
 yourself , and go into the same lobby and be see at the same club , 
 it be your duty to be civil both for your own sake and for that of 
 the cause . it be for the hermit of society to indulge in personal 
 disliking , - for man who have never be active and never mean to be 
 active . I have be tell Mr. Kennedy how much I think of you , - as 
 a good Liberal . " 
 " and I come in and spoilt it all . " 
 " yes , you do . you knock down my little house , and I must build it 
 all up again . " 
 " do not   trouble yourself , Lady Laura . " 
 " I shall . it will be a great deal of trouble , - a great deal , indeed ; 
 but I shall take it . I mean you to be very intimate with Mr. Kennedy , 
 and to shoot his grouse , and to stalk his deer , and to help to 
 keep he in progress as a liberal member of Parliament . I be quite 
 prepared to admit , as a friend , that he would go back without some 
 such help . " 
 " oh ; - I understand . " 
 " I do not believe that you do understand at all , but I must endeavour 
 to make you do so by degree . if you be to be my political pupil , 
 you must at any rate be obedient . the next time you meet Mr. Kennedy , 
 ask he his opinion instead of tell he your own . he have be in 
 Parliament twelve year , and he be a good deal old than you when 
 he begin . " at this moment a side door be open , and the red - haired , 
 red - bearded man whom Phineas have see before enter the room . he 
 hesitate a moment , as though he be go to retreat again , and 
 then begin to pull about the book and toy which lie on one of the 
 distant table , as though he be in quest of some article . and he 
 would have retreat have not Lady Laura call to he . 
 " Oswald , " she say , " let I introduce you to Mr. Finn . Mr. Finn , I do 
 not think you have ever meet my brother , Lord Chiltern . " then the two 
 young man bow , and each of they mutter something . " do not be in a 
 hurry , Oswald . you have nothing special to take you away . here be Mr. 
 Finn come to tell we who be all the possible new Prime Ministers . he 
 be uncivil enough not to have name papa . " 
 " my father be out of the question , " say Lord Chiltern . 
 " of course he be , " say Lady Laura , " but I may be allow my little 
 joke . " 
 " I suppose he will at any rate be in the Cabinet , " say Phineas . 
 " I know nothing whatever about politic , " say Lord Chiltern . 
 " I wish you do , " say his sister , - " with all my heart . " 
 " I never do , - and I never shall , for all your wishing . it be the 
 mean trade go I think , and I be sure it be the most dishonest . 
 they talk of leg on the turf , and of course there be leg ; but what 
 be they to the leg in the House ? I do not   know whether you be in 
 Parliament , Mr. Finn . " 
 " yes , I be ; but do not mind I . " 
 " I beg your pardon . of course there be honest man there , and no 
 doubt you be one of they . " 
 " he be indifferent honest , - as yet , " say Lady Laura . 
 " I be speak of man who go into Parliament to look after 
 Government place , " say Lord Chiltern . 
 " that be just what I be do , " say Phineas . " why should not a man 
 serve the Crown ? he have to work very hard for what he earn . " 
 " I do not   believe that the most of they work at all . however , I beg 
 your pardon . I do not   mean you in particular . " 
 " Mr. Finn be such a thorough politician that he will never forgive 
 you , " say Lady Laura . 
 " yes , I will , " say Phineas , " and I will convert he some day . if he 
 do come into the House , Lady Laura , I suppose he will come on the 
 right side ? " 
 " I will never go into the House , as you call it , " say Lord Chiltern . 
 " but , I will tell you what ; I shall be very happy if you will dine with 
 I to - morrow at Moroni 's . they give you a capital little dinner at 
 Moroni 's , and they have   the good Chateau Yquem in London . " 
 " do , " say Lady Laura , in a whisper . " oblige I . " 
 Phineas be engage to dine with one of the Vice - Chancellors on the 
 day name . he have never before din at the house of this great law 
 luminary , whose acquaintance he have make through Mr. Low , and he have 
 think a great deal of the occasion . Mrs. Freemantle have send he 
 the invitation nearly a fortnight ago , and he understand there be to 
 be an elaborate dinner party . he do not know it for a fact , but he 
 be in hope of meet the expire Lord Chancellor . he consider 
 it to be his duty never to throw away such a chance . he would in 
 all respect have prefer Mr. Freemantle 's dinner in Eaton Place , 
 dull and heavy though it might probably be , to the chance of Lord 
 Chiltern 's companion at Moroni 's . whatever might be the fault of 
 our hero , he be not give to what be generally call dissipation 
 by the world at large , - by which the world mean self - indulgence . he 
 care not a brass farthe for Moroni 's Chateau Yquem , nor for the 
 wondrously study repast which he would doubtless find prepare for 
 he at that celebrated establishment in St. James 's Street ; - not a 
 farthing as compare with the chance of meet so great a man as 
 Lord Moles . and Lord Chiltern 's friend might probably be just the 
 man whom he would not desire to know . but Lady Laura 's request 
 overrode everything with he . she have ask he to oblige she , and of 
 course he would do so . have he be go to dine with the incoming 
 Prime Minister , he would have put off his engagement at her request . 
 he be not quick enough to make an answer without hesitation ; but 
 after a moment 's pause he say he should be most happy to dine with 
 Lord Chiltern at Moroni 's . 
 " that be right ; 7.30 sharp , - only I can tell you you will not   meet any 
 other member . " then the servant announce more visitor , and Lord 
 Chiltern escape out of the room before he be see by the new 
 comer . these be Mrs. Bonteen and Laurence Fitzgibbon , and then Mr. 
 Bonteen , - and after they Mr. Ratler , the Whip , who be in a violent 
 hurry , and do not stay there a moment , and then Barrington Erle and 
 young Lord James Fitz - Howard , the young son of the Duke of St. 
 Bungay . in twenty or thirty minute there be a gathering of liberal 
 political notability in Lady Laura 's drawing - room . there be two 
 great piece of news by which they be all enthral . Mr. Mildmay 
 would not be Prime Minister , and Sir Everard Powell be - dead . of 
 course nothing quite positive could be know about Mr. Mildmay . he 
 be to be with the Queen at Windsor on the morrow at eleven o'clock , 
 and it be improbable that he would tell his mind to any one before 
 he tell it to her Majesty . but there be no doubt that he have engage 
 " the Duke , " - so he be call by Lord James , - to go down to Windsor 
 with he , that he might be in readiness if want . " I have learn 
 that at home , " say Lord James , who have just hear the news from his 
 sister , who have hear it from the Duchess . Lord James be delighted 
 with the importance give to he by his father 's come journey . 
 from this , and from other equally well - know circumstance , it be 
 surmise that Mr. Mildmay would decline the task propose to he . 
 this , nevertheless , be only a surmise , - whereas the fact with 
 reference to Sir Everard be fully substantiate . the gout have fly 
 to his stomach , and he be dead . " by - - yes ; as dead as a herring , " 
 say Mr. Ratler , who at that moment , however , be not within hearing 
 of either of the lady present . and then he rub his hand , and 
 look as though he be delighted . and he be delighted , - not 
 because his old friend Sir Everard be dead , but by the excitement 
 of the tragedy . " have do so good a deed in his last moment , " 
 say Laurence Fitzgibbon , " we may take it for grant that he will 
 go straight to heaven . " " I hope there will be no crowner 's quest , 
 Ratler , " say Mr. Bonteen ; " if there be I do not   know how you will 
 get out of it . " " I do not   see anything in it so horrible , " say 
 Mr. Ratler . " if a fellow die lead his regiment we do not   think 
 anything of it . Sir Everard 's vote be of more service to his country 
 than anything that a colonel or a captain can do . " but nevertheless 
 I think that Mr. Ratler be somewhat in dread of future newspaper 
 paragraph , should it be find necessary to summon a coroner 's 
 inquisition to sit upon poor Sir Everard . 
 while this be go on Lady Laura take Phineas apart for a moment . 
 " I be so much oblige to you ; I be indeed , " she say . 
 " what nonsense ! " 
 " never mind whether it be nonsense or not ; - but I be . I can not   explain 
 it all now , but I do so want you to know my brother . you may be of 
 the great service to he , - of the very great . he be not half so 
 bad as people say he be . in many way he be very good , - very good . 
 and he be very clever . " 
 " at any rate I will think and believe no ill of he . " 
 " just so ; - do not believe evil of he , - not more evil than you see . I 
 be so anxious , - so very anxious to try to put he on his leg , and I 
 find it so difficult to get any connect link with he . papa will 
 not speak with he , - because of money . " 
 " but he be friend with you . " 
 " yes ; I think he love I . I see how distasteful it be to you to go 
 to he ; - and probably you be engage ? " 
 " one can always get off those sort of thing if there be an object . " 
 " yes ; - just so . and the object be to oblige I ; - be it not ? " 
 " of course it be . but I must go now . we be to hear Daubeny 's 
 statement at four , and I would not miss it for world . " 
 " I wonder whether you would go abroad with my brother in the autumn ? 
 but I have no right to think of such a thing ; - have I ? at any rate 
 I will not think of it yet . good - bye , - I shall see you perhaps on 
 Sunday if you be in town . " 
 Phineas walk down to Westminster with his mind very full of Lady 
 Laura and Lord Chiltern . what do she mean by her affectionate 
 manner to himself , and what do she mean by the continual praise 
 which she lavish upon Mr. Kennedy ? of whom be she think most , 
 of Mr. Kennedy , or of he ? she have call herself his mentor . be 
 the description of her feeling towards himself , as convey in that 
 name , of a kind to be gratify to he ? no ; - he think not . but 
 then might it not be within his power to change the nature of those 
 feeling ? she be not in love with he at present . he could not make 
 any boast to himself on that head . but it might be within his power 
 to compel she to love he . the female mentor might be soften . that 
 she could not love Mr. Kennedy , he think that he be quite sure . 
 there be nothing like love in her manner to Mr. Kennedy . as to Lord 
 Chiltern , Phineas would do whatever might be in his power . all that 
 he really know of Lord Chiltern be that he have gamble and that he 
 have drunk . 
 CHAPTER IX 
 the New Government 
 in the House of Lords that night , and in the House of Commons , the 
 outgoing Ministers make their explanation . as our business at the 
 present moment be with the Commons , we will confine ourselves to 
 their chamber , and will do so the more willingly because the upshot 
 of what be say in the two place be the same . the outgoing 
 minister be very grave , very self - laudatory , and very courteous . 
 in regard to courtesy it may be declare that no stranger to the 
 way of the place could have understand how such soft word could be 
 speak by Mr. Daubeny , beat , so quickly after the very sharp word 
 which he have utter when he only expect to be beat . he announce 
 to his fellow - commoner that his right honourable friend and 
 colleague Lord de Terrier have think it right to retire from the 
 Treasury . Lord de Terrier , in constitutional obedience to the vote 
 of the Lower House , have resign , and the Queen have be graciously 
 pleased to accept Lord de Terrier 's resignation . Mr. Daubeny could 
 only inform the House that her Majesty have signify her pleasure 
 that Mr. Mildmay should wait upon she to - morrow at eleven o'clock . 
 Mr. Mildmay , - so Mr. Daubeny understand , - would be with her Majesty 
 to - morrow at that hour . Lord de Terrier have find it to be his duty 
 to recommend her Majesty to send for Mr. Mildmay . such be the real 
 import of Mr. Daubeny 's speech . that further portion of it in which 
 he explain with blandest , most beneficent , honey - flow word that 
 his party would have do everything that the country could require 
 of any party , have the House allow it to remain on the Treasury 
 bench for a month or two , - and explain also that his party would 
 never recriminate , would never return evil for evil , would in no wise 
 copy the factious opposition of their adversary ; that his party 
 would now , as it ever have do , carry itself with the meekness of 
 the dove , and the wisdom of the serpent , - all this , I say , be so 
 generally feel by gentleman on both side of the House to be " leather 
 and prunella " that very little attention be pay to it . the great 
 point be that Lord de Terrier have resign , and that Mr. Mildmay have 
 be summon to Windsor . 
 the Queen have send for Mr. Mildmay in compliance with advice give 
 to she by Lord de Terrier . and yet Lord de Terrier and his first 
 lieutenant have use all the most practised effort of their eloquence 
 for the last three day in endeavour to make their countryman 
 believe that no more unfit Minister than Mr. Mildmay ever 
 attempt to hold the rein of office ! nothing have be too bad 
 for they to say of Mr. Mildmay , - and yet , in the very first moment 
 in which they find themselves unable to carry on the Government 
 themselves , they advise the Queen to send for that most incompetent 
 and baneful statesman ! we who be conversant with our own method of 
 politic , see nothing odd in this , because we be use to it ; but 
 surely in the eye of stranger our practice must be very singular . 
 there be nothing like it in any other country , - nothing as yet . 
 nowhere else be there the same good - humour , affectionate , 
 prize - fight ferocity in politic . the leader of our two great 
 party be to each other exactly as be the two champion of the 
 ring who knock each other about for the belt and for five hundred 
 pound a side once in every two year . how they fly at each other , 
 strike as though each blow should carry death if it be but 
 possible ! and yet there be no one whom the Birmingham Bantam 
 respect so highly as he do Bill Burns the Brighton Bully , or with 
 whom he have so much delight in discuss the merit of a pot of 
 half - and - half . and so it be with Mr. Daubeny and Mr. Mildmay . in 
 private life Mr. Daubeny almost adulate his eld rival , - and Mr. 
 Mildmay never omit an opportunity of take Mr. Daubeny warmly by 
 the hand . it be not so in the United States . there the same political 
 enmity exist , but the political enmity produce private hatred . the 
 leader of party there really mean what they say when they abuse 
 each other , and be in earnest when they talk as though they be 
 about to tear each other limb from limb . I doubt whether Mr. Daubeny 
 would have injure a hair of Mr. Mildmay 's venerable head , even for 
 an assurance of six continue month in office . 
 when Mr. Daubeny have complete his statement , Mr. Mildmay simply tell 
 the House that he have receive and would obey her Majesty 's command . 
 the House would of course understand that he by no mean mean to 
 aver that the Queen would even commission he to form a Ministry . but 
 if he take no such command from her Majesty it would become his duty 
 to recommend her Majesty to impose the task upon some other person . 
 then everything be say that have to be say , and member return to 
 their club . a certain damp be throw over the joy of some excitable 
 Liberals by tiding which reach the House during Mr. Daubeny 's 
 speech . Sir Everard Powell be no more dead than be Mr. Daubeny 
 himself . now it be very unpleasant to find that your news be untrue , 
 when you have be at great pain to disseminate it . " oh , but he be 
 dead , " say Mr. Ratler . " Lady Powell assure I half an hour ago , " 
 say Mr. Ratler 's opponent , " that he be at that moment a great deal 
 well than he have be for the last three month . the journey down 
 to the House do he a world of good . " " then we will have he down for 
 every division , " say Mr. Ratler . 
 the political portion of London be in a ferment for the next five 
 day . on the Sunday morning it be know that Mr. Mildmay have 
 decline to put himself at the head of a liberal government . he and 
 the Duke of St. Bungay , and Mr. Plantagenet Palliser , have be in 
 conference so often , and so long , that it may almost be say they 
 live together in conference . then Mr. Gresham have be with Mr. 
 Mildmay , - and Mr. Monk also . at the club it be say by many that 
 Mr. Monk have be with Mr. Mildmay ; but it be also say very 
 vehemently by other that no such interview have take place . Mr. Monk 
 be a Radical , much admire by the people , sit in Parliament for 
 that most radical of all constituency , the Pottery Hamlets , who 
 have never as yet be in power . it be the great question of the day 
 whether Mr. Mildmay would or would not ask Mr. Monk to join he ; and 
 it be say by those who habitually think at every period of change 
 that the time have now come in which the difficulty to form a 
 government will at last be find to be insuperable , that Mr. Mildmay 
 could not succeed either with Mr. Monk or without he . there be at 
 the present moment two section of these gentleman , - the section 
 which declare that Mr. Mildmay have send for Mr. Monk , and the 
 section which declare that he have not . but there be other , who 
 perhaps know well what they be say , by whom it be assert 
 that the whole difficulty lie with Mr. Gresham . Mr. Gresham be 
 willing to serve with Mr. Mildmay , - with certain stipulation as 
 to the special seat in the Cabinet which he himself be to occupy , 
 and as to the introduction of certain friend of his own ; but , - so 
 say these gentleman who be suppose really to understand the 
 matter , - Mr. Gresham be not willing to serve with the Duke and with 
 Mr. Palliser . now , everybody who know anything know that the Duke 
 and Mr. Palliser be indispensable to Mr. Mildmay . and a liberal 
 Government , with Mr. Gresham in the opposition , could not live half 
 through a session ! all Sunday and Monday these thing be discuss ; 
 and on the Monday Lord de Terrier absolutely state to the Upper 
 House that he have receive her Majesty 's command to form another 
 government . Mr. Daubeny , in half a dozen most modest word , - in word 
 hardly audible , and most unlike himself , - make his statement in the 
 Lower House to the same effect . then Mr. Ratler , and Mr. Bonteen , and 
 Mr. Barrington Erle , and Mr. Laurence Fitzgibbon arouse themselves 
 and swear that such thing could not be . should the prey which they 
 have win for themselves , the spoil of their bow and arrow , be 
 snatch from out of their very mouth by treachery ? Lord de Terrier 
 and Mr. Daubeny could not venture even to make another attempt unless 
 they do so in combination with Mr. Gresham . such a combination , say 
 Mr. Barrington Erle , would be disgraceful to both party , but would 
 prove Mr. Gresham to be as false as Satan himself . early on the 
 Tuesday morning , when it be know that Mr. Gresham have be at Lord 
 de Terrier 's house , Barrington Erle be free to confess that he have 
 always be afraid of Mr. Gresham . " I have feel for year , " say he , 
 " that if anybody could break up the party it would be Mr. Gresham . " 
 on that Tuesday morning Mr. Gresham certainly be with Lord de 
 Terrier , but nothing come of it . Mr. Gresham be either not enough 
 like Satan for the occasion , or else he be too closely like he . 
 Lord de Terrier do not bid high enough , or else Mr. Gresham do not 
 like bidding from that quarter . nothing then come from this attempt , 
 and on the Tuesday afternoon the Queen again send for Mr. Mildmay . on 
 the Wednesday morning the gentleman who think that the insuperable 
 difficulty have at length arrive , begin to wear their long 
 face , and to be triumphant with melancholy foreboding . now at 
 last there be a dead lock . nobody could form a government . it 
 be assert that Mr. Mildmay have fall at her Majesty 's foot 
 dissolve in tear , and have implore to be relieve from further 
 responsibility . it be well known to many at the club that the Queen 
 have on that morning telegraph to Germany for advice . there be man 
 so gloomy as to declare that the Queen must throw herself into the 
 arm of Mr. Monk , unless Mr. Mildmay would consent to rise from his 
 knee and once more buckle on his ancient armour . " even that would 
 be well than Gresham , " say Barrington Erle , in his anger . " I will 
 tell you what it be , " say Ratler , " we shall have Gresham and Monk 
 together , and you and I shall have to do their bidding . " Mr. 
 Barrington Erle 's reply to that suggestion I may not dare to insert 
 in these page . 
 on the Wednesday night , however , it be know that everything have 
 be arrange , and before the Houses meet on the Thursday every place 
 have be bestow , either in reality or in imagination . the Times , 
 in its second edition on the Thursday , give a list of the Cabinet , in 
 which four place out of fourteen be rightly fill . on the Friday 
 it name ten place aright , and indicate the law officer , with only 
 one mistake in reference to Ireland ; and on the Saturday it give 
 a list of the under Secretaries of State , and Secretaries and 
 Vice - president generally , with wonderful correctness as to the 
 individual , though the office be a little jumbled . the government 
 be at last form in a manner which everybody have see to be the 
 only possible way in which a government could be form . nobody be 
 surprised , and the week 's work be regard as though the regular 
 routine of government making have simply be follow . Mr. Mildmay 
 be Prime Minister ; Mr. Gresham be at the Foreign Office ; Mr. Monk 
 be at the Board of Trade ; the Duke be President of the Council ; the 
 Earl of Brentford be Privy Seal ; and Mr. Palliser be Chancellor of 
 the Exchequer . Barrington Erle make a step up in the world , and go 
 to the Admiralty as Secretary ; Mr. Bonteen be send again to the 
 Admiralty ; and Laurence Fitzgibbon become a junior Lord of the 
 Treasury . Mr. Ratler be , of course , instal as Patronage Secretary 
 to the same Board . Mr. Ratler be perhaps the only man in the party 
 as to whose destination there could not possibly be a doubt . Mr. 
 Ratler have really qualify himself for a position in such a way as 
 to make all man feel that he would , as a matter of course , be call 
 upon to fill it . I do not know whether as much could be say on 
 behalf of any other man in the new Government . 
 during all this excitement , and through all these movement , Phineas 
 Finn feel himself to be leave more and more out in the cold . he have 
 not be such a fool as to suppose that any office would be offer 
 to he . he have never hint at such a thing to his one dearly 
 intimate friend , Lady Laura . he have not hitherto open his mouth in 
 Parliament . indeed , when the new Government be form he have not 
 be sit for above a fortnight . of course nothing could be do 
 for he as yet . but , nevertheless , he feel himself to be out in the 
 cold . the very man who have discuss with he the question of the 
 division , - who have discuss it with he because his vote be then as 
 good as that of any other member , - do not care to talk to he about 
 the distribution of place . he , at any rate , could not be one of 
 they . he , at any rate , could not be a rival . he could neither mar 
 nor assist . he could not be either a successful or a disappointed 
 sympathiser , - because he could not himself be a candidate . the affair 
 which perhaps disgust he more than anything else be the offer of 
 an office , - not in the Cabinet , indeed , but one suppose to confer 
 high dignity , - to Mr. Kennedy . Mr. Kennedy refuse the offer , and 
 this somewhat lessen Finn 's disgust , but the offer itself make he 
 unhappy . 
 " I suppose it be make simply because of his money , " he say to 
 Fitzgibbon . 
 " I do not   believe that , " say Fitzgibbon . " People seem to think that 
 he have get a head on his shoulder , though he have get no tongue in 
 it . I wonder at his refuse it because of the Right Honourable . " 
 " I be so glad that Mr. Kennedy refuse , " say Lady Laura to he . 
 " and why ? he would have be the Right Hon . Robert Kennedy for ever 
 and ever . " phinea when he say this do not as yet know exactly 
 how it would have come to pass that such honour , - the honour of the 
 enduring prefix to his name , - would have come in the way of Mr. 
 Kennedy have Mr. Kennedy accept the office in question ; but he be 
 very quick to learn all these thing , and , in the meantime , he rarely 
 make any mistake about they . 
 " what would that have be to he , - with his wealth ? " say Lady 
 Laura . " he have a position of his own and need not care for such 
 thing . there be man who should not attempt what be call 
 independence in Parliament . by do so they simply decline to make 
 themselves useful . but there be a few whose special walk in life it 
 be to be independent , and , as it be , unmove by party . " 
 " Great Akinetoses ! you know Orion , " say Phineas . 
 " Mr. Kennedy be not an Akinetos , " say Lady Laura . 
 " he hold a very proud position , " say Phineas , ironically . 
 " a very proud position indeed , " say Lady Laura , in sober earnest . 
 the dinner at Moroni 's have be eat , and Phineas have give an 
 account of the entertainment to Lord Chiltern 's sister . there have 
 be only two other guest , and both of they have be man on the 
 turf . " I be the first there , " say Phineas , " and he surprise I 
 ever so much by tell I that you have speak to he of I before . " 
 " yes ; I do so . I wish he to know you . I want he to know some man 
 who think of something besides horse . he be very well educate , you 
 know , and would certainly have take honour if he have not quarrel 
 with the people at Christ Church . " 
 " do he take a degree ? " 
 " no ; - they send he down . it be good always to have the truth among 
 friend . of course you will hear it some day . they expel he 
 because he be drunk . " then Lady Laura burst out into tear , and 
 Phineas sit near she , and console she , and swear that if in any way 
 he could befriend her brother he would do so . 
 Mr. Fitzgibbon at this time claim a promise which he say that 
 Phineas have make to he , - that Phineas would go over with he to Mayo 
 to assist at his re - election . and Phineas do go . the whole affair 
 occupy but a week , and be chiefly memorable as be the mean of 
 cement the friendship which exist between the two irish member . 
 " a thousand a year ! " say Laurence Fitzgibbon , speak of the salary 
 of his office . " it be not   much ; be it ? and every fellow to whom I owe 
 a shilling will be down upon I . if I have study my own comfort , I 
 should have do the same as Kennedy . " 
 CHAPTER X 
 Violet Effingham 
 it be now the middle of May , and a month have elapse since the 
 terrible difficulty about the Queen 's Government have be solve . a 
 month have elapse , and thing have shake themselves into their place 
 with more of ease and apparent fitness than man have give they credit 
 for possess . Mr. Mildmay , Mr. Gresham , and Mr. Monk be the good 
 friend in the world , swear by each other in their own house , and 
 support in the other by as gallant a phalanx of Whig peer as ever 
 be get together to fight against the instinct of their own order 
 in compliance with the instinct of those below they . Lady Laura 's 
 father be in the Cabinet , to Lady Laura 's infinite delight . it 
 be her ambition to be bring as near to political action as be 
 possible for a woman without surrender any of the privilege of 
 feminine inaction . that woman should even wish to have vote at 
 parliamentary election be to her abominable , and the cause of the 
 Rights of Women generally be odious to she ; but , nevertheless , for 
 herself , she delight in hop that she too might be useful , - in 
 think that she too be perhaps , in some degree , politically 
 powerful ; and she have receive considerable increase to such hope 
 when her father accept the Privy Seal . the Earl himself be not an 
 ambitious man , and , but for his daughter , would have sever himself 
 altogether from political life before this time . he be an unhappy 
 man ; - be an obstinate man , and have in his obstinacy quarrel 
 with his only son . in his unhappiness he would have keep himself 
 alone , live in the country , brood over his wretchedness , be 
 it not for his daughter . on her behalf , and in obedience to her 
 requirement , he come yearly up to London , and , perhaps in compliance 
 with her persuasion , have take some part in the debate of the House 
 of Lords . it be easy for a peer to be a statesman , if the trouble of 
 the life be not too much for he . Lord Brentford be now a statesman , 
 if a seat in the Cabinet be proof of statesmanship . 
 at this time , in May , there be stay with Lady Laura in Portman 
 Square a very dear friend of her , by name Violet Effingham . Violet 
 Effingham be an orphan , an heiress , and a beauty ; with a terrible 
 aunt , one Lady Baldock , who be suppose to be the dragon who have 
 Violet , as a captive maiden , in charge . but as Miss Effingham be of 
 age , and be mistress of her own fortune , Lady Baldock be , in truth , 
 not omnipotent as a dragon should be . the dragon , at any rate , be 
 not now stay in Portman Square , and the captivity of the maiden 
 be therefore not severe at the present moment . Violet Effingham be 
 very pretty , but could hardly be say to be beautiful . she be small , 
 with light crispy hair , which seem to be ever on the flutter round 
 her brow , and which yet be never a hair astray . she have sweet , soft 
 grey eye , which never look at you long , hardly for a moment , - but 
 which yet , in that half moment , nearly kill you by the power of 
 their sweetness . her cheek be the soft thing in nature , and the 
 colour of it , when its colour be fix enough to be tell , be a 
 shade of pink so faint and creamy that you would hardly dare to call 
 it by its name . her mouth be perfect , not small enough to give that 
 expression of silliness which be so common , but almost divine , with 
 the temptation of its full , rich , ruby lip . her tooth , which she but 
 seldom show , be very even and very white , and there rest on she 
 chin the dearest dimple that ever act as a loadstar to men 's eye . 
 the fault of her face , if it have a fault , be in her nose , - which 
 be a little too sharp , and perhaps too small . a woman who want to 
 depreciate Violet Effingham have once call she a pug - nosed puppet ; 
 but I , as her chronicler , deny that she be pug - nose , - and all the 
 world who know she soon come to understand that she be no puppet . in 
 figure she be small , but not so small as she look to be . her foot 
 and hand be delicately fine , and there be a softness about her 
 whole person , an apparent compressibility , which seem to indicate 
 that she might go into very small compass . into what compass and 
 how compress , there be very many man who hold very different 
 opinion . Violet Effingham be certainly no puppet . she be great 
 at dancing , - as perhaps might be a puppet , - but she be great also 
 at archery , great at skating , - and great , too , at hunting . with 
 reference to that last accomplishment , she and Lady Baldock have have 
 more than one terrible tussle , not always with advantage to the 
 dragon . " my dear aunt , " she have say once during the last winter , 
 " I be go to the meet with George , " - George be her cousin , Lord 
 Baldock , and be the dragon 's son , - " and there , let there be an end 
 of it . " " and you will promise I that you will not go far , " say 
 the dragon . " I will promise nothing to - day to any man or to any 
 woman , " say Violet . what be to be say to a young lady who speak in 
 this way , and who have become of age only a fortnight since ? she ride 
 that day the famous run from Bagnall 's Gorse to Foulsham Common , and 
 be in at the death . 
 Violet Effingham be now sit in conference with her friend Lady 
 Laura , and they be discuss matter of high import , - of very high 
 import , indeed , - to the interest of both of they . " I do not ask you 
 to accept he , " say Lady Laura . 
 " that be lucky , " say the other , " as he have never ask I . " 
 " he have do much the same . you know that he love you . " 
 " I know , - or fancy that I know , - that so many man love I ! but , after 
 all , what sort of love be it ? it be just as when you and I , when we 
 see something nice in a shop , call it a dear duck of a thing , and 
 tell somebody to go and buy it , let the price be ever so extravagant . 
 I know my own position , Laura . I be a dear duck of a thing . " 
 " you be a very dear thing to Oswald . " 
 " but you , Laura , will some day inspire a grand passion , - or I daresay 
 have already , for you be a great deal too close to tell ; - and then 
 there will be cut of throat , and a mighty hubbub , and a real 
 tragedy . I shall never go beyond genteel comedy , - unless I run away 
 with somebody beneath I , or do something awfully improper . " 
 " do not   do that , dear . " 
 " I should like to , because of my aunt . I should indeed . if it be 
 possible , without compromise myself , I should like she to be tell 
 some morning that I have go off with the curate . " 
 " how can you be so wicked , Violet ! " 
 " it would serve she right , and her countenance would be so awfully 
 comic . mind , if it be ever to come off , I must be there to see it . I 
 know what she would say as well as possible . she would turn to poor 
 Gussy . ' augusta , ' she would say , ' I always expect it . I always 
 do . ' then I should come out and curtsey to she , and say so prettily , 
 ' dear aunt , it be only our little joke . ' that be my line . but for 
 you , - you , if you plan it , would go off to - morrow with Lucifer 
 himself if you like he . " 
 " but fail Lucifer , I shall probably be very humdrum . " 
 " you do not   mean that there be anything settle , Laura ? " 
 " there be nothing settle , - or any beginning of anything that ever 
 can be settle , but I be not talk about myself . he have tell I 
 that if you will accept he , he will do anything that you and I may 
 ask he . " 
 " yes ; - he will promise . " 
 " do you ever know he to break his word ? " 
 " I know nothing about he , my dear . how should I ? " 
 " do not pretend to be ignorant and meek , Violet . you do know 
 he , - much well than most girl know the man they marry . you have 
 know he , more or less intimately , all your life . " 
 " but be I bind to marry he because of that accident ? " 
 " no ; you be not bind to marry he , - unless you love he . " 
 " I do not love he , " say Violet , with slow , emphatic word , and a 
 little forward motion of her face , as though she be specially eager 
 to convince her friend that she be quite in earnest in what she 
 say . 
 " I fancy , Violet , that you be near to love he than any other 
 man . " 
 " I be not at all near to love any man . I doubt whether I ever shall 
 be . it do not seem to I to be possible to myself to be what girl 
 call in love . I can like a man . I do like , perhaps , half a dozen . I 
 like they so much that if I go to a house or to a party it be quite 
 a matter of importance to I whether this man or that will or will 
 not be there . and then I suppose I flirt with they . at least augusta 
 tell I that my aunt say that I do . but as for care about any one 
 of they in the way of love he , - want to marry he , and have he 
 all to myself , and that sort of thing , - I do not   know what it mean . " 
 " but you intend to be marry some day , " say Lady Laura . 
 " certainly I do . and I do not   intend to wait very much long . I be 
 heartily tired of Lady Baldock , and though I can generally escape 
 among my friend , that be not sufficient . I be begin to think 
 that it would be pleasant to have a house of my own . a girl become 
 such a Bohemian when she be always go about , and do not   quite 
 know where any of her thing be . " 
 then there be a silence between they for a few minute . Violet 
 Effingham be double up in a corner of a sofa , with her foot tuck 
 under she , and her face recline upon one of her shoulder . and as 
 she talk she be play with a little toy which be construct 
 to take various shape as it be fling this way or that . a bystander 
 look at she would have think that the toy be much more to she 
 than the conversation . Lady Laura be sit upright , in a common 
 chair , at a table not far from her companion , and be manifestly 
 devote herself altogether to the subject that be be discuss 
 between they . she have take no lounging , easy attitude , she have find 
 no employment for her finger , and she look steadily at Violet as 
 she talk , - whereas Violet be look only at the little manikin 
 which she toss . and now Laura get up and come to the sofa , and sit 
 close to her friend . Violet , though she somewhat move one foot , so 
 as to seem to make room for the other , still go on with her play . 
 " if you do marry , Violet , you must choose some one man out of the 
 lot . " 
 " that be quite true , my dear , I certainly can not   marry they all . " 
 " and how do you mean to make the choice ? " 
 " I do not   know . I suppose I shall toss up . " 
 " I wish you would be in earnest with I . " 
 " well ; - I will be in earnest . I shall take the first that come after 
 I have quite make up my mind . you will think it very horrible , but that 
 be really what I shall do . after all , a husband be very much like a 
 house or a horse . you do not   take your house because it be the good 
 house in the world , but because just then you want a house . you go 
 and see a house , and if it be very nasty you do not   take it . but if 
 you think it will suit pretty well , and if you be tired of look 
 about for house , you do take it . that be the way one buy one 's 
 horse , - and one 's husband . " 
 " and you have not make up your mind yet ? " 
 " not quite . Lady Baldock be a little more decent than usual just 
 before I leave Baddingham . when I tell she that I mean to have a pair 
 of pony , she merely throw up her hand and grunt . she do not 
 gnash her tooth , and curse and swear , and declare to I that I be a 
 child of perdition . " 
 " what do you mean by curse and swearing ? " 
 " she tell I once that if I buy a certain little dog , it would 
 lead to my be everlastingly - you know what . she be not   so squeamish 
 as I be , and say it out . " 
 " what do you do ? " 
 " I buy the little dog , and it bite my aunt 's heel . I be very sorry 
 then , and give the creature to Mary Rivers . he be such a beauty ! I 
 hope the perdition have go with he , for I do not   like Mary Rivers 
 at all . I have to give the poor beasty to somebody , and Mary Rivers 
 happen to be there . I tell she that Puck be connect with 
 Apollyon , but she do not   mind that . Puck be worth twenty guineas , 
 and I daresay she have sell he . " 
 " Oswald may have an equal chance then among the other favourite ? " 
 say Lady Laura , after another pause . 
 " there be no favourite , and I will not say that any man may have a 
 chance . why do you press I about your brother in this way ? " 
 " because I be so anxious . because it would save he . because you be 
 the only woman for whom he have ever care , and because he love you 
 with all his heart ; and because his father would be reconcile to he 
 to - morrow if he hear that you and he be engage . " 
 " Laura , my dear - " 
 " well . " 
 " you will not   be angry if I speak out ? " 
 " certainly not . after what I have say , you have a right to speak 
 out . " 
 " it seem to I that all your reason be reason why he should marry 
 I ; - not reason why I should marry he . " 
 " be not his love for you a reason ? " 
 " no , " say Violet , pausing , - and speak the word in the low 
 possible whisper . " if he do not love I , that , if know to I , 
 should be a reason why I should not marry he . ten man may love 
 I , - I do not   say that any man do - " 
 " he do . " 
 " but I can not   marry all the ten . and as for that business of save 
 he - " 
 " you know what I mean ! " 
 " I do not   know that I have any special mission for save young man . I 
 sometimes think that I shall have quite enough to do to save myself . 
 it be strange what a propensity I feel for the wrong side of the 
 post . " 
 " I feel the strong assurance that you will always keep on the 
 right side . " 
 " thank you , my dear . I mean to try , but I be quite sure that the 
 jockey who take I in hand ought to be very steady himself . now , 
 Lord Chiltern - " 
 " well , - out with it . what have you to say ? " 
 " he do not bear the good reputation in this world as a steady man . 
 be he altogether the sort of man that mamma of the good kind be 
 seek for their daughter ? I like a roue myself ; - and a prig who 
 sit all night in the House , and talk about nothing but church - rate 
 and suffrage , be to I intolerable . I prefer man who be improper , 
 and all that sort of thing . if I be a man myself I should go in for 
 everything I ought to leave alone . I know I should . but you see , - I be 
 not a man , and I must take care of myself . the wrong side of a post 
 for a woman be so very much the wrong side . I like a fast man , but I 
 know that I must not dare to marry the sort of man that I like . " 
 " to be one of we , then , - the very first among we ; - would that be the 
 wrong side ? " 
 " you mean that to be Lady Chiltern in the present tense , and Lady 
 Brentford in the future , would be promotion for Violet Effingham in 
 the past ? " 
 " how hard you be , Violet ! " 
 " Fancy , - that it should come to this , - that you should call I hard , 
 Laura . I should like to be your sister . I should like well enough to 
 be your father 's daughter . I should like well enough to be Chiltern 's 
 friend . I be his friend . nothing that any one have ever say of he 
 have estrange I from he . I have fight for he till I have be 
 black in the face . yes , I have , - with my aunt . but I be afraid to be 
 his wife . the risk would be so great . suppose that I do not save 
 he , but that he bring I to shipwreck instead ? " 
 " that could not be ! " 
 " could it not ? I think it might be so very well . when I be a child 
 they use to be always tell I to mind myself . it seem to I that 
 a child and a man need not mind themselves . let they do what they 
 may , they can be set right again . let they fall as they will , you can 
 put they on their foot . but a woman have to mind herself ; - and very 
 hard work it be when she have a dragon of her own drive she ever the 
 wrong way . " 
 " I want to take you from the dragon . " 
 " yes ; - and to hand I over to a griffin . " 
 " the truth be , Violet , that you do not know Oswald . he be not a 
 griffin . " 
 " I do not mean to be uncomplimentary . take any of the dangerous 
 wild beast you please . I merely intend to point out that he be a 
 dangerous wild beast . I daresay he be noble - minded , and I will call 
 he a lion if you like it well . but even with a lion there be 
 risk . " 
 " of course there will be risk . there be risk with every man , - unless 
 you will be content with the prig you describe . of course there 
 would be risk with my brother . he have be a gambler . " 
 " they say he be one still . " 
 " he have give it up in part , and would entirely at your instance . " 
 " and they say other thing of he , Laura . " 
 " it be true . he have have paroxysm of evil life which have well - nigh 
 ruin he . " 
 " and these paroxysm be so dangerous ! be he not in debt ? " 
 " he be , - but not deeply . every shilling that he owe would be 
 pay ; - every shilling . mind , I know all his circumstance , and I 
 give you my word that every shilling should be pay . he have never 
 lie , - and he have tell I everything . his father could not leave an 
 acre away from he if he would , and would not if he could . " 
 " I do not ask as fear that . I speak only of a dangerous habit . a 
 paroxysm of spend money be apt to make one so uncomfortable . and 
 then - " 
 " well . " 
 " I do not   know why I should make a catalogue of your brother 's 
 weakness . " 
 " you mean to say that he drink too much ? " 
 " I do not say so . People say so . the dragon say so . and as I always 
 find her saying to be untrue , I suppose this be like the rest of 
 they . " 
 " it be untrue if it be say of he as a habit . " 
 " it be another paroxysm , - just now and then . " 
 " do not laugh at I , Violet , when I be take his part , or I shall be 
 offend . " 
 " but you see , if I be to be his wife , it be - rather important . " 
 " still you need not ridicule I . " 
 " Dear Laura , you know I do not ridicule you . you know I love you for 
 what you be do . would not I do the same , and fight for he down 
 to my nail if I have a brother ? " 
 " and therefore I want you to be Oswald 's wife ; - because I know that 
 you would fight for he . it be not true that he be a - drunkard . look 
 at his hand , which be as steady as your . look at his eye . be there a 
 sign of it ? he have be drunk , once or twice , perhaps , - and have do 
 fearful thing . " 
 " it might be that he would do fearful thing to I . " 
 " you never know a man with a soft heart or with a fine spirit . I 
 believe as I sit here that if he be married to - morrow , his vice 
 would fall from he like old clothe . " 
 " you will admit , Laura , that there will be some risk for the wife . " 
 " of course there will be a risk . be there not always a risk ? " 
 " the man in the city would call this double - dangerous , I think , " say 
 Violet . then the door be open , and the man of whom they be 
 speak enter the room . 
 CHAPTER XI 
 Lord Chiltern 
 the reader have be tell that Lord Chiltern be a red man , and that 
 peculiarity of his personal appearance be certainly the first to 
 strike a stranger . it impart a certain look of ferocity to he , 
 which be apt to make man afraid of he at first sight . woman be not 
 actuate in the same way , and be accustomed to look deep into man 
 at the first sight than other man will trouble themselves to do . his 
 beard be red , and be clip , so as to have none of the softness of 
 wave hair . the hair on his head also be keep short , and be very 
 red , - and the colour of his face be red . nevertheless he be a 
 handsome man , with well - cut feature , not tall , but very strongly 
 build , and with a certain curl in the corner of his eyelid which 
 give to he a look of resolution , - which perhaps he do not possess . 
 he be know to be a clever man , and when very young have have 
 the reputation of be a scholar . when he be three - and - twenty 
 grey - haired votary of the turf declare that he would make his 
 fortune on the race - course , - so clear - head be he as to odd , so 
 excellent a judge of a horse 's performance , and so gifted with a 
 memory of event . when he be five - and - twenty he have lose every 
 shilling of a fortune of his own , have squeeze from his father more 
 than his father ever choose to name in speak of his affair to 
 any one , and be know to be in debt . but he have sacrifice himself 
 on one or two memorable occasion in conformity with turf law of 
 honour , and man say of he , either that he be very honest or very 
 chivalric , - in accordance with the special view on the subject of 
 the man who be speak . it be report now that he no long own 
 horse on the turf ; - but this be doubt by some who could name 
 the animal which they say that he own , and which he run in the 
 name of Mr. Macnab , - say some ; of Mr. Pardoe , - say other ; of Mr. 
 Chickerwick , - say a third set of informant . the fact be that Lord 
 Chiltern at this moment have no interest of his own in any horse upon 
 the turf . 
 but all the world know that he drink . he have take by the throat 
 a proctor 's bull - dog when he have be drunk at Oxford , have nearly 
 strangle the man , and have be expel . he have fall through his 
 violence into some terrible misfortune at Paris , have be bring 
 before a public judge , and his name and his infamy have be make 
 notorious in every newspaper in the two capital . after that he have 
 fight a ruffian at Newmarket , and have really kill he with his 
 fist . in reference to this latter affray it have be prove that the 
 attack have be make on he , that he have not be to blame , and that 
 he have not be drunk . after a prolonged investigation he have come 
 forth from that affair without disgrace . he would have do so , at 
 least , if he have not be heretofore disgrace . but we all know how 
 the man well speak of may steal a horse , while he who be of evil 
 repute may not look over a hedge . it be assert widely by many who 
 be suppose to know all about everything that Lord Chiltern be in 
 a fit of delirium tremen when he kill the ruffian at Newmarket . 
 the bad of that latter affair be that it produce the total 
 estrangement which now exist between Lord Brentford and his son . 
 Lord Brentford would not believe that his son be in that matter 
 more sin against than sin . " such thing do not happen to 
 other man 's son , " he say , when Lady Laura plead for her brother . 
 Lady Laura could not induce her father to see his son , but so far 
 prevail that no sentence of banishment be pronounce against 
 Lord Chiltern . there be nothing to prevent the son sit at 
 his father 's table if he so please . he never do so please , - but 
 nevertheless he continue to live in the house in Portman Square ; 
 and when he meet the Earl , in the hall , perhaps , or on the staircase , 
 would simply bow to he . then the Earl would bow again , and shuffle 
 on , - and look very wretched , as no doubt he be . a grown - up son must 
 be the great comfort a man can have , - if he be his father 's good 
 friend ; but otherwise he can hardly be a comfort . as it be in this 
 house , the son be a constant thorn in his father 's side . 
 " what do he do when we leave London ? " Lord Brentford once say to 
 his daughter . 
 " he stay here , papa . " 
 " but he hunt still ? " 
 " yes , he hunt , - and he have a room somewhere at an inn , - down in 
 Northamptonshire . but he be mostly in London . they have train on 
 purpose . " 
 " what a life for my son ! " say the Earl . " what a life ! of course no 
 decent person will let he into his house . " Lady Laura do not know 
 what to say to this , for in truth Lord Chiltern be not fond of 
 stay at the house of person whom the Earl would have call 
 decent . 
 General Effingham , the father of Violet , and Lord Brentford have be 
 the close and dearest of friend . they have be young man in the 
 same regiment , and through life each have confide in the other . when 
 the General 's only son , then a youth of seventeen , be kill in 
 one of our grand New Zealand war , the bereaved father and the Earl 
 have be together for a month in their sorrow . at that time Lord 
 Chiltern 's career have still be open to hope , - and the one man have 
 contrast his lot with the other . General Effingham live long 
 enough to hear the Earl declare that his lot be the happy of the 
 two . now the General be dead , and Violet , the daughter of a second 
 wife , be all that be leave of the Effinghams . this second wife have 
 be a Miss Plummer , a lady from the city with much money , whose 
 sister have marry Lord Baldock . Violet in this way have fall to the 
 care of the Baldock people , and not into the hand of her father 's 
 friend . but , as the reader will have surmise , she have idea of her 
 own of emancipate herself from Baldock thraldom . 
 twice before that last terrible affair at Newmarket , before the 
 quarrel between the father and the son have be complete , Lord 
 Brentford have say a word to his daughter , - merely a word , - of his 
 son in connection with Miss Effingham . 
 " if he think of it I shall be glad to see he on the subject . you 
 may tell he so . " that have be the first word . he have just then 
 resolve that the affair in Paris should be regard as condone , - as 
 among the thing to be forget . " she be too good for he ; but if he 
 ask she let he tell she everything . " that have be the second word , 
 and have be speak immediately subsequent to a payment of twelve 
 thousand pound make by the Earl towards the settlement of certain 
 Doncaster account . Lady Laura in negotiate for the money have 
 be very eloquent in describe some honest , - or shall we say 
 chivalric , - sacrifice which have bring her brother into this special 
 difficulty . since that the Earl have decline to interest himself in 
 his son 's matrimonial affair ; and when Lady Laura have once again 
 mention the matter , declare her belief that it would be the mean 
 of save her brother Oswald , the Earl have desire she to be silent . 
 " would you wish to destroy the poor child ? " he have say . nevertheless 
 Lady Laura feel sure that if she be to go to her father with a 
 positive statement that Oswald and Violet be engage , he would 
 relent and would accept Violet as his daughter . as for the payment of 
 Lord Chiltern 's present debt ; - she have a little scheme of her own 
 about that . 
 Miss Effingham , who have be already two day in Portman Square , have 
 not as yet see Lord Chiltern . she know that he live in the house , 
 that be , that he sleep there , and probably eat his breakfast in some 
 apartment of his own ; - but she know also that the habit of the house 
 would not by any mean make it necessary that they should meet . Laura 
 and her brother probably see each other daily , - but they never go 
 into society together , and do not know the same set of people . 
 when she have announce to Lady Baldock her intention of spend the 
 first fortnight of her London season with her friend Lady Laura , 
 Lady Baldock have as a matter of course - " jump upon she , " as Miss 
 Effingham would herself call it . 
 " you be go to the house of the bad reprobate in all England , " 
 say Lady Baldock . 
 " what ; - dear old Lord Brentford , whom papa love so well ! " 
 " I mean Lord Chiltern , who , only last year , - murder a man ! " 
 " that be not true , aunt . " 
 " there be bad than that , - much bad . he be always - tipsy , and 
 always gamble , and always - but it be quite unfit that I should 
 speak a word more to you about such a man as Lord Chiltern . his name 
 ought never to be mention . " 
 " then why do you mention it , aunt ? " 
 Lady Baldock 's process of jump upon her niece , - in which I think 
 the aunt have generally the bad of the exercise , - go on for some 
 time , but Violet of course carry her point . 
 " if she marry he there will be an end of everything , " say Lady 
 Baldock to her daughter Augusta . 
 " she have more sense than that , mamma , " say Augusta . 
 " I do not   think she have any sense at all , " say Lady Baldock ; - " not in 
 the least . I do wish my poor sister have live ; - I do indeed . " 
 Lord Chiltern be now in the room with Violet , - immediately upon that 
 conversation between Violet and his sister as to the expediency of 
 Violet become his wife . indeed his entrance have interrupt the 
 conversation before it be over . " I be so glad to see you , Miss 
 Effingham , " he say . " I come in think that I might find you . " 
 " here I be , as large as life , " she say , get up from her 
 corner on the sofa and give he her hand . " Laura and I have be 
 discuss the affair of the nation for the last two day , and have 
 nearly bring our discussion to an end . " she could not help look , 
 first at his eye and then at his hand , not as want evidence to 
 the truth of the statement which his sister have make , but because 
 the idea of a drunkard 's eye and a drunkard 's hand have be bring 
 before her mind . Lord Chiltern 's hand be like the hand of any other 
 man , but there be something in his eye that almost frighten she . 
 it look as though he would not hesitate to wring his wife 's neck 
 round , if ever he should be bring to threaten to do so . and then 
 his eye , like the rest of he , be red . no ; - she do not think that 
 she could ever bring herself to marry he . why take a venture that 
 be double - dangerous , when there be so many venture open to she , 
 apparently with very little of danger attach to they ? " if it should 
 ever be say that I love he , I would do it all the same , " she say 
 to herself . 
 " if I do not come and see you here , I suppose that I should never 
 see you , " say he , seat himself . " I do not often go to party , 
 and when I do you be not likely to be there . " 
 " we might make our little arrangement for meeting , " say she , 
 laugh . " my aunt , Lady Baldock , be go to have an evening next 
 week . " 
 " the servant would be order to put I out of the house . " 
 " oh no . you can tell she that I invite you . " 
 " I do not   think that Oswald and Lady Baldock be great friend , " say 
 Lady Laura . 
 " or he might come and take you and I to the Zoo on Sunday . that be 
 the proper sort of thing for a brother and a friend to do . " 
 " I hate that place in the Regent 's Park , " say Lord Chiltern . 
 " when be you there last ? " demand Miss Effingham . 
 " when I come home once from Eton . but I will not   go again till I can 
 come home from Eton again . " then he alter his tone as he continue 
 to speak . " People would look at I as if I be the wild beast in 
 the whole collection . " 
 " then , " say Violet , " if you will not   go to Lady Baldock 's or to the 
 Zoo , we must confine ourselves to Laura 's drawing - room ; - unless , 
 indeed , you like to take I to the top of the Monument . " 
 " I will take you to the top of the Monument with pleasure . " 
 " what do you say , Laura ? " 
 " I say that you be a foolish girl , " say Lady Laura , " and that I 
 will have nothing to do with such a scheme . " 
 " then there be nothing for it but that you should come here ; and as 
 you live in the house , and as I be sure to be here every morning , 
 and as you have no possible occupation for your time , and as we have 
 nothing particular to do with ours , - I daresay I shall not   see you again 
 before I go to my aunt 's in Berkeley Square . " 
 " very likely not , " he say . 
 " and why not , Oswald ? " ask his sister . 
 he pass his hand over his face before he answer she . " because she 
 and I run in different groove now , and be not such meet playfellow 
 as we use to be once . do you remember my take you away right 
 through Saulsby Wood once on the old pony , and not bring you back 
 till tea - time , and Miss Blink go and tell my father ? " 
 " do I remember it ? I think it be the happy day in my life . his 
 pocket be cram full of gingerbread and Everton toffy , and we 
 have three bottle of lemonade sling on to the pony 's saddlebow . I 
 think it be a pity that we should ever come back . " 
 " it be a pity , " say Lord Chiltern . 
 " but , nevertheless , substantially necessary , " say Lady Laura . 
 " fail our power of reproduce the toffy , I suppose it be , " say 
 Violet . 
 " you be not Miss Effingham then , " say Lord Chiltern . 
 " no , - not as yet . these disagreeable reality of life grow upon 
 one ; do they not ? you take off my shoe and dry they for I at a 
 woodman 's cottage . I be oblige to put up with my maid 's do those 
 thing now . and Miss Blink the mild be change for Lady Baldock the 
 martinet . and if I ride about with you in a wood all day I should 
 be send to Coventry instead of to bed . and so you see everything be 
 change as well as my name . " 
 " everything be not change , " say Lord Chiltern , get up from 
 his seat . " I be not change , - at least not in this , that as I love 
 you well than any being in the world , - well even than Laura 
 there , - so do I love you now infinitely the good of all . do not look 
 so surprised at I . you know it before as well as you do now ; - and 
 Laura know it . there be no secret to be keep in the matter among we 
 three . " 
 " but , Lord Chiltern , - " say Miss Effingham , rise also to her foot , 
 and then pause , not know how to answer he . there have be a 
 suddenness in his mode of address she which have , so to say , almost 
 take away her breath ; and then to be tell by a man of his love 
 before his sister be in itself , to she , a matter so surprising , that 
 none of those word come at her command which will come , as though by 
 instinct , to young lady on such occasion . 
 " you have know it always , " say he , as though he be angry with 
 she . 
 " Lord Chiltern , " she reply , " you must excuse I if I say that you 
 be , at the least , very abrupt . I do not think when I be go back 
 so joyfully to our childish day that you would turn the table on I 
 in this way . " 
 " he have say nothing that ought to make you angry , " say Lady Laura . 
 " only because he have drive I to say that which will make I appear 
 to be uncivil to himself . Lord Chiltern , I do not love you with that 
 love of which you be speak now . as an old friend I have always 
 regard you , and I hope that I may always do so . " then she get up 
 and leave the room . 
 " why be you so sudden with she , - so abrupt , - so loud ? " say his 
 sister , come up to he and take he by the arm almost in anger . 
 " it would make no difference , " say he . " she do not care for I . " 
 " it make all the difference in the world , " say Lady Laura . " such 
 a woman as Violet can not be have after that fashion . you must begin 
 again . " 
 " I have begin and end , " he say . 
 " that be nonsense . of course you will persist . it be madness to 
 speak in that way to - day . you may be sure of this , however , that 
 there be no one she like well than you . you must remember that you 
 have do much to make any girl afraid of you . " 
 " I do remember it . " 
 " do something now to make she fear you no long . speak to she 
 softly . tell she of the sort of life which you would live with she . 
 tell she that all be change . as she come to love you , she will 
 believe you when she would believe no one else on that matter . " 
 " be I to tell she a lie ? " say Lord Chiltern , look his sister full 
 in the face . then he turn upon his heel and leave she . 
 CHAPTER XII 
 Autumnal Prospects 
 the session go on very calmly after the opening battle which oust 
 Lord de Terrier and send Mr. Mildmay back to the Treasury , - so calmly 
 that Phineas Finn be unconsciously disappointed , as lack that 
 excitement of contest to which he have be introduce in the first 
 day of his parliamentary career . from time to time certain waspish 
 attack be make by Mr. Daubeny , now on this Secretary of State and 
 now on that ; but they be feel by both party to mean nothing ; and 
 as no great measure be bring forward , nothing which would serve 
 by the magnitude of its interest to divide the liberal side of the 
 House into fraction , Mr. Mildmay 's Cabinet be allow to hold its 
 own in comparative peace and quiet . it be now July , - the middle of 
 July , - and the member for Loughshane have not yet address the House . 
 how often have he meditate do so ; how he have compose his speech 
 walk round the Park on his way down to the House ; how he get his 
 subject up , - only to find on hear they discuss that he really 
 know little or nothing about they ; how he have his argument and 
 almost his very word take out of his mouth by some other member ; 
 and lastly , how he have actually be deter from get upon his 
 leg by a certain tremor of blood round his heart when the moment 
 for rise have come , - of all this he never say a word to any man . 
 since that last journey to county Mayo , Laurence Fitzgibbon have be 
 his most intimate friend , but he say nothing of all this even to 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon . to his other friend , Lady Laura Standish , he do 
 explain something of his feeling , not absolutely describe to she 
 the extent of hindrance to which his modesty have subject he , but 
 let she know that he have his qualm as well as his aspiration . 
 but as Lady Laura always recommend patience , and more than once 
 express her opinion that a young member would be well to sit 
 in silence at least for one session , he be not drive to the 
 mortification of feeling that he be incur her contempt by his 
 bashfulness . as regard the man among whom he live , I think he be 
 almost annoyed at find that no one seem to expect that he should 
 speak . Barrington Erle , when he have first talk of send Phineas 
 down to Loughshane , have predict for he all manner of parliamentary 
 success , and have express the warm admiration of the manner in 
 which Phineas have discuss this or that subject at the Union . " we 
 have not above one or two man in the House who can do that kind of 
 thing , " Barrington Erle have once say . but now no allusion whatever 
 be make to his power of speech , and Phineas in his modest moment 
 begin to be more amazed than ever that he should find himself seat 
 in that chamber . 
 to the form and technicality of parliamentary business he do give 
 close attention , and be unremitting in his attendance . on one or two 
 occasion he venture to ask a question of the Speaker , and as the 
 word of experience fall into his ear , he would tell himself that 
 he be go through his education , - that he be learn to be a 
 work member , and perhaps to be a statesman . but his regret with 
 reference to Mr. Low and the dingy chamber in Old Square be very 
 frequent ; and have it be possible for he to undo all that he have 
 do , he would often have abandon to some one else the honour of 
 represent the elector of Loughshane . 
 but he be support in all his difficulty by the kindness of his 
 friend , Lady Laura Standish . he be often in the house in Portman 
 Square , and be always receive with cordiality , and , as he think , 
 almost with affection . she would sit and talk to he , sometimes 
 say a word about her brother and sometimes about her father , as 
 though there be more between they than the casual intimacy of 
 London acquaintance . and in Portman Square he have be introduce to 
 Miss Effingham , and have find Miss Effingham to be - very nice . Miss 
 Effingham have quite take to he , and he have dance with she at two 
 or three party , talk always , as he do so , about Lady Laura 
 Standish . 
 " I declare , Laura , I think your friend Mr. Finn be in love with you , " 
 say Violet to Lady Laura one night . 
 " I do not   think that . he be fond of I , and so be I of he . he be 
 so honest , and so naive without be awkward ! and then he be 
 undoubtedly clever . " 
 " and so uncommonly handsome , " say Violet . 
 " I do not   know that that make much difference , " say Lady Laura . 
 " I think it do if a man look like a gentleman as well . " 
 " Mr. Finn certainly look like a gentleman , " say Lady Laura . 
 " and no doubt be one , " say Violet . " I wonder whether he have get any 
 money . " 
 " not a penny , I should say . " 
 " how do such a man manage to live ? there be so many man like that , 
 and they be always mystery to I . I suppose he will have to marry an 
 heiress . " 
 " whoever get he will not have a bad husband , " say Lady Laura 
 Standish . 
 phinea during the summer have very often meet Mr. Kennedy . they sit 
 on the same side of the House , they belong to the same club , they 
 din together more than once in Portman Square , and on one occasion 
 Phineas have accept an invitation to dinner send to he by Mr. 
 Kennedy himself . " a slow affair I never see in my life , " he say 
 afterwards to Laurence Fitzgibbon . " though there be two or three 
 man there who talk everywhere else , they could not talk at his 
 table . " " he give you good wine , I should say , " say Fitzgibbon , " and 
 let I tell you that that cover a multitude of sin . " in spite , 
 however , of all these opportunity for intimacy , now , nearly at 
 the end of the session , Phineas have hardly speak a dozen word to 
 Mr. Kennedy , and really know nothing whatsoever of the man , as one 
 friend , - or even as one acquaintance know another . Lady Laura have 
 desire he to be on good term with Mr. Kennedy , and for that reason 
 he have din with he . nevertheless he dislike Mr. Kennedy , and feel 
 quite sure that Mr. Kennedy dislike he . he be therefore rather 
 surprised when he receive the follow note : - 
 Albany , z 3 , July 17 , 186 - . 
 MY DEAR MR . FINN , 
 I shall have some friend at Loughlinter next month , and 
 should be very glad if you will join we . I will name the 
 16th August . I do not   know whether you shoot , but there be 
 grouse and deer . 
 your truly , 
 ROBERT KENNEDY . 
 what be he to do ? he have already begin to feel rather uncomfortable 
 at the prospect of be separate from all his new friend as soon 
 as the session should be over . Laurence Fitzgibhon have ask he to 
 make another visit to county Mayo , but that he have decline . Lady 
 Laura have say something to he about go abroad with her brother , 
 and since that there have spring up a sort of intimacy between he and 
 Lord Chiltern ; but nothing have be fix about this foreign trip , 
 and there be pecuniary objection to it which put it almost out of 
 his power . the Christmas holiday he would of course pass with his 
 family at Killaloe , but he hardly like the idea of hurry off to 
 Killaloe immediately the session should be over . everybody around 
 he seem to be look forward to pleasant leisure doing in the 
 country . man talk about grouse , and of the lady at the house to 
 which they be go and of the people whom they be to meet . Lady 
 Laura have say nothing of her own movement for the early autumn , and 
 no invitation have come to he to go to the Earl 's country house . he 
 have already feel that every one would depart and that he would be 
 leave , - and this have make he uncomfortable . what be he to do with 
 the invitation from Mr. Kennedy ? he dislike the man , and have tell 
 himself half a dozen time that he despise he . of course he must 
 refuse it . even for the sake of the scenery , and the grouse , and the 
 pleasant party , and the feeling that go to Loughlinter in August 
 would be the proper sort of thing to do , he must refuse it ! but it 
 occur to he at last that he would call in Portman Square before 
 he write his note . 
 " of course you will go , " say Lady Laura , in her most decide tone . 
 " and why ? " 
 " in the first place it be civil in he to ask you , and why should you 
 be uncivil in return ? " 
 " there be nothing uncivil in not accept a man 's invitation , " say 
 Phineas . 
 " we be go , " say Lady Laura , " and I can only say that I shall be 
 disappointed if you do not go too . both Mr. Gresham and Mr. Monk will 
 be there , and I believe they have never stay together in the same 
 house before . I have no doubt there be a dozen man on your side of 
 the House who would give their eye to be there . of course you will 
 go . " 
 of course he do go . the note accept Mr. Kennedy 's invitation be 
 write at the Reform Club within a quarter of an hour of his leaving 
 Portman Square . he be very careful in write to be not more 
 familiar or more civil than Mr. Kennedy have be to himself , and 
 then he sign himself " your truly , Phineas Finn . " but another 
 proposition be make to he , and a most charming proposition , during 
 the few minute that he remain in Portman Square . " I be so glad , " 
 say Lady Laura , " because I can now ask you to run down to we at 
 Saulsby for a couple of day on your way to Loughlinter . till this 
 be fix I could not   ask you to come all the way to Saulsby for two 
 day ; and there will not   be room for more between our leave London 
 and start to Loughlinter . " Phineas swear that he would have go 
 if it have be but for one hour , and if Saulsby have be twice the 
 distance . " very well ; come on the 13th and go on the 15th . you must 
 go on the 15th , unless you choose to stay with the housekeeper . 
 and remember , Mr. Finn , we have get no grouse at Saulsby . " Phineas 
 declare that he do not care a straw for grouse . 
 there be another little occurrence which happen before Phineas 
 leave London , and which be not altogether so charming as his 
 prospect at Saulsby and Loughlinter . early in August , when the 
 session be still incomplete , he din with Laurence Fitzgibbon at 
 the Reform Club . Laurence have specially invite he to do so , and 
 make very much of he on the occasion . " by George , my dear fellow , " 
 Laurence say to he that morning , " nothing have happen to I this 
 session that have give I so much pleasure as your be in the 
 House . of course there be fellow with whom one be very intimate and 
 of whom one be very fond , - and all that sort of thing . but most of 
 these englishman on our side be such cold fellow ; or else they be 
 like Ratler and Barrington Erle , think of nothing but politic . 
 and then as to our own man , there be so many of they one can hardly 
 trust ! that be the truth of it . your be in the House have be such 
 a comfort to I ! " Phineas , who really like his friend Laurence , 
 express himself very warmly in answer to this , and become 
 affectionate , and make sundry protestation of friendship which be 
 perfectly sincere . their sincerity be test after dinner , when 
 Fitzgibbon , as they two be seat on a sofa in the corner of the 
 smoking - room , ask Phineas to put his name to the back of a bill for 
 two hundred and fifty pound at six month ' date . 
 " but , my dear Laurence , " say Phineas , " two hundred and fifty pound 
 be a sum of money utterly beyond my reach . " 
 " exactly , my dear boy , and that be why I have   come to you . D'ye think 
 I would have ask anybody who by any impossibility might have be make 
 to pay anything for I ? " 
 " but what be the use of it then ? " 
 " all the use in the world . it be for I to judge of the use , you know . 
 why , d'ye think I would ask it if it be not   any use ? I will make it of use , 
 my boy . and take my word , you will never hear about it again . it be just 
 a forestalling of my salary ; that be all . I would not   do it till I see 
 that we be at least safe for six month to come . " then Phineas Finn 
 with many misgiving , with much inward hatred of himself for his own 
 weakness , do put his name on the back of the bill which Laurence 
 Fitzgibbon have prepare for his signature . 
 CHAPTER XIII 
 Saulsby Wood 
 " so you will not   come to Moydrum again ? " say Laurence Fitzgibbon to his 
 friend . 
 " not this autumn , Laurence . your father would think that I want to 
 live there . " 
 " Bedad , it be my father would be glad to see you , - and the oftener the 
 well . " 
 " the fact be , my time be fill up . " 
 " you be not go to be one of the party at Loughlinter ? " 
 " I believe I be . Kennedy ask I , and people seem to think that 
 everybody be to do what he bid they . " 
 " I should think so too . I wish he have ask I . I should have think 
 it as good as a promise of an under - secretaryship . all the Cabinet 
 be to be there . I do not   suppose he ever have an Irishman in his house 
 before . when do you start ? " 
 " well ; - on the 12th or 13th . I believe I shall go to Saulsby on my 
 way . " 
 " the devil you will . upon my word , Phineas , my boy , you be the 
 lucky fellow I know . this be your first year , and you be ask to 
 the two most difficult house in England . you have only to look out 
 for an heiress now . there be little Vi Effingham ; - she be sure to be 
 at Saulsby . good - bye , old fellow . do not   you be in the least unhappy 
 about the bill . I will see to make that all right . " 
 Phineas be rather unhappy about the bill ; but there be so much that 
 be pleasant in his cup at the present moment , that he resolve , as 
 far as possible , to ignore the bitter of that one ingredient . he be 
 a little in the dark as to two or three matter respect these 
 come visit . he would have like to have take a servant with he ; 
 but he have no servant , and feel ashamed to hire one for the occasion . 
 and then he be in trouble about a gun , and the paraphernalia of 
 shooting . he be not a bad shot at snipe in the bog of county Clare , 
 but he have never even see a gun use in England . however , he buy 
 himself a gun , - with other paraphernalia , and take a license for 
 himself , and then groan over the expense to which he find that his 
 journey would subject he . and at last he hire a servant for the 
 occasion . he be intensely ashamed of himself when he have do so , 
 hat himself , and tell himself that he be go to the devil 
 headlong . and why have he do it ? not that Lady Laura would like he 
 the well , or that she would care whether he have a servant or not . 
 she probably would know nothing of his servant . but the people about 
 she would know , and he be foolishly anxious that the people about 
 she should think that he be worthy of she . 
 then he call on Mr. Low before he start . " I do not like to leave 
 London without see you , " he say ; " but I know you will have 
 nothing pleasant to say to I . " 
 " I shall say nothing unpleasant certainly . I see your name in the 
 division , and I feel a sort of envy myself . " 
 " any fool could go into a lobby , " say Phineas . 
 " to tell you the truth , I have be gratify to see that you have 
 have the patience to abstain from speak till you have look about 
 you . it be more than I expect from your hot irish blood . go 
 to meet Mr. Gresham and Mr. Monk , - be you ? well , I hope you may 
 meet they in the Cabinet some day . mind you come and see I when 
 Parliament meet in February . " 
 Mrs. Bunce be delighted when she find that Phineas have hire a 
 servant ; but Mr. Bunce predict nothing but evil from so vain an 
 expense . " do not   tell I ; where be it to come from ? he be not   no 
 rich because he be in Parliament . there be not   no wage . M.P. and 
 M.T. , " - whereby Mr. Bunce , I fear , mean empty , - " be pretty much 
 alike when a man have not   a fortune at his back . " " but he be go to 
 stay with all the lord in the Cabinet , " say Mrs. Bunce , to whom 
 Phineas , in his pride , have confide perhaps more than be necessary . 
 " Cabinet , indeed , " say Bunce ; " if he would stick to chamber , and let 
 alone cabinet , he would do a deal well . give up his room , have 
 he , - till February ? he do not   expect we be go to keep they empty 
 for he ! " 
 Phineas find that the house be full at Saulsby , although the 
 sojourn of the visitor would necessarily be so short . there 
 be three or four there on their way on to Loughlinter , like 
 himself , - Mr. Bonteen and Mr. Ratler , with Mr. Palliser , the 
 Chancellor of the Exchequer , and his wife , - and there be Violet 
 Effingham , who , however , be not go to Loughlinter . " no , indeed , " 
 she say to our hero , who on the first evening have the pleasure 
 of take she in to dinner , " unfortunately I have not   a seat in 
 Parliament , and therefore I be not ask . " 
 " Lady Laura be go . " 
 " yes ; - but Lady Laura have a Cabinet Minister in her keeping . I have 
 only one comfort ; - you will be awfully dull . " 
 " I daresay it would be very much nice to stay here , " say Phineas . 
 " if you want to know my real mind , " say Violet , " I would give one of 
 my little finger to go . there will be four Cabinet Ministers in the 
 house , and four un - Cabinet Ministers , and half a dozen other member 
 of Parliament , and there will be Lady Glencora Palliser , who be the 
 good fun in the world ; and , in point of fact , it be the thing of the 
 year . but I be not ask . you see I belong to the Baldock faction , 
 and we do not   sit on your side of the House . Mr. Kennedy think that I 
 should tell secret . " 
 why on earth have Mr. Kennedy invite he , Phineas Finn , to meet four 
 Cabinet Ministers and Lady Glencora Palliser ? he could only have do 
 so at the instance of Lady Laura Standish . it be delightful for 
 Phineas to think that Lady Laura care for he so deeply ; but it be 
 not equally delightful when he remember how very close must be 
 the alliance between Mr. Kennedy and Lady Laura , when she be thus 
 powerful with he . 
 at Saulsby Phineas do not see much of his hostess . when they be 
 make their plan for the one entire day of this visit , she say a 
 soft word of apology to he . " I be so busy with all these people , 
 that I hardly know what I be do . but we shall be able to find a 
 quiet minute or two at Loughlinter , - unless , indeed , you intend to 
 be on the mountain all day . I suppose you have bring a gun like 
 everybody else ? " 
 " yes ; - I have bring a gun . I do shoot ; but I be not an inveterate 
 sportsman . " 
 on that one day there be a great riding party make up , and Phineas 
 find himself mount , after luncheon , with some dozen other 
 equestrian . among they be Miss Effingham and Lady Glencora , Mr. 
 Ratler and the Earl of Brentford himself . Lady Glencora , whose 
 husband be , as have be say , Chancellor of the Exchequer , and who 
 be still a young woman , and a very pretty woman , have take lately 
 very strongly to politic , which she discuss among man and woman 
 of both party with something more than ordinary audacity . " what a 
 nice , happy , lazy time you have   have of it since you have   be in , " say 
 she to the Earl . 
 " I hope we have be more happy than lazy , " say the Earl . 
 " but you have   do nothing . Mr. Palliser have twenty scheme of reform , 
 all mature ; but among you you have   not let he bring in one of they . 
 the Duke and Mr. Mildmay and you will break his heart among you . " 
 " Poor Mr. Palliser ! " 
 " the truth be , if you do not   take care he and Mr. Monk and Mr. Gresham 
 will arise and shake themselves , and turn you all out . " 
 " we must look to ourselves , Lady Glencora . " 
 " indeed , yes ; - or you will be know to all posterity as the faineant 
 government . " 
 " let I tell you , Lady Glencora , that a faineant government be not 
 the bad government that England can have . it have be the great 
 fault of our politician that they have all want to do something . " 
 " Mr. Mildmay be at any rate innocent of that charge , " say Lady 
 Glencora . 
 they be now rid through a vast wood , and Phineas find himself 
 delightfully establish by the side of Violet Effingham . " Mr. Ratler 
 have be explain to I that he must have nineteen next session . 
 now , if I be you , Mr. Finn , I would decline to be count up in 
 that way as one of Mr. Ratler 's sheep . " 
 " but what be I to do ? " 
 " do something on your own hook . you man in Parliament be so much 
 like sheep ! if one jump at a gap , all go after he , - and then you 
 be pen into lobby , and then you be feed , and then you be 
 fleece . I wish I be in Parliament . I would get up in the middle and 
 make such a speech . you all seem to I to be so much afraid of one 
 another that you do not   quite dare to speak out . do you see that 
 cottage there ? " 
 " what a pretty cottage it be ! " 
 " yes ; - be it not ? twelve year ago I take off my shoe and stocking 
 and have they dry in that cottage , and when I get back to the house 
 I be put to bed for have be out all day in the wood . " 
 " be you wander about alone ? " 
 " no , I be not   alone . Oswald Standish be with I . we be child 
 then . do you know he ? " 
 " Lord Chiltern ; - yes , I know he . he and I have be rather friend 
 this year . " 
 " he be very good ; - be he not ? " 
 " good , - in what way ? " 
 " honest and generous ! " 
 " I know no man whom I believe to be more so . " 
 " and he be clever ? " ask Miss Effingham . 
 " very clever . that is , he talk very well if you will let he talk 
 after his own fashion . you would always fancy that he be go to 
 eat you ; - but that be his way . " 
 " and you like he ? " 
 " very much . " 
 " I be so glad to hear you say so . " 
 " be he a favourite of your , Miss Effingham ? " 
 " not now , - not particularly . I hardly ever see he . but his sister be 
 the good friend I have , and I use to like he so much when he be a 
 boy ! I have not see that cottage since that day , and I remember it 
 as though it be yesterday . Lord Chiltern be quite change , be he 
 not ? " 
 " change , - in what way ? " 
 " they use to say that he be - unsteady you know . " 
 " I think he be change . but Chiltern be at heart a Bohemian . it be 
 impossible not to see that at once . he hat the decency of life . " 
 " I suppose he do , " say Violet . " he ought to marry . if he be 
 married , that would all be cure ; - do not   you think so ? " 
 " I can not fancy he with a wife , " say Phineas , " there be a savagery 
 about he which would make he an uncomfortable companion for a 
 woman . " 
 " but he would love his wife ? " 
 " yes , as he do his horse . and he would treat she well , - as he do 
 his horse . but he expect every horse he have to do anything that any 
 horse can do ; and he would expect the same of his wife . " 
 Phineas have no idea how deep an injury he might be do his friend 
 by this description , nor do it once occur to he that his companion 
 be think of herself as the possible wife of this Red Indian . Miss 
 Effingham ride on in silence for some distance , and then she say 
 but one word more about Lord Chiltern . " he be so good to I in that 
 cottage . " 
 on the following day the party at Saulsby be break up , and there 
 be a regular pilgrimage towards Loughlinter . phinea resolve upon 
 sleep a night at Edinburgh on his way , and he find himself join 
 in the band of close companionship with Mr. Ratler for the occasion . 
 the evening be by no mean throw away , for he learn much of his 
 trade from Mr. Ratler . and Mr. Ratler be hear to declare afterwards 
 at Loughlinter that Mr. Finn be a pleasant young man . 
 it soon come to be admit by all who know Phineas Finn that he have 
 a peculiar power of make himself agreeable which no one know how to 
 analyse or define . " I think it be because he listen so well , " say 
 one man . " but the woman would not like he for that , " say another . 
 " he have study when to listen and when to talk , " say a third . the 
 truth , however , be , that Phineas Finn have make no study in the 
 matter at all . it be simply his nature to be pleasant . 
 CHAPTER XIV 
 Loughlinter 
 Phineas Finn reach Loughlinter together with Mr. Ratler in a 
 post - chaise from the neighbouring town . Mr. Ratler , who have do this 
 kind of thing very often before , travel without impediment , but 
 the new servant of our hero 's be stick outside with the driver , and 
 be in the way . " I never bring a man with I , " say Mr. Ratler to his 
 young friend . " the servant of the house like it much well , because 
 they get fee'd ; you be just as well wait on , and it do not   cost 
 half as much . " Phineas blush as he hear all this ; but there be 
 the impediment , not to be get rid of for the nonce , and Phineas make 
 the good of his attendant . " it be one of those point , " say he , " as 
 to which a man never quite make up his mind . if you bring a fellow , 
 you wish you have not   bring he ; and if you do not , you wish you have . " 
 " I be a great deal more decide in my way that that , " say Mr. 
 Ratler . 
 Loughlinter , as they approach it , seem to Phineas to be a much 
 fine place than Saulsby . and so it be , except that Loughlinter 
 want that graceful beauty of age which Saulsby possess . 
 Loughlinter be all of cut stone , but the stone have be cut only 
 yesterday . it stand on a gentle slope , with a greensward fall from 
 the front entrance down to a mountain lake . and on the other side of 
 the Lough there rise a mighty mountain to the sky , Ben Linter . at 
 the foot of it , and all round to the left , there run the wood of 
 Linter , stretch for mile through crag and bog and mountain 
 land . no well ground for deer than the side of Ben Linter be 
 there in all those highland . and the Linter , rush down into the 
 Lough through rock which , in some place , almost meet together above 
 its water , run so near to the house that the pleasant noise of its 
 cataract could be hear from the hall door . behind the house the 
 expanse of drain park land seem to be interminable ; and then , 
 again , come the mountain . there be Ben Linn and Ben Lody ; - and 
 the whole territory belong to Mr. Kennedy . he be laird of Linn 
 and laird of Linter , as his people use to say . and yet his father 
 have walk into Glasgow as a little boy , - no doubt with the normal 
 half - crown in his breech pocket . 
 " Magnificent ; - be it not ? " say Phineas to the Treasury Secretary , 
 as they be be drive up to the door . 
 " very grand ; - but the young tree show the new man . a new man may buy 
 a forest ; but he can not   get park tree . " 
 Phineas , at the moment , be think how far all these thing which 
 he see , the mountain stretch everywhere around he , the castle , 
 the lake , the river , the wealth of it all , and , more than the wealth , 
 the nobility of the beauty , might act as temptation to Lady Laura 
 Standish . if a woman be ask to have the half of all this , would 
 it be possible that she should prefer to take the half of his 
 nothing ? he think it might be possible for a girl who would 
 confess , or seem to confess , that love should be everything . but it 
 could hardly be possible for a woman who look at the world almost 
 as a man look at it , - as an oyster to be open with such weapon 
 as she could find ready to her hand . Lady Laura profess to have a 
 care for all the affair of the world . she love politic , and could 
 talk of social science , and have broad idea about religion , and be 
 devoted to certain educational view . such a woman would feel that 
 wealth be necessary to she , and would be willing , for the sake of 
 wealth , to put up with a husband without romance . Nay ; might it not 
 be that she would prefer a husband without romance ? thus Phineas be 
 argue to himself as he be drive up to the door of Loughlinter 
 Castle , while Mr. Ratler be eloquent on the beauty of old park 
 tree . " after all , a Scotch forest be a very scrubby sort of thing , " 
 say Mr. Ratler . 
 there be nobody in the house , - at least , they find nobody ; and 
 within half an hour Phineas be walk about the ground by himself . 
 Mr. Ratler have declare himself to be delighted at have an 
 opportunity of write letter , - and no doubt be write they by 
 the dozen , all date from Loughlinter , and all detail the fact 
 that Mr. Gresham , and Mr. Monk , and Plantagenet Palliser , and Lord 
 Brentford be in the same house with he . Phineas have no letter to 
 write , and therefore rush down across the broad lawn to the river , 
 of which he hear the noisy tumbling water . there be something in 
 the air which immediately fill he with high spirit ; and , in his 
 desire to investigate the glory of the place , he forget that he be 
 go to dine with four Cabinet Ministers in a row . he soon reach 
 the stream , and begin to make his way up it through the ravine . there 
 be waterfall over waterfall , and there be little bridge here and 
 there which look to be half natural and half artificial , and a path 
 which require that you should climb , but which be yet a path , and 
 all be so arrange that not a pleasant splashing rush of the water 
 be lose to the visitor . he go on and on , up the stream , till there 
 be a sharp turn in the ravine , and then , look upwards , he see 
 above his head a man and a woman stand together on one of the 
 little half - make wooden bridge . his eye be sharp , and he see at a 
 glance that the woman be Lady Laura Standish . he have not recognise 
 the man , but he have very little doubt that it be Mr. Kennedy . of 
 course it be Mr. Kennedy , because he would prefer that it should be 
 any other man under the sun . he would have turn back at once if he 
 have think that he could have do so without be observe ; but he 
 feel sure that , stand as they be , they must have observe he . 
 he do not like to join they . he would not intrude himself . so he 
 remain still , and begin to throw stone into the river . but he have 
 not throw above a stone or two when he be call from above . he 
 look up , and then he perceive that the man who call he be his 
 host . of course it be Mr. Kennedy . thereupon he cease to throw 
 stone , and go up the path , and join they upon the bridge . Mr. 
 Kennedy step forward , and bid he welcome to Loughlinter . his 
 manner be less cold , and he seem to have more word at command 
 than be usual with he . " you have not be long , " he say , " in 
 find out the most beautiful spot about the place . " 
 " be it not lovely ? " say Laura . " we have not be here an hour yet , 
 and Mr. Kennedy insist on bring I here . " 
 " it be wonderfully beautiful , " say Phineas . 
 " it be this very spot where we now stand that make I build the house 
 where it be , " say Mr. Kennedy , " and I be only eighteen when I stand 
 here and make up my mind . that be just twenty - five year ago . " " so he 
 be forty - three , " say Phineas to himself , think how glorious it 
 be to be only twenty - five . " and within twelve month , " continue Mr. 
 Kennedy , " the foundation be be dig and the stone - cutter be 
 at work . " 
 " what a good - natured man your father must have be , " say Lady 
 Laura . 
 " he have nothing else to do with his money but to pour it over my 
 head , as it be . I do not   think he have any other enjoyment of it 
 himself . will you go a little high , Lady Laura ? we shall get a fine 
 view over to Ben Linn just now . " Lady Laura declare that she would 
 go as much high as he choose to take she , and Phineas be rather in 
 doubt as to what it would become he to do . he would stay where he 
 be , or go down , or make himself to vanish after any most acceptable 
 fashion ; but if he be to do so abruptly it would seem as though he 
 be attribute something special to the companionship of the other 
 two . Mr. Kennedy see his doubt , and ask he to join they . " you may 
 as well come on , Mr. Finn . we do not   dine till eight , and it be not 
 much past six yet . the man of business be all write letter , and 
 the lady who have be travel be in bed , I believe . " 
 " not all of they , Mr. Kennedy , " say Lady Laura . then they go 
 on with their walk very pleasantly , and the lord of all that they 
 survey take they from one point of vantage to another , till they 
 both swear that of all spot upon the earth Loughlinter be surely 
 the most lovely . " I do delight in it , I own , " say the lord . " when 
 I come up here alone , and feel that in the midst of this little bit 
 of a crowded island I have all this to myself , - all this with which 
 no other man 's wealth can interfere , - I grow proud of my own , till 
 I become thoroughly ashamed of myself . after all , I believe it be 
 well to dwell in city than in the country , - well , at any rate , 
 for a rich man . " Mr. Kennedy have now speak more word than Phineas 
 have hear to fall from his lip during the whole time that they have 
 be acquaint with each other . 
 " I believe so too , " say Laura , " if one be oblige to choose 
 between the two . for myself , I think that a little of both be good 
 for man and woman . " 
 " there be no doubt about that , " say Phineas . 
 " no doubt as far as enjoyment go , " say Mr. Kennedy . 
 he take they up out of the ravine on to the side of the mountain , and 
 then down by another path through the wood to the back of the house . 
 as they go he relapse into his usual silence , and the conversation 
 be keep up between the other two . at a point not very far from the 
 castle , - just so far that one could see by the break of the ground 
 where the castle stand , Kennedy leave they . " Mr. Finn will take you 
 back in safety , I be sure , " say he , " and , as I be here , I will go up 
 to the farm for a moment . if I do not   show myself now and again when I 
 be here , they think I be indifferent about the ' bestial ' . " 
 " now , Mr. Kennedy , " say Lady Laura , " you be go to pretend to 
 understand all about sheep and oxen . " Mr. Kennedy , own that it 
 be so , go away to his farm , and Phineas with Lady Laura return 
 towards the house . " I think , upon the whole , " say Lady Laura , " that 
 that be as good a man as I know . " 
 " I should think he be an idle one , " say Phineas . 
 " I doubt that . he be , perhaps , neither zealous nor active . but he be 
 thoughtful and high - principle , and have a method and a purpose in the 
 use which he make of his money . and you see that he have poetry in 
 his nature too , if you get he upon the right string . how fond he be 
 of the scenery of this place ! " 
 " any man would be fond of that . I be ashamed to say that it almost 
 make I envy he . I certainly never have wish to be Mr. Robert 
 Kennedy in London , but I should like to be the Laird of Loughlinter . " 
 " ' Laird of Linn and Laird of Linter , - here in summer , go in 
 winter . ' there be some ballad about the old laird ; but that belong 
 to a time when Mr. Kennedy have not be hear of , when some branch of 
 the Mackenzies live down at that wretched old tower which you see as 
 you first come upon the lake . when old Mr. Kennedy buy it there 
 be hardly a hundred acre on the property under cultivation . " 
 " and it belong to the mackenzie . " 
 " yes ; - to the Mackenzie of Linn , as he be call . it be Mr. 
 Kennedy , the old man , who be first call Loughlinter . that be 
 Linn Castle , and they live there for hundred of year . but these 
 highlander , with all that be say of their family pride , have 
 forget the Mackenzies already , and be quite proud of their rich 
 landlord . " 
 " that be unpoetical , " say Phineas . 
 " yes ; - but then poetry be so usually false . I doubt whether Scotland 
 would not have be as prosaic a country as any under the sun but for 
 Walter Scott ; - and I have no doubt that Henry V owe the romance of 
 his character altogether to Shakspeare . " 
 " I sometimes think you despise poetry , " say Phineas . 
 " when it be false I do . the difficulty be to know when it be false 
 and when it be true . Tom Moore be always false . " 
 " not so false as Byron , " say Phineas with energy . 
 " much more so , my friend . but we will not discuss that now . have you 
 see Mr. Monk since you have be here ? " 
 " I have see no one . I come with Mr. Ratler . " 
 " why with Mr. Ratler ? you can not find Mr. Ratler a companion much to 
 your taste . " 
 " Chance bring we together . but Mr. Ratler be a man of sense , Lady 
 Laura , and be not to be despise . " 
 " it always seem to I , " say Lady Laura , " that nothing be to be 
 gain in politic by sit at the foot of the little Gamaliels . " 
 " but the great Gamaliels will not have a novice on their footstool . " 
 " then sit at no man 's foot . be it not astonish that the price 
 generally put upon any article by the world be that which the owner 
 put on it ? - and that this be specially true of a man 's own self ? if 
 you herd with Ratler , man will take it for grant that you be a 
 Ratlerite , and no more . if you consort with Greshams and Pallisers , 
 you will equally be suppose to know your own place . " 
 " I never know a mentor , " say Phineas , ' so apt as you be to fill his 
 Telemachus with pride . " 
 " it be because I do not think your fault lie that way . if it do , 
 or if I think so , my telemachu , you may be sure that I should 
 resign my position as Mentor . here be Mr. Kennedy and Lady Glencora 
 and Mrs. Gresham on the step . " then they go up through the Ionic 
 column on to the broad stone terrace before the door , and there they 
 find a crowd of man and woman . for the legislator and statesman have 
 write their letter , and the lady have take their necessary rest . 
 Phineas , as he be dress , consider deeply all that Lady Laura 
 have say to he , - not so much with reference to the advice which she 
 have give he , though that also be of importance , as to the fact 
 that it have be give by she . she have first call herself his 
 mentor ; but he have accept the name and have address she as her 
 Telemachus . and yet he believe himself to be old than she , - if , 
 indeed , there be any difference in their age . and be it possible 
 that a female mentor should love her Telemachus , - should love he as 
 Phineas desire to be love by Lady Laura ? he would not say that it 
 be impossible . perhaps there have be mistake between they ; - a 
 mistake in his manner of address she , and another in hers of 
 address he . perhaps the old bachelor of forty - three be not 
 think of a wife . have this old bachelor of forty - three be really 
 in love with Lady Laura , would he have allow she to walk home alone 
 with Phineas , leave she with some flimsy pretext of have to look 
 at his sheep ? Phineas resolve that he must at any rate play out his 
 game , - whether he be to lose it or to win it ; and in play it he 
 must , if possible , drop something of that Mentor and Telemachus style 
 of conversation . as to the advice give he of herd with Greshams 
 and Pallisers , instead of with Ratlers and Fitzgibbons , - he must use 
 that as circumstance might direct . to he , himself , as he think 
 of it all , it be sufficiently astonishing that even the Ratlers and 
 Fitzgibbons should admit he among they as one of themselves . " when 
 I think of my father and of the old house at Killaloe , and remember 
 that hitherto I have do nothing myself , I can not understand how 
 it be that I should be at Loughlinter . " there be only one way of 
 understand it . if Lady Laura really love he , the riddle might 
 be read . 
 the room at Loughlinter be splendid , much large and very much 
 more richly furnish than those at Saulsby . but there be a certain 
 stiffness in the movement of thing , and perhaps in the manner of 
 some of those present , which be not feel at Saulsby . phinea at 
 once miss the grace and prettiness and cheery audacity of Violet 
 Effingham , and feel at the same time that Violet Effingham would be 
 out of her element at Loughlinter . at Loughlinter they be meet for 
 business . it be at least a semi - political , or perhaps rather a 
 semi - official gathering , and he become aware that he ought not to 
 look simply for amusement . when he enter the drawing - room before 
 dinner , Mr. Monk and Mr. Palliser , and Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Gresham , 
 with sundry other , be stand in a wide group before the 
 fireplace , and among they be Lady Glencora Palliser and Lady Laura 
 and Mrs. Bonteen . as he approach they it seem as though a sort 
 of opening be make for himself ; but he could see , though other do 
 not , that the movement come from Lady Laura . 
 " I believe , Mr. Monk , " say Lady Glencora , " that you and I be the 
 only two in the whole party who really know what we would be at . " 
 " if I must be divide from so many of my friend , " say Mr. Monk , " I 
 be happy to go astray in the company of Lady Glencora Palliser . " 
 " and might I ask , " say Mr. Gresham , with a peculiar smile for which 
 he be famous , " what it be that you and Mr. Monk be really at ? " 
 " make man and woman all equal , " say Lady Glencora . " that I take to 
 be the gist of our political theory . " 
 " Lady Glencora , I must cry off , " say Mr. Monk . 
 " yes ; - no doubt . if I be in the Cabinet myself I should not admit 
 so much . there be reticence , - of course . and there be an official 
 discretion . " 
 " but you do not   mean to say , Lady Glencora , that you would really 
 advocate equality ? " say Mrs. Bonteen . 
 " I do mean to say so , Mrs. Bonteen . and I mean to go far , and to 
 tell you that you be no Liberal at heart unless you do so likewise ; 
 unless that be the basis of your political aspiration . " 
 " pray let I speak for myself , Lady Glencora . " 
 " by no mean , - not when you be criticise I and my politic . do 
 you not wish to make the low order comfortable ? " 
 " certainly , " say Mrs. Bonteen . 
 " and educate , and happy and good ? " 
 " undoubtedly . " 
 " to make they as comfortable and as good as yourself ? " 
 " well if possible . " 
 " and I be sure you wish to make yourself as good and as comfortable as 
 anybody else , - as those above you , if anybody be above you ? you will 
 admit that ? " 
 " yes ; - if I understand you . " 
 " then you have admit everything , and be an advocate for general 
 equality , - just as Mr. Monk be , and as I be . there be no get out 
 of it ; - be there , Mr. Kennedy ? " then dinner be announce , and Mr. 
 Kennedy walk off with the french Republican on his arm . as she 
 go , she whisper into Mr. Kennedy 's ear , " you will understand 
 I . I be not say that people be equal ; but that the tendency 
 of all law - making and of all governing should be to reduce the 
 inequality . " in answer to which Mr. Kennedy say not a word . Lady 
 Glencora 's politic be too fast and furious for his nature . 
 a week pass by at Loughlinter , at the end of which Phineas find 
 himself on term of friendly intercourse with all the political 
 magnate assemble in the house , but especially with Mr. Monk . he have 
 determine that he would not follow Lady Laura 's advice as to his 
 selection of companion , if in do so he should be drive even to 
 a seeming of intrusion . he make no attempt to sit at the foot of 
 anybody , and would stand aloof when big man than himself be 
 talk , and be content to be less , - as indeed he be less , - than 
 Mr. Bonteen or Mr. Ratler . but at the end of a week he find that , 
 without any effort on his part , - almost in opposition to effort on 
 his part , - he have fall into an easy pleasant way with these man 
 which be very delightful to he . he have kill a stag in company 
 with Mr. Palliser , and have stop beneath a crag to discuss with he 
 a question as to the duty on irish malt . he have play chess with Mr. 
 Gresham , and have be tell that gentleman 's opinion on the trial of 
 Mr. Jefferson Davis . Lord Brentford have - at last - call he Finn , 
 and have prove to he that nothing be know in Ireland about sheep . 
 but with Mr. Monk he have have long discussion on abstract question 
 in politic , - and before the week be over be almost disposed to 
 call himself a disciple , or , at least , a follower of Mr. Monk . why 
 not of Mr. Monk as well as of any one else ? Mr. Monk be in the 
 Cabinet , and of all the member of the Cabinet be the most advanced 
 Liberal . " Lady Glencora be not so far wrong the other night , " Mr. 
 Monk say to he . " equality be an ugly word and should not   be use . it 
 mislead , and frightens , and be a bugbear . and she , in use it , have 
 not perhaps a clearly define meaning for it in her own mind . but 
 the wish of every honest man should be to assist in lift up those 
 below he , till they be something nearer his own level than he find 
 they . " to this Phineas assent , - and by degree he find himself 
 assent to a great many thing that Mr. Monk say to he . 
 Mr. Monk be a thin , tall , gaunt man , who have devote his whole life 
 to politic , hitherto without any personal reward beyond that which 
 come to he from the reputation of his name , and from the honour of 
 a seat in Parliament . he be one of four or five brother , - and all 
 besides he be in trade . they have prosper in trade , whereas he 
 have prosper solely in politic ; and man say that he be dependent 
 altogether on what his relative supply for his support . he have now 
 be in Parliament for more than twenty year , and have be know not 
 only as a Radical but as a Democrat . ten year since , when he have 
 rise to fame , but not to repute , among the man who then govern 
 England , nobody dream that Joshua Monk would ever be a pay servant 
 of the Crown . he have inveigh against one minister after another 
 as though they all deserve impeachment . he have advocate political 
 doctrine which at that time seem to be altogether at variance 
 with any possibility of govern accord to english rule of 
 government . he have be regard as a pestilent thorn in the side of 
 all minister . but now he be a member of the Cabinet , and those whom 
 he have terrify in the old day begin to find that he be not so 
 much unlike other man . there be but few horse which you can not put 
 into harness , and those of the high spirit will generally do your 
 work the good . 
 Phineas , who have his eye about he , think that he could perceive 
 that Mr. Palliser do not shoot a deer with Mr. Ratler , and that Mr. 
 Gresham play no chess with Mr. Bonteen . Bonteen , indeed , be a 
 noisy push man whom nobody seem to like , and Phineas wonder 
 why he should be at Loughlinter , and why he should be in office . his 
 friend Laurence Fitzgibbon have indeed once endeavour to explain 
 this . " a man who can vote hard , as I call it ; and who will speak a 
 few word now and then as they be want , without any ambition that 
 way , may always have his price . and if he have a pretty wife into the 
 bargain , he ought to have a pleasant time of it . " Mr. Ratler no doubt 
 be a very useful man , who thoroughly know his business ; but yet , 
 as it seem to Phineas , no very great distinction be show to 
 Mr. Ratler at Loughlinter . " if I get as high as that , " he say to 
 himself , " I should think myself a miracle of luck . and yet nobody 
 seem to think anything of Ratler . it be all nothing unless one can 
 go to the very top . " 
 " I believe I do right to accept office , " Mr. Monk say to he one 
 day , as they sit together on a rock close by one of the little 
 bridge over the Linter . " indeed , unless a man do so when the bond 
 of the office tender to he be make compatible with his own view , 
 he decline to proceed on the open path towards the prosecution of 
 those view . a man who be combat one ministry after another , and 
 strive to imbue those minister with his conviction , can hardly 
 decline to become a minister himself when he find that those 
 conviction of his own be henceforth , - or at least for some time to 
 come , - to be the ministerial conviction of the day . do you follow 
 I ? " 
 " very clearly , " say Phineas . " you would have deny your own 
 child have you refuse . " 
 " unless indeed a man be to feel that he be in some way unfit 
 for office work . I very nearly provide for myself an escape on that 
 plea ; - but when I come to sift it , I think that it would be false . 
 but let I tell you that the delight of political life be altogether 
 in opposition . why , it be freedom against slavery , fire against clay , 
 movement against stagnation ! the very inaccuracy which be permit 
 to opposition be in itself a charm worth more than all the patronage 
 and all the prestige of ministerial power . you will try they both , and 
 then say if you do not agree with I . give I the full swing of the 
 bench below the gangway , where I need to care for no one , and 
 could always enjoy myself on my leg as long as I feel that I be 
 true to those who send I there ! that be all over now . they have get 
 I into harness , and my shoulder be sore . the oat , however , be of 
 the good , and the hay be unexceptionable . " 
 CHAPTER XV 
 Donald Bean 's Pony 
 Phineas like be tell that the pleasure of opposition and the 
 pleasure of office be both open to he , - and he like also to 
 be the choose receptacle of Mr. Monk 's confidence . he have come to 
 understand that he be expect to remain ten day at Loughlinter , 
 and that then there be to be a general movement . since the first day 
 he have see but little of Mr. Kennedy , but he have find himself very 
 frequently with Lady Laura . and then have come up the question of his 
 project trip to Paris with Lord Chiltern . he have receive a letter 
 from Lord Chiltern . 
 DEAR FINN , 
 be you go to Paris with I ? 
 your , C. 
 there have be not a word beyond this , and before he answer it he 
 make up his mind to tell Lady Laura the truth . he could not go to 
 Paris because he have no money . 
 " I have   just get that from your brother , " say he . 
 " how like Oswald . he write to I perhaps three time in the year , 
 and his letter be just the same . you will go I hope ? " 
 " well ; - no . " 
 " I be sorry for that . " 
 " I wonder whether I may tell you the real reason , Lady Laura . " 
 " Nay ; - I can not answer that ; but unless it be some political secret 
 between you and Mr. Monk , I should think you might . " 
 " I can not afford to go to Paris this autumn . it seem to be a 
 shocking admission to make , - though I do not   know why it should be . " 
 " nor I ; - but , Mr. Finn , I like you all the well for make it . I 
 be very sorry , for Oswald 's sake . it be so hard to find any companion 
 for he whom he would like and whom we , - that be I , - should think 
 altogether - ; you know what I mean , Mr. Finn . " 
 " your wish that I should go with he be a great compliment , and I 
 thoroughly wish that I could do it . as it be , I must go to Killaloe 
 and retrieve my finance . I daresay , Lady Laura , you can hardly 
 conceive how very poor a man I be . " there be a melancholy tone 
 about his voice as he say this , which make she think for the moment 
 whether or no he have be right in go into Parliament , and whether 
 she have be right in instigate he to do so . but it be too late 
 to recur to that question now . 
 " you must climb into office early , and forego those pleasure of 
 opposition which be so dear to Mr. Monk , " she say , smile . " after 
 all , money be an accident which do not count nearly so high as do 
 some other thing . you and Mr. Kennedy have the same enjoyment of 
 everything around you here . " 
 " yes ; while it last . " 
 " and Lady Glencora and I stand pretty much on the same footing , in 
 spite of all her wealth , - except that she be a married woman . I do 
 not know what she be worth , - something not to be count ; and I be 
 worth , - just what papa choose to give I . a ten - pound note at the 
 present moment I should look upon as great rich . " this be the 
 first time she have ever speak to he of her own position as regard 
 money ; but he have hear , or think that he have hear , that she have 
 be leave a fortune altogether independent of her father . 
 the last of the ten day have now come , and Phineas be discontent 
 and almost unhappy . the more he see of Lady Laura the more he fear 
 that it be impossible that she should become his wife . and yet from 
 day to day his intimacy with she become more close . he have never make 
 love to she , nor could he discover that it be possible for he to 
 do so . she seem to be a woman for whom all the ordinary stage of 
 love - making be quite unsuitable , of course he could declare his 
 love and ask she to be his wife on any occasion on which he might 
 find himself to be alone with she . and on this morning he have make 
 up his mind that he would do so before the day be over . it might 
 be possible that she would never speak to he again ; - that all the 
 pleasure and ambitious hope to which she have introduce he might 
 be over as soon as that rash word should have be speak ! but , 
 nevertheless , he would speak it . 
 on this day there be to be a grouse - shoot party , and the shooter 
 be to be out early . it have be talk of for some day or two past , 
 and Phineas know that he could not escape it . there have be some 
 rivalry between he and Mr. Bonteen , and there be to be a sort of 
 match as to which of the two would kill most bird before lunch . but 
 there have also be some half promise on Lady Laura 's part that she 
 would walk with he up the Linter and come down upon the lake , take 
 an opposite direction from that by which they have return with Mr. 
 Kennedy . 
 " but you will be shoot all day , " she say , when he propose it to 
 she as they be start for the moor . the waggonet that be to take 
 they be at the door , and she be there to see they start . her father 
 be one of the shoot party , and Mr. Kennedy be another . 
 " I will undertake to be back in time , if you will not think it too 
 hot . I shall not see you again till we meet in town next year . " 
 " then I certainly will go with you , - that be to say , if you be here . 
 but you can not return without the rest of the party , as you be go 
 so far . " 
 " I will get back somehow , " say Phineas , who be resolve that a 
 few mile more or less of mountain should not detain he from the 
 prosecution of a task so vitally important to he . " if we start at 
 five that will be early enough . " 
 " quite early enough , " say Lady Laura . 
 Phineas go off to the mountain , and shoot his grouse , and win his 
 match , and eat his luncheon . Mr. Bonteen , however , be not beat by 
 much , and be in consequence somewhat ill - humour . 
 " I will tell you what I will do , " say Mr. Bonteen , " I will back myself for 
 the rest of the day for a ten - pound note . " 
 now there have be no money stake on the match at all , - but it have 
 be simply a trial of skill , as to which would kill the most bird 
 in a give time . and the proposition for that trial have come from Mr. 
 Bonteen himself . " I should not think of shoot for money , " say 
 Phineas . 
 " and why not ? a bet be the only way to decide these thing . " 
 " partly because I be sure I should not   hit a bird , " say Phineas , " and 
 partly because I have not   get any money to lose . " 
 " I hate bet , " say Mr. Kennedy to he afterwards . " I be annoy 
 when Bonteen offer the wager . I feel sure , however , you would not 
 accept it . " 
 " I suppose such bet be very common . " 
 " I do not   think man ought to propose they unless they be quite 
 sure of their company . maybe I be wrong , and I often feel that I be 
 strait - laced about such thing . it be so odd to I that man can not 
 amuse themselves without pit themselves against each other . when 
 a man tell I that he can shoot well than I , I tell he that my 
 keeper can shoot well than he . " 
 " all the same , it be a good thing to excel , " say Phineas . 
 " I be not so sure of that , " say Mr. Kennedy . " a man who can kill more 
 salmon than anybody else , can rarely do anything else . be you go 
 on with your match ? " 
 " no ; I be go to make my way to Loughlinter . " 
 " not alone ? " 
 " yes , alone . " 
 " it be over nine mile . you can not   walk it . " 
 Phineas look at his watch , and find that it be now two o'clock . 
 it be a broil day in August , and the way back to Loughlinter , for 
 six or seven out of the nine mile , would be along a high road . " I 
 must do it all the same , " say he , prepare for a start . " I have an 
 engagement with Lady Laura Standish ; and as this be the last day that 
 I shall see she , I certainly do not mean to break it . " 
 " an engagement with Lady Laura , " say Mr. Kennedy . " why do you not 
 tell I , that I might have a pony ready ? but come along . Donald Bean 
 have a pony . he be not much big than a dog , but he will carry you to 
 Loughlinter . " 
 " I can walk it , Mr. Kennedy . " 
 " yes ; and think of the state in which you would reach Loughlinter ! come 
 along with I . " 
 " but I can not   take you off the mountain , " say Phineas . 
 " then you must allow I to take you off . " 
 so Mr. Kennedy lead the way down to Donald Bean 's cottage , and before 
 three o'clock Phineas find himself mount on a shaggy steed , which , 
 in sober truth , be not much big than a large dog . " if Mr. Kennedy 
 be really my rival , " say Phineas to himself , as he trot along , " I 
 almost think that I be do an unhandsome thing in take the pony . " 
 at five o'clock he be under the portico before the front door , and 
 there he find Lady Laura wait for he , - wait for he , or at 
 least ready for he . she have on her hat and glove and light shawl , 
 and her parasol be in her hand . he think that he have never see 
 her look so young , so pretty , and so fit to receive a lover 's vow . 
 but at the same moment it occur to he that she be Lady Laura 
 Standish , the daughter of an Earl , the descendant of a line of 
 Earls , - and that he be the son of a simple country doctor in 
 Ireland . be it fitting that he should ask such a woman to be his 
 wife ? but then Mr. Kennedy be the son of a man who have walk into 
 Glasgow with half - a - crown in his pocket . Mr. Kennedy 's grandfather 
 have be , - Phineas think that he have hear that Mr. Kennedy 's 
 grandfather have be a Scotch drover ; whereas his own grandfather 
 have be a little squire near Ennistimon , in county Clare , and his 
 own first cousin once remove still hold the paternal acre at Finn 
 Grove . his family be suppose to be descend from king in that 
 part of Ireland . it certainly do not become he to fear Lady Laura 
 on the score of rank , if it be to be allow to Mr. Kennedy to 
 proceed without fear on that head . as to wealth , Lady Laura have 
 already tell he that her fortune be no great than his . her 
 statement to himself on that head make he feel that he should not 
 hesitate on the score of money . they neither have any , and he be 
 willing to work for both . if she fear the risk , let she say so . 
 it be thus that he argue with himself ; but yet he know , - know as 
 well as the reader will know , - that he be go to do that which he 
 have no right to do . it might be very well for he to wait , - presume 
 he to be successful in his love , - for the opening of that oyster 
 with his political sword , that oyster on which he propose that they 
 should both live ; but such waiting could not well be to the taste 
 of Lady Laura Standish . it could hardly be pleasant to she to look 
 forward to his be make a junior lord or an assistant secretary 
 before she could establish herself in her home . so he tell himself . 
 and yet he tell himself at the same time that it be incumbent on he 
 to persevere . 
 " I do not expect you in the least , " say Lady Laura . 
 " and yet I speak very positively . " 
 " but there be thing as to which a man may be very positive , and yet 
 may be allow to fail . in the first place , how on earth do you get 
 home ? " 
 " Mr. Kennedy get I a pony , - Donald Bean 's pony . " 
 " you tell he , then ? " 
 " yes ; I tell he why I be come , and that I must be here . then he 
 take the trouble to come all the way off the mountain to persuade 
 Donald to lend I his pony . I must acknowledge that Mr. Kennedy have 
 conquer I at last . " 
 " I be so glad of that , " say Lady Laura . " I know he would , - unless it 
 be your own fault . " 
 they go up the path by the brook , from bridge to bridge , till they 
 find themselves out upon the open mountain at the top . Phineas have 
 resolve that he would not speak out his mind till he find himself 
 on that spot ; that then he would ask she to sit down , and that while 
 she be so seated he would tell she everything . at the present moment 
 he have on his head a Scotch cap with a grouse 's feather in it , and he 
 be dress in a velvet shooting - jacket and dark knickerbocker ; and 
 be certainly , in this costume , as handsome a man as any woman would 
 wish to see . and there be , too , a look of breed about he which 
 have come to he , no doubt , from the royal Finns of old , which ever 
 serve he in great stead . he be , indeed , only Phineas Finn , and 
 be know by the world to be no more ; but he look as though he 
 might have be anybody , - a royal Finn himself . and then he have 
 that special grace of appear to be altogether unconscious of his 
 own personal advantage . and I think that in truth he be barely 
 conscious of they ; that he depend on they very little , if at all ; 
 that there be nothing of personal vanity in his composition . he have 
 never indulge in any hope that Lady Laura would accept he because 
 he be a handsome man . 
 " after all that climb , " he say , " will you not sit down for a 
 moment ? " as he speak to she she look at he and tell herself that 
 he be as handsome as a god . " do sit down for one moment , " he say . 
 " I have something that I desire to say to you , and to say it here . " 
 " I will , " she say ; " but I also have something to tell you , and will 
 say it while I be yet stand . yesterday I accept an offer of 
 marriage from Mr. Kennedy . " 
 " then I be too late , " say Phineas , and put his hand into the 
 pocket of his coat , he turn his back upon she , and walk away 
 across the mountain . 
 what a fool he have be to let she know his secret when her knowledge 
 of it could be of no service to he , - when her knowledge of it could 
 only make he appear foolish in her eye ! but for his life he could 
 not have keep his secret to himself . nor now could he bring himself 
 to utter a word of even decent civility . but he go on walk as 
 though he could thus leave she there , and never see she again . what 
 an ass he have be in suppose that she care for he ! what a fool 
 to imagine that his poverty could stand a chance against the wealth 
 of Loughlinter ! but why have she lure he on ? how he wish that he 
 be now grind , hard at work in Mr. Low 's chamber , or sit 
 at home at Killaloe with the hand of that pretty little irish girl 
 within his own ! 
 presently he hear a voice behind he , - call he gently . then he 
 turn and find that she be very near he . he himself have then 
 be stand still for some moment , and she have follow he . " Mr. 
 Finn , " she say . 
 " well ; - yes : what be it ? " and turn round he make an attempt to 
 smile . 
 " will you not wish I joy , or say a word of congratulation ? have I not 
 think much of your friendship , I should not have be so quick to 
 tell you of my destiny . no one else have be tell , except papa . " 
 " of course I hope you will be happy . of course I do . no wonder he 
 lend I the pony ! " 
 " you must forget all that . " 
 " forget what ? " 
 " well , - nothing . you need forget nothing , " say Lady Laura , " for 
 nothing have be say that need be regret . only wish I joy , and 
 all will be pleasant . " 
 " Lady Laura , I do wish you joy , with all my heart , - but that will not 
 make all thing pleasant . I come up here to ask you to be my wife . " 
 " no ; - no , no ; do not say it . " 
 " but I have say it , and will say it again . I , poor , penniless , plain 
 simple fool that I be , have be ass enough to love you , Lady Laura 
 Standish ; and I bring you up here to - day to ask you to share with 
 I - my nothingness . and this I have do on soil that be to be all 
 your own . tell I that you regard I as a conceited fool , - as a 
 bewildered idiot . " 
 " I wish to regard you as a dear friend , - both of my own and of my 
 husband , " say she , offer he her hand . 
 " should I have have a chance , I wonder , if I have speak a week since ? " 
 " how can I answer such a question , Mr. Finn ? or , rather , I will , 
 answer it fully . it be not a week since we tell each other , you to 
 I and I to you , that we be both poor , - both without other mean 
 than those which come to we from our father . you will make your 
 way ; - will make it surely ; but how at present could you marry any 
 woman unless she have money of her own ? for I , - like so many other 
 girl , it be necessary that I should stay at home or marry some one 
 rich enough to dispense with fortune in a wife . the man whom in all 
 the world I think the good have ask I to share everything with 
 he ; - and I have think it wise to accept his offer . " 
 " and I be fool enough to think that you love I , " say Phineas . to 
 this she make no immediate answer . " yes , I be . I feel that I owe it 
 you to tell you what a fool I have be . I do . I think you love 
 I . at least I think that perhaps you love I . it be like a child 
 want the moon ; - be it not ? " 
 " and why should I not have love you ? " she say slowly , lay she 
 hand gently upon his arm . 
 " why not ? because Loughlinter - " 
 " stop , Mr. Finn ; stop . do not say to I any unkind word that I 
 have not deserve , and that would make a breach between we . I have 
 accept the owner of Loughlinter as my husband , because I verily 
 believe that I shall thus do my duty in that sphere of life to which 
 it have please God to call I . I have always like he , and I will 
 love he . for you , - may I trust myself to speak openly to you ? " 
 " you may trust I as against all other , except we two ourselves . " 
 " for you , then , I will say also that I have always like you since I 
 know you ; that I have love you as a friend ; - and could have love 
 you otherwise have not circumstance show I so plainly that it 
 would be unwise . " 
 " oh , Lady Laura ! " 
 " listen a moment . and pray remember that what I say to you now must 
 never be repeat to any ear . no one know it but my father , my 
 brother , and Mr. Kennedy . early in the spring I pay my brother 's 
 debt . his affection to I be more than a return for what I have do 
 for he . but when I do this , - when I make up my mind to do it , I 
 make up my mind also that I could not allow myself the same freedom 
 of choice which would otherwise have belong to I . will that be 
 sufficient , Mr. Finn ? " 
 " how can I answer you , Lady Laura ? sufficient ! and you be not angry 
 with I for what I have say ? " 
 " no , I be not angry . but it be understand , of course , that nothing 
 of this shall ever be repeat , - even among ourselves . be that a 
 bargain ? " 
 " oh , yes . I shall never speak of it again . " 
 " and now you will wish I joy ? " 
 " I have wish you joy , Lady Laura . and I will do so again . may you 
 have every blessing which the world can give you . you can not expect 
 I to be very jovial for awhile myself ; but there will be nobody to 
 see my melancholy mood . I shall be hide myself away in Ireland . 
 when be the marriage to be ? " 
 " nothing have be say of that . I shall be guide by he , - but there 
 must , of course , be delay . there will be settlement and I know not 
 what . it may probably be in the spring , - or perhaps the summer . I 
 shall do just what my better tell I to do . " 
 Phineas have now seat himself on the exact stone on which he have 
 wish she to sit when he propose to tell his own story , and be 
 look forth upon the lake . it seem to he that everything have 
 be change for he while he have be up there upon the mountain , 
 and that the change have be marvellous in its nature . when he have 
 be come up , there have be apparently two alternative before 
 he : the glory of successful love , - which , indeed , have seem to he 
 to be a most improbable result of the come interview , - and the 
 despair and utter banishment attendant on disdainful rejection . but 
 his position be far remove from either of these alternative . she 
 have almost tell he that she would have love he have she not be 
 poor , - that she be begin to love he and have quench her love , 
 because it have become impossible to she to marry a poor man . in such 
 circumstance he could not be angry with she , - he could not quarrel 
 with she ; he could not do other than swear to himself that he would 
 be her friend . and yet he love she well than ever ; - and she be 
 the promise wife of his rival ! why have not Donald Bean 's pony break 
 his neck ? 
 " shall we go down now ? " she say . 
 " oh , yes . " 
 " you will not go on by the lake ? " 
 " what be the use ? it be all the same now . you will want to be back to 
 receive he in from shoot . " 
 " not that , I think . he be above those little care . but it will be as 
 well we should go the near way , as we have spend so much of our 
 time here . I shall tell Mr. Kennedy that I have tell you , - if you do 
 not mind . " 
 " tell he what you please , " say Phineas . 
 " but I will not   have it take in that way , Mr. Finn . your brusque want 
 of courtesy to I I have forgive , but I shall expect you to make up 
 for it by the alacrity of your congratulation to he . I will not 
 have you uncourteous to Mr. Kennedy . " 
 " if I have be uncourteous I beg your pardon . " 
 " you need not do that . we be old friend , and may take the liberty 
 of speak plainly to each other ; - but you will owe it to Mr. 
 Kennedy to be gracious . think of the pony . " 
 they walk back to the house together , and as they go down the 
 path very little be say . just as they be about to come out upon 
 the open lawn , while they be still under cover of the rock and 
 shrub , Phineas stop his companion by stand before she , and 
 then he make his farewell speech to she . 
 " I must say good - bye to you . I shall be away early in the morning . " 
 " good - bye , and God bless you , " say Lady Laura . 
 " give I your hand , " say he . and she give he her hand . " I do not 
 suppose you know what it be to love dearly . " 
 " I hope I do . " 
 " but to be in love ! I believe you do not . and to miss your love ! I 
 think , - I be bind to think that you have never be so tormented . it 
 be very sore ; - but I will do my good , like a man , to get over it . " 
 " do , my friend , do . so small a trouble will never weigh heavily on 
 shoulder such as your . " 
 " it will weigh very heavily , but I will struggle hard that it may not 
 crush I . I have love you so dearly ! as we be part give I one 
 kiss , that I may think of it and treasure it in my memory ! " what 
 murmur word she speak to express her refusal of such a request , 
 I will not quote ; but the kiss have be take before the denial be 
 complete , and then they walk on in silence together , - and in 
 peace , towards the house . 
 on the next morning six or seven man be go away , and there be 
 an early breakfast . there be none of the lady there , but Mr. 
 Kennedy , the host , be among his friend . a large drag with four 
 horse be there to take the traveller and their luggage to the 
 station , and there be naturally a good deal of noise at the front 
 door as the preparation for the departure be make . in the middle 
 of they Mr. Kennedy take our hero aside . " Laura have tell I , " say 
 Mr. Kennedy , " that she have acquaint you with my good fortune . " 
 " and I congratulate you most heartily , " say Phineas , grasp the 
 other 's hand . " you be indeed a lucky fellow . " 
 " I feel myself to be so , " say Mr. Kennedy . " such a wife be all that 
 be want to I , and such a wife be very hard to find . will you 
 remember , Finn , that Loughlinter will never be so full but what 
 there will be a room for you , or so empty but what you will be make 
 welcome ? I say this on Lady Laura 's part and on my own . " 
 Phineas , as he be be carry away to the railway station , could 
 not keep himself from speculate as to how much Kennedy know of 
 what have take place during the walk up the Linter . of one small 
 circumstance that have occur , he feel quite sure that Mr. Kennedy 
 know nothing . 
 CHAPTER XVI 
 Phineas Finn return to Killaloe 
 Phineas Finn 's first session of Parliament be over , - his first 
 session with all its adventure . when he get back to Mrs. Bunce 's 
 house , - for Mrs. Bunce receive he for a night in spite of her 
 husband 's advice to the contrary , - I be afraid he almost feel that 
 Mrs. Bunce and her room be beneath he . of course he be very 
 unhappy , - as wretched as a man can be ; there be moment in which he 
 think that it would hardly become he to live unless he could do 
 something to prevent the marriage of Lady Laura and Mr. Kennedy . but , 
 nevertheless , he have his consolation . these be reflection which 
 have in they much of melancholy satisfaction . he have not be despise 
 by the woman to whom he have tell his love . she have not show he that 
 she think he to be unworthy of she . she have not regard his love 
 as an offence . indeed , she have almost tell he that prudence alone 
 have forbid she to return his passion . and he have kiss she , and 
 have afterwards part from she as a dear friend . I do not know why 
 there should have be a flavour of exquisite joy in the midst of his 
 agony as he think of this ; - but it be so . he would never kiss she 
 again . all future delight of that kind would belong to Mr. Kennedy , 
 and he have no real idea of interfere with that gentleman in the 
 fruition of his privilege . but still there be the kiss , - an 
 eternal fact . and then , in all respect except that of his love , his 
 visit to Loughlinter have be pre - eminently successful . Mr. Monk have 
 become his friend , and have encourage he to speak during the next 
 session , - set before he various model , and prescribe for he 
 a course of reading . Lord Brentford have become intimate with he . he 
 be on pleasant term with Mr. Palliser and Mr. Gresham . and as for 
 Mr. Kennedy , - he and Mr. Kennedy be almost bosom friend . it seem 
 to he that he have quite surpass the Ratlers , Fitzgibbons , and 
 Bonteens in that politico - social success which go so far towards 
 downright political success , and which in itself be so pleasant . he 
 have surpass these man in spite of their office and their acquire 
 position , and could not but think that even Mr. Low , if he know it 
 all , would confess that he have be right . 
 as to his bosom friendship with Mr. Kennedy , that of course trouble 
 he . ought he not to be drive a poniard into Mr. Kennedy 's heart ? 
 the convention of life forbid that ; and therefore the bosom 
 friendship be to be excuse . if not an enemy to the death , then 
 there could be no reason why he should not be a bosom friend . 
 he go over to Ireland , stay but one night with Mrs. Bunce , and 
 come down upon they at Killaloe like a god out of the heaven . even 
 his father be well - nigh overwhelm by admiration , and his mother 
 and sister think themselves only fit to minister to his pleasure . 
 he have learn , if he have learn nothing else , to look as though he 
 be master of the circumstance around he , and be entirely free 
 from internal embarrassment . when his father speak to he about his 
 legal study , he do not exactly laugh at his father 's ignorance , 
 but he recapitulate to his father so much of Mr. Monk 's wisdom at 
 second hand , - show plainly that it be his business to study the 
 art of speech and the technicality of the House , and not to study 
 law , - that his father have nothing furth to say . he have become a 
 man of such dimension that an ordinary father could hardly dare to 
 inquire into his proceeding ; and as for an ordinary mother , - such as 
 Mrs. Finn certainly be , - she could do no more than look after her 
 son 's linen with awe . 
 Mary Flood Jones , - the reader I hope will not quite have forget 
 Mary Flood Jones , - be in a great tremor when first she meet the hero 
 of Loughshane after return from the honour of his first session . 
 she have be somewhat disappointed because the newspaper have not 
 be full of the speech he have make in Parliament . and indeed the 
 lady of the Finn household have all be ill at ease on this head . 
 they could not imagine why Phineas have restrain himself with so 
 much philosophy . but Miss Flood Jones in discuss the matter 
 with the Miss Finns have never express the slight doubt of his 
 capacity or his judgment . and when tiding come , - the tiding come 
 in a letter from Phineas to his father , - that he do not intend to 
 speak that session , because speech from a young member on his first 
 session be think to be inexpedient , Miss Flood Jones and the Miss 
 Finns be quite willing to accept the wisdom of this decision , much 
 as they might regret the effect of it . Mary , when she meet her hero , 
 hardly dare to look he in the face , but she remember accurately 
 all the circumstance of her last interview with he . could it be 
 that he wear that ringlet near his heart ? Mary have receive from 
 Barbara Finn certain hair suppose to have come from the head of 
 Phineas , and these she always wear near her own . and moreover , since 
 she have see Phineas she have refuse an offer of marriage from Mr. 
 Elias Bodkin , - have refuse it almost ignominiously , - and when do 
 so have tell herself that she would never be false to Phineas Finn . 
 " we think it so good of you to come to see we again , " she say . 
 " good to come home to my own people ? " 
 " of course you might be stay with plenty of grandee if you like 
 it . " 
 " no , indeed , Mary . it do happen by accident that I have to go to the 
 house of a man whom perhaps you would call a grandee , and to meet 
 grandee there . but it be only for a few day , and I be very glad to 
 be take in again here , I can assure you . " 
 " you know how very glad we all be to have you . " 
 " be you glad to see I , Mary ? " 
 " very glad . why should I not be glad , and Barbara the dear friend 
 I have in the world ? of course she talk about you , - and that make 
 I think of you . " 
 " if you know , Mary , how often I think about you . " then Mary , who be 
 very happy at hear such word , and who be walk in to dinner 
 with he at the moment , could not refrain herself from press his 
 arm with her little finger . she know that Phineas in his position 
 could not marry at once ; but she would wait for he , - oh , for ever , 
 if he would only ask she . he of course be a wicked traitor to tell 
 she that he be will not to think of she . but Jove smile at lover ' 
 perjury ; - and it be well that he should do so , as such perjury 
 can hardly be avoid altogether in the difficult circumstance of a 
 successful gentleman 's life . Phineas be a traitor , of course , but he 
 be almost force to be a traitor , by the simple fact that Lady Laura 
 Standish be in London , and Mary Flood Jones in Killaloe . 
 he remain for nearly five month at Killaloe , and I doubt whether 
 his time be altogether well spend . some of the book recommend 
 to he by Mr. Monk he probably do read , and be often to be find 
 encompass by blue book . I fear that there be a grain of pretence 
 about his blue book and parliamentary paper , and that in these day 
 he be , in a gentle way , something of an impostor . " you must not be 
 angry with I for not go to you , " he say once to Mary 's mother 
 when he have decline an invitation to drink tea ; " but the fact be 
 that my time be not my own . " " pray do not   make any apology . we be 
 quite aware that we have very little to offer , " say Mrs. Flood 
 Jones , who be not altogether happy about Mary , and who perhaps know 
 more about member of Parliament and blue book than Phineas Finn have 
 suppose . " Mary , you be a fool to think of that man , " the mother 
 say to her daughter the next morning . " I do not   think of he , mamma ; 
 not particularly . " " he be no well than anybody else that I can see , 
 and he be begin to give himself air , " say Mrs. Flood Jones . 
 Mary make no answer ; but she go up into her room and swear before a 
 figure of the Virgin that she would be true to Phineas for ever and 
 ever , in spite of her mother , in spite of all the world , - in spite , 
 should it be necessary , even of himself . 
 about Christmas time there come a discussion between Phineas and his 
 father about money . " I hope you find you get on pretty well , " say 
 the doctor , who think that he have be liberal . 
 " it be a tight fit , " say Phineas , - who be less afraid of his father 
 than he have be when he last discuss these thing . 
 " I have hop it would have be ample , " say the doctor . 
 " do not   think for a moment , sir , that I be complain , " say Phineas . 
 " I know it be much more than I have a right to expect . " 
 the doctor begin to make an inquiry within his own breast as to 
 whether his son have a right to expect anything ; - whether the time 
 have not come in which his son should be earn his own bread . " I 
 suppose , " he say , after a pause , " there be no chance of your do 
 anything at the bar now ? " 
 " not immediately . it be almost impossible to combine the two study 
 together . " Mr. Low himself be aware of that . " but you be not to 
 suppose that I have give the profession up . " 
 " I hope not , - after all the money it have cost we . " 
 " by no mean , sir . and all that I be do now will , I trust , be of 
 assistance to I when I shall come back to work at the law . of course 
 it be on the card that I may go into office , - and if so , public 
 business will become my profession . " 
 " and be turn out with the Ministry ! " 
 " yes ; that be true , sir . I must run my chance . if the bad come to 
 the bad , I hope I might be able to secure some permanent place . I 
 should think that I can hardly fail to do so . but I trust I may never 
 be drive to want it . I think , however , that we have settle all 
 this before . " then Phineas assume a look of injure innocence , as 
 though his father be drive he too hard . 
 " and in the mean time your money have be enough ? " say the doctor , 
 after a pause . 
 " I have intend to ask you to advance I a hundred pound , " say 
 Phineas . " there be expense to which I be drive on first enter 
 Parliament . " 
 " a hundred pound . " 
 " if it be inconvenient , sir , I can do without it . " he have not as 
 yet pay for his gun , or for that velvet coat in which he have be 
 shooting , or , most probably , for the knickerbocker . he know he 
 want the hundred pound badly ; but he feel ashamed of himself in 
 ask for it . if he be once in office , - though the office be but 
 a sorry junior lordship , - he would repay his father instantly . 
 " you shall have it , of course , " say the doctor ; " but do not let the 
 necessity for ask for more hundred come oftener than you can 
 help . " Phineas say that he would not , and then there be no far 
 discourse about money . it need hardly be say that he tell his father 
 nothing of that bill which he have endorse for Laurence Fitzgibbon . 
 at last come the time which call he again to London and the 
 glory of London life , - to lobby , and the club , and the gossip of 
 man in office , and the chance of promotion for himself ; to the glare 
 of the gas - lamp , the mock anger of rival debater , and the prospect 
 of the Speaker 's wig . during the idleness of the recess he have 
 resolve at any rate upon this , - that a month of the session should 
 not have pass by before he have be see upon his leg in the 
 House , - have be see and hear . and many a time as he have wander 
 alone , with his gun , across the bog which lie on the other side of 
 the Shannon from Killaloe , he have practise the sort of address which 
 he would make to the House . he would be short , - always short ; and he 
 would eschew all action and gesticulation ; Mr. Monk have be very 
 urgent in his instruction to he on that head ; but he would be 
 especially careful that no word should escape he which have not in 
 they some purpose . he might be wrong in his purpose , but purpose 
 there should be . he have be twit more than once at Killaloe 
 with his silence ; - for it have be conceive by his fellow - townsman 
 that he have be send to Parliament on the special ground of his 
 eloquence . they should twit he no more on his next return . he would 
 speak and would carry the House with he if a human effort might 
 prevail . 
 so he pack up his thing , and start again for London in the 
 beginning of February . " good - bye , Mary , " he say with his sweetest 
 smile . but on this occasion there be no kiss , and no culling of 
 lock . " I know he can not help it , " say Mary to herself . " it be his 
 position . but whether it be for good or evil , I will be true to he . " 
 " I be afraid you be unhappy , " Babara Finn say to she on the next 
 morning . 
 " no ; I be not unhappy , - not at all . I have a deal to make I happy 
 and proud . I do not   mean to be a bit unhappy . " then she turn away 
 and cry heartily , and Barbara Finn cry with she for company . 
 CHAPTER XVII 
 Phineas Finn return to London 
 Phineas have receive two letter during his recess at Killaloe from 
 two woman who admire he much , which , as they be both short , shall 
 be submit to the reader . the first be as follow : - 
 Saulsby , October 20 , 186 - . 
 MY DEAR MR . FINN , 
 I write a line to tell you that our marriage be to be 
 hurry on as quickly as possible . Mr. Kennedy do not 
 like to be absent from Parliament ; nor will he be content 
 to postpone the ceremony till the session be over . the day 
 fix be the 3rd of December , and we then go at once to 
 Rome , and intend to be back in London by the opening of 
 Parliament . 
 your most sincerely , 
 LAURA STANDISH . 
 our London address will be No . 52 , Grosvenor Place . 
 to this he write an answer as short , express his ardent wish 
 that those winter hymeneal might produce nothing but happiness , and 
 say that he would not be in town many day before he knock at 
 the door of no . 52 , Grosvenor Place . 
 and the second letter be as follow : - 
 Great Marlborough Street , December , 186 - . 
 DEAR and HONOURED SIR , 
 bunce be get ever so anxious about the room , and 
 say as how he have a young Equity draftsman and wife and 
 baby as would take the whole house , and all because Miss 
 Pouncefoot say a word about her port wine , which any lady 
 of her age might say in her tantrum , and mean nothing 
 after all . I and Miss Pouncefoot 's know each other for 
 seven year , and what be a word or two as be not   mean after 
 that ? but , honoured sir , it be not about that as I write 
 to trouble you , but to ask if I may say for certain that 
 you will take the room again in February . it be easy to 
 let they for the month after Christmas , because of the 
 pantomime . only say at once , because Bunce be nag 
 I day after day . I do not   want nobody 's wife and baby to 
 have to do for , and would soon have a Parliament gent like 
 yourself than any one else . 
 your umbly and respectful , 
 JANE BUNCE . 
 to this he reply that he would certainly come back to the room 
 in Great Marlborough Street , should he be lucky enough to find they 
 vacant , and he express his willingness to take they on and from 
 the 1st of February . and on the 3rd of February he find himself in 
 the old quarter , Mrs. Bunce have contrive , with much conjugal 
 adroitness , both to keep Miss Pouncefoot and to stave off the Equity 
 draftsman 's wife and baby . Bunce , however , receive Phineas very 
 coldly , and tell his wife the same evening that as far as he could 
 see their lodger would never turn up to be a trump in the matter of 
 the ballot . " if he mean well , why do he go and stay with they lord 
 down in Scotland ? I know all about it . I know a man when I see 
 he . Mr. Low , who be look out to be a Tory judge some of these 
 day , be a deal well ; - because he know what he be after . " 
 immediately on his return to town , Phineas find himself summon to 
 a political meeting at Mr. Mildmay 's house in St. James 's Square . 
 " we be go to begin in earnest this time , " Barrington Erle say to 
 he at the club . 
 " I be glad of that , " say Phineas . 
 " I suppose you hear all about it down at Loughlinter ? " 
 now , in truth , Phineas have hear very little of any settle plan down 
 at Loughlinter . he have play a game of chess with Mr. Gresham , and 
 have shoot a stag with Mr. Palliser , and have discuss sheep with Lord 
 Brentford , but have hardly hear a word about politic from any one 
 of those influential gentleman . from Mr. Monk he have hear much of a 
 come reform Bill ; but his communication with Mr. Monk have rather 
 be private discussion , - in which he have learn Mr. Monk 's own 
 view on certain point , - than revelation on the intention of the 
 party to which Mr. Monk belong . " I hear of nothing settle , " say 
 Phineas ; " but I suppose we be to have a Reform Bill . " 
 " that be a matter of course . " 
 " and I suppose we be not to touch the question of ballot . " 
 " that be the difficulty , " say Barrington Erle . " but of course we 
 shall not   touch it as long as Mr. Mildmay be in the Cabinet . he will 
 never consent to the ballot as First Minister of the Crown . " 
 " nor would Gresham , or Palliser , " say Phineas , who do not choose to 
 bring forward his great gun at first . 
 " I do not   know about Gresham . it be impossible to say what Gresham 
 might bring himself to do . Gresham be a man who may go any length 
 before he have do . Planty Pall , " - for such be the name by which Mr. 
 Plantagenet Palliser be ordinarily know among his friend , - " would 
 of course go with Mr. Mildmay and the Duke . " 
 " and Monk be oppose to the ballot , " say Phineas . 
 " ah , that be the question . no doubt he have assent to the proposition 
 of a measure without the ballot ; but if there should come a row , and 
 man like Turnbull demand it , and the London mob kick up a shindy , I 
 do not   know how far Monk would be steady . " 
 " whatever he say , he will stick to . " 
 " he be your leader , then ? " ask Barrington . 
 " I do not   know that I have a leader . Mr. Mildmay lead our side ; and 
 if anybody lead I , he do . but I have great faith in Mr. Monk . " 
 " there be one who would go for the ballot to - morrow , if it be 
 bring forward stoutly , " say Barrington Erle to Mr. Ratler a few 
 minute afterwards , point to Phineas as he speak . 
 " I do not   think much of that young man , " say Ratler . 
 Mr. Bonteen and Mr. Ratler have put their head together during that 
 last evening at Loughlinter , and have agree that they do not think 
 much of Phineas Finn . why do Mr. Kennedy go down off the mountain 
 to get he a pony ? and why do Mr. Gresham play chess with he ? Mr. 
 Ratler and Mr. Bonteen may have be right in make up their mind 
 to think but little of Phineas Finn , but Barrington Erle have be 
 quite wrong when he have say that Phineas would " go for the ballot " 
 to - morrow . Phineas have make up his mind very strongly that he would 
 always oppose the ballot . that he would hold the same opinion 
 throughout his life , no one should pretend to say ; but in his present 
 mood , and under the tuition which he have receive from Mr. Monk , 
 he be prepared to demonstrate , out of the House and in it , that 
 the ballot be , as a political measure , unmanly , ineffective , and 
 enervate . Enervating have be a great word with Mr. Monk , and 
 Phineas have clung to it with admiration . 
 the meeting take place at Mr. Mildmay 's on the third day of the 
 session . Phineas have of course hear of such meeting before , but have 
 never attend one . indeed , there have be no such gathering when 
 Mr. Mildmay 's party come into power early in the last session . Mr. 
 Mildmay and his man have then make their effort in turn out their 
 opponent , and have be well pleased to rest awhile upon their oar . 
 now , however , they must go again to work , and therefore the liberal 
 party be collect at Mr. Mildmay 's house , in order that the liberal 
 party might be tell what it be that Mr. Mildmay and his Cabinet 
 intend to do . 
 Phineas Finn be quite in the dark as to what would be the nature 
 of the performance on this occasion , and entertain some idea that 
 every gentleman present would be call upon to express individually 
 his assent or dissent in regard to the measure propose . he walk to 
 St. James 's Square with Laurence Fitzgibbon ; but even with Fitzgibbon 
 be ashamed to show his ignorance by ask question . " after all , " 
 say Fitzgibbon , " this kind of thing mean nothing . I know as well as 
 possible , and so do you , what Mr. Mildmay will say , - and then Gresham 
 will say a few word ; and then Turnbull will make a murmur , and then 
 we shall all assent , - to anything or to nothing ; - and then it will be 
 over . " still Phineas do not understand whether the assent require 
 would or would not be an individual personal assent . when the affair 
 be over he find that he be disappoint , and that he might almost 
 as well have stay away from the meeting , - except that he have 
 attend at Mr. Mildmay 's bidding , and have give a silent adhesion to 
 Mr. Mildmay 's plan of reform for that session . Laurence Fitzgibbon 
 have be very nearly correct in his description of what would occur . 
 Mr. Mildmay make a long speech . Mr. Turnbull , the great Radical of 
 the day , - the man who be suppose to represent what many call the 
 Manchester school of politic , - ask half a dozen question . in 
 answer to these Mr. Gresham make a short speech . then Mr. Mildmay 
 make another speech , and then all be over . the gist of the whole 
 thing be , that there should be a Reform Bill , - very generous in its 
 enlargement of the franchise , - but no ballot . Mr. Turnbull express 
 his doubt whether this would be satisfactory to the country ; but even 
 Mr. Turnbull be soft in his tone and complaisant in his manner . as 
 there be no reporter present , - that plan of turn private meeting 
 at gentleman 's house into public assembly not have be as yet 
 adopt , - there could be no need for energy or violence . they go to 
 Mr. Mildmay 's house to hear Mr. Mildmay 's plan , - and they hear it . 
 two day after this Phineas be to dine with Mr. Monk . Mr. Monk have 
 ask he in the lobby of the House . " I do not   give dinner party , " 
 he say , " but I should like you to come and meet Mr. Turnbull . " 
 Phineas accept the invitation as a matter of course . there be 
 many who say that Mr. Turnbull be the great man in the nation , 
 and that the nation could be save only by a direct obedience to 
 Mr. Turnbull 's instruction . other say that Mr. Turnbull be a 
 demagogue and at heart a rebel ; that he be un - english , false and 
 very dangerous . Phineas be rather inclined to believe the latter 
 statement ; and as danger and dangerous man be always more attractive 
 than safety and safe man , he be glad to have an opportunity of 
 meet Mr. Turnbull at dinner . 
 in the meantime he go to call on Lady Laura , whom he have not 
 see since the last evening which he spend in her company at 
 Loughlinter , - whom , when he be last speak to she , he have kiss 
 close beneath the fall of the Linter . he find she at home , and with 
 she be her husband . " here be a Darby and Joan meeting , be it not ? " 
 she say , get up to welcome he . he have see Mr. Kennedy before , 
 and have be stand close to he during the meeting at Mr. 
 Mildmay 's . 
 " I be very glad to find you both together . " 
 " but Robert be go away this instant , " say Lady Laura . " have he 
 tell you of our adventure at Rome ? " 
 " not a word . " 
 " then I must tell you ; - but not now . the dear old Pope be so civil 
 to we . I come to think it quite a pity that he should be in trouble . " 
 " I must be off , " say the husband , get up . " but I shall meet you 
 at dinner , I believe . " 
 " do you dine at Mr. Monk 's ? " 
 " yes , and be ask expressly to hear Turnbull make a convert of you . 
 there be only to be we four . Au revoir . " then Mr. Kennedy go , and 
 Phineas find himself alone with Lady Laura . he hardly know how to 
 address she , and remain silent . he have not prepare himself for the 
 interview as he ought to have do , and feel himself to be awkward . 
 she evidently expect he to speak , and for a few second sit 
 wait for what he might say . 
 at last she find that it be incumbent on she to begin . " be you 
 surprised at our suddenness when you get my note ? " 
 " a little . you have speak of wait . " 
 " I have never imagine that he would have be impetuous . and he seem 
 to think that even the business of get himself married would not 
 justify he stay away from Parliament . he be a rigid martinet in 
 all matter of duty . " 
 " I do not wonder that he should be in a hurry , but that you should 
 submit . " 
 " I tell you that I should do just what the wise people tell I . I 
 ask papa , and he say that it would be well . so the lawyer be 
 drive out of their mind , and the milliner out of their body , and 
 the thing be do . " 
 " who be there at the marriage ? " 
 " Oswald be not there . that I know be what you mean to ask . Papa say 
 that he might come if he please . Oswald stipulate that he should be 
 receive as a son . then my father speak the hard word that ever 
 fall from his mouth . " 
 " what do he say ? " 
 " I will not repeat it , - not altogether . but he say that Oswald be 
 not entitle to a son 's treatment . he be very sore about my money , 
 because Robert be so generous as to his settlement . so the breach 
 between they be as wide as ever . " 
 " and where be chiltern now ? " say Phineas . 
 " down in Northamptonshire , stay at some inn from whence he hunt . 
 he tell I that he be quite alone , - that he never din out , never 
 have any one to dine with he , that he hunt five or six day a 
 week , - and read at night . " 
 " that be not a bad sort of life . " 
 " not if the reading be any good . but I can not bear that he should be 
 so solitary . and if he break down in it , then his companion will 
 not be fit for he . do you ever hunt ? " 
 " oh yes , - at home in county Clare . all Irishmen hunt . " 
 " I wish you would go down to he and see he . he would be delighted 
 to have you . " 
 Phineas think over the proposition before he answer it , and then 
 make the reply that he have make once before . " I would do so , Lady 
 Laura , - but that I have no money for hunt in England . " 
 " alas , alas ! " say she , smile . " how that hit one on every side ! " 
 " I might manage it , - for a couple of day , - in March . " 
 " do not do what you think you ought not to do , " say Lady Laura . 
 " no ; certainly . but I should like it , and if I can I will . " 
 " he could mount you , I have no doubt . he have no other expense now , 
 and keep a stable full of horse . I think he have seven or eight . and 
 now tell I , Mr. Finn ; when be you go to charm the House ? or be 
 it your first intention to strike terror ? " 
 he blush , - he know that he blush as he answer . " oh , I suppose I 
 shall make some sort of attempt before long . I can not   bear the idea of 
 be a bore . " 
 " I think you ought to speak , Mr. Finn . " 
 " I do not know about that , but I certainly mean to try . there will be 
 lot of opportunity about the new Reform Bill . of course you know 
 that Mr. Mildmay be go to bring it in at once . you hear all that 
 from Mr. Kennedy . " 
 " and papa have tell I . I still see papa almost every day . you must 
 call upon he . mind you do . " Phineas say that he certainly would . 
 " Papa be very lonely now , and I sometimes feel that I have be 
 almost cruel in desert he . and I think that he have a horror of 
 the house , - especially later in the year , - always fancy that he 
 will meet Oswald . I be so unhappy about it all , Mr. Finn . " 
 " why do not   your brother marry ? " say Phineas , know nothing as 
 yet of Lord Chiltern and Violet Effingham . " if he be to marry well , 
 that would bring your father round . " 
 " yes , - it would . " 
 " and why should he not ? " 
 Lady Laura pause before she answer ; and then she tell the whole 
 story . " he be violently in love , and the girl he love have refuse 
 he twice . " 
 " be it with Miss Effingham ? " ask Phineas , guess the truth at 
 once , and remember what Miss Effingham have say to he when rid 
 in the wood . 
 " yes ; - with Violet Effingham ; my father 's pet , his favourite , whom he 
 love next to myself , - almost as well as myself ; whom he would really 
 welcome as a daughter . he would gladly make her mistress of his 
 house , and of Saulsby . everything would then go smoothly . " 
 " but she do not like Lord Chiltern ? " 
 " I believe she love he in her heart ; but she be afraid of he . as 
 she say herself , a girl be bind to be so careful of herself . with 
 all her seem frolic , Violet Effingham be very wise . " 
 Phineas , though not conscious of anything akin to jealousy , be 
 annoy at the revelation make to he . since he have hear that Lord 
 Chiltern be in love with Miss Effingham , he do not like Lord 
 Chiltern quite as well as he have do before . he himself have simply 
 admire Miss Effingham , and have take pleasure in her society ; but , 
 though this have be all , he do not like to hear of another man 
 want to marry she , and he be almost angry with Lady Laura for 
 say that she believe Miss Effingham love her brother . if Miss 
 Effingham have twice refuse Lord Chiltern , that ought to have be 
 sufficient . it be not that Phineas be in love with Miss Effingham 
 himself . as he be still violently in love with Lady Laura , any other 
 love be of course impossible ; but , nevertheless , there be something 
 offensive to he in the story as it have be tell . " if it be wisdom 
 on her part , " say he , answer Lady Laura 's last word , " you can not 
 find fault with she for her decision . " 
 " I find no fault ; - but I think my brother would make she happy . " 
 Lady Laura , when she be leave alone , at once revert to the tone in 
 which Phineas Finn have answer her remark about Miss Effingham . 
 Phineas be very ill able to conceal his thought , and wear his heart 
 almost upon his sleeve . " can it be possible that he care for her 
 himself ? " that be the nature of Lady Laura 's first question to 
 herself upon the matter . and in ask herself that question , she 
 think nothing of the disparity in rank or fortune between Phineas 
 Finn and Violet Effingham . nor do it occur to she as at all 
 improbable that Violet might accept the love of he who have so lately 
 be her own lover . but the idea grate against her wish on two 
 side . she be most anxious that Violet should ultimately become her 
 brother 's wife , - and she could not be pleased that Phineas should be 
 able to love any woman . 
 I must beg my reader not to be carry away by those last word 
 into any erroneous conclusion . they must not suppose that Lady Laura 
 Kennedy , the lately married bride , indulge a guilty passion for the 
 young man who have love she . though she have probably think often 
 of Phineas Finn since her marriage , her thought have never be of 
 a nature to disturb her rest . it have never occur to she even to 
 think that she regard he with any feeling that be an offence 
 to her husband . she would have hat herself have any such idea 
 present itself to her mind . she pride herself on be a pure 
 high - principle woman , who have keep so strong a guard upon herself as 
 to be nearly free from the danger of those rock upon which other 
 woman make shipwreck of their happiness . she take pride in this , and 
 would then blame herself for her own pride . but though she so blame 
 herself , it never occur to she to think that to she there might be 
 danger of such shipwreck . she have put away from herself the idea of 
 love when she have first perceive that Phineas have regard she with 
 more than friendship , and have accept Mr. Kennedy 's offer with an 
 assure conviction that by do so she be act well for her own 
 happiness and for that of all those concern . she have feel the 
 romance of the position to be sweet when Phineas have stand with she 
 at the top of the fall of the Linter , and have tell she of the hope 
 which he have dare to indulge . and when at the bottom of the fall he 
 have presume to take she in his arm , she have forgive he without 
 difficulty to herself , tell herself that that would be the alpha 
 and the omega of the romance of her life . she have not feel herself 
 bind to tell Mr. Kennedy of what have occur , - but she have feel 
 that he could hardly have be angry even have he be tell . and she 
 have often think of her lover since , and of his love , - tell 
 herself that she too have once have a lover , never regard her 
 husband in that light ; but her thought have not frighten she as 
 guilty thought will do . there have come a romance which have be 
 pleasant , and it be go . it have be soon banish , - but it 
 have leave to she a sweet flavour , of which she love to taste the 
 sweetness though she know that it be go . and the man should be her 
 friend , but especially her husband 's friend . it should be her care to 
 see that his life be successful , - and especially her husband 's care . 
 it be a great delight to she to know that her husband like the man . 
 and the man would marry , and the man 's wife should be her friend . all 
 this have be very pure and very pleasant . now an idea have flit 
 across her brain that the man be in love with some one else , - and 
 she do not like it ! 
 but she do not therefore become afraid of herself , or in the least 
 realise at once the danger of her own position . her immediate glance 
 at the matter do not go beyond the falseness of man . if it be so , 
 as she suspect , - if Phineas have in truth transfer his affection 
 to Violet Effingham , of how little value be the love of such a man ! 
 it do not occur to she at this moment that she also have transfer 
 her to Robert Kennedy , or that , if not , she have do bad . but she 
 do remember that in the autumn this young Phoebus among man have 
 turn his back upon she out upon the mountain that he might hide 
 from she the agony of his heart when he learn that she be to be 
 the wife of another man ; and that now , before the winter be over , he 
 could not hide from she the fact that his heart be elsewhere ! and 
 then she speculate , and count up fact , and satisfy herself that 
 Phineas could not even have see Violet Effingham since they two have 
 stand together upon the mountain . how false be man ! - how false and 
 how weak of heart ! 
 " chiltern and Violet Effingham ! " say Phineas to himself , as he 
 walk away from Grosvenor Place . " be it fair that she should be 
 sacrifice because she be rich , and because she be so win and so 
 fascinating that Lord Brentford would receive even his son for the 
 sake of receive also such a daughter - in - law ? " Phineas also like 
 Lord Chiltern ; have see or fancy that he have see fine thing in 
 he ; have look forward to his regeneration , hop , perhaps , that he 
 might have some hand in the good work . but he do not recognise the 
 propriety of sacrifice Violet Effingham even for work so good as 
 this . if Miss Effingham have refuse Lord Chiltern twice , surely that 
 ought to be sufficient . it do not occur to he that the love of such 
 a girl as Violet would be a great treasure - to himself . as regard 
 himself , he be still in love , - hopelessly in love , with Lady Laura 
 Kennedy ! 
 CHAPTER XVIII 
 Mr. Turnbull 
 it be a Wednesday evening and there be no House ; - and at seven 
 o'clock Phineas be at Mr. Monk 's hall door . he be the first of the 
 guest , and he find Mr. Monk alone in the dining - room . " I be do 
 butler , " say Mr. Monk , who have a brace of decanter in his hand , 
 which he proceed to put down in the neighbourhood of the fire . 
 " but I have finish , and now we will go up - stair to receive the 
 two great man properly . " 
 " I beg your pardon for come too early , " say Finn . 
 " not a minute too early . seven be seven , and it be I who be too late . 
 but , Lord bless you , you do not   think I be ashamed of be find in 
 the act of decant my own wine ! I remember Lord Palmerston say 
 before some committee about salary , five or six year ago now , I 
 daresay , that it would not   do for an English Minister to have his hall 
 door open by a maid - servant . now , I be an English Minister , and 
 I have   get nobody but a maid - servant to open my hall door , and I be 
 oblige to look after my own wine . I wonder whether it be improper ? I 
 should not   like to be the mean of injure the British Constitution . " 
 " perhaps if you resign soon , and if nobody follow your example , 
 grave evil result may be avoid . " 
 " I sincerely hope so , for I do love the British Constitution ; and I 
 love also the respect in which member of the English Cabinet be 
 hold . now Turnbull , who will be here in a moment , hat it all ; but 
 he be a rich man , and have more powdered footman hang about his 
 house than ever Lord Palmerston have himself . " 
 " he be still in business . " 
 " oh yes ; - and make his thirty thousand a year . here he be . how be 
 you , Turnbull ? we be talk about my maid - servant . I hope she 
 open the door for you properly . " 
 " certainly , - as far as I perceive , " say Mr. Turnbull , who be 
 well at a speech than a joke . " a very respectable young woman I 
 should say . " 
 " there be not one more so in all London , " say Mr. Monk ; " but Finn 
 seem to think that I ought to have a man in livery . " 
 " it be a matter of perfect indifference to I , " say Mr. Turnbull . 
 " I be one of those who never think of such thing . " 
 " nor I either , " say Mr. Monk . then the laird of Loughlinter be 
 announce , and they all go down to dinner . 
 Mr. Turnbull be a good - looking robust man about sixty , with long 
 grey hair and a red complexion , with hard eye , a well - cut nose , and 
 full lip . he be nearly six foot high , stand quite upright , and 
 always wear a black swallow - tail coat , black trouser , and a black 
 silk waistcoat . in the House , at least , he be always so dressed , and 
 at dinner table . what difference there might be in his costume when 
 at home at Staleybridge few of those who see he in London have the 
 mean of know . there be nothing in his face to indicate special 
 talent . no one look at he would take he to be a fool ; but there 
 be none of the fire of genius in his eye , nor be there in the line 
 of his mouth any of that play of thought or fancy which be generally 
 to be find in the face of man and woman who have make themselves 
 great . Mr. Turnbull have certainly make himself great , and could 
 hardly have do so without force of intellect . he be one of the 
 most popular , if not the most popular politician in the country . poor 
 man believe in he , think that he be their most honest public 
 friend ; and man who be not poor believe in his power , think 
 that his counsel must surely prevail . he have obtain the ear of the 
 House and the favour of the reporter , and open his voice at no 
 public dinner , on no public platform , without a conviction that the 
 word speak by he would be read by thousand . the first necessity 
 for good speaking be a large audience ; and of this advantage Mr. 
 Turnbull have make himself sure . and yet it could hardly be say that 
 he be a great orator . he be gift with a powerful voice , with 
 strong , and I may , perhaps , call they broad conviction , with perfect 
 self - reliance , with almost unlimited power of endurance , with hot 
 ambition , with no keen scruple , and with a moral skin of great 
 thickness . nothing say against he pain he , no attack wound 
 he , no raillery touch he in the least . there be not a sore spot 
 about he , and probably his first thought on wake every morning 
 tell he that he , at least , be totus tere atque rotundus . he be , 
 of course , a thorough Radical , - and so be Mr. Monk . but Mr. Monk 's 
 first wake thought be probably exactly the reverse of those 
 of his friend . Mr. Monk be a much hotter man in debate than Mr. 
 Turnbull ; - but Mr. Monk be ever doubting of himself , and never 
 doubt of himself so much as when he have be most violent , and 
 also most effective , in debate . when Mr. Monk jeer at himself for 
 be a Cabinet Minister and keep no attendant grander than a 
 parlour - maid , there be a substratum of self - doubt under the joke . 
 Mr. Turnbull be certainly a great Radical , and as such enjoy a 
 great reputation . I do not think that high office in the State have 
 ever be offer to he ; but thing have be say which justify 
 he , or seem to himself to justify he , in declare that in 
 no possible circumstance would he serve the Crown . " I serve the 
 people , " he have say , " and much as I respect the servant of the 
 Crown , I think that my own office be the high . " he have be greatly 
 call to task for this speech ; and Mr. Mildmay , the present Premier , 
 have ask he whether he do not recognise the so - call servant of 
 the Crown as the most hard - work and true servant of the people . 
 the House and the press have support Mr. Mildmay , but to all that 
 Mr. Turnbull be quite indifferent ; and when an assertion make by he 
 before three or four thousand person at Manchester , to the effect 
 that he , - he specially , - be the friend and servant of the people , 
 be receive with acclamation , he feel quite satisfied that he have 
 gain his point . progressive reform in the franchise , of which 
 manhood suffrage should be the acknowledged and not far distant end , 
 equal electoral district , ballot , tenant right for England as well 
 as Ireland , reduction of the stand army till there should be no 
 stand army to reduce , utter disregard of all political movement 
 in Europe , an almost idolatrous admiration for all political 
 movement in America , free trade in everything except malt , and 
 an absolute extinction of a State Church , - these be among the 
 principal article in Mr. Turnbull 's political catalogue . and I 
 think that when once he have learn the art of arrange his word 
 as he stand upon his leg , and have so master his voice as to 
 have obtain the ear of the House , the work of his life be not 
 difficult . have nothing to construct , he could always deal with 
 generality . be free from responsibility , he be not call upon 
 either to study detail or to master even great fact . it be his 
 business to inveigh against existing evil , and perhaps there be 
 no easy business when once the privilege of an audience have be 
 attain . it be his work to cut down forest - tree , and he have 
 nothing to do with the subsequent cultivation of the land . Mr. 
 Monk have once tell Phineas Finn how great be the charm of that 
 inaccuracy which be permit to the Opposition . Mr. Turnbull no 
 doubt enjoy these charm to the full , though he would soon have 
 put a padlock on his mouth for a month than have own as much . upon 
 the whole , Mr. Turnbull be no doubt right in resolve that he would 
 not take office , though some reticence on that subject might have 
 be more become to he . 
 the conversation at dinner , though it be altogether on political 
 subject , have in it nothing of special interest as long as the girl 
 be there to change the plate ; but when she be go , and the door 
 be close , it gradually open out , and there come on to be a 
 pleasant sparring match between the two great Radicals , - the Radical 
 who have join himself to the govern power , and the Radical who 
 stand aloof . Mr. Kennedy barely say a word now and then , and Phineas 
 be almost as silent as Mr. Kennedy . he have come there to hear some 
 such discussion , and be quite willing to listen while gun of such 
 great calibre be be fire off for his amusement . 
 " I think Mr. Mildmay be make a great step forward , " say Mr. 
 Turnbull . 
 " I think he be , " say Mr. Monk . 
 " I do not believe that he would ever live to go so far . it will 
 hardly suffice even for this year ; but still come from he , it be 
 a great deal . it only show how far a man may be make to go , if only 
 the proper force be apply . after all , it matter very little who 
 be the Ministers . " 
 " that be what I have always declare , " say Mr. Monk . 
 " very little indeed . we do not   mind whether it be Lord de Terrier , or 
 Mr. Mildmay , or Mr. Gresham , or you yourself , if you choose to get 
 yourself make First Lord of the Treasury . " 
 " I have no such ambition , Turnbull . " 
 " I should have think you have . if I go in for that kind of thing 
 myself , I should like to go to the top of the ladder . I should feel 
 that if I could do any good at all by become a Minister , I could 
 only do it by become first Minister . " 
 " you would not   doubt your own fitness for such a position ? " 
 " I doubt my fitness for the position of any Minister , " say Mr. 
 Turnbull . 
 " you mean that on other ground , " say Mr. Kennedy . 
 " I mean it on every ground , " say Mr. Turnbull , rise on his leg 
 and stand with his back to the fire . " of course I be not fit to 
 have diplomatic intercourse with man who would come to I simply with 
 the desire of deceive I . of course I be unfit to deal with member 
 of Parliament who would flock around I because they want place . 
 of course I be unfit to answer every man 's question so as to give no 
 information to any one . " 
 " could you not answer they so as to give information ? " say Mr. 
 Kennedy . 
 but Mr. Turnbull be so intent on his speech that it may be doubt 
 whether he hear this interruption . he take no notice of it as he 
 go on . " of course I be unfit to maintain the propriety of a 
 seem confidence between a Crown all - powerless and a people 
 all - powerful . no man recognise his own unfitness for such work more 
 clearly than I do , Mr. Monk . but if I take in hand such work at all , 
 I should like to be the leader , and not the lead . tell we fairly , now , 
 what be your conviction worth in Mr. Mildmay 's Cabinet ? " 
 " that be a question which a man may hardly answer himself , " say Mr. 
 Monk . 
 " it be a question which a man should at least answer for himself 
 before he consent to sit there , " say Mr. Turnbull , in a tone of 
 voice which be almost angry . 
 " and what reason have you for suppose that I have omit that 
 duty ? " say Mr. Monk . 
 " simply this , - that I can not reconcile your known opinion with the 
 practice of your colleague . " 
 " I will not tell you what my conviction may be worth in Mr. 
 Mildmay 's Cabinet . I will not take upon myself to say that they be 
 worth the chair on which I sit when I be there . but I will tell you 
 what my aspiration be when I consent to fill that chair , and you 
 shall judge of their worth . I think that they might possibly leaven 
 the batch of bread which we have to bake , - give to the whole batch 
 more of the flavour of reform than it would have possess have I 
 absent myself . I think that when I be ask to join Mr. Mildmay 
 and Mr. Gresham , the very fact of that request indicate liberal 
 progress , and that if I refuse the request I should be decline to 
 assist in good work . " 
 " you could have support they , if anything be propose worthy of 
 support , " say Mr. Turnbull . 
 " yes ; but I could not have be so effective in take care that 
 some measure be propose worthy of support as I may possibly be now . 
 I think a good deal about it , and I believe that my decision be 
 right . " 
 " I be sure you be right , " say Mr. Kennedy . 
 " there can be no juster object of ambition than a seat in the 
 Cabinet , " say Phineas . 
 " Sir , I must dispute that , " say Mr. Turnbull , turn round upon our 
 hero . " I regard the position of our high Ministers as most 
 respectable . " 
 " thank you for so much , " say Mr. Monk . but the orator go on again , 
 regardless of the interruption : - 
 " the position of gentleman in inferior office , - of gentleman who 
 attend rather to the nod and wink of their superior in Downing 
 Street than to the interest of their constituent , - I do not regard 
 as be highly respectable . " 
 " a man can not begin at the top , " say Phineas . 
 " our friend Mr. Monk have begin at what you be pleased to call the 
 top , " say Mr. Turnbull . " but I will not profess to think that even 
 he have raise himself by go into office . to be an independent 
 representative of a really popular commercial constituency be , in my 
 estimation , the high object of an Englishman 's ambition . " 
 " but why commercial , Mr. Turnbull ? " say Mr. Kennedy . 
 " because the commercial constituency really do elect their own 
 member in accordance with their own judgment , whereas the county 
 and the small town be coerce either by individual or by a 
 combination of aristocratic influence . " 
 " and yet , " say Mr. Kennedy , " there be not half a dozen 
 conservative return by all the county in Scotland . " 
 " Scotland be very much to be honour , " say Mr. Turnbull . 
 Mr. Kennedy be the first to take his departure , and Mr. Turnbull 
 follow he very quickly . phinea get up to go at the same time , but 
 stay at his host 's request , and sit for awhile smoke a cigar . 
 " turnbull be a wonderful man , " say Mr. Monk . 
 " do he not domineer too much ? " 
 " his fault be not arrogance , so much as ignorance that there be , 
 or should be , a difference between public and private life . in the 
 House of Commons a man in Mr. Turnbull 's position must speak with 
 dictatorial assurance . he be always address , not the House only , 
 but the country at large , and the country will not believe in he 
 unless he believe in himself . but he forget that he be not always 
 address the country at large . I wonder what sort of a time Mrs. 
 Turnbull and the little Turnbulls have of it ? " 
 Phineas , as he go home , make up his mind that Mrs. Turnbull and 
 the little Turnbulls must probably have a bad time of it . 
 CHAPTER XIX 
 Lord Chiltern rid his Horse Bonebreaker 
 it be know that whatever might be the detail of Mr. Mildmay 's 
 bill , the ballot would not form a part of it ; and as there be a 
 strong party in the House of Commons , and a very numerous party out 
 of it , who be desirous that voting by ballot should be make a part 
 of the electoral law , it be decide that an independent motion 
 should be bring on in anticipation of Mr. Mildmay 's bill . the 
 arrangement be probably one of Mr. Mildmay 's own making ; so that 
 he might be hamper by no opposition on that subject by his own 
 follower if , - as he do not doubt , - the motion should be lose . 
 it be expect that the debate would not last over one night , 
 and Phineas resolve that he would make his maiden speech on this 
 occasion . he have very strong opinion as to the inefficacy of the 
 ballot for any good purpose , and think that he might be able to 
 strike out from his conviction some spark of that fire which use 
 to be so plentiful with he at the old debating club . but even at 
 breakfast that morning his heart begin to beat quickly at the idea 
 of have to stand on his leg before so critical an audience . 
 he know that it would be well that he should if possible get the 
 subject off his mind during the day , and therefore go out among the 
 people who certainly would not talk to he about the ballot . he sit 
 for nearly an hour in the morning with Mr. Low , and do not even tell 
 Mr. Low that it be his intention to speak on that day . then he make 
 one or two other call , and at about three go up to Portman Square 
 to look for Lord Chiltern . it be now nearly the end of February , and 
 Phineas have often see Lady Laura . he have not see her brother , but 
 have learn from his sister that he have be drive up to London by 
 the frost , he be tell by the porter at Lord Brentford 's that Lord 
 Chiltern be in the house , and as he be pass through the hall he 
 meet Lord Brentford himself . he be thus drive to speak , and feel 
 himself call upon to explain why he be there . " I be come to see 
 Lord Chiltern , " he say . 
 " be Lord Chiltern in the house ? " say the Earl , turn to the 
 servant . 
 " yes , my lord ; his lordship arrive last night . " 
 " you will find he upstairs , I suppose , " say the Earl . " for myself 
 I know nothing of he . " he speak in an angry tone , as though he 
 resent the fact that any one should come to his house to call upon 
 his son ; and turn his back quickly upon Phineas . but he think 
 well of it before he reach the front door , and turn again . 
 " by - the - bye , " say he , " what majority shall we have to - night , Finn ? " 
 " pretty nearly as many as you please to name , my lord , " say Phineas . 
 " well ; - yes ; I suppose we be tolerably safe . you ought to speak upon 
 it . " 
 " perhaps I may , " say Phineas , feel that he blush as he speak . 
 " do , " say the Earl . " do . if you see Lord Chiltern will you tell he 
 from I that I should be glad to see he before he leave London . I 
 shall be at home till noon to - morrow . " Phineas , much astonish at 
 the commission give to he , of course say that he would do as he 
 be desire , and then pass on to Lord Chiltern 's apartment . 
 he find his friend stand in the middle of the room , without coat 
 and waistcoat , with a pair of dumb - bell in his hand . " when there be 
 no hunting I be drive to this kind of thing , " say Lord Chiltern . 
 " I suppose it be good exercise , " say Phineas . 
 " and it give I something to do . when I be in London I feel like a 
 gipsy in church , till the time come for prowl out at night . I have 
 no occupation for my day whatever , and no place to which I can take 
 myself . I can not   stand in a club window as some man do , and I should 
 disgrace any decent club if I do stand there . I belong to the 
 Travellers , but I doubt whether the porter would let I go in . " 
 " I think you pique yourself on be more of an outer Bohemian than 
 you be , " say Phineas . 
 " I pique myself on this , that whether Bohemian or not , I will go 
 nowhere that I be not want . though , - for the matter of that , I 
 suppose I be not want here . " then Phineas give he the message from 
 his father . " he wish to see I to - morrow morning ? " continue Lord 
 Chiltern . " let he send I word what it be he have to say to I . I do 
 not choose to be insult by he , though he be my father . " 
 " I would certainly go , if I be you . " 
 " I doubt it very much , if all the circumstance be the same . let 
 he tell I what he want . " 
 " of course I can not ask he , Chiltern . " 
 " I know what he want very well . Laura have be interfere and do 
 no good . you know Violet Effingham ? " 
 " yes ; I know she , " say Phineas , much surprised . 
 " they want she to marry I . " 
 " and you do not wish to marry she ? " 
 " I do not say that . but do you think that such a girl as Miss 
 Effingham would marry such a man as I be ? she would be much more 
 likely to take you . by George , she would ! do you know that she have 
 three thousand a year of her own ? " 
 " I know that she have money . " 
 " that be about the tune of it . I would take she without a shilling 
 to - morrow , if she would have I , - because I like she . she be the only 
 girl I ever do like . but what be the use of my like she ? they have 
 paint I so black among they , especially my father , that no decent 
 girl would think of marry I . " 
 " your father can not   be angry with you if you do your good to comply 
 with his wish . " 
 " I do not   care a straw whether he be angry or not . he allow I eight 
 hundred a year , and he know that if he stop it I should go to the 
 Jews the next day . I could not help myself . he can not   leave an acre 
 away from I , and yet he will not   join I in raise money for the sake 
 of pay Laura her fortune . " 
 " Lady Laura can hardly want money now . " 
 " that detestable prig whom she have choose to marry , and whom I 
 hate with all my heart , be rich than ever Croesus be ; but 
 nevertheless Laura ought to have her own money . she shall have it 
 some day . " 
 " I would see Lord Brentford , if I be you . " 
 " I will think about it . now tell I about come down to Willingford . 
 Laura say you will come some day in March . I can mount you for a 
 couple of day and should be delighted to have you . my horse all 
 pull like the mischief , and rush like devil , and want a deal of 
 riding ; but an Irishman like that . " 
 " I do not dislike it particularly . " 
 " I like it . I prefer to have something to do on horseback . when 
 a man tell I that a horse be an armchair , I always tell he to 
 put the brute into his bedroom . mind you come . the house I stay 
 at be call the Willingford Bull , and it be just four mile from 
 Peterborough . " Phineas swear that he would go down and ride the 
 pull horse , and then take his leave , earnestly advise Lord 
 Chiltern , as he go , to keep the appointment propose by his father . 
 when the morning come , at half - past eleven , the son , who have be 
 stand for half an hour with his back to the fire in the large 
 gloomy dining - room , suddenly ring the bell . " tell the Earl , " he say 
 to the servant , " that I be here and will go to he if he wish it . " 
 the servant come back , and say that the Earl be wait . then Lord 
 Chiltern strode after the man into his father 's room . 
 " Oswald , " say the father , " I have send for you because I think it 
 may be as well to speak to you on some business . will you sit down ? " 
 Lord Chiltern sit down , but do not answer a word . " I feel very 
 unhappy about your sister 's fortune , " say the Earl . 
 " so do I , - very unhappy . we can raise the money between we , and pay 
 her to - morrow , if you please it . " 
 " it be in opposition to my advice that she pay your debt . " 
 " and in opposition to mine too . " 
 " I tell she that I would not pay they , and be I to give she back 
 to - morrow , as you say , the money that she have so use , I should be 
 stultify myself . but I will do so on one condition . I will join 
 with you in raise the money for your sister , on one condition . " 
 " what be that ? " 
 " Laura tell I , - indeed she have tell I often , - that you be 
 attach to Violet Effingham . " 
 " but Violet Effingham , my lord , be unhappily not attach to I . " 
 " I do not know how that may be . of course I can not say . I have never 
 take the liberty of interrogate she upon the subject . " 
 " even you , my lord , could hardly have do that . " 
 " what do you mean by that ? I say that I never have , " say the Earl , 
 angrily . 
 " I simply mean that even you could hardly have ask Miss Effingham 
 such a question . I have ask she , and she have refuse I . " 
 " but girl often do that , and yet accept afterwards the man whom they 
 have refuse . Laura tell I that she believe that Violet would 
 consent if you press your suit . " 
 " Laura know nothing about it , my lord . " 
 " there you be probably wrong . Laura and Violet be very close 
 friend , and have no doubt discuss this matter between they . at any 
 rate , it may be as well that you should hear what I have to say . of 
 course I shall not interfere myself . there be no ground on which I 
 can do so with propriety . " 
 " none whatever , " say Lord Chiltern . 
 the Earl become very angry , and nearly break down in his anger . he 
 pause for a moment , feel disposed to tell his son to go and never 
 to see he again . but he gulp down his wrath , and go on with his 
 speech . " my meaning , sir , be this ; - that I have so great faith in 
 Violet Effingham , that I would receive her acceptance of your hand as 
 the only proof which would be convincing to I of amendment in your 
 mode of life . if she be to do so , I would join with you in raise 
 money to pay your sister , would make some further sacrifice with 
 reference to an income for you and your wife , and - would make you 
 both welcome to Saulsby , - if you choose to come . " the Earl 's voice 
 hesitate much and become almost tremulous as he make the last 
 proposition . and his eye have fall away from his son 's gaze , and 
 he have bend a little over the table , and be move . but he recover 
 himself at once , and add , with all proper dignity , " if you have 
 anything to say I shall be glad to hear it . " 
 " all your offer would be nothing , my lord , if I do not like the 
 girl . " 
 " I should not ask you to marry a girl if you do not like she , as you 
 call it . " 
 " but as to Miss Effingham , it happen that our wish jump together . 
 I have ask she , and she have refuse I . I do not   even know where 
 to find she to ask she again . if I go to Lady Baldock 's house the 
 servant would not let I in . " 
 " and whose fault be that ? " 
 " your partly , my lord . you have tell everybody that I be the devil , 
 and now all the old woman believe it . " 
 " I never tell anybody so . " 
 " I will tell you what I will do . I will go down to Lady Baldock 's to - day . 
 I suppose she be at Baddingham . and if I can get speech of Miss 
 Effingham - " 
 " Miss Effingham be not at Baddingham . Miss Effingham be stay with 
 your sister in Grosvenor Place . I see she yesterday . " 
 " she be in London ? " 
 " I tell you that I see she yesterday . " 
 " very well , my lord . then I will do the good I can . Laura will tell 
 you of the result . " 
 the father would have give the son some advice as to the mode in 
 which he should put forward his claim upon Violet 's hand , but the son 
 would not wait to hear it . choose to presume that the conference 
 be over , he go back to the room in which he have keep his 
 dumb - bell , and for a minute or two go to work at his favourite 
 exercise . but he soon put the dumb - bell down , and begin to prepare 
 himself for his work . if this thing be to be do , it might as 
 well be do at once . he look out of his window , and see that the 
 street be in a mess of slush . white snow be become black mud , 
 as it will do in London ; and the violence of frost be give way to 
 the horror of thaw . all would be soft and comparatively pleasant in 
 Northamptonshire on the following morning , and if everything go 
 right he would breakfast at the Willingford Bull . he would go down by 
 the hunting train , and be at the inn by ten . the meet be only six 
 mile distant , and all would be pleasant . he would do this whatever 
 might be the result of his work to - day ; - but in the meantime he would 
 go and do his work . he have a cab call , and within half an hour of 
 the time at which he have leave his father , he be at the door of his 
 sister 's house in Grosvenor Place . the servant tell he that the 
 lady be at lunch . " I can not   eat lunch , " he say . " tell they that I 
 be in the drawing - room . " 
 " he have come to see you , " say Lady Laura , as soon as the servant have 
 leave the room . 
 " I hope not , " say Violet . 
 " do not say that . " 
 " but I do say it . I hope he have not come to see I ; - that be , not to 
 see I specially . of course I can not pretend not to know what you 
 mean . " 
 " he may think it civil to call if he have hear that you be in town , " 
 say Lady Laura , after a pause . 
 " if it be only that , I will be civil in return ; - as sweet as May to 
 he . if it be really only that , and if I be sure of it , I should 
 be really glad to see he . " then they finish their lunch , and Lady 
 Laura get up and lead the way to the drawing - room . 
 " I hope you remember , " say she , gravely , " that you might be a 
 saviour to he . " 
 " I do not believe in girl be saviour to man . it be the man who 
 should be the saviour to the girl . if I marry at all , I have the 
 right to expect that protection shall be give to I , - not that I 
 shall have to give it . " 
 " Violet , you be determined to misrepresent what I mean . " 
 Lord Chiltern be walk about the room , and do not sit down when 
 they enter . the ordinary greeting take place , and Miss Effingham 
 make some remark about the frost . " but it seem to be go , " she 
 say , " and I suppose that you will soon be at work again ? " 
 " yes ; - I shall hunt to - morrow , " say Lord Chiltern . 
 " and the next day , and the next , and the next , " say Violet , " till 
 about the middle of April ; - and then your period of misery will 
 begin ! " 
 " exactly , " say Lord Chiltern . " I have nothing but hunt that I can 
 call an occupation . " 
 " why do not   you make one ? " say his sister . 
 " I mean to do so , if it be possible . Laura , would you mind leave I 
 and Miss Effingham alone for a few minute ? " 
 Lady Laura get up , and so also do Miss Effingham . " for what 
 purpose ? " say the latter . " it can not be for any good purpose . " 
 " at any rate I wish it , and I will not harm you . " Lady Laura be now 
 go , but pause before she reach the door . " Laura , will you do as 
 I ask you ? " say the brother . then Lady Laura go . 
 " it be not that I fear you would harm I , Lord Chiltern , " say 
 Violet . 
 " no ; - I know it be not . but what I say be always say awkwardly . an 
 hour ago I do not know that you be in town , but when I be tell 
 the news I come at once . my father tell I . " 
 " I be so glad that you see your father . " 
 " I have not speak to he for month before , and probably may not 
 speak to he for month again . but there be one point , Violet , on 
 which he and I agree . " 
 " I hope there will soon be many . " 
 " it be possible , - but I fear not probable . look here , Violet , " - and 
 he look at she with all his eye , till it seem to she that he be 
 all eye , so great be the intensity of his gaze ; - " I should scorn 
 myself be I to permit myself to come before you with a plea for 
 your favour found on my father 's whim . my father be unreasonable , 
 and have be very unjust to I . he have ever believe evil of I , and 
 have believe it often when all the world know that he be wrong . I 
 care little for be reconcile to a father who have be so cruel to 
 I . " 
 " he love I dearly , and be my friend . I would rather that you should 
 not speak against he to I . " 
 " you will understand , at least , that I be ask nothing from you 
 because he wish it . Laura probably have tell you that you may make 
 thing straight by become my wife . " 
 " she have , - certainly , Lord Chiltern . " 
 " it be an argument that she should never have use . it be an argument 
 to which you should not listen for a moment . make thing straight 
 indeed ! who can tell ? there would be very little make straight by 
 such a marriage , if it be not that I love you . Violet , that be 
 my plea , and my only one . I love you so well that I do believe that 
 if you take I I should return to the old way , and become as other 
 man be , and be in time as respectable , as stupid , - and perhaps as 
 ill - natured as old Lady Baldock herself . " 
 " my poor aunt ! " 
 " you know she say bad thing of I than that . now , dearest , you 
 have hear all that I have to say to you . " as he speak he come close 
 to she , and put out his hand , - but she do not touch it . " I have no 
 other argument to use , - not a word more to say . as I come here in 
 the cab I be turn it over in my mind that I might find what good 
 I should say . but , after all , there be nothing more to be say than 
 that . " 
 " the word make no difference , " she reply . 
 " not unless they be so utter as to force a belief . I do love you . I 
 know no other reason but that why you should be my wife . I have no 
 other excuse to offer for come to you again . you be the one thing 
 in the world that to I have any charm . can you be surprised that I 
 should be persistent in ask for it ? " he be look at she still 
 with the same gaze , and there seem to be a power in his eye from 
 which she could not escape . he be still stand with his right hand 
 out , as though expect , or at least hop , that her hand might be 
 put into his . 
 " how be I to answer you ? " she say . 
 " with your love , if you can give it to I . do you remember how you 
 swear once that you would love I for ever and always ? " 
 " you should not remind I of that . I be a child then , - a naughty 
 child , " she add , smile ; " and be put to bed for what I do on 
 that day . " 
 " be a child still . " 
 " ah , if we but could ! " 
 " and have you no other answer to make I ? " 
 " of course I must answer you . you be entitle to an answer . Lord 
 Chiltern , I be sorry that I can not give you the love for which you 
 ask . " 
 " never ? " 
 " never . " 
 " be it myself personally , or what you have hear of I , that be so 
 hateful to you ? " 
 " nothing be hateful to I . I have never speak of hate . I shall 
 always feel the strong regard for my old friend and playfellow . 
 but there be many thing which a woman be bind to consider before 
 she allow herself so to love a man that she can consent to become 
 his wife . " 
 " allow herself ! then it be a matter entirely of calculation . " 
 " I suppose there should be some thought in it , Lord Chiltern . " 
 there be now a pause , and the man 's hand be at last allow to 
 drop , as there come no response to the proffered grasp . he walk 
 once or twice across the room before he speak again , and then he 
 stop himself closely opposite to she . 
 " I shall never try again , " he say . 
 " it will be well so , " she reply . 
 " there be something to I unmanly in a man 's persecute a girl . just 
 tell Laura , will you , that it be all over ; and she may as well tell 
 my father . good - bye . " 
 she then tender her hand to he , but he do not take it , - probably 
 do not see it , and at once leave the room and the house . 
 " and yet I believe you love he , " Lady Laura say to her friend 
 in her anger , when they discuss the matter immediately on Lord 
 Chiltern 's departure . 
 " you have no right to say that , Laura . " 
 " I have a right to my belief , and I do believe it . I think you love 
 he , and that you lack the courage to risk yourself in try to save 
 he . " 
 " be a woman bind to marry a man if she love he ? " 
 " yes , she be , " reply Lady Laura impetuously , without think of 
 what she be say ; " that be , if she be convince that she also be 
 love . " 
 " whatever be the man 's character ; - whatever be the circumstance ? 
 must she do so , whatever friend may say to the contrary ? be there to 
 be no prudence in marriage ? " 
 " there may be a great deal too much prudence , " say Lady Laura . 
 " that be true . there be certainly too much prudence if a woman 
 marrie prudently , but without love . " Violet intend by this no 
 attack upon her friend , - have not have present in her mind at the 
 moment any idea of Lady Laura 's special prudence in marry Mr. 
 Kennedy ; but Lady Laura feel it keenly , and know at once that an 
 arrow have be shoot which have wound she . 
 " we shall get nothing , " she say , " by descend to personality 
 with each other . " 
 " I mean none , Laura . " 
 " I suppose it be always hard , " say Lady Laura , " for any one person 
 to judge altogether of the mind of another . if I have say anything 
 severe of your refusal of my brother , I retract it . I only wish that 
 it could have be otherwise . " 
 Lord Chiltern , when he leave his sister 's house , walk through the 
 slush and dirt to a haunt of his in the neighbourhood of Covent 
 Garden , and there he remain through the whole afternoon and 
 evening . a certain Captain Clutterbuck join he , and din with 
 he . he tell nothing to Captain Clutterbuck of his sorrow , but 
 Captain Clutterbuck could see that he be unhappy . 
 " let us have another bottle of ' cham , ' " say Captain Clutterbuck , when 
 their dinner be nearly over . " ' Cham ' be the only thing to screw one 
 up when one be down a peg . " 
 " you can have what you like , " say Lord Chiltern ; " but I shall have 
 some brandy - and - water . " 
 " the bad of brandy - and - water be , that one get tired of it before 
 the night be over , " say Captain Clutterbuck . 
 nevertheless , Lord Chiltern do go down to Peterborough the next day 
 by the hunting train , and ride his horse Bonebreaker so well in that 
 famous run from Sutton spring to gidde that after the run young 
 Piles , - of the house of Piles , Sarsnet , and Gingham , - offer he 
 three hundred pound for the animal . 
 " he be not   worth above fifty , " say Lord Chiltern . 
 " but I will give you the three hundred , " say Piles . 
 " you could not   ride he if you would get he , " say Lord Chiltern . 
 " oh , could not   I ! " say Piles . but Mr. Piles do not continue the 
 conversation , content himself with tell his friend Grogram that 
 that red devil Chiltern be as drunk as a lord . 
 CHAPTER XX 
 the Debate on the Ballot 
 Phineas take his seat in the House with a consciousness of much 
 inward trepidation of heart on that night of the ballot debate . after 
 leave Lord Chiltern he go down to his club and din alone . three 
 or four man come and speak to he ; but he could not talk to they at 
 his ease , nor do he quite know what they be say to he . he 
 be go to do something which he long to achieve , but the very 
 idea of which , now that it be so near to he , be a terror to he . 
 to be in the House and not to speak would , to his thinking , be a 
 disgraceful failure . indeed , he could not continue to keep his seat 
 unless he speak . he have be put there that he might speak . he would 
 speak . of course he would speak . have he not already be conspicuous 
 almost as a boy orator ? and yet , at this moment he do not know 
 whether he be eat mutton or beef , or who be stand opposite to 
 he and talk to he , so much be he in dread of the ordeal which 
 he have prepare for himself . as he go down to the House after 
 dinner , he almost make up his mind that it would be a good thing to 
 leave London by one of the night mail train . he feel himself to be 
 stiff and stilte as he walk , and that his clothe be uneasy to 
 he . when he turn into Westminster Hall he regret more keenly 
 than ever he have do that he have secede from the keeping of Mr. 
 Low . he could , he think , have speak very well in court , and would 
 there have learn that self - confidence which now fail he so 
 terribly . it be , however , too late to think of that . he could only 
 go in and take his seat . 
 he go in and take his seat , and the chamber seem to he to be 
 mysteriously large , as though bench be crowd over bench , and 
 gallery over gallery . he have be long enough in the House to 
 have lose the original awe inspire by the Speaker and the clerk of 
 the House , by the row of Ministers , and by the unequalled importance 
 of the place . on ordinary occasion he could saunter in and out , and 
 whisper at his ease to a neighbour . but on this occasion he go 
 direct to the bench on which he ordinarily sit , and begin at once to 
 rehearse to himself his speech . he have in truth be do this all 
 day , in spite of the effort that he have make to rid himself of all 
 memory of the occasion . he have be collect the head of his 
 speech while Mr. Low have be talk to he , and refresh his 
 quotation in the presence of Lord Chiltern and the dumb - bell . he 
 have tax his memory and his intellect with various task , which , 
 as he fear , would not adjust themselves one with another . he have 
 learn the heading of his speech , - so that one head might follow 
 the other , and nothing be forget . and he have learn verbatim the 
 word which he intend to utter under each heading , - with a hope 
 that if any one compact part should be destroy or injure in its 
 compactness by treachery of memory , or by the course of the debate , 
 each other compact part might be there in its entirety , ready for 
 use ; - or at least so many of the compact part as treachery of 
 memory and the accident of the debate might leave to he ; so 
 that his speech might be like a vessel , watertight in its various 
 compartment , that would float by the buoyancy of its stern and bow , 
 even though the hold should be waterlogge . but this use of his 
 compose word , even though he should be able to carry it through , 
 would not complete his work ; - for it would be his duty to answer in 
 some sort those who have go before he , and in order to do this he 
 must be able to insert , without any prearrangement of word or idea , 
 little intercalatory part between those compact mass of argument 
 with which he have be occupy himself for many laborious hour . as 
 he look round upon the House and perceive that everything be dim 
 before he , that all his original awe of the House have return , and 
 with it a present quake fear that make he feel the pulsation 
 of his own heart , he become painfully aware that the task he have 
 prepare for himself be too great . he should , on this the occasion 
 of his rise to his maiden leg , have either prepare for himself 
 a short general speech , which could indeed have do little for his 
 credit in the House , but which might have serve to carry off the 
 novelty of the thing , and have introduce he to the sound of his own 
 voice within those wall , - or he should have trust to what his wit 
 and spirit would produce for he on the spur of the moment , and not 
 have burden himself with a huge exercise of memory . during the 
 presentation of a few petition he try to repeat to himself the 
 first of his compact part , - a compact part on which , as it might 
 certainly be bring into use let the debate have go as it might , 
 he have expend great care . he have flatter himself that there 
 be something of real strength in his word as he repeat they to 
 himself in the comfortable seclusion of his own room , and he have make 
 they so ready to his tongue that he think it to be impossible that 
 he should forget even an intonation . now he find that he could not 
 remember the first phrase without unloose and look at a small 
 roll of paper which he hold furtively in his hand . what be the good 
 of look at it ? he would forget it again in the next moment . he have 
 intend to satisfy the most eager of his friend , and to astound his 
 opponent . as it be , no one would be satisfied , - and none astound 
 but they who have trust in he . 
 the debate begin , and if the leisure afford by a long and tedious 
 speech could have serve he , he might have have leisure enough . he 
 try at first to follow all that this advocate for the ballot might 
 say , hop thence to acquire the impetus of strong interest ; but he 
 soon weary of the work , and begin to long that the speech might 
 be end , although the period of his own martyrdom would thereby 
 be bring near to he . at half - past seven so many member have 
 desert their seat , that Phineas begin to think that he might be 
 save all further pain by a " count out . " he reckon the member 
 present and find that they be below the mystic forty , - first by 
 two , then by four , by five , by seven , and at one time by eleven . 
 it be not for he to ask the Speaker to count the House , but he 
 wonder that no one else should do so . and yet , as the idea of this 
 termination to the night 's work come upon he , and as he think of 
 his lose labour , he almost take courage again , - almost dreaded rather 
 than wish for the interference of some malicious member . but there 
 be no malicious member then present , or else it be know that Lords 
 of the Treasury and Lords of the Admiralty would flock in during 
 the Speaker 's ponderous counting , - and thus the slow length of the 
 ballot - lover 's verbosity be permit to evolve itself without 
 interruption . at eight o'clock he have complete his catalogue of 
 illustration , and immediately Mr. Monk rise from the Treasury bench 
 to explain the ground on which the Government must decline to 
 support the motion before the House . 
 Phineas be aware that Mr. Monk intend to speak , and be aware also 
 that his speech would be very short . " my idea be , " he have say to 
 Phineas , " that every man possess of the franchise should dare to 
 have and to express a political opinion of his own ; that otherwise 
 the franchise be not worth have ; and that man will learn that when 
 all so dare , no evil can come from such daring . as the ballot would 
 make any courage of that kind unnecessary , I dislike the ballot . I 
 shall confine myself to that , and leave the illustration to young 
 debater . " Phineas also have be inform that Mr. Turnbull would 
 reply to Mr. Monk , with the purpose of crush Mr. Monk into dust , 
 and Phineas have prepare his speech with something of an intention of 
 subsequently crush Mr. Turnbull . he know , however , that he could 
 not command his opportunity . there be the chapter of accident to 
 which he must accommodate himself ; but such have be his programme 
 for the evening . 
 Mr. Monk make his speech , - and though he be short , he be very fiery 
 and energetic . quick as lightning word of wrath and scorn fly from 
 he , in which he paint the cowardice , the meanness , the falsehood 
 of the ballot . " the ballot - box , " he say , " be the grave of all true 
 political opinion . " though he speak hardly for ten minute , he seem 
 to say more than enough , ten time enough , to slaughter the argument 
 of the former speaker . at every hot word as it fall Phineas be 
 drive to regret that a paragraph of his own be take away from he , 
 and that his choice morsel of stand ground be be cut from 
 under his foot . when Mr. Monk sit down , Phineas feel that Mr. Monk 
 have say all that he , Phineas Finn , have intend to say . 
 then Mr. Turnbull rise slowly from the bench below the gangway . with 
 a speaker so frequent and so famous as Mr. Turnbull no hurry be 
 necessary . he be sure to have his opportunity . the Speaker 's eye be 
 ever travel to the accustomed spot . Mr. Turnbull rise slowly and 
 begin his oration very mildly . " there be nothing , " he say , " that he 
 admire so much as the poetic imagery and the high - fly sentiment 
 of his right honourable friend the member for West Bromwich , " - Mr. 
 Monk sit for West Bromwich , - " unless it be the stubborn fact and 
 unanswered argument of his honourable friend who have bring forward 
 this motion . " then Mr. Turnbull proceed after his fashion to crush 
 Mr. Monk . he be very prosaic , very clear both in voice and language , 
 very harsh , and very unscrupulous . he and Mr. Monk have be join 
 together in politic for over twenty year ; - but one would have 
 think , from Mr. Turnbull 's word , that they have be the bitter 
 of enemy . Mr. Monk be taunt with his office , taunt with his 
 desertion of the liberal party , taunt with his ambition , - and 
 taunt with his lack of ambition . " I once think , " say Mr. 
 Turnbull , - " nay , not long ago I think , that he and I would have 
 fight this battle for the people , shoulder to shoulder , and knee to 
 knee ; - but he have prefer that the knee next to his own shall wear 
 a garter , and that the shoulder which support he shall be deck 
 with a blue ribbon , - as shoulder , I presume , be deck in those 
 closet conference which be call cabinet . " 
 just after this , while Mr. Turnbull be still go on with a variety 
 of illustration draw from the United States , Barrington Erle 
 step across the bench up to the place where Phineas be sit , 
 and whisper a few word into his ear . " bonteen be prepared to 
 answer Turnbull , and wish to do it . I tell he that I think you 
 should have the opportunity , if you wish it . " Phineas be not ready 
 with a reply to Erle at the spur of the moment . " somebody tell 
 I , " continue Erle , " that you have say that you would like to speak 
 to - night . " 
 " so I do , " say Phineas . 
 " shall I tell Bonteen that you will do it ? " 
 the chamber seem to swim round before our hero 's eye . Mr. Turnbull 
 be still go on with his clear , loud , unpleasant voice , but there 
 be no know how long he might go on . upon Phineas , if he should 
 now consent , might devolve the duty , within ten minute , within three 
 minute , of rise there before a full House to defend his great 
 friend , Mr. Monk , from a gross personal attack . be it fit that 
 such a novice as he should undertake such a work as that ? be he 
 to do so , all that speech which he have prepare , with its various 
 self - float part , must go for nothing . the task be exactly that 
 which , of all task , he would well like to have accomplish , and 
 to have accomplish well . but if he should fail ! and he feel that 
 he would fail . for such work a man should have all his sens 
 about he , - his full courage , perfect confidence , something almost 
 approach to contempt for listening opponent , and nothing of fear 
 in regard to listening friend . he should be as a cock in his own 
 farmyard , master of all the circumstance around he . but Phineas 
 Finn have not even as yet hear the sound of his own voice in that 
 room . at this moment , so confused be he , that he do not know where 
 sit Mr. Mildmay , and where Mr. Daubeny . all be confused , and there 
 arise as it be a sound of water in his ear , and a feeling as of a 
 great hell around he . " I have rather wait , " he say at last . " bonteen 
 have well reply . " Barrington Erle look into his face , and then 
 step back across the bench , tell Mr. Bonteen that the 
 opportunity be his . 
 Mr. Turnbull continue speak quite long enough to give poor 
 Phineas time for repentance ; but repentance be of no use . he have 
 decide against himself , and his decision could not be reverse . he 
 would have leave the House , only it seem to he that have he do so 
 every one would look at he . he draw his hat down over his eye , and 
 remain in his place , hat Mr. Bonteen , hat Barrington Erle , 
 hat Mr. Turnbull , - but hat no one so much as he hat himself . 
 he have disgrace himself for ever and could never recover the 
 occasion which he have lose . 
 Mr. Bonteen 's speech be in no way remarkable . Mr. Monk , he say , have 
 do the State good service by add his wisdom and patriotism to 
 the Cabinet . the sort of argument which Mr. Bonteen use to prove 
 that a man who have gain credit as a legislator should in process of 
 time become a member of the executive , be trite and common , and be 
 not use by Mr. Bonteen with any special force . Mr. Bonteen be glib 
 of tongue and possess that familiarity with the place which poor 
 Phineas have lack so sorely . there be one moment , however , which 
 be terrible to Phineas . as soon as Mr. Bonteen have show the purpose 
 for which he be on his leg , Mr. Monk look round at Phineas , as 
 though in reproach . he have expect that this work should fall into 
 the hand of one who would perform it with more warmth of heart than 
 could be expect from Mr. Bonteen . when Mr. Bonteen cease , two or 
 three other short speech be make and member fire off their 
 little gun . phinea have lose so great an opportunity , would not 
 now consent to accept one that should be comparatively valueless . 
 then there come a division . the motion be lose by a large 
 majority , - by any number you might choose to name , as Phineas have 
 say to Lord Brentford ; but in that there be no triumph to the poor 
 wretch who have fail through fear , and who be now a coward in his 
 own esteem . 
 he leave the House alone , carefully avoid all speech with any one . 
 as he come out he have see Laurence Fitzgibbon in the lobby , but he 
 have go on without pause a moment , so that he might avoid his 
 friend . and when he be out in Palace Yard , where be he to go next ? 
 he look at his watch , and find that it be just ten . he do not 
 dare to go to his club , and it be impossible for he to go home and 
 to bed . he be very miserable , and nothing would comfort he but 
 sympathy . be there any one who would listen to his abuse of himself , 
 and would then answer he with kindly apology for his own weakness ? 
 Mrs. Bunce would do it if she know how , but sympathy from Mrs. Bunce 
 would hardly avail . there be but one person in the world to whom he 
 could tell his own humiliation with any hope of comfort , and that 
 person be Lady Laura Kennedy . Sympathy from any man would have be 
 distasteful to he . he have think for a moment of fling himself 
 at Mr. Monk 's foot and tell all his weakness ; - but he could not 
 have endure pity even from Mr. Monk . it be not to be endure from 
 any man . 
 he think that Lady Laura Kennedy would be at home , and probably 
 alone . he know , at any rate , that he might be allow to knock at her 
 door , even at that hour . he have leave Mr. Kennedy in the House , and 
 there he would probably remain for the next hour . there be no man 
 more constant than Mr. Kennedy in see the work of the day , - or of 
 the night , - to its end . so Phineas walk up Victoria Street , and 
 from thence into Grosvenor Place , and knock at Lady Laura 's door . 
 " yes ; Lady Laura be at home ; and alone . " he be show up into the 
 drawing - room , and there he find Lady Laura wait for her husband . 
 " so the great debate be over , " she say , with as much of irony as she 
 know how to throw into the epithet . 
 " yes ; it be over . " 
 " and what have they do , - those leviathan of the people ? " 
 then Phineas tell she what be the majority . 
 " be there anything the matter with you , Mr. Finn ? " she say , look 
 at he suddenly . " be you not well ? " 
 " yes ; I be very well . " 
 " will you not sit down ? there be something wrong , I know . what be 
 it ? " 
 " I have simply be the great idiot , the great coward , the most 
 awkward ass that ever live ! " 
 " what do you mean ? " 
 " I do not know why I should come to tell you of it at this hour at 
 night , but I have come that I might tell you . probably because there 
 be no one else in the whole world who would not laugh at I . " 
 " at any rate , I shall not laugh at you , " say Lady Laura . 
 " but you will despise I . " 
 " that I be sure I shall not do . " 
 " you can not help it . I despise myself . for year I have place before 
 myself the ambition of speak in the House of Commons ; - for year I 
 have be think whether there would ever come to I an opportunity 
 of make myself hear in that assembly , which I consider to be 
 the first in the world . to - day the opportunity have be offer to 
 I , - and , though the motion be nothing , the opportunity be great . 
 the subject be one on which I be thoroughly prepared . the manner 
 in which I be summon be most flattering to I . I be especially 
 call on to perform a task which be most congenial to my 
 feeling ; - and I decline because I be afraid . " 
 " you have think too much about it , my friend , " say Lady Laura . 
 " too much or too little , what do it matter ? " reply Phineas , in 
 despair . " there be the fact . I could not do it . do you remember the 
 story of Conachar in the ' Fair Maid of Perth ; ' - how his heart refuse 
 to give he blood enough to fight ? he have be suckle with the milk 
 of a timid creature , and , though he could die , there be none of the 
 strength of manhood in he . it be about the same thing with I , I 
 take it . " 
 " I do not think you be at all like Conachar , " say Lady Laura . 
 " I be equally disgrace , and I must perish after the same fashion . I 
 shall apply for the Chiltern Hundreds in a day or two . " 
 " you will do nothing of the kind , " say Lady Laura , get up from 
 her chair and come towards he . " you shall not leave this room till 
 you have promise I that you will do nothing of the kind . I do not 
 know as yet what have occur to - night ; but I do know that that 
 modesty which have keep you silent be more often a grace than a 
 disgrace . " 
 this be the kind of sympathy which he want , she draw her chair 
 nearer to he , and then he explain to she as accurately as he could 
 what have take place in the House on this evening , - how he have 
 prepare his speech , how he have feel that his preparation be vain , 
 how he perceive from the course of the debate that if he speak 
 at all his speech must be very different from what he have first 
 intend ; how he have decline to take upon himself a task which 
 seem to require so close a knowledge of the way of the House and 
 of the temper of the man , as the defence of such a man as Mr. Monk . 
 in accuse himself he , unconsciously , excuse himself , and his 
 excuse , in Lady Laura 's ear , be more valid than his accusation . 
 " and you would give it all up for that ? " she say . 
 " yes ; I think I ought . " 
 " I have very little doubt but that you be right in allow Mr. 
 Bonteen to undertake such a task . I should simply explain to Mr. Monk 
 that you feel too keen an interest in his welfare to stand up as an 
 untried member in his defence . it be not , I think , the work for a man 
 who be not at home in the House . I be sure Mr. Monk will feel this , 
 and I be quite certain that Mr. Kennedy will think that you have be 
 right . " 
 " I do not care what Mr. Kennedy may think . " 
 " why do you say that , Mr. Finn ? that be not courteous . " 
 " simply because I care so much what Mr. Kennedy 's wife may think . 
 your opinion be all in all to I , - only that I know you be too kind 
 to I . " 
 " he would not be too kind to you . he be never too kind to any one . he 
 be justice itself . " 
 Phineas , as he hear the tone of her voice , could not but feel that 
 there be in Lady Laura 's word something of an accusation against 
 her husband . 
 " I hate justice , " say Phineas . " I know that justice would condemn 
 I . but love and friendship know nothing of justice . the value of 
 love be that it overlook fault , and forgive even crime . " 
 " I , at any rate , " say Lady Laura , " will forgive the crime of your 
 silence in the House . my strong belief in your success will not be in 
 the least affected by what you tell I of your failure to - night . you 
 must await another opportunity ; and , if possible , you should be less 
 anxious as to your own performance . there be Violet . " as Lady Laura 
 speak the last word , there be a sound of a carriage stop in the 
 street , and the front door be immediately open . " she be stay 
 here , but have be din with her uncle , Admiral Effingham . " then 
 Violet Effingham enter the room , roll up in pretty white fur , 
 and silk cloak , and lace shawl . " here be Mr. Finn , come to tell we 
 of the debate about the ballot . " 
 " I do not   care twopence about the ballot , " say Violet , as she put out 
 her hand to Phineas . " be we go to have a new iron fleet build ? 
 that be the question . " 
 " Sir Simeon have come out strong to - night , " say Lady Laura . 
 " there be no political question of any importance except the question 
 of the iron fleet , " say Violet . " I be quite sure of that , and so , if 
 Mr. Finn can tell I nothing about the iron fleet , I will go to bed . " 
 " Mr. Kennedy will tell you everything when he come home , " say 
 Phineas . 
 " oh , Mr. Kennedy ! Mr. Kennedy never tell one anything . I doubt 
 whether Mr. Kennedy think that any woman know the meaning of the 
 British Constitution . " 
 " do you know what it mean , Violet ? " ask Lady Laura . 
 " to be sure I do . it be liberty to growl about the iron fleet , or 
 the ballot , or the taxis , or the peer , or the bishop , - or anything 
 else , except the House of Commons . that be the British Constitution . 
 good - night , Mr. Finn . " 
 " what a beautiful creature she be ! " say Phineas . 
 " yes , indeed , " say Lady Laura . 
 " and full of wit and grace and pleasantness . I do not wonder at your 
 brother 's choice . " 
 it will be remember that this be say on the day before Lord 
 Chiltern have make his offer for the third time . 
 " Poor Oswald ! he do not know as yet that she be in town . " 
 after that Phineas go , not wish to await the return of Mr. 
 Kennedy . he have feel that Violet Effingham have come into the room 
 just in time to remedy a great difficulty . he do not wish to speak 
 of his love to a married woman , - to the wife of the man who call 
 he friend , - to a woman who he feel sure would have rebuke he . but 
 he could hardly have restrain himself have not Miss Effingham be 
 there . 
 but as he go home he think more of Miss Effingham than he do of 
 Lady Laura ; and I think that the voice of Miss Effingham have do 
 almost as much towards comfort he as have the kindness of the 
 other . 
 at any rate , he have be comfort . 
 CHAPTER XXI 
 " do be punctual " 
 on the very morning after his failure in the House of Commons , when 
 Phineas be read in the Telegraph , - he take the Telegraph not 
 from choice but for economy , - the word of that debate which he have 
 hear and in which he should have take a part , a most unwelcome 
 visit be pay to he . it be near eleven , and the breakfast thing 
 be still on the table . he be at this time on a Committee of the 
 House with reference to the use of potted pea in the army and 
 navy , at which he have sit once , - at a preliminary meeting , - and in 
 reference to which he have already resolve that as he have fail so 
 frightfully in debate , he would certainly do his duty to the utmost 
 in the more easy but infinitely more tedious work of the Committee 
 Room . the Committee meet at twelve , and he intend to walk down to 
 the Reform Club , and then to the House . he have just complete his 
 reading of the debate and of the leader in the Telegraph on the 
 subject . he have tell himself how little the writer of the article 
 know about Mr. Turnbull , how little about Mr. Monk , and how little 
 about the people , - such be his own idea as to the qualification 
 of the writer of that leading article , - and be about to start . but 
 Mrs. Bunce arrest he by tell he that there be a man below who 
 want to see he . 
 " what sort of a man , Mrs. Bunce ? " 
 " he be not   a gentleman , sir . " 
 " do he give his name ? " 
 " he do not , sir ; but I know it be about money . I know the way of 
 they so well . I have   see this one 's face before somewhere . " 
 " you have well show he up , " say Phineas . he know well the business 
 on which the man be come . the man want money for that bill which 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon have send afloat , and which Phineas have endorse . 
 Phineas have never as yet fall so deeply into trouble of money as 
 to make it necessary that he need refuse himself to any caller on 
 that score , and he do not choose to do so now . nevertheless he most 
 heartily wish that he have leave his lodging for the club before the 
 man have come . this be not the first he have hear of the bill be 
 overdue and unpaid . the bill have be bring to he note a month 
 since , and then he have simply tell the youth who bring it that he 
 would see Mr. Fitzgibbon and have the matter settle . he have speak 
 to his friend Laurence , and Laurence have simply assure he that all 
 should be make right in two day , - or , at furth , by the end of 
 a week . since that time he have observe that his friend have be 
 somewhat shy of speak to he when no other be with they . 
 Phineas would not have allude to the bill have he and Laurence be 
 alone together ; but he have be quick enough to guess from his 
 friend 's manner that the matter be not settle . now , no doubt , 
 serious trouble be about to commence . 
 the visitor be a little man with grey hair and a white cravat , some 
 sixty year of age , dress in black , with a very decent hat , - which , 
 on enter the room , he at once put down on the near chair , - with 
 reference to whom , any judge on the subject would have concur at 
 first sight in the decision pronounce by Mrs. Bunce , though none 
 but a judge very well use to sift the cause of his own conclusion 
 could have give the reason for that early decision . " he be not   a 
 gentleman , " Mrs. Bunce have say . and the man certainly be not a 
 gentleman . the old man in the white cravat be very neatly dress , 
 and carry himself without any of that humility which betray one 
 class of uncertified aspirant to gentility , or of that assume 
 arrogance which be at once fatal to another class . but , nevertheless , 
 Mrs. Bunce have see at a glance that he be not a gentleman , - have 
 see , moreover , that such a man could have come only upon one 
 mission . she be right there too . this visitor have come about money . 
 " about this bill , Mr. Finn , " say the visitor , proceed to take 
 out of his breast coat - pocket a rather large leathern case , as he 
 advance up towards the fire . " my name be Clarkson , Mr. Finn . if I 
 may venture so far , I will take a chair . " 
 " certainly , Mr. Clarkson , " say Phineas , get up and point to 
 a seat . 
 " Thankye , Mr. Finn , thankye . we shall be more comfortable do 
 business sitting , shall not   we ? " whereupon the horrid little man draw 
 himself close in to the fire , and spread out his leathern case 
 upon his knee , begin to turn over one suspicious bit of paper after 
 another , as though he be uncertain in what part of his portfolio 
 lie this identical bit which he be seek . he seem to be quite 
 at home , and to feel that there be no ground whatever for hurry 
 in such comfortable quarter . Phineas hat he at once , - with a 
 hatred altogether unconnected with the difficulty which his friend 
 Fitzgibbon have bring upon he . 
 " here it be , " say Mr. Clarkson at last . " oh , dear I , dear I ! the 
 third of November , and here we be in March ! I do not   think it be 
 so bad as this ; - I do not   indeed . this be very bad , - very bad ! and 
 for Parliament gent , too , who should be more punctual than anybody , 
 because of the privilege . should not   they now , Mr. Finn ? " 
 " all man should be punctual , I suppose , " say Phineas . 
 " of course they should ; of course they should . I always say to my 
 gent , ' be punctual , and I will do anything for you . ' but , perhaps , Mr. 
 Finn , you can hand I a cheque for this amount , and then you and I 
 will begin square . " 
 " indeed I can not , Mr. Clarkson . " 
 " not hand I a cheque for it ! " 
 " upon my word , no . " 
 " that be very bad ; - very bad indeed . then I suppose I must take the 
 half , and renew for the remainder , though I do not   like it ; - I do not 
 indeed . " 
 " I can pay no part of that bill , Mr. Clarkson . " 
 " pay no part of it ! " and Mr. Clarkson , in order that he might the 
 well express his surprise , arrest his hand in the very act of 
 poke his host 's fire . 
 " if you will allow I , I will manage the fire , " say Phineas , put out 
 his hand for the poker . 
 but Mr. Clarkson be fond of poking fire , and would not surrender 
 the poker . " pay no part of it ! " he say again , hold the poker away 
 from Phineas in his left hand . " do not   say that , Mr. Finn . pray do not 
 say that . do not   drive I to be severe . I do not   like to be severe with 
 my gent . I will do anything , Mr. Finn , if you will only be punctual . " 
 " the fact be , Mr. Clarkson , I have never have one penny of 
 consideration for that bill , and - " 
 " oh , Mr. Finn ! oh , Mr. Finn ! " and then Mr. Clarkson have his will of 
 the fire . 
 " I never have one penny of consideration for that bill , " continue 
 Phineas . " of course , I do not   deny my responsibility . " 
 " no , Mr. Finn ; you can not   deny that . here it be ; - Phineas Finn ; - and 
 everybody know you , because you be a Parliament gent . " 
 " I do not   deny it . but I have no reason to suppose that I should 
 be call upon for the money when I accommodate my friend , Mr. 
 Fitzgibbon , and I have not get it . that be the long and the short 
 of it . I must see he and take care that arrangement be make . " 
 " arrangement ! " 
 " yes , arrangement for settle the bill . " 
 " he have not   get the money , Mr. Finn . you know that as well as I do . " 
 " I know nothing about it , Mr. Clarkson . " 
 " oh yes , Mr. Finn ; you know ; you know . " 
 " I tell you I know nothing about it , " say Phineas , wax angry . 
 " as to Mr. Fitzgibbon , he be the pleasantest gent that ever live . 
 be not   he now ? I have   know'd he these ten year . I do not   suppose that 
 for ten year I have   be without his name in my pocket . but , bless 
 you , Mr. Finn , there be an end to everything . I should not   have look 
 at this bit of paper if it have not   be for your signature . of course 
 not . you be just begin , and it be natural you should want a little 
 help . you will find I always ready , if you will only be punctual . " 
 " I tell you again , sir , that I never have a shilling out of that for 
 myself , and do not want any such help . " here Mr. Clarkson smile 
 sweetly . " I give my name to my friend simply to oblige he . " 
 " I like you irish gent because you do hang together so close , " say 
 Mr. Clarkson . 
 " simply to oblige he , " continue Phineas . " as I say before , I know 
 that I be responsible ; but , as I say before also , I have not the 
 mean of take up that bill . I will see Mr. Fitzgibbon , and let 
 you know what we propose to do . " then Phineas get up from his seat 
 and take his hat . it be full time that he should go down to his 
 Committee . but Mr. Clarkson do not get up from his seat . " I be afraid 
 I must ask you to leave I now , Mr. Clarkson , as I have business down 
 at the House . " 
 " business at the House never press , Mr. Finn , " say Mr. Clarkson . 
 " that be the good of Parliament . I have   know Parliament gent this 
 thirty year and more . would you believe it - I have   have a Prime 
 Minister 's name in that portfolio ; that I have ; and a Lord 
 Chancellor 's ; that I have ; - and an Archbishop 's too . I know 
 what Parliament be , Mr. Finn . come , come ; do not   put I off with 
 Parliament . " 
 there he sit before the fire with his pouch open before he , and 
 Phineas have no power of move he . could Phineas have pay he the 
 money which be manifestly due to he on the bill , the man would of 
 course have go ; but fail in that , Phineas could not turn he 
 out . there be a black cloud on the young member 's brow , and great 
 anger at his heart , - against Fitzgibbon rather than against the man 
 who be sit there before he . " Sir , " he say , " it be really 
 imperative that I should go . I be pledge to an appointment at the 
 House at twelve , and it want now only a quarter . I regret that your 
 interview with I should be so unsatisfactory , but I can only promise 
 you that I will see Mr. Fitzgibbon . " 
 " and when shall I call again , Mr. Finn ? " 
 " perhaps I have well write to you , " say Phineas . 
 " oh dear , no , " say Mr. Clarkson . " I should much prefer to look in . 
 look in be always best . we can get to understand one another in 
 that way . let I see . I daresay you be not particular . suppose I say 
 Sunday morning . " 
 " really , I could not see you on Sunday morning , Mr. Clarkson . " 
 " parliament gent be not   generally particular , - ' speciaily not among 
 the Catholics , " plead Mr. Clarkson . 
 " I be always engage on Sundays , " say Phineas . 
 " suppose we say Monday , - or Tuesday . Tuesday morning at eleven . and 
 do be punctual , Mr. Finn . at Tuesday morning I will come , and then no 
 doubt I shall find you ready . " Whereupon Mr. Clarkson slowly put up 
 his bill within his portfolio , and then , before Phineas know where 
 he be , have warmly shake that poor dismayed member of Parliament by 
 the hand . " only do be punctual , Mr. Finn , " he say , as he make his 
 way down the stair . 
 it be now twelve , and Phineas rush off to a cab . he be in such 
 a fervour of rage and misery that he could hardly think of his 
 position , or what he have well do , till he get into the Committee 
 Room ; and when there he could think of nothing else . he intend to 
 go deeply into the question of potted pea , hold an equal balance 
 between the assailed Government office on the one hand , and the 
 advocate of the potted pea on the other . the potter of the pea , 
 who want to sell their article to the Crown , declare that an 
 extensive , - perhaps we may say , an unlimited , - use of the article 
 would save the whole army and navy from the scourge of scurvy , 
 dyspepsia , and rheumatism , would be the good safeguard against 
 typhus and other fever , and would be an invaluable aid in all other 
 malady to which soldier and sailor be peculiarly subject . the 
 pea in question be grow on a large scale in Holstein , and their 
 growth have be foster with the special object of do good to the 
 british army and navy . the pea be so cheap that there would be a 
 great saving in money , - and it really have seem to many that the 
 official of the Horse Guards and the Admiralty have be actuate 
 by some fiendish desire to deprive their man of salutary fresh 
 vegetable , simply because they be of foreign growth . but the 
 official of the War Office and the Admiralty declare that the 
 potted pea in question be hardly fit for swine . the motion for the 
 Committee have be make by a gentleman of the opposition , and Phineas 
 have be put upon it as an independent member . he have resolve to 
 give it all his mind , and , as far as he be concern , to reach a 
 just decision , in which there should be no favour show to the 
 Government side . new broom be proverbial for thorough work , 
 and in this Committee work Phineas be as yet a new broom . but , 
 unfortunately , on this day his mind be so harass that he could 
 hardly understand what be go on . it do not , perhaps , much 
 signify , as the witness examine be altogether agricultural . they 
 only prove the production of pea in Holstein , - a fact as to which 
 Phineas have no doubt . the proof be naturally slow , as the evidence 
 be give in German , and have to be translate into English . and 
 the work of the day be much impede by a certain member who 
 unfortunately speak German , who seem to be fond of speak German 
 before his brother of the Committee , and who be curious as to 
 agriculture in Holstein generally . the chairman do not understand 
 German , and there be a difficulty in check this gentleman , and 
 in make he understand that his question be not relevant to the 
 issue . 
 Phineas could not keep his mind during the whole afternoon from the 
 subject of his misfortune . what should he do if this horrid man come 
 to he once or twice a week ? he certainly do owe the man the money . 
 he must admit that to himself . the man no doubt be a dishonest 
 knave who have discount the bill probably at fifty per cent ; but , 
 nevertheless , Phineas have make himself legally responsible for the 
 amount . the privilege of the House prohibit he from arrest . he 
 think of that very often , but the thought only make he the more 
 unhappy . would it not be say , and might it not be say truly , that 
 he have incur this responsibility , - a responsibility which he be 
 altogether unequal to answer , - because he be so protect ? he do 
 feel that a certain consciousness of his privilege have be present 
 to he when he have put his name across the paper , and there have be 
 dishonesty in that very consciousness . and of what service would his 
 privilege be to he , if this man could harass every hour of his 
 life ? the man be to be with he again in a day or two , and when the 
 appointment have be propose , he , Phineas , have not dare to negative 
 it . and how be he to escape ? as for pay the bill , that with he 
 be altogether impossible . the man have tell he , - and he have believe 
 the man , - that payment by Fitzgibbon be out of the question . and 
 yet Fitzgibbon be the son of a peer , whereas he be only the son of 
 a country doctor ! of course Fitzgibbon must make some effort , - some 
 great effort , - and have the thing settle . alas , alas ! he know enough 
 of the world already to feel that the hope be vain . 
 he go down from the Committee Room into the House , and he din 
 at the House , and remain there until eight or nine at night ; but 
 Fitzgibbon do not come . he then go to the Reform Club , but he be 
 not there . both at the club and in the House many man speak to he 
 about the debate of the previous night , express surprise that he 
 have not speak , - make he more and more wretched . he see Mr. Monk , 
 but Mr. Monk be walk arm in arm with his colleague , Mr. Palliser , 
 and Phineas could do no more than just speak to they . he think that 
 Mr. Monk 's nod of recognition be very cold . that might be fancy , but 
 it certainly be a fact that Mr. Monk only nod to he . he would 
 tell Mr. Monk the truth , and then , if Mr. Monk choose to quarrel with 
 he , he at any rate would take no step to renew their friendship . 
 from the Reform Club he go to the Shakspeare , a small club to 
 which Fitzgibbon belong , - and of which Phineas much wish to 
 become a member , - and to which he know that his friend resort when 
 he wish to enjoy himself thoroughly , and to be at ease in his 
 inn . man at the Shakspeare could do as they please . there be no 
 politic there , no fashion , no stiffness , and no rule , - so man say ; 
 but that be hardly true . everybody call everybody by his christian 
 name , and member smoke all over the house . they who do not belong 
 to the Shakspeare think it an Elysium upon earth ; and they who 
 do , believe it to be among Pandemoniums the most pleasant . Phineas 
 call at the Shakspeare , and be tell by the porter that Mr. 
 Fitzgibbon be up - stair . he be show into the stranger room , and 
 in five minute his friend come down to he . 
 " I want you to come down to the Reform with I , " say Phineas . 
 " by jingo , my dear fellow , I be in the middle of a rubber of whist . " 
 " there have be a man with I about that bill . " 
 " what ; - Clarkson ? " 
 " yes , Clarkson , " say Phineas . 
 " do not   mind he , " say Fitzgibbon . 
 " that be nonsense . how be I to help mind he ? I must mind he . he 
 be come to I again on Tuesday morning . " 
 " do not   see he . " 
 " how can I help see he ? " 
 " make they say you be not at home . " 
 " he have make an appointment . he have tell I that he will never leave I 
 alone . he will be the death of I if this be not settle . " 
 " it shall be settle , my dear fellow . I will see about it . I will see 
 about it and write you a line . you must excuse I now , because those 
 fellow be wait . I will have it all arrange . " 
 again as Phineas go home he thoroughly wish that he have not 
 secede from Mr. Low . 
 CHAPTER XXII 
 Lady Baldock at home 
 about the middle of March Lady Baldock come up from Baddingham to 
 London , coerce into do so , as Violet Effingham declare , in 
 thorough opposition to all her own taste , by the know wish of her 
 friend and relative . her friend and relative , so Miss Effingham 
 insinuate , be unanimous in wish that Lady Baldock should 
 remain at Baddingham Park , and therefore , - that wish have be 
 indiscreetly express , - she have put herself to great inconvenience , 
 and have come to London in March . " Gustavus will go mad , " say Violet 
 to Lady Laura . the Gustavus in question be the Lord Baldock of the 
 present generation , Miss Effingham 's Lady Baldock be the peer 's 
 mother . " why do not Lord Baldock take a house himself ? " ask Lady 
 Laura . " do not   you know , my dear , " Violet answer , " how much we 
 Baddingham people think of money ? we do not   like be vex and 
 drive mad , but even that be well than keep up two household . " 
 as regard Violet , the injury arise from Lady Baldock 's early 
 migration be very great , for she be thus compel to move from 
 Grosvenor Place to Lady Baldock 's house in Berkeley Square . " as you 
 be so fond of be in London , Augusta and I have make up our mind 
 to come up before Easter , " Lady Baldock have write to she . 
 " I shall go to she now , " Violet have say to her friend , " because I 
 have not quite make up my mind as to what I will do for the future . " 
 " Marry Oswald , and be your own mistress . " 
 " I mean to be my own mistress without marry Oswald , though I do not 
 see my way quite clearly as yet . I think I shall set up a little 
 house of my own , and let the world say what it please . I suppose 
 they could not   make I out to be a lunatic . " 
 " I should not   wonder if they be to try , " say Lady Laura . 
 " they could not prevent I in any other way . but I be in the dark as 
 yet , and so I shall be obedient and go to my aunt . " 
 Miss Effingham go to Berkeley Square , and Phineas Finn be 
 introduce to Lady Baldock . he have be often in Grosvenor Place , 
 and have see Violet frequently . Mr. Kennedy give periodical 
 dinner , - once a week , - to which everybody go who could get an 
 invitation ; and Phineas have be a guest more than once . indeed , in 
 spite of his misery he have take to din out a good deal , and be 
 popular as an eater of dinner . he could talk when want , and do 
 not talk too much , be pleasant in manner and appearance , and have 
 already achieve a certain recognise position in London life . of 
 those who know he intimately , not one in twenty be aware from 
 whence he come , what be his parentage , or what his mean of living . 
 he be a member of Parliament , a friend of Mr. Kennedy 's , be 
 intimate with Mr. Monk , though an Irishman do not as a rule herd 
 with other Irishmen , and be the right sort of person to have at your 
 house . some people say he be a cousin of Lord Brentford 's , and 
 other declare that he be Lord Chiltern 's early friend . there he 
 be , however , with a position gain , and even Lady Baldock ask he 
 to her house . 
 Lady Baldock have evening . People go to her house , and stand about 
 the room and on the stair , talk to each other for half an hour , 
 and go away . in these March day there be no crowding , but still 
 there be always enough of people there to show that Lady Baldock 
 be successful . why people should have go to Lady Baldock 's I 
 can not explain ; - but there be house to which people go without 
 any reason . Phineas receive a little card ask he to go , and he 
 always go . 
 " I think you like my friend , Mr. Finn , " Lady Laura say to Miss 
 Effingham , after the first of these evening . 
 " yes , I do . I like he decidedly . " 
 " so do I. I should hardly have think that you would have take a 
 fancy to he . " 
 " I hardly know what you call take a fancy , " say Violet . " I be not 
 quite sure I like to be tell that I have take a fancy for a young 
 man . " 
 " I mean no offence , my dear . " 
 " of course you do not   but , to speak truth , I think I have rather take 
 a fancy to he . there be just enough of he , but not too much . I 
 do not   mean materially , - in regard to his inch ; but as to his mental 
 belonging . I hate a stupid man who can not   talk to I , and I hate a 
 clever man who talk I down . I do not   like a man who be too lazy to 
 make any effort to shine ; but I particularly dislike the man who be 
 always strive for effect . I abominate a humble man , but yet I love 
 to perceive that a man acknowledge the superiority of my sex , and 
 youth , and all that kind of thing . " 
 " you want to be flatter without plain flattery . " 
 " of course I do . a man who would tell I that I be pretty , unless he 
 be over seventy , ought to be kick out of the room . but a man who 
 can not   show I that he think I so without say a word about it , 
 be a lout . now in all those matter , your friend , Mr. Finn , seem to 
 know what he be about . in other word , he make himself pleasant , 
 and , therefore , one be glad to see he . " 
 " I suppose you do not mean to fall in love with he ? " 
 " not that I know of , my dear . but when I do , I will be sure to give you 
 notice . " 
 I fear that there be more of earnestness in Lady Laura 's last 
 question than Miss Effingham have suppose . she have declare to 
 herself over and over again that she have never be in love with 
 Phineas Finn . she have acknowledge to herself , before Mr. Kennedy have 
 ask her hand in marriage , that there have be danger , - that she 
 could have learn to love the man if such love would not have be 
 ruinous to she , - that the romance of such a passion would have be 
 pleasant to she . she have go far than this , and have say to 
 herself that she would have give way to that romance , and would have 
 be ready to accept such love if offer to she , have she not put 
 it out of her own power to marry a poor man by her generosity to 
 her brother . then she have thrust the thing aside , and have clearly 
 understand , - she think that she have clearly understand , - that life 
 for she must be a matter of business . be it not the case with nine 
 out of every ten among mankind , with nine hundred and ninety - nine out 
 of every thousand , that life must be a matter of business and not of 
 romance ? of course she could not marry Mr. Finn , know , as she do , 
 that neither of they have a shilling . of all man in the world she 
 esteem Mr. Kennedy the most , and when these thought be pass 
 through her mind , she be well aware that he would ask she to be 
 his wife . have she not resolve that she would accept the offer , she 
 would not have go to Loughlinter . have put aside all romance as 
 unfit to her life , she could , she think , do her duty as Mr. 
 Kennedy 's wife . she would teach herself to love he . Nay , - she have 
 teach herself to love he . she be at any rate so sure of her 
 own heart that she would never give her husband cause to rue the 
 confidence he place in she . and yet there be something sore within 
 she when she think that Phineas Finn be fond of Violet Effingham . 
 it be Lady Baldock 's second evening , and Phineas come to the house 
 at about eleven o'clock . at this time he have encounter a second 
 and a third interview with Mr. Clarkson , and have already fail in 
 obtain any word of comfort from Laurence Fitzgibbon about the 
 bill . it be clear enough now that Laurence feel that they be both 
 make safe by their privilege , and that Mr. Clarkson should be treat 
 as you treat the organ - grinder . they be a nuisance and must be 
 endure . but the nuisance be not so great but what you can live in 
 comfort , - if only you be not too sore as to the annoyance . " my dear 
 fellow , " Laurence have say to he , " I have have Clarkson almost live 
 in my room . he use to drink nearly a pint of sherry a day for I . 
 all I look to be that I do not   live there at the same time . if you 
 wish it , I will send in the sherry . " this be very bad , and Phineas 
 try to quarrel with his friend ; but he find that it be difficult 
 to quarrel with Laurence Fitzgibbon . 
 but though on this side Phineas be very miserable , on another side 
 he have obtain great comfort . Mr. Monk and he be well friend 
 than ever . " as to what Turnbull say about I in the House , " Mr. 
 Monk have say , laugh ; " he and I understand each other perfectly . 
 I should like to see you on your leg , but it be just as well , 
 perhaps , that you have defer it . we shall have the real question 
 on immediately after Easter , and then you will have plenty of 
 opportunity . " Phineas have explain how he have attempt , how he 
 have fail , and how he have suffer ; - and Mr. Monk have be generous 
 in his sympathy . " I know all about it , " say he , " and have go 
 through it all myself . the more respect you feel for the House , 
 the more satisfaction you will have in address it when you have 
 master this difficulty . " 
 the first person who speak to Phineas at Lady Baldock 's be Miss 
 Fitzgibbon , Laurence 's sister . Aspasia Fitzgibbon be a warm woman as 
 regard money , and as she be moreover a most discreet spinster , 
 she be make welcome by Lady Baldock , in spite of the well - know 
 iniquity of her male relative . " Mr. Finn , " say she , " how d'ye do ? 
 I want to say a word to ye . just come here into the corner . " Phineas , 
 not know how to escape , do retreat into the corner with Miss 
 Fitzgibbon . " tell I now , Mr. Finn ; - have ye be lend money to 
 Laurence ? " 
 " no ; I have lend he no money , " say Phineas , much astonish by the 
 question . 
 " do not . that be my advice to ye . do not . on any other matter Laurence 
 be the good creature in the world , - but he be bad to lend money to . 
 you be not   in any hobble with he , then ? " 
 " well ; - nothing to speak of . what make you ask ? " 
 " then you be in a hobble ? dear , dear ! I never see such a man as 
 Laurence ; - never . good - bye . I would not   do it again , if I be 
 you ; - that be all . " then Miss Fitzgibbon come out of the corner and 
 make her way down - stair . 
 Phineas immediately afterwards come across Miss Effingham . " I do not 
 know , " say she , " that you and the divine Aspasia be such close 
 ally . " 
 " we be the dear friend in the world , but she have take my breath 
 away now . " 
 " may a body be tell how she have do that ? " Violet ask . 
 " well , no ; I be afraid not , even though the body be Miss Effingham . it 
 be a profound secret ; - really a secret concern a third person , 
 and she begin about it just as though she be speak about the 
 weather ! " 
 " how charming ! I do so like she . you have not   hear , have you , that 
 Mr. Ratler propose to she the other day ? " 
 " no ! " 
 " but he do ; - at least , so she tell everybody . she say she would take 
 he if he would promise to get her brother 's salary double . " 
 " do she tell you ? " 
 " no ; not I . and of course I do not   believe a word of it . I suppose 
 Barrington Erle make up the story . be you go out of town next 
 week , Mr. Finn ? " the week next to this be easter - week . " I hear you 
 be go into Northamptonshire . " 
 " from Lady Laura ? " 
 " yes ; - from Lady Laura . " 
 " I intend to spend three day with Lord Chiltern at Willingford . it 
 be an old promise . I be go to ride his horse , - that be , if I be 
 able to ride they . " 
 " take care what you be about , Mr. Finn ; - they say his horse be so 
 dangerous ! " 
 " I be rather good at fall , I flatter myself . " 
 " I know that Lord Chiltern rid anything he can sit , so long as it 
 be some animal that nobody else will ride . it be always so with he . 
 he be so odd ; be he not ? " 
 Phineas know , of course , that Lord Chiltern have more than once ask 
 Violet Effingham to be his wife , - and he believe that she , from she 
 intimacy with Lady Laura , must know that he know it . he have also 
 hear Lady Laura express a very strong wish that , in spite of these 
 refusal , Violet might even yet become her brother 's wife . and 
 Phineas also know that Violet Effingham be become , in his own 
 estimation , the most charming woman of his acquaintance . how be he 
 to talk to she about Lord Chiltern ? 
 " he be odd , " say Phineas ; " but he be an excellent fellow , - whom his 
 father altogether misunderstand . " 
 " exactly , - just so ; I be so glad to hear you say that , - you who have 
 never have the misfortune to have anything to do with a bad set . why 
 do not   you tell Lord Brentford ? Lord Brentford would listen to you . " 
 " to I ? " 
 " yes ; - of course he would , - for you be just the link that be 
 want . you be Chiltern 's intimate friend , and you be also the 
 friend of big - wig and Cabinet Ministers . " 
 " Lord Brentford would put I down at once if I speak to he on such a 
 subject . " 
 " I be sure he would not . you be too big to be put down , and no man 
 can really dislike to hear his son well speak of by those who be 
 well speak of themselves . will not   you try , Mr. Finn ? " Phineas say 
 that he would think of it , - that he would try if any fit opportunity 
 could be find . " of course you know how intimate I have be with the 
 Standishes , " say Violet ; " that Laura be to I a sister , and that 
 Oswald use to be almost a brother . " 
 " why do not you speak to Lord Brentford ; - you who be his favourite ? " 
 " there be reason , Mr. Finn . besides , how can any girl come forward 
 and say that she know the disposition of any man ? you can live with 
 Lord Chiltern , and see what he be make of , and know his thought , and 
 learn what be good in he , and also what be bad . after all , how be 
 any girl really to know anything of a man 's life ? " 
 " if I can do anything , Miss Effingham , I will , " say Phineas . 
 " and then we shall all of we be so grateful to you , " say Violet , 
 with her sweetest smile . 
 Phineas , retreat from this conversation , stand for a while alone , 
 thinking of it . have she speak thus of Lord Chiltern because she do 
 love he or because she do not ? and the sweet commendation which 
 have fall from her lip upon he , - he , Phineas Finn , - be they 
 compatible with anything like a grow partiality for himself , or 
 be they incompatible with any such feeling ? have he most reason to 
 be comfort or to be discomfit by what have take place ? it seem 
 hardly possible to his imagination that Violet Effingham should 
 love such a nobody as he . and yet he have have fair evidence that one 
 standing as high in the world as Violet Effingham would fain have 
 love he could she have follow the dictate of her heart . he have 
 tremble when he have first resolve to declare his passion to Lady 
 Laura , - fear that she would scorn he as be presumptuous . but 
 there have be no cause for such fear as that . he have declare his 
 love , and she have not think he to be presumptuous . that now be 
 age ago , - eight month since ; and Lady Laura have become a married 
 woman . since he have become so warmly alive to the charm of Violet 
 Effingham he have determine , with stern propriety , that a passion for 
 a married woman be disgraceful . such love be in itself a sin , even 
 though it be accompany by the severe forbearance and the most 
 rigid propriety of conduct . no ; - Lady Laura have do wisely to check 
 the grow feeling of partiality which she have admit ; and now 
 that she be marry , he would be as wise as she . it be clear to he 
 that , as regard his own heart , the way be open to he for a new 
 enterprise . but what if he be to fail again , and be tell by Violet , 
 when he declare his love , that she have just engage herself to Lord 
 Chiltern ! 
 " what be you and Violet talk about so eagerly ? " say Lady Laura 
 to he , with a smile that , in its approach to laughter , almost 
 betray its mistress . 
 " we be talk about your brother . " 
 " you be go to he , be you not ? " 
 " yes ; I leave London on Sunday night ; - but only for a day or two . " 
 " has he any chance there , do you think ? " 
 " what , with Miss Effingham ? " 
 " yes ; - with Violet . sometimes I think she love he . " 
 " how can I say ? in such a matter you can judge well than I can do . 
 one woman with reference to another can draw the line between love 
 and friendship . she certainly like Chiltern . " 
 " oh , I believe she love he . I do indeed . but she fear he . she 
 do not quite understand how much there be of tenderness with that 
 assume ferocity . and Oswald be so strange , so unwise , so impolitic , 
 that though he love she well than all the world beside , he will 
 not sacrifice even a turn of a word to win she . when he ask she to 
 marry he , he almost fly at her throat , as an angry debtor who 
 apply for instant payment . tell he , Mr. Finn , never to give it 
 over ; - and teach he that he should be soft with she . tell he , also , 
 that in her heart she like he . one woman , as you say , know another 
 woman ; and I be certain he would win she if he would only be gentle 
 with she . " then , again , before they part , Lady Laura tell he that 
 this marriage be the dear wish of her heart , and that there would 
 be no end to her gratitude if Phineas could do anything to promote 
 it . all which again make our hero unhappy . 
 CHAPTER XXIII 
 Sunday in Grosvenor Place 
 Mr. Kennedy , though he be a most scrupulously attentive member of 
 Parliament , be a man very punctual to hour and rule in his own 
 house , - and like that his wife should be as punctual as himself . 
 Lady Laura , who in marry he have firmly resolve that she would do 
 her duty to he in all way , even though the way might sometimes be 
 painful , - and have be perhaps more punctilious in this respect than 
 she might have be have she love he heartily , - be not perhaps 
 quite so fond of accurate regularity as her husband ; and thus , by 
 this time , certain habit of his have become rather bond than habit 
 to she . he always have prayer at nine , and breakfast at a quarter 
 past nine , let the hour on the night before have be as late as 
 they might before the time for rest have come . after breakfast he 
 would open his letter in his study , but he like she to be with 
 he , and desire to discuss with she every application he get from 
 a constituent . he have his private secretary in a room apart , but he 
 think that everything should be filter to his private secretary 
 through his wife . he be very anxious that she herself should 
 superintend the account of their own private expenditure , and have 
 take some trouble to teach she an excellent mode of book - keeping . 
 he have recommend to she a certain course of reading , - which be 
 pleasant enough ; lady like to receive such recommendation ; but Mr. 
 Kennedy , have draw out the course , seem to expect that his wife 
 should read the book he have name , and , bad still , that she should 
 read they in the time he have allocate for the work . this , I think , 
 be tyranny . then the Sundays become very wearisome to Lady Laura . 
 go to church twice , she have learn , would be a part of her duty ; 
 and though in her father 's household attendance at church have never 
 be very strict , she have make up her mind to this cheerfully . but 
 Mr. Kennedy expect also that he and she should always dine together 
 on Sundays , that there should be no guest , and that there should be 
 no evening company . after all , the demand be not very severe , but 
 yet she find that it operate injuriously upon her comfort . the 
 Sundays be very wearisome to she , and make she feel that her lord 
 and master be - her lord and master . she make an effort or two to 
 escape , but the effort be all in vain . he never speak a cross word 
 to she . he never give a stern command . but yet he have his way . " I 
 will not   say that read a novel on a Sunday be a sin , " he say ; " but 
 we must at any rate admit that it be a matter on which man disagree , 
 that many of the good of man be against such occupation on Sunday , 
 and that to abstain be to be on the safe side . " so the novel be 
 put away , and Sunday afternoon with the long evening become rather 
 a stumble - block to Lady Laura . 
 those two hour , moreover , with her husband in the morning become 
 very wearisome to she . at first she have declare that it would be her 
 great ambition to help her husband in his work , and she have read 
 all the letter from the MacNabs and MacFies , ask to be make 
 gauger and landing - waiter , with an assumed interest . but the work 
 pal upon she very quickly . her quick intellect discover soon 
 that there be nothing in it which she really do . it be all form 
 and verbiage , and pretence at business . her husband go through it 
 all with the utmost patience , read every word , give order as 
 to every detail , and conscientiously do that which he conceive 
 he have undertake to do . but Lady Laura want to meddle with high 
 politic , to discuss reform bill , to assist in put up Mr. this 
 and put down my Lord that . why should she waste her time in 
 do that which the lad in the next room , who be call a private 
 secretary , could do as well ? 
 still she would obey . let the task be as hard as it might , she would 
 obey . if he counsel she to do this or that , she would follow his 
 counsel , - because she owe he so much . if she have accept the half 
 of all his wealth without love he , she owe he the more on that 
 account . but she know , - she could not but know , - that her intellect 
 be bright than his ; and might it not be possible for she to lead 
 he ? then she make effort to lead her husband , and find that he be 
 as stiff - neck as an ox . Mr. Kennedy be not , perhaps , a clever man ; 
 but he be a man who know his own way , and who intend to keep it . 
 " I have get a headache , Robert , " she say to he one Sunday after 
 luncheon . " I think I will not go to church this afternoon . " 
 " it be not serious , I hope . " 
 " oh dear no . do not   you know how one feel sometimes that one have get 
 a head ? and when that be the case one 's armchair be the good place . " 
 " I be not sure of that , " say Mr. Kennedy . 
 " if I go to church I should not attend , " say Lady Laura . 
 " the fresh air would do you more good than anything else , and we 
 could walk across the park . " 
 " thank you ; - I will not   go out again to - day . " this she say with 
 something almost of crossness in her manner , and Mr. Kennedy go to 
 the afternoon service by himself . 
 Lady Laura when she be leave alone begin to think of her position . 
 she be not more than four or five month marry , and she be 
 become very tired of her life . be it not also true that she be 
 become tired of her husband ? she have twice tell Phineas Finn that 
 of all man in the world she esteem Mr. Kennedy the most . she do 
 not esteem he less now . she know no point or particle in which 
 he do not do his duty with accuracy . but no person can live 
 happily with another , - not even with a brother or a sister or a 
 friend , - simply upon esteem . all the virtue in the calendar , 
 though they exist on each side , will not make a man and woman happy 
 together , unless there be sympathy . Lady Laura be begin to 
 find out that there be a lack of sympathy between herself and her 
 husband . 
 she think of this till she be tired of thinking of it , and then , 
 wish to divert her mind , she take up the book that be lie 
 near to her hand . it be a volume of a new novel which she have 
 be read on the previous day , and now , without much thought about 
 it , she go on with her reading . there come to she , no doubt , some 
 dim , half - form idea that , as she be free from go to church by 
 the plea of a headache , she be also absolve by the same plea from 
 other Sunday hindrance . a child , when it be ill , have butter toast 
 and a picture - book instead of bread - and - milk and lesson . in this 
 way , Lady Laura conceive herself to be entitle to her novel . 
 while she be read it , there come a knock at the door , and 
 Barrington Erle be show upstairs . Mr. Kennedy have give no order 
 against Sunday visitor , but have simply say that Sunday visit be 
 not to his taste . Barrington , however , be Lady Laura 's cousin , and 
 people must be very strict if they can not   see their cousin on Sunday . 
 Lady Laura soon lose her headache altogether in the animation 
 of discuss the chance of the new Reform Bill with the Prime 
 Minister 's private secretary ; and have leave her chair , and be 
 stand by the table with the novel in her hand , protest this 
 and deny that , express infinite confidence in Mr. Monk , and 
 violently denounce Mr. Turnbull , when her husband return from 
 church and come up into the drawing - room . Lady Laura have forget 
 her headache altogether , and have in her composition none of that 
 thoughtfulness of hypocrisy which would have teach she to moderate 
 her political feeling at her husband 's return . 
 " I do declare , " she say , " that if Mr. Turnbull oppose the 
 Government measure now , because he can not   have his own way in 
 everything , I will never again put my trust in any man who call 
 himself a popular leader . " 
 " you never should , " say Barrington Erle . 
 " that be all very well for you , Barrington , who be an aristocratic 
 Whig of the old official school , and who call yourself a Liberal 
 simply because Fox be a Liberal a hundred year ago . my heart be in 
 it . " 
 " heart should never have anything to do with politic ; should it ? " 
 say Erle , turn round to Mr. Kennedy . 
 Mr. Kennedy do not wish to discuss the matter on a Sunday , nor yet 
 do he wish to say before Barrington Erle that he think it wrong 
 to do so . and he be desirous of treat his wife in some way 
 as though she be an invalid , - that she thereby might be , as it 
 be , punish ; but he do not wish to do this in such a way that 
 Barrington should be aware of the punishment . 
 " Laura have well not disturb herself about it now , " he say . 
 " how be a person to help be disturb ? " say Lady Laura , laugh . 
 " well , well ; we will not   mind all that now , " say Mr. Kennedy , turn 
 away . then he take up the novel which Lady Laura have just lay down 
 from her hand , and , have look at it , carry it aside , and place 
 it on a book - shelf which be remote from they . Lady Laura watch he 
 as he do this , and the whole course of her husband 's thought on the 
 subject be open to she at once . she regret the novel , and she 
 regret also the political discussion . soon afterwards Barrington 
 Erle go away , and the husband and wife be alone together . 
 " I be glad that your head be so much well , " say he . he do not 
 intend to be severe , but he speak with a gravity of manner which 
 almost amount to severity . 
 " yes ; it be , " she say , " Barrington 's come in cheer I up . " 
 " I be sorry that you should have want cheer . " 
 " do not   you know what I mean , Robert ? " 
 " no ; I do not think that I do , exactly . " 
 " I suppose your head be strong . you do not get that feeling 
 of daze , helpless imbecility of brain , which hardly amount to 
 headache , but which yet - be almost as bad . " 
 " imbecility of brain may be bad than headache , but I do not   think it 
 can produce it . " 
 " well , well ; - I do not   know how to explain it . " 
 " Headache come , I think , always from the stomach , even when produce 
 by nervous affection . but imbecility of the brain - " 
 " oh , Robert , I be so sorry that I use the word . " 
 " I see that it do not prevent your reading , " he say , after a pause . 
 " not such reading as that . I be up to nothing well . " 
 then there be another pause . 
 " I will not   deny that it may be a prejudice , " he say , " but I confess 
 that the use of novel in my own house on Sundays be a pain to I . 
 my mother 's idea on the subject be very strict , and I can not think 
 that it be bad for a son to hang on to the teaching of his mother . " 
 this he say in the most serious tone which he could command . 
 " I do not   know why I take it up , " say Lady Laura . " simply , I believe , 
 because it be there . I will avoid do so for the future . " 
 " do , my dear , " say the husband . " I shall be oblige and grateful if 
 you will remember what I have say . " then he leave she , and she sit 
 alone , first in the dusk and then in the dark , for two hour , do 
 nothing . be this to be the life which she have procure for herself 
 by marry Mr. Kennedy of Loughlinter ? if it be harsh and 
 unendurable in London , what would it be in the country ? 
 CHAPTER XXIV 
 the Willingford Bull 
 Phineas leave London by a night mail train on Easter Sunday , and find 
 himself at the Willingford Bull about half an hour after midnight . 
 Lord Chiltern be up and wait for he , and supper be on the 
 table . the Willingford Bull be an English inn of the old stamp , 
 which have now , in these latter year of railway travel , cease 
 to have a road business , - for there be no traveller on the road , 
 and but little posting - but have acquire a new trade as a depot for 
 hunter and hunt man . the landlord let out horse and keep hunt 
 stable , and the house be generally fill from the beginning of 
 November till the middle of April . then it become a desert in the 
 summer , and no guest be see there , till the pink coat flock 
 down again into the shire . 
 " how many day do you mean to give we ? " say Lord Chiltern , as he 
 help his friend to a devilled leg of turkey . 
 " I must go back on Wednesday , " say Phineas . 
 " that mean Wednesday night . I will tell you what we will do . we have   the 
 Cottesmore to - morrow . we will get into Tailby 's country on Tuesday , and 
 Fitzwilliam will be only twelve mile off on Wednesday . we shall be 
 rather short of horse . " 
 " pray do not   let I put you out . I can hire something here , I 
 suppose ? " 
 " you will not   put I out at all . there will be three between we each day , 
 and we will run our luck . the horse have go on to Empingham for 
 to - morrow . Tailby be rather a way off , - at Somerby ; but we will manage 
 it . if the bad come to the bad , we can get back to Stamford by 
 rail . on Wednesday we shall have everything very comfortable . they be 
 out beyond Stilton and will draw home our way . I have   plan it all 
 out . I have   a trap with a fast stepper , and if we start to - morrow at 
 half - past nine , we shall be in plenty of time . you shall ride Meg 
 Merrilies , and if she do not   carry you , you may shoot she . " 
 " be she one of the pull one ? " 
 " she be heavy in hand if you be heavy at she , but leave her mouth 
 alone and she will go like flow water . you would well not ride more 
 in a crowd than you can help . now what will you drink ? " 
 they sit up half the night smoking and talking , and Phineas learn 
 more about Lord Chiltern then than ever he have learn before . there 
 be brandy and water before they , but neither of they drank . Lord 
 Chiltern , indeed , have a pint of beer by his side from which he sip 
 occasionally . " I have   take to beer , " he say , " as be the good drink 
 go . when a man hunt six day a week he can afford to drink beer . 
 I be on an allowance , - three pint a day . that be not too much . " 
 " and you drink nothing else ? " 
 " nothing when I be alone , - except a little cherry - brandy when I be out . 
 I never care for drink ; - never in my life . I do like excitement , and 
 have be less careful than I ought to have be as to what it have 
 come from . I could give up drink to - morrow , without a struggle , - if 
 it be worth my while to make up my mind to do it . and it be the same 
 with gambling . I never do gamble now , because I have   get no money ; but 
 I own I like it well than anything in the world . while you be at 
 it , there be life in it . " 
 " you should take to politic , Chiltern . " 
 " and I would have do so , but my father would not help I . never 
 mind , we will not talk about he . how do Laura get on with her 
 husband ? " 
 " very happily , I should say . " 
 " I do not   believe it , " say Lord Chiltern . " her temper be too much 
 like mine to allow she to be happy with such a log of wood as Robert 
 Kennedy . it be such man as he who drive I out of the pale of decent 
 life . if that be decency , I would soon be indecent . you mark my word . 
 they will come to grief . she will never be able to stand it . " 
 " I should think she have her own way in everything , " say Phineas . 
 " no , no . though he be a prig , he be a man ; and she will not find it 
 easy to drive he . " 
 " but she may bend he . " 
 " not an inch ; - that be if I understand his character . I suppose you 
 see a good deal of they ? " 
 " yes , - pretty well . I be not there so often as I use to be in the 
 Square . " 
 " you get sick of it , I suppose . I should . do you see my father 
 often ? " 
 " only occasionally . he be always very civil when I do see he . " 
 " he be the very pink of civility when he please , but the most unjust 
 man I ever meet . " 
 " I should not have think that . " 
 " yes , he be , " say the Earl 's son , " and all from lack of judgment to 
 discern the truth . he make up his mind to a thing on insufficient 
 proof , and then nothing will turn he . he think well of you , - would 
 probably believe your word on any indifferent subject without thought 
 of a doubt ; but if you be to tell he that I do not   get drunk every 
 night of my life and spend most of my time in thrash policeman , he 
 would not believe you . he would smile incredulously and make you a 
 little bow . I can see he do it . " 
 " you be too hard on he , Chiltern . " 
 " he have be too hard on I , I know . be Violet Effingham still in 
 Grosvenor Place ? " 
 " no ; she be with Lady Baldock . " 
 " that old grandmother of evil have come to town , - have she ? poor 
 Violet ! when we be young together we use to have such fun about 
 that old woman . " 
 " the old woman be an ally of mine now , " say Phineas . 
 " you make ally everywhere . you know Violet Effingham of course ? " 
 " oh yes . I know she . " 
 " do not   you think she very charming ? " say Lord Chiltern . 
 " exceedingly charming . " 
 " I have ask that girl to marry I three time , and I shall never 
 ask she again . there be a point beyond which a man should not   go . 
 there be many reason why it would be a good marriage . in the first 
 place , her money would be serviceable . then it would heal matter in 
 our family , for my father be as prejudiced in her favour as he be 
 against I . and I love she dearly . I have   love she all my life , - since 
 I use to buy cake for she . but I shall never ask she again . " 
 " I would if I be you , " say Phineas , - hardly know what it might 
 be good for he to say . 
 " no ; I never will . but I will tell you what . I shall get into some 
 desperate scrape about she . of course she will marry , and that soon . 
 then I shall make a fool of myself . when I hear that she be engage I 
 shall go and quarrel with the man , and kick he , - or get kick . all 
 the world will turn against I , and I shall be call a wild beast . " 
 " a dog in the manger be what you should be call . " 
 " exactly ; - but how be a man to help it ? if you love a girl , could 
 you see another man take she ? " Phineas remember of course that he 
 have lately come through this ordeal . " it be as though he be to come 
 and put his hand upon I , and want my own heart out of I . though 
 I have no property in she at all , no right to she , - though she never 
 give I a word of encouragement , it be as though she be the most 
 private thing in the world to I . I should be half mad , and in my 
 madness I could not master the idea that I be be rob . I should 
 resent it as a personal interference . " 
 " I suppose it will come to that if you give she up yourself , " say 
 Phineas . 
 " it be no question of give up . of course I can not make her marry 
 I . light another cigar , old fellow . " 
 Phineas , as he light the other cigar , remember that he owe a certain 
 duty in this matter to Lady Laura . she have commission he to 
 persuade her brother that his suit with Violet Effingham would not be 
 hopeless , if he could only restrain himself in his mode of conduct 
 it . Phineas be dispose to do his duty , although he feel it to be 
 very hard that he should be call upon to be eloquent against his 
 own interest . he have be think for the last quarter of an hour 
 how he must bear himself if it might turn out that he should be the 
 man whom Lord Chiltern be resolve to kick . he look at his friend 
 and host , and become aware that a kicking - match with such a one would 
 not be pleasant pastime . nevertheless , he would be happy enough to be 
 subject to Lord Chiltern 's wrath for such a reason . he would do his 
 duty by Lord Chiltern ; and then , when that have be adequately do , 
 he would , if occasion serve , fight a battle for himself . 
 " you be too sudden with she , Chiltern , " he say , after a pause . 
 " what do you mean by too sudden ? " say Lord Chiltern , almost angrily . 
 " you frighten she by be so impetuous . you rush at she as though 
 you want to conquer she by a single blow . " 
 " so I do . " 
 " you should be more gentle with she . you should give her time to find 
 out whether she like you or not . " 
 " she have know I all her life , and have find that out long ago . not 
 but what you be right . I know you be right . if I be you , and have 
 your skill in pleasing , I should drop soft word into her ear till I 
 have catch she . but I have no gift in that way . I be as awkward as 
 a pig at what be call flirt . and I have an accursed pride which 
 stand in my own light . if she be in this house this moment , and 
 if I know she be to be have for ask , I do not   think I could bring 
 myself to ask again . but we will go to bed . it be half - past two , and we 
 must be off at half - past nine , if we be to be at Exton Park gate at 
 eleven . " 
 Phineas , as he go up - stair , assure himself that he have do his 
 duty . if there ever should come to be anything between he and Violet 
 Effingham , Lord Chiltern might quarrel with he , - might probably 
 attempt that kicking encounter to which allusion have be make , - but 
 nobody could justly say that he have not behave honourably to his 
 friend . 
 on the next morning there be a bustle and a scurry , as there always 
 be on such occasion , and the two man get off about ten minute after 
 time . but Lord Chiltern drive hard , and they reach the meet before 
 the master have move off . they have a fair day 's sport with the 
 Cottesmore ; and Phineas , though he find that Meg Merrilies do 
 require a good deal of riding , go through his day 's work with 
 credit . he have be rid since he be a child , as be the custom 
 with all boy in Munster , and have an Irishman 's natural aptitude for 
 jump . when they get back to the Willingford Bull he feel pleased 
 with the day and rather proud of himself . " it be not   fast , you know , " 
 say Chiltern , " and I do not   call that a stiff country . besides , Meg 
 be very handy when you have   get she out of the crowd . you shall ride 
 Bonebreaker to - morrow at Somerby , and you will find that well fun . " 
 " Bonebreaker ? have not   I hear you say he rush like mischief ? " 
 " well , he do rush . but , by George ! you want a horse to rush in that 
 country . when you have to go right through four or five foot of stiff 
 green wood , like a bullet through a target , you want a little force , 
 or you be apt to be leave up a tree . " 
 " and what do you ride ? " 
 " a brute I never put my leg on yet . he be send down to Wilcox here , 
 out of Lincolnshire , because they could not   get anybody to ride he 
 there . they say he go with his head up in the air , and will not   look 
 at a fence that be not   as high as his breast . but I think he will do 
 here . I never see a well make beast , or one with more power . do you 
 look at his shoulder . he be to be have for seventy pound , and these 
 be the sort of horse I like to buy . " 
 again they din alone , and Lord Chiltern explain to Phineas that 
 he rarely associate with the man of either of the hunt in which 
 he ride . " there be a set of fellow down here who be poison to I , 
 and there be another set , and I be poison to they . everybody be 
 very civil , as you see , but I have no associate . and gradually I be 
 get to have a reputation as though I be the devil himself . I 
 think I shall come out next year dress entirely in black . " 
 " be you not wrong to give way to that kind of thing ? " 
 " what the deuce be I to do ? I can not   make civil little speech . when 
 once a man get a reputation as an ogre , it be the most difficult 
 thing in the world to drop it . I could have a score of man here every 
 day if I like it , - my title would do that for I ; - but they would 
 be man I should loathe , and I should be sure to tell they so , 
 even though I do not mean it . Bonebreaker , and the new horse , 
 and another , go on at twelve to - day . you must expect hard work 
 to - morrow , as I daresay we shall not   be home before eight . " 
 the next day 's meet be in Leicestershire , not far from Melton , and 
 they start early . Phineas , to tell the truth of he , be rather 
 afraid of Bonebreaker , and look forward to the probability of an 
 accident . he have neither wife nor child , and nobody have a well 
 right to risk his neck . " we will put a gag on ' I m , " say the groom , 
 " and you will ride ' I m in a ring , - so that you may well - nigh break 
 his jaw ; but he be a rum un , sir . " " I will do my good , " say Phineas . 
 " he will take all that , " say the groom . " just let he have his own way 
 at everything , " say Lord Chiltern , as they move away from the meet 
 to Pickwell Gorse ; " and if you will only sit on his back , he will carry 
 you through as safe as a church . " Phineas could not help think 
 that the counsel of the master and of the groom be very different . 
 " my idea be , " continue Lord Chiltern , " that in hunt you should 
 always avoid a crowd . I do not   think a horse be worth rid that 
 will go in a crowd . it be just like yachting , - you should have plenty 
 of sea - room . if you be to pull your horse up at every fence till 
 somebody else be over , I think you would well come out on a donkey . " 
 and so they go away to Pickwell Gorse . 
 there be over two hundred man out , and Phineas begin to think that 
 it might not be so easy to get out of the crowd . a crowd in a fast 
 run no doubt quickly become small by degree and beautifully less ; 
 but it be very difficult , especially for a stranger , to free himself 
 from the rush at the first start . Lord Chiltern 's horse plunge about 
 so violently , as they stand on a little hill - side look down upon 
 the cover , that he be oblige to take he to a distance , and Phineas 
 follow he . " if he break down wind , " say Lord Chiltern , " we can not 
 be well than we be here . if he go up wind , he must turn before 
 long , and we shall be all right . " as he speak an old hound open 
 true and sharp , - an old hound whom all the pack believe , - and in a 
 moment there be no doubt that the fox have be find . " there be not 
 above eight or nine acre in it , " say Lord Chiltern , " and he can not 
 hang long . do you ever see such an uneasy brute as this in your 
 life ? but I feel certain he will go well when he get away . " 
 Phineas be too much occupy with his own horse to think much of 
 that on which Lord Chiltern be mount . Bonebreaker , the very moment 
 that he hear the old hound 's note , stretch out his head , and put 
 his mouth upon the bit , and begin to tremble in every muscle . " he be 
 a great deal more anxious for it than you and I be , " say Lord 
 Chiltern . " I see they have   give you that gag . but do not   you ride he 
 on it till he want it . give he lot of room , and he will go in the 
 snaffle . " all which caution make Phineas think that any insurance 
 office would charge very dear on his life at the present moment . 
 the fox take two ring of the gorse , and then he go , - up wind . 
 " it be not a vixen , I will swear , " say Lord Chiltern . " a vixen in cub 
 never go away like that yet . now then , Finn , my boy , keep to the 
 right . " and Lord Chiltern , with the horse out of Lincolnshire , go 
 away across the brow of the hill , leave the hound to the left , and 
 select , as his point of exit into the next field , a stiff rail , 
 which , have there be an accident , must have put a very wide margin 
 of ground between the rider and his horse . " go hard at your fence , 
 and then you will fall clear , " he have say to Phineas . I do not   think , 
 however , that he would have ride at the rail as he do , but 
 that there be no help for he . " the brute begin in his own way , 
 and carry on after in the same fashion all through , " he say 
 afterwards . Phineas take the fence a little low down , and what 
 it be at which he ride he never know . Bonebreaker sail over it , 
 whatever it be , and he soon find himself by his friend 's side . 
 the ruck of the man be low down than our two hero , and there 
 be other far away to the left , and other , again , who have be at 
 the end of the gorse , and be now behind . our friend be not near 
 the hound , not within two field of they , but the hound be below 
 they , and therefore could be see . " do not   be in a hurry , and they will 
 be round upon we , " Lord Chiltern say . " how the deuce be one to help 
 be in a hurry ? " say Phineas , who be do his very good to ride 
 Bonebreaker with the snaffle , but have already begin to feel that 
 Bonebreaker care nothing for that weak instrument . " by George , I 
 should like to change with you , " say Lord Chiltern . the Lincolnshire 
 horse be go along with his head very low , boring as he gallop , 
 but throw his neck up at his fence , just when he ought to have 
 keep himself steady . after this , though Phineas keep near Lord 
 Chiltern throughout the run , they be not again near enough to 
 exchange word ; and , indeed , they have but little breath for such 
 purpose . 
 Lord Chiltern ride still a little in advance , and Phineas , know 
 his friend 's partiality for solitude when take his fence , keep a 
 little to his left . he begin to find that Bonebreaker know pretty 
 well what he be about . as for not use the gag rein , that be 
 impossible . when a horse put out what strength he have against a 
 man 's arm , a man must put out what strength he have against the 
 horse 's mouth . but Bonebreaker be cunning , and have have a gag rein 
 on before . he contract his lip here , and bent out his jaw there , 
 till he have settle it to his mind , and then go away after his 
 own fashion . he seem to have a passion for smash through big , 
 high - grow ox - fence , and by degree his rider come to feel that if 
 there be nothing bad come , the fun be not bad . 
 the fox run up wind for a couple of mile or so , as Lord Chiltern have 
 prophesy , and then turn , - not to the right , as would well have 
 serve he and Phineas , but to the left , - so that they be force 
 to make their way through the ruck of horse before they could place 
 themselves again . Phineas find himself cross a road , in and out 
 of it , before he know where he be , and for a while he lose sight of 
 Lord Chiltern . but in truth he be lead now , whereas Lord Chiltern 
 have lead before . the two horse have be together all the morning , 
 and on the previous day , be willing enough to remain in company , 
 if they be allow to do so . they both cross the road , not very 
 far from each other , go in and out amidst a crowd of horse , and 
 before long be again place well , now have the hunt on their 
 right , whereas hitherto it have be on their left . they go over 
 large pasture field , and Phineas begin to think that as long as 
 Bonebreaker would be able to go through the thick grow - up hedge , 
 all would be right . now and again he come to a cut fence , a fence 
 that have be cut and lay , and these be not so pleasant . Force 
 be not sufficient for they , and they admit of a mistake . but the 
 horse , though he would rush at they unpleasantly , take they when they 
 come without touch they . it might be all right yet , - unless the 
 beast should tire with he ; and then , Phineas think , a misfortune 
 might probably occur . he remember , as he fly over one such 
 impediment , that he ride a stone heavy than his friend . at the end 
 of forty - five minute Bonebreaker also might become aware of the 
 fact . 
 the hound be run well in sight to their right , and Phineas 
 begin to feel some of that pride which a man indulge when he become 
 aware that he have take his place comfortably , have leave the squad 
 behind , and be go well . there be man nearer the hound than he 
 be , but he be near enough even for ambition . there have already be 
 enough of the run to make he sure that it would be a " good thing " , 
 and enough to make he aware also that probably it might be too good . 
 when a run be over , man be very apt to regret the termination , who 
 a minute or two before be anxiously long that the hound might 
 pull down their game . to finish well be everything in hunting . to 
 have lead for over an hour be nothing , let the pace and country have 
 be what they might , if you fall away during the last half mile . 
 therefore it be that those behind hope that the fox may make this 
 or that cover , while the forward man long to see he turn over in 
 every field . to ride to hound be very glorious ; but to have ride 
 to hound be more glorious still . they have now cross another road , 
 and a large one , and have get into a somewhat close country . the 
 field be not so big , and the fence be not so high . phinea get 
 a moment to look about he , and see Lord Chiltern rid without his 
 cap . he be very red in the face , and his eye seem to glare , and 
 he be tug at his horse with all his might . but the animal seem 
 still to go with perfect command of strength , and Phineas have too 
 much work on his own hand to think of offer quixotic assistance 
 to any one else . he see some one , a farmer , as he think , speak to 
 Lord Chiltern as they ride close together ; but Chiltern only shake 
 his head and pull at his horse . 
 there be brook in those part . the river Eye form itself 
 thereabout , or some of its tributary do so ; and these tributary , 
 though small as river , be considerable to man on one side who be 
 call by the exigency of the occasion to place themselves quickly 
 on the other . Phineas know nothing of these brook ; but Bonebreaker 
 have go gallantly over two , and now that there come a third in the 
 way , it be to be hop that he might go gallantly over that also . 
 Phineas , at any rate , have no power to decide otherwise . as long as 
 the brute would go straight with he he could sit he ; but he have 
 long give up the idea of have a will of his own . indeed , till he 
 be within twenty yard of the brook , he do not see that it be 
 large than the other . he look around , and there be chiltern 
 close to he , still fight with his horse ; - but the farmer have 
 turn away . he think that Chiltern nod to he , as much as to 
 tell he to go on . on he go at any rate . the brook , when he come to 
 it , seem to be a huge black hole , yawn beneath he . the bank 
 be quite steep , and just where he be to take off there be an 
 ugly stump . it be too late to think of anything . he stick his knee 
 against his saddle , - and in a moment be on the other side . the 
 brute , who have take off a yard before the stump , know well the 
 danger of strike it with his foot , come down with a grunt , and do , 
 I think , begin to feel the weight of that extra stone . Phineas , as 
 soon as he be safe , look back , and there be Lord Chiltern 's horse 
 in the very act of his spring , - high up the rivulet , where it be 
 even broad . at that distance Phineas could see that Lord Chiltern 
 be wild with rage against the beast . but whether he wish to take 
 the leap or wish to avoid it , there be no choice leave to he . the 
 animal rush at the brook , and in a moment the horse and horseman 
 be lose to sight . it be well then that that extra stone should 
 tell , as it enable Phineas to arrest his horse and to come back to 
 his friend . 
 the Lincolnshire horse have cheste the further bank , and of course 
 have fall back into the stream . when Phineas get down he find that 
 Lord Chiltern be wedge in between the horse and the bank , which be 
 well , at any rate , than be under the horse in the water . " all 
 right , old fellow , " he say , with a smile , when he see Phineas . " you 
 go on ; it be too good to lose . " but he be very pale , and seem to be 
 quite helpless where he lay . the horse do not move , - and never do 
 move again . he have smash his shoulder to piece against a stump on 
 the bank , and be afterwards shoot on that very spot . 
 when Phineas get down he find that there be but little water where 
 the horse lay . the depth of the stream have be on the side from 
 which they have take off , and the thick black mud lie within a foot 
 of the surface , close to the bank against which Lord Chiltern be 
 prop . " that be the bad one I ever be on , " say Lord Chiltern ; 
 " but I think he be gruelle now . " 
 " be you hurt ? " 
 " well ; - I fancy there be something amiss . I can not   move my arm ; and I 
 catch my breath . my leg be all right if I could get away from this 
 accurse brute . " 
 " I tell you so , " say the farmer , come and look down upon they 
 from the bank . " I tell you so , but you would not   be say . " then he too 
 get down , and between they both they extricate Lord Chiltern from 
 his position , and get he on to the bank . 
 " that un 's a dead un , " say the farmer , point to the horse . 
 " so much the well , " say his lordship . " give we a drop of sherry , 
 Finn . " 
 he have break his collar - bone and three of his rib . they get a 
 farmer 's trap from Wissindine and take he into Oakham . when there , 
 he insist on be take on through Stamford to the Willingford 
 Bull before he would have his bone set , - pick up , however , a 
 surgeon at Stamford . Phineas remain with he for a couple of day , 
 lose his run with the Fitzwilliams and a day at the potted pea , 
 and become very fond of his patient as he sit by his bedside . 
 " that be a good run , though , be not   it ? " say Lord Chiltern 
 as Phineas take his leave . " and , by George , Phineas , you ride 
 Bonebreaker so well , that you shall have he as often as you will come 
 down . I do not   know how it be , but you irish fellow always ride . " 
 CHAPTER XXV 
 Mr. Turnbull 's Carriage Stops the way 
 when Phineas get back to London , a day after his time , he find that 
 there be already a great political commotion in the metropolis . 
 he have know that on Easter Monday and Tuesday there be to be 
 a gathering of the people in favour of the ballot , and that on 
 Wednesday there be to be a procession with a petition which Mr. 
 Turnbull be to receive from the hand of the people on Primrose 
 Hill . it have be at first intend that Mr. Turnbull should receive 
 the petition at the door of Westminster Hall on the Thursday ; but he 
 have be request by the Home Secretary to put aside this intention , 
 and he have comply with the request make to he . Mr. Mildmay be 
 to move the second reading of his Reform Bill on that day , the 
 preliminary step have be take without any special notice ; but 
 the bill of course include no clause in favour of the ballot ; and 
 this petition be the consequence of that omission . Mr. Turnbull have 
 predict evil consequence , both in the House and out of it , and 
 be now do the good in his power to bring about the verification 
 of his own prophecy . Phineas , who reach his lodging late on the 
 Thursday , find that the town have be in a state of ferment for 
 three day , that on the Wednesday forty or fifty thousand person have 
 be collect at Primrose Hill , and that the police have be force 
 to interfere , - and that bad be expect on the Friday . though Mr. 
 Turnbull have yield to the Government as to receive the petition , 
 the crowd be resolve that they would see the petition carry into 
 the House . it be argue that the Government would have do well 
 to have refrain from interfere as to the previously intend 
 arrangement . it would have be easy to deal with a procession than 
 with a mob of man gather together without any semblance of form . 
 Mr. Mildmay have be ask to postpone the second reading of his 
 bill ; but the request have come from his opponent , and he would 
 not yield to it . he say that it would be a bad expedient to close 
 Parliament from fear of the people . Phineas find at the Reform Club 
 on the Thursday evening that member of the House of Commons be 
 request to enter on the Friday by the door usually use by the 
 peer , and to make their way thence to their own House . he find that 
 his landlord , Mr. Bunce , have be out with the people during the 
 entire three day ; - and Mrs. Bunce , with a flood of tear , beg 
 Phineas to interfere as to the Friday . " he be that headstrong that 
 he will be take if anybody 's take ; and they say that all Westminster be 
 to be line with soldier . " phinea on the Friday morning do have 
 some conversation with his landlord ; but his first work on reach 
 London be to see Lord Chiltern 's friend , and tell they of the 
 accident . 
 the potted pea Committee sit on the Thursday , and he ought to have 
 be there . his absence , however , be unavoidable , as he could not 
 have leave his friend 's bed - side so soon after the accident . on the 
 Wednesday he have write to Lady Laura , and on the Thursday evening 
 he go first to Portman Square and then to Grosvenor Place . 
 " of course he will kill himself some day , " say the Earl , - with a 
 tear , however , in each eye . 
 " I hope not , my lord . he be a magnificent horseman ; but accident of 
 course will happen . " 
 " how many of his bone be there not break , I wonder ? " say the 
 father . " it be useless to talk , of course . you think he be not in 
 danger ? " 
 " certainly not . " 
 " I should fear that he would be so liable to inflammation . " 
 " the doctor say that there be none . he have be take an enormous 
 deal of exercise , " say Phineas , " and drink no wine . all that be 
 in his favour . " 
 " what do he drink , then ? " ask the Earl . 
 " nothing . I rather think , my lord , you be mistake a little about 
 his habit . I do not   fancy he ever drink unless he be provoke to do 
 it . " 
 " provoke ! could anything provoke you to make a brute of yourself ? 
 but I be glad that he be in no danger . if you hear of he , let I 
 know how he go on . " 
 Lady Laura be of course full of concern . " I want to go down to 
 he , " she say , " but Mr. Kennedy think that there be no occasion . " 
 " nor be there any ; - I mean in regard to danger . he be very solitary 
 there . " 
 " you must go to he again . Mr. Kennedy will not let I go unless I 
 can say that there be danger . he seem to think that because Oswald 
 have have accident before , it be nothing . of course I can not leave 
 London without his leave . " 
 " your brother make very little of it , you know . " 
 " ah ; - he would make little of anything . but if I be ill he would be 
 in London by the first train . " 
 " Kennedy would let you go if you ask he . " 
 " but he advise I not to go . he say my duty do not require it , 
 unless Oswald be in danger . do not   you know , Mr. Finn , how hard it be 
 for a wife not to take advice when it be so give ? " this she say , 
 within six month of her marriage , to the man who have be her 
 husband 's rival ! 
 Phineas ask she whether Violet have hear the news , and learn that 
 she be still ignorant of it . " I get your letter only this morning , 
 and I have not see she , " say Lady Laura . " indeed , I be so angry 
 with she that I hardly wish to see she . " Thursday be Lady Baldock 's 
 night , and Phineas go from Grosvenor Place to Berkeley Square . 
 there he see Violet , and find that she have hear of the accident . 
 " I be so glad to see you , Mr. Finn , " she say . " do tell I ; - be it 
 much ? " 
 " much in inconvenience , certainly ; but not much in danger . " 
 " I think Laura be so unkind not to send I word ! I only hear it 
 just now . do you see it ? " 
 " I be close to he , and help he up . the horse jump into a river 
 with he , and crush he up against the bank . " 
 " how lucky that you should be there ! have you jump the river ? " 
 " yes ; - almost unintentionally , for my horse be rush so that I 
 could not hold he . Chiltern be rid a brute that no one should 
 have ride . no one will again . " 
 " do he destroy himself ? " 
 " he have to be kill afterwards . he break his shoulder . " 
 " how very lucky that you should have be near he , - and , again , how 
 lucky that you should not have be hurt yourself ! " 
 " it be not likely that we should both come to grief at the same 
 fence . " 
 " but it might have be you . and you think there be no danger ? " 
 " none whatever , - if I may believe the doctor . his hunting be do for 
 this year , and he will be very desolate . I shall go down again to he 
 in a few day , and try to bring he up to town . " 
 " do ; - do . if he be lay up in his father 's house , his father must 
 see he . " Phineas have not look at the matter in that light ; but he 
 think that Miss Effingham might probably be right . 
 early on the next morning he see Mr. Bunce , and use all his 
 eloquence to keep that respectable member of society at home ; - but 
 in vain . " what good do you expect to do , Mr. Bunce ? " he say , with 
 perhaps some little tone of authority in his voice . 
 " to carry my point , " say Bunce . 
 " and what be your point ? " 
 " my present point be the ballot , as a part of the Government 
 measure . " 
 " and you expect to carry that by go out into the street with all 
 the rough of London , and put yourself in direct opposition to 
 the authority of the magistrate ? do you really believe that the 
 ballot will become the law of the land any soon because you incur 
 this danger and inconvenience ? " 
 " look here , Mr. Finn ; I do not   believe the sea will become any fuller 
 because the Piddle run into it out of the dorsetshire field ; but I 
 do believe that the water from all the country be what make the 
 ocean . I shall help ; and it be my duty to help . " 
 " it be your duty as a respectable citizen , with a wife and family , to 
 stay at home . " 
 " if everybody with a wife and family be to say so , there would be 
 none there but rough , and then where should we be ? what would the 
 Government people say to we then ? if every man with a wife and family 
 be to show hisself in the street to - night , we should have the 
 ballot before Parliament break up , and if none of them do not   do it , 
 we shall never have the ballot . ai not   that so ? " Phineas , who intend 
 to be honest , be not prepared to dispute the assertion on the spur 
 of the moment . " if that be so , " say Bunce , triumphantly , " a man 's 
 duty 's clear enough . he ought to go , though he have two wife and 
 family . " and he go . 
 the petition be to be present at six o'clock , but the crowd , who 
 collect to see it carry into Westminster Hall , begin to form 
 itself by noon . it be say afterwards that many of the house in 
 the neighbourhood of Palace Yard and the Bridge be fill with 
 soldier ; but if so , the man do not show themselves . in the course 
 of the evening three or four company of the Guards in St. James 's 
 Park do show themselves , and have some rough work to do , for many of 
 the people take themselves away from Westminster by that route . the 
 police , who be very numerous in Palace Yard , have a hard time of it 
 all the afternoon , and it be say afterwards that it would have be 
 much well to have allow the petition to have be bring up by 
 the procession on Wednesday . a procession , let it be who it will that 
 proceed , have in it , of its own nature something of order . but now 
 there be no order . the petition , which be say to fill fifteen 
 cab , - though the absolute sheet of signature be carry into 
 the House by four man , - be be drag about half the day and it 
 certainly would have be impossible for a member to have make his 
 way into the House through Westminster Hall between the hour of four 
 and six . to effect an entrance at all they be oblige to go round 
 at the back of the Abbey , as all the space round St. Margaret 's 
 Church and Canning 's monument be fill with the crowd . Parliament 
 Street be quite impassable at five o clock , and there be no traffic 
 across the bridge from that hour till after eight . as the evening 
 go on , the mob extend itself to Downing Street and the front 
 of the Treasury Chambers , and before the night be over all the 
 hoarding round the new Government office have be pull down . the 
 window also of certain obnoxious member of Parliament be break , 
 when those obnoxious member live within reach . one gentleman who 
 unfortunately hold a house in Richmond Terrace , and who be say 
 to have say that the ballot be the resort of coward , fare very 
 badly ; - for his window be not only break , but his furniture and 
 mirror be destroy by the stone that be throw . Mr. Mildmay , 
 I say , be much blame . but after all , it may be a doubt whether the 
 procession on Wednesday might not have end bad . Mr. Turnbull be 
 hear to say afterwards that the number of people collect would 
 have be much great . 
 Mr. Mildmay move the second reading of his bill , and make his 
 speech . he make his speech with the knowledge that the Houses of 
 Parliament be surround by a mob , and I think that the fact add 
 to its efficacy . it certainly give he an appropriate opportunity 
 for a display which be not difficult . his voice falter on two or 
 three occasion , and falter through real feeling ; but this sort of 
 feeling , though it be real , be at the command of orator on certain 
 occasion , and do they yeoman 's service . Mr. Mildmay be an 
 old man , nearly wear out in the service of his country , who be 
 know to have be true and honest , and to have love his country 
 well , - though there be of course they who declare that his 
 hand have be too weak for power , and that his service have be 
 naught ; - and on this evening his virtue be remember . once when 
 his voice fail he the whole House get up and cheer . the nature 
 of a Whig Prime Minister 's speech on such an occasion will be 
 understand by most of my reader without further indication . the bill 
 itself have be read before , and it be understand that no objection 
 would be make to the extent of the change provide in it by the 
 liberal side of the House . the opposition come from liberal member 
 be to be confine to the subject of the ballot . and even as yet 
 it be not know whether Mr. Turnbull and his follower would vote 
 against the second reading , or whether they would take what be 
 give , and declare their intention of obtain the remainder on a 
 separate motion . the opposition of a large party of Conservatives be 
 a matter of certainty ; but to this party Mr. Mildmay do not conceive 
 himself bind to offer so large an amount of argument as he would 
 have give have there be at the moment no crowd in Palace Yard . and 
 he probably feel that that crowd would assist he with his old tory 
 enemy . when , in the last word of his speech , he declare that 
 under no circumstance would he disfigure the close of his political 
 career by vote for the ballot , - not though the people , on whose 
 behalf he have be fight battle all his life , should be there in 
 any number to coerce he , - there come another round of applause from 
 the opposition bench , and Mr. Daubeny begin to fear that some young 
 horse in his team might get loose from their trace . with great 
 dignity Mr. Daubeny have keep aloof from Mr. Turnbull and from Mr. 
 Turnbull 's tactic ; but he be not the less alive to the fact 
 that Mr. Turnbull , with his mob and his big petition , might be of 
 considerable assistance to he in this present duel between himself 
 and Mr. Mildmay . I think Mr. Daubeny be in the habit of look at 
 these contest as duel between himself and the leader on the other 
 side of the House , - in which assistance from any quarter might be 
 accept if offer . 
 Mr. Mildmay 's speech do not occupy much over an hour , and at 
 half - past seven Mr. Turnbull get up to reply . it be presume that he 
 would do so , and not a member leave his place , though that time of the 
 day be an interesting time , and though Mr. Turnbull be accustom to 
 be long . there soon come to be but little ground for doubt what 
 would be the nature of Mr. Turnbull 's vote on the second reading . 
 " how may I dare , " say he , " to accept so small a measure of reform as 
 this with such a message from the country as be now convey to I 
 through the presence of fifty thousand of my countryman , who be at 
 this moment demand their measure of reform just beyond the frail 
 wall of this chamber ? the right honourable gentleman have tell we 
 that he will never be intimidate by a concourse of people . I do not 
 know that there be any need that he should speak of intimidation . 
 no one have accuse the right honourable gentleman of political 
 cowardice . but , as he have so say , I will follow in his footstep . 
 neither will I be intimidate by the large majority which this House 
 present the other night against the wish of the people . I will 
 support no great measure of reform which do not include the ballot 
 among its clause . " and so Mr. Turnbull throw down the gauntlet . 
 Mr. Turnbull speak for two hour , and then the debate be adjourn 
 till the Monday . the adjournment be move by an independent member , 
 who , as be know , would support the Government , and at once receive 
 Mr. Turnbull 's assent . there be no great hurry with the bill , and 
 it be feel that it would be well to let the ferment subside . enough 
 have be do for glory when Mr. Mildmay move the second reading , 
 and quite enough in the way of debate , - with such an audience almost 
 within hearing , - when Mr. Turnbull 's speech have be make . then the 
 House empty itself at once . the elderly , cautious member make 
 their exit through the peer ' door . the young man get out into 
 the crowd through Westminster Hall , and be push about among the 
 rough for an hour or so . Phineas , who make his way through the hall 
 with Laurence Fitzgibbon , find Mr. Turnbull 's carriage wait at 
 the entrance with a dozen policeman round it . 
 " I hope he will not   get home to dinner before midnight , " say Phineas . 
 " he understand all about it , " say Laurence . " he have a good meal at 
 three , before he leave home , and you would find sandwich and sherry in 
 plenty if you be to search his carriage . he know how to remedy the 
 cost of mob popularity . " 
 at that time poor bunce be be hustle about in the crowd in the 
 vicinity of Mr. Turnbull 's carriage . Phineas and Fitzgibbon make 
 their way out , and by degree work a passage for themselves into 
 Parliament Street . Mr. Turnbull have be somewhat behind they in 
 come down the hall , and have not be without a sense of enjoyment 
 in the ovation which be be give to he . there can be no doubt 
 that he be wrong in what he be do . that affair of the carriage 
 be altogether wrong , and do Mr. turnbull much harm for many a day 
 afterwards . when he get outside the door , where be the twelve 
 policeman guard his carriage , a great number of his admirer 
 endeavour to shake hand with he . among they be the devoted 
 Bunce . but the policeman seem to think that Mr. Turnbull be to be 
 guard , even from the affection of his friend , and be as careful 
 that he should be usher into his carriage untouched , as though he 
 have be the favourite object of political aversion for the moment . 
 Mr. Turnbull himself , when he begin to perceive that man be 
 crowd close upon the gate , and to hear the noise , and to feel , as 
 it be , the breath of the mob , step on quickly into his carriage . 
 he say a word or two in a loud voice . " thank you , my friend . I 
 trust you may obtain all your just demand . " but he do not pause 
 to speak . indeed , he could hardly have do so , as the policeman 
 be manifestly in a hurry . the carriage be get away at a snail 's 
 pace ; - but there remain in the spot where the carriage have stand 
 the making of a very pretty street row . 
 Bunce have strive hard to shake hand with his hero , - Bunce and some 
 other reformer as ardent and as decent as himself . the police be 
 very determinate that there should be no such interruption to their 
 programme for get Mr. Turnbull off the scene . Mr. Bunce , who have 
 his own idea as to his right to shake hand with any gentleman at 
 Westminster Hall who might choose to shake hand with he , become 
 uneasy under the impediment that be place in his way , and 
 express himself warmly as to his civil right . now a London 
 policeman in a political row be , I believe , the most forbearing 
 of man . so long as he meet with no special political opposition , 
 ordinary ill - usage do not even put he out of temper . he be pay 
 for rough work among rough , and take his rub gallantly . but he 
 feel himself to be an instrument for the moment of despotic power 
 as oppose to civil right , and he will not   stand what he call " jaw . " 
 trip up a policeman in such a scramble , and he will take it in good 
 spirit ; but mention the word " Habeas Corpus , " and he will lock you up 
 if he can . as a rule , his instinct be right ; for the man who talk 
 about " Habeas Corpus " in a political crowd will generally do more 
 harm than can be effect by the tripping up of any constable . but 
 these instinct may be the mean of individual injustice . I think 
 they be so when Mr. Bunce be arrest and keep a fast prisoner . 
 his wife have show her knowledge of his character when she declare 
 that he would be " take " if any one be " take . " 
 Bunce be take into custody with some three or four other like 
 himself , - decent man , who mean no harm , but who think that as man 
 they be bind to show their political opinion , perhaps at the 
 expense of a little martyrdom , - and be carry into a temporary 
 stronghold , which have be provide for the necessity of the 
 police , under the clock - tower . 
 " keep I , at your peril ! " say Bunce , indignantly . 
 " we mean it , " say the sergeant who have he in custody . 
 " I have   do no ha'porth to break the law , " say Bunce . 
 " you be break the law when you be upset my man , as I see 
 you , " say the sergeant . 
 " I have   upset nobody , " say Bunce . 
 " very well , " rejoin the sergeant ; " you can say it all before the 
 magistrate , to - morrow . " 
 " and be I to be lock up all night ? " say Bunce . 
 " I be afraid you will , " reply the sergeant . 
 Bunce , who be not by nature a very talkative man , say no more ; but 
 he swear in his heart that there should be vengeance . between eleven 
 and twelve he be take to the regular police - station , and from 
 thence he be enable to send word to his wife . 
 " bunce have be take , " say she , with something of the tragic queen , 
 and something also of the injure wife in the tone of her voice , as 
 soon as Phineas let himself in with the latchkey between twelve and 
 one . and then , mingle with , and at last dominant over , those severer 
 tone , come the voice of the love woman whose beloved one be in 
 trouble . " I know how it would be , Mr. Finn . do not   I ? and what must we 
 do ? I do not   suppose he have have a bit to eat from the moment he go 
 out ; - and as for a drop of beer , he never think of it , except what 
 I put down for he at his meal . they nasty police always take the 
 good . that be why I be so afeard . " 
 Phineas say all that he could to comfort she , and promise to go 
 to the police - office early in the morning and look after Bunce . no 
 serious evil would , he think , probably come of it ; but still Bunce 
 have be wrong to go . 
 " but you might have be take yourself , " argue Mrs. Bunce , " just as 
 well as he . " then Phineas explain that he have go forth in the 
 execution of a public duty . " you might have be take , all the same , " 
 say Mrs. Bunce , " for I be sure Bunce do not   do nothing amiss . " 
 CHAPTER XXVI 
 " the First Speech " 
 on the following morning , which be Saturday , Phineas be early at 
 the police - office at Westminster look after the interest of his 
 landlord ; but there have be a considerable number of man take up 
 during the row , and our friend could hardly procure that attention 
 for Mr. Bunce 's case to which he think the decency of his client 
 and his own position as a member of Parliament be entitle . the man 
 who have be take up be take in batch before the magistrate ; 
 but as the soldier in the park have be maltreat , and a 
 considerable injury have be do in the neighbourhood of Downing 
 Street , there be a good deal of strong feeling against the mob , and 
 the magistrate be dispose to be severe . if decent man choose to go 
 out among such companion , and thereby get into trouble , decent man 
 must take the consequence . during the Saturday and Sunday a very 
 strong feeling grow up against Mr. Turnbull . the story of the 
 carriage be tell , and he be declare to be a turbulent demagogue , 
 only desirous of get popularity . and together with this feeling 
 there arise a general verdict of " serve they right " against all who 
 have come into contact with the police in the great Turnbull row ; and 
 thus it come to pass that Mr. Bunce have not be liberate up to 
 the Monday morning . on the Sunday Mrs. Bunce be in hysteric , and 
 declare her conviction that Mr. Bunce would be imprison for life . 
 Poor Phineas have an unquiet time with she on the morning of that day . 
 in every ecstasy of her grief she throw herself into his arm , either 
 metaphorically or materially , accord to the excess of her agony at 
 the moment , and express repeatedly an assured conviction that all 
 her child would die of starvation , and that she herself would be 
 pick up under the arch of one of the bridge . Phineas , who be 
 soft - hearted , do what he could to comfort she , and allow himself 
 to be work up to strong parliamentary anger against the magistrate 
 and police . " when they think that they have public opinion on their 
 side , there be nothing in the way or arbitrary excess which be too 
 great for they . " this he say to Barrington Erle , who anger he and 
 increase the warmth of his feeling by declare that a little close 
 confinement would be good for the Bunces of the day . " if we do not 
 keep the mob down , the mob will keep we down , " say the Whig private 
 secretary . Phineas have no opportunity of answer this , but declare 
 to himself that Barrington Erle be no more a Liberal at heart than 
 be Mr. Daubeny . " he be bear on that side of the question , and have 
 be receive Whig wage all his life . that be the history of his 
 politic ! " 
 on the Sunday afternoon Phineas go to Lord Brentford 's in Portman 
 Square , intend to say a word or two about Lord Chiltern , and 
 meaning also to induce , if possible , the Cabinet Minister to take 
 part with he against the magistrate , - have a hope also , in which 
 he be not disappointed , that he might find Lady Laura Kennedy with 
 her father . he have come to understand that Lady Laura be not to be 
 visit at her own house on Sundays . so much indeed she have tell 
 he in so many word . but he have come to understand also , without 
 any plain telling , that she rebel in heart against this Sabbath 
 tyranny , - and that she would escape from it when escape be possible . 
 she have now come to talk to her father about her brother , and have 
 bring Violet Effingham with she . they have walk together across 
 the park after church , and intend to walk back again . Mr. Kennedy 
 do not like to have any carriage out on a Sunday , and to this 
 arrangement his wife make no objection . 
 Phineas have receive a letter from the Stamford surgeon , and be able 
 to report favourably of Lord Chiltern . " the man say that he have 
 well not be move for a month , " say Phineas . " but that mean 
 nothing . they always say that . " 
 " will it not be good for he to remain where he be ? " say the Earl . 
 " he have not a soul to speak to , " say Phineas . 
 " I wish I be with he , " say his sister . 
 " that be , of course , out of the question , " say the Earl . " they know 
 he at that inn , and it really seem to I well that he should stay 
 there . I do not think he would be so much at his ease here . " 
 " it must be dreadful for a man to be confine to his room without 
 a creature near he , except the servant , " say Violet . the Earl 
 frown , but say nothing far . they all perceive that as soon as 
 he have learn that there be no real danger as to his son 's life , he 
 be determined that this accident should not work he up to any show 
 of tenderness . " I do so hope he will come up to London , " continue 
 Violet , who be not afraid of the Earl , and be determine not to be 
 put down . 
 " you do not   know what you be talk about , my dear , " say Lord 
 Brentford . 
 after this Phineas find it very difficult to extract any sympathy 
 from the Earl on behalf of the man who have be lock up . he be 
 moody and cross , and could not be induce to talk on the great 
 subject of the day . Violet Effingham declare that she do not care 
 how many bunce be lock up ; nor for how long , - add , however , 
 a wish that Mr. Turnbull himself have be among the number of the 
 prisoner . Lady Laura be somewhat soft than this , and consent to 
 express pity in the case of Mr. Bunce himself ; but Phineas perceive 
 that the pity be award to he and not to the sufferer . the feeling 
 against Mr. Turnbull be at the present moment so strong among all 
 the upper class , that Mr. Bunce and his brother might have be 
 keep in durance for a week without commiseration from they . 
 " it be very hard certainly on a man like Mr. Bunce , " say Lady Laura . 
 " why do not Mr. Bunce stay at home and mind his business ? " say the 
 Earl . 
 Phineas spend the remainder of that day alone , and come to a 
 resolution that on the come occasion he certainly would speak in 
 the House . the debate would be resume on the Monday , and he would 
 rise to his leg on the very first moment that it become possible 
 for he to do so . and he would do nothing towards prepare a 
 speech ; - nothing whatever . on this occasion he would trust entirely 
 to such word as might come to he at the moment ; - ay , and to such 
 thought . he have before burden his memory with preparation , and 
 the very weight of the burden have be too much for his mind . he have 
 fear to trust himself to speak , because he have feel that he be 
 not capable of perform the double labour of say his lesson 
 by heart , and of face the House for the first time . there should 
 be nothing now for he to remember . his thought be full of his 
 subject . he would support Mr. Mildmay 's bill with all his eloquence , 
 but he would implore Mr. Mildmay , and the Home Secretary , and the 
 Government generally , to abstain from animosity against the populace 
 of London , because they desire one special boon which Mr. Mildmay 
 do not think that it be his duty to give they . he hop that idea 
 and word would come to he . idea and word have be free enough 
 with he in the old day of the Dublin debating society . if they 
 fail he now , he must give the thing up , and go back to Mr. Low . 
 on the Monday morning Phineas be for two hour at the police - court 
 in Westminster , and at about one on that day Mr. Bunce be liberate . 
 when he be bring up before the magistrate , Mr. Bunce speak his 
 mind very freely as to the usage he have receive , and declare his 
 intention of bring an action against the sergeant who have detain 
 he . the magistrate , of course , take the part of the police , and 
 declare that , from the evidence of two man who be examine , Bunce 
 have certainly use such violence in the crowd as have justify his 
 arrest . 
 " I use no violence , " say Bunce . 
 " accord to your own showing , you endeavour to make your way up 
 to Mr. Turnbull 's carriage , " say the magistrate . 
 " I be close to the carriage before the police even see I , " say 
 Bunce . 
 " but you try to force your way round to the door . " 
 " I use no force till a man have I by the collar to push I back ; and 
 I be not   violent , not then . I tell he I be do what I have a right 
 to do , - and it be that as make he hang on to I . " 
 " you be not do what you have a right to do . you be assist to 
 create a riot , " say the magistrate , with that indignation which a 
 London magistrate should always know how to affect . 
 Phineas , however , be allow to give evidence as to his landlord 's 
 character , and then Bunce be liberate . but before he go he 
 again swear that that should not be the last of it , and he tell the 
 magistrate that he have be ill - use . when liberate , he be join 
 by a dozen sympathising friend , who escort he home , and among 
 they be one or two literary gentleman , employ on those excellent 
 penny paper , the People 's Banner and the ballot - box . it be 
 their intention that Mr. Bunce 's case should not be allow to sleep . 
 one of these gentleman make a distinct offer to Phineas Finn of 
 unbounded popularity during life and of immortality afterwards , 
 if he , as a member of Parliament , would take up Bunce 's case with 
 vigour . Phineas , not quite understand the nature of the offer , and 
 not as yet know the profession of the gentleman , give some general 
 reply . 
 " you come out strong , Mr. Finn , and we will see that you be properly 
 report . I be on the Banner , sir , and I will answer for that . " 
 Phineas , who have be somewhat eager in express his sympathy 
 with Bunce , and have not give very close attention to the gentleman 
 who be address he , be still in the dark . the nature of the 
  Banner , which the gentleman be on , do not at once come home to 
 he . 
 " something ought to be do , certainly , " say Phineas . 
 " we shall take it up strong , " say the gentleman , " and we shall be 
 happy to have you among we . you will find , Mr. Finn , that in public 
 life there be nothing like have a horgan to back you . what be the 
 most you can do in the ' Ouse ? nothing , if you be not report . you be 
 speak to the country ; - be not   you ? and you can not   do that without a 
 horgan , Mr. Finn . you come among we on the Banner , Mr. Finn . you 
 can not   do well . " 
 then Phineas understand the nature of the offer make to he . as they 
 part , the literary gentleman give our hero his card . " Mr. Quintus 
 Slide . " so much be print . then , on the corner of the card be 
 write , " Banner Office , 137 , Fetter Lane . " Mr. Quintus Slide 
 be a young man , under thirty , not remarkable for clean linen , and 
 who always talk of the " ' Ouse . " but he be a well - know and not 
 undistinguished member of a powerful class of man . he have be a 
 reporter , and as such know the " ' ouse " well , and be a writer for the 
 press . and , though he talk of " ' Ouses " and " horgans " , he write good 
 English with great rapidity , and be possess of that special sort 
 of political fervour which show itself in a man 's work rather than 
 in his conduct . it be Mr. Slide 's taste to be an advanced reformer , 
 and in all his operation on behalf of the People 's Banner he 
 be a reformer very much advanced . no man could do an article on the 
 people 's indefeasible right with more pronounced vigour than Mr. 
 Slide . but it have never occur to he as yet that he ought to care 
 for anything else than the fight , - than the advantage of have a 
 good subject on which to write slash article . Mr. Slide be an 
 energetic but not a thoughtful man ; but in his thought on politic , 
 as far as they go with he , he regard the wrong of the people as 
 be of infinitely great value than their right . it be not that 
 he be insincere in all that he be daily say ; - but simply that 
 he never think about it . very early in life he have fall among 
 " people 's friend , " and an opening on the liberal press have come in 
 his way . to be a " people 's friend " suit the turn of his ambition , 
 and he be a " people 's friend . " it be his business to abuse 
 Government , and to express on all occasion an opinion that as a 
 matter of course the rule power be the " people 's enemy . " have 
 the rule power cease to be the " people 's enemy , " Mr. Slide 's 
 ground would have be take from under his foot . but such a 
 catastrophe be out of the question . that excellent old arrangement 
 that have go on since demagogue be first invent be in 
 full vigour . there be the rule power and there be the 
 people , - devil on one side and angel on the other , - and as long 
 as a people 's friend have a pen in his hand all be right . 
 Phineas , when he leave the indignant Bunce to go among his friend , 
 walk to the House think a good deal of what Mr. Slide have say 
 to he . the potted peas Committee be again on , and he have intend 
 to be in the Committee Room by twelve punctually : but he have be 
 unable to leave Mr. Bunce in the lurch , and it be now past one . 
 indeed , he have , from one unfortunate circumstance after another , 
 fail hitherto in give to the potted pea that resolute attention 
 which the subject demand . on the present occasion his mind be full 
 of Mr. Quintus Slide and the People 's Banner . after all , be there 
 not something in Mr. Slide 's proposition ? he , Phineas , have come into 
 Parliament as it be under the wing of a Government pack , and his 
 friendship , which have be very successful , have be make with 
 Ministers , and with the friend of Ministers . he have make up his mind 
 to be Whig Ministerial , and to look for his profession in that line . 
 he have be specially fortified in this resolution by his dislike 
 to the ballot , - which dislike have be the result of Mr. Monk 's 
 teaching . have Mr. Turnbull become his friend instead , it may well be 
 that he would have like the ballot . on such subject man must think 
 long , and be sure that they have think in earnest , before they be 
 justify in say that their opinion be the result of their 
 own thought . but now he begin to reflect how far this ministerial 
 profession would suit he . would it be much to be a Lord of the 
 Treasury , subject to the dominion of Mr. Ratler ? such lordship and 
 such subjection would be the result of success . he tell himself 
 that he be at heart a true Liberal . would it not be well for he 
 to abandon the idea of office trammel , and go among they on the 
  People 's Banner ? a glow of enthusiasm come over he as he think 
 of it . but what would Violet Effingham say to the People 's Banner 
 and Mr. Quintus Slide ? and he would have like the Banner well 
 have not Mr. Slide talk about the ' Ouse . 
 from the Committee Room , in which , alas ! he take no active part in 
 reference to the potted pea , he go down to the House , and be 
 present when the debate be resume . not unnaturally , one speaker 
 after another make some allusion to the row in the street , and the 
 work which have fall to the lot of the magistrate . Mr. Turnbull 
 have declare that he would vote against the second reading of Mr. 
 Mildmay 's bill , and have explain that he would do so because he 
 could consent to no Reform Bill which do not include the ballot as 
 one of its measure . the debate fashion itself after this speech of 
 Mr. Turnbull 's , and turn again very much upon the ballot , - although 
 it have be think that the late debate have settle that question . 
 one or two of Mr. Turnbull 's follower declare that they also would 
 vote against the bill , - of course , as not go far enough ; and one 
 or two gentleman from the conservative bench extend a spoken 
 welcome to these new colleague . then Mr. Palliser get up and 
 address the House for an hour , struggle hard to bring back the 
 real subject , and to make the House understand that the ballot , 
 whether good or bad , have be knock on the head , and that member 
 have no right at the present moment to consider anything but the 
 expediency or inexpediency of so much reform as Mr. Mildmay present 
 to they in the present bill . 
 Phineas be determined to speak , and to speak on this evening if he 
 could catch the Speaker 's eye . again the scene before he be go 
 round before he ; again thing become dim , and again he feel his 
 blood beat hard at his heart . but thing be not so bad with 
 he as they have be before , because he have nothing to remember . he 
 hardly know , indeed , what he intend to say . he have an idea that he 
 be desirous of join in earnest support of the measure , with a 
 vehement protest against the injustice which have be do to the 
 people in general , and to Mr. Bunce in particular . he have firmly 
 resolve that no fear of lose favour with the Government should 
 induce he to hold his tongue as to the Buncean cruelty . soon 
 than do so he would certainly " go among they " at the Banner office . 
 he start up , wildly , when Mr. Palliser have complete his speech ; 
 but the Speaker 's eye , not unnaturally , have travel to the other 
 side of the House , and there be a Tory of the old school upon his 
 leg , - Mr. Western , the member for East Barsetshire , one of the 
 gallant few who dare to vote against Sir Robert Peel 's bill for 
 repeal the Corn Laws in 1846 . Mr. Western speak with a slow , 
 ponderous , unimpressive , but very audible voice , for some twenty 
 minute , disdain to make reference to Mr. Turnbull and his 
 politic , but plead against any reform , with all the old 
 argument . phinea do not hear a word that he say ; - do not attempt 
 to hear . he be keen in his resolution to make another attempt at the 
 Speaker 's eye , and at the present moment be think of that , and 
 of that only . he do not even give himself a moment 's reflection as 
 to what his own speech should be . he would dash at it and take his 
 chance , resolve that at least he would not fail in courage . twice he 
 be on his leg before Mr. Western have finish his slow harangue , 
 and twice he be compel to reseat himself , - think that he have 
 subject himself to ridicule . at last the member for East Barset sit 
 down , and Phineas be conscious that he have lose a moment or two in 
 present himself again to the Speaker . 
 he hold his ground , however , though he see that he have various rival 
 for the right of speech . he hold his ground , and be instantly aware 
 that he have gain his point . there be a slight pause , and as 
 some other urgent member do not reseat himself , Phineas hear the 
 president of that august assembly call upon himself to address the 
 House . the thing be now to be do . there he be with the House of 
 Commons at his foot , - a crowded House , bind to be his auditor as 
 long as he should think fit to address they , and reporter by ten 
 and twenty in the gallery ready and eager to let the country know 
 what the young member for Loughshane would say in this his maiden 
 speech . 
 Phineas Finn have sundry gift , a powerful and pleasant voice , which 
 he have learn to modulate , a handsome presence , and a certain 
 natural mixture of modesty and self - reliance , which would certainly 
 protect he from the fault of arrogance and pomposity , and which , 
 perhaps , might carry he through the peril of his new position . and 
 he have also the great advantage of friend in the House who be 
 anxious that he should do well . but he have not that gift of slow 
 blood which on the former occasion would have enable he to remember 
 his prepared speech , and which would now have place all his own 
 resource within his own reach . he begin with the expression of an 
 opinion that every true reformer ought to accept Mr. Mildmay 's bill , 
 even if it be accept only as an instalment , - but before he have 
 get through these sentence , he become painfully conscious that he 
 be repeat his own word . 
 he be cheer almost from the outset , and yet he know as he go 
 on that he be fail . he have certain argument at his finger ' 
 end , - point with which he be , in truth , so familiar that he need 
 hardly have trouble himself to arrange they for special use , - and he 
 forget even these . he find that he be go on with one platitude 
 after another as to the benefit of reform , in a manner that would 
 have sham he six or seven year ago at a debating club . he press 
 on , fear that word would fail he altogether if he pause ; - but 
 he do in truth speak very much too fast , knock his word together 
 so that no reporter could properly catch they . but he have nothing to 
 say for the bill except what hundred have say before , and hundred 
 would say again . still he be cheer , and still he go on ; and as 
 he become more and more conscious of his failure there grow upon he 
 the idea , - the dangerous hope , that he might still save himself from 
 ignominy by the eloquence of his invective against the police . 
 he try it , and succeed thoroughly in make the House understand 
 that he be very angry , - but he succeed in nothing else . he could 
 not catch the word to express the thought of his mind . he could not 
 explain his idea that the people out of the House have as much right 
 to express their opinion in favour of the ballot as member in the 
 House have to express theirs against it ; and that animosity have be 
 show to the people by the authority because they have so express 
 their opinion . then he attempt to tell the story of Mr. Bunce in a 
 light and airy way , fail , and sit down in the middle of it . again 
 he be cheer by all around he , - cheer as a new member be usually 
 cheer , - and in the midst of the cheer would have blow out his 
 brain have there be a pistol there ready for such an operation . 
 that hour with he be very bad . he do not know how to get up and 
 go away , or how to keep his place . for some time he sit with his 
 hat off , forgetful of his privilege of wear it ; and then put it 
 on hurriedly , as though the fact of his not wear it must have 
 be observe by everybody . at last , at about two , the debate be 
 adjourn , and then as he be slowly leave the House , think how 
 he might creep away without companionship , Mr. Monk take he by the 
 arm . 
 " be you go to walk ? " say Mr. Monk . 
 " yes " , say Phineas ; " I shall walk . " 
 " then we may go together as far as Pall Mall . come along . " Phineas 
 have no mean of escape , and leave the House hang on Mr. Monk 's arm , 
 without a word . nor do Mr. Monk speak till they be out in Palace 
 Yard . " it be not much amiss , " say Mr. Monk ; " but you will do well 
 than that yet . " 
 " Mr. Monk , " say Phineas , " I have make an ass of myself so 
 thoroughly , that there will at any rate be this good result , that I 
 shall never make an ass of myself again after the same fashion . " 
 " ah ! - I think you have some such feeling as that , and therefore I 
 be determined to speak to you . you may be sure , Finn , that I do not 
 care to flatter you , and I think you ought to know that , as far as I 
 be able , I will tell you the truth . your speech , which be certainly 
 nothing great , be about on a par with other maiden speech in the 
 House of Commons . you have do yourself neither good nor harm . nor 
 be it desirable that you should . my advice to you now be , never to 
 avoid speak on any subject that interest you , but never to speak 
 for above three minute till you find yourself as much at home on 
 your leg as you be when sit . but do not suppose that you have 
 make an ass of yourself , - that be , in any special degree . now , 
 good - night . " 
 CHAPTER XXVII 
 Phineas discuss 
 Lady Laura Kennedy hear two account of her friend 's speech , - and 
 both from man who have be present . her husband be in his place , in 
 accordance with his constant practice , and Lord Brentford have be 
 seat , perhaps unfortunately , in the peer ' gallery . 
 " and you think it be a failure ? " Lady Laura say to her husband . 
 " it certainly be not a success . there be nothing particular about 
 it . there be a good deal of it you could hardly hear . " 
 after that she get the morning newspaper , and turn with great 
 interest to the report . Phineas Finn have be , as it be , adopt by 
 she as her own political offspring , - or at any rate as her political 
 godchild . she have make promise on his behalf to various personage 
 of high political standing , - to her father , to Mr. Monk , to the Duke 
 of St. Bungay , and even to Mr. Mildmay himself . she have thoroughly 
 intend that Phineas Finn should be a political success from the 
 first ; and since her marriage , she have , I think , be more intent 
 upon it than before . perhaps there be a feeling on her part that 
 have wrong he in one way , she would repay he in another . she 
 have become so eager for his success , - for a while scorn to conceal 
 her feeling , - that her husband have unconsciously begin to entertain 
 a dislike to her eagerness . we know how quickly woman arrive at an 
 understanding of the feeling of those with whom they live ; and now , 
 on that very occasion , Lady Laura perceive that her husband do not 
 take in good part her anxiety on behalf of her friend . she see that 
 it be so as she turn over the newspaper look for the report of 
 the speech . it be give in six line , and at the end of it there be 
 an intimation , - express in the shape of advice , - that the young 
 orator have well speak more slowly if he wish to be efficacious 
 either with the House or with the country . 
 " he seem to have be cheer a good deal , " say Lady Laura . 
 " all member be cheer at their first speech , " say Mr. Kennedy . 
 " I have   no doubt he will do well yet , " say Lady Laura . 
 " very likely , " say Mr. Kennedy . then he turn to his newspaper , and 
 do not take his eye off it as long as his wife remain with he . 
 later in the day Lady Laura see her father , and Miss Effingham be 
 with she at the time . Lord Brentford say something which indicate 
 that he have hear the debate on the previous evening , and Lady Laura 
 instantly begin to ask he about Phineas . 
 " the less say the well , " be the Earl 's reply . 
 " do you mean that it be so bad as that ? " ask Lady Laura . 
 " it be not very bad at first ; - though indeed nobody could say it be 
 very good . but he get himself into a mess about the police and the 
 magistrate before he have do , and nothing but the kindly feeling 
 always show to a first effort save he from be cough down . " 
 Lady Laura have not a word more to say about Phineas to her father ; 
 but , womanlike , she resolve that she would not abandon he . how 
 many first failure in the world have be the precursor of ultimate 
 success ! " Mildmay will lose his bill , " say the Earl , sorrowfully . 
 " there do not seem to be a doubt about that . " 
 " and what will you all do ? " ask Lady Laura . 
 " we must go to the country , I suppose , " say the Earl . 
 " what be the use ? you can not   have a more liberal House than you have 
 now , " say Lady Laura . 
 " we may have one less liberal , - or rather less radical , - with few 
 man to support Mr. Turnbull . I do not see what else we can do . they 
 say that there be no less than twenty - seven man on our side of the 
 House who will either vote with Turnbull against we , or will decline 
 to vote at all . " 
 " every one of they ought to lose his seat , " say Lady Laura . 
 " but what can we do ? how be the Queen 's Government to be carry on ? " 
 we all know the sad earnestness which impress itself on the Earl 's 
 brow as he ask these momentous question . " I do not   suppose that Mr. 
 Turnbull can form a Ministry . " 
 " with Mr. Daubeny as whipper - in , perhaps he might , " say Lady Laura . 
 " and will Mr. Finn lose his seat ? " ask Violet Effingham . " Most 
 probably , " say the Earl . " he only get it by an accident . " 
 " you must find he a seat somewhere in England , " say Violet . 
 " that might be difficult , " say the Earl , who then leave the room . 
 the two woman remain together for some quarter of an hour before 
 they speak again . then Lady Laura say something about her brother . 
 " if there be a dissolution , I hope Oswald will stand for Loughton . " 
 Loughton be a borough close to Saulsby , in which , as regard its 
 political interest , Lord Brentford be suppose to have considerable 
 influence . to this Violet say nothing . " it be quite time , " continue 
 Lady Laura , " that old Mr. Standish should give way . he have have the 
 seat for twenty - five year , and have never do anything , and he 
 seldom go to the House now . " 
 " he be not your uncle , be he ? " 
 " no ; he be papa 's cousin ; but he be ever so much old than 
 papa ; - nearly eighty , I believe . " 
 " would not that be just the place for Mr. Finn ? " say Violet . 
 then Lady Laura become very serious . " Oswald would of course have a 
 well right to it than anybody else . " 
 " but would Lord Chiltern go into Parliament ? I have hear he declare 
 that he would not . " 
 " if we could get papa to ask he , I think he would change his mind , " 
 say Lady Laura . 
 there be again silence for a few moment , after which Violet 
 return to the original subject of their conversation . " it would be 
 a thousand pity that Mr. Finn should be turn out into the cold . 
 do not   you think so ? " 
 " I , for one , should be very sorry . " 
 " so should I , - and the more so from what Lord Brentford say about 
 his not speak well last night . I do not   think that it be very much 
 of an accomplishment for a gentleman to speak well . Mr. Turnbull , I 
 suppose , speak well ; and they say that that horrid man , Mr. Bonteen , 
 can talk by the hour together . I do not   think that it show a man to 
 be clever at all . but I believe Mr. Finn would do it , if he set his 
 mind to it , and I shall think it a great shame if they turn he out . " 
 " it would depend very much , I suppose , on Lord Tulla . " 
 " I do not   know anything about Lord Tulla , " say Violet ; " but I be quite 
 sure that he might have Loughton , if we manage it properly . of course 
 Lord Chiltern should have it if he want it , but I do not   think he 
 will stand in Mr. Finn 's way . " 
 " I be afraid it be out of the question , " say Lady Laura , gravely . 
 " Papa think so much about the borough . " the reader will remember 
 that both Lord Brentford and his daughter be thorough reformer ! 
 the use of a little borough of his own , however , be a convenience to 
 a great peer . 
 " those difficult thing have always to be talk of for a long while , 
 and then they become easy , " say Violet . " I believe if you be 
 to propose to Mr. Kennedy to give all his property to the Church 
 Missionaries and emigrate to New Zealand , he would begin to consider it 
 seriously after a time . " 
 " I shall not try , at any rate . " 
 " because you do not   want to go to New Zealand ; - but you might try 
 about Loughton for poor Mr. Finn . " 
 " Violet , " say Lady Laura , after a moment 's pause ; - and she speak 
 sharply ; " Violet , I believe you be in love with Mr. Finn . " 
 " that be just like you , Laura . " 
 " I never make such an accusation against you before , or against 
 anybody else that I can remember . but I do begin to believe that you 
 be in love with Mr. Finn . " 
 " why should not   I be in love with he , if I like ? " 
 " I say nothing about that ; - only he have not get a penny . " 
 " but I have , my dear . " 
 " and I doubt whether you have any reason for suppose that he be in 
 love with you . " 
 " that would be my affair , my dear . " 
 " then you be in love with he ? " 
 " that be my affair also . " 
 Lady Laura shrug her shoulder . " of course it be ; and if you tell 
 I to hold my tongue , of course I will do so . if you ask I whether I 
 think it a good match , of course I must say I do not . " 
 " I do not   tell you to hold your tongue , and I do not   ask you what you 
 think about the match . you be quite welcome to talk as much about I 
 as you please ; - but as to Mr. Phineas Finn , you have no business to 
 think anything . " 
 " I should not   talk to anybody but yourself . " 
 " I be grow to be quite indifferent as to what people say . Lady 
 Baldock ask I the other day whether I be go to throw myself 
 away on Mr. Laurence Fitzgibbon . " 
 " no ! " 
 " indeed she do . " 
 " and what do you answer ? " 
 " I tell she that it be not quite settle ; but that as I have only 
 speak to he once during the last two year , and then for not more 
 than half a minute , and as I be not   sure whether I know he by sight , 
 and as I have reason to suppose he do not   know my name , there might , 
 perhaps , be a delay of a week or two before the thing come off . then 
 she flounce out of the room . " 
 " but what make she ask about Mr. Fitzgibbon ? " 
 " somebody have be hoax she . I be begin to think that Augusta 
 do it for her private amusement . if so , I shall think more highly 
 of my dear cousin than I have hitherto do . but , Laura , as you 
 have make a similar accusation against I , and as I can not get out 
 of it with you as I do with my aunt , I must ask you to hear my 
 protestation . I be not in love with Mr. Phineas Finn . Heaven help 
 I ; - as far as I can tell , I be not in love with any one , and never 
 shall be . " Lady Laura look pleased . " do you know , " continue 
 Violet , " that I think I could be in love with Mr. Phineas Finn , if 
 I could be in love with anybody ? " then Lady Laura look displeased . 
 " in the first place , he be a gentleman , " continue Violet . " then he 
 be a man of spirit . and then he have not too much spirit ; - not that 
 kind of spirit which make some man think that they be the fine 
 thing go . his manner be perfect ; - not Chesterfieldian , and yet 
 never offensive . he never browbeat any one , and never toady any 
 one . he know how to live easily with man of all rank , without any 
 appearance of claim a special status for himself . if he be make 
 Archbishop of Canterbury to - morrow , I believe he would settle down 
 into the place of the first subject in the land without arrogance , 
 and without false shame . " 
 " you be his eulogist with a vengeance . " 
 " I be his eulogist ; but I be not in love with he . if he be to 
 ask I to be his wife to - morrow , I should be distress , and should 
 refuse he . if he be to marry my dear friend in the world , I 
 should tell he to kiss I and be my brother . as to Mr. Phineas 
 Finn , - those be my sentiment . " 
 " what you say be very odd . " 
 " why odd ? " 
 " simply because mine be the same . " 
 " be they the same ? I once think , Laura , that you do love 
 he ; - that you mean to be his wife . " 
 Lady Laura sit for a while without make any reply to this . she 
 sit with her elbow on the table and with her face lean on her 
 hand , - think how far it would tend to her comfort if she speak in 
 true confidence . Violet during the time never take her eye from her 
 friend 's face , but remain silent as though wait for an answer . 
 she have be very explicit as to her feeling . would Laura Kennedy be 
 equally explicit ? she be too clever to forget that such plainness 
 of speech would be , must be more difficult to Lady Laura than to 
 herself . Lady Laura be a married woman ; but she feel that her friend 
 would have be wrong to search for secret , unless she be ready to 
 tell she own . it be probably some such feeling which make Lady Laura 
 speak at last . 
 " so I do , nearly - " say Lady Laura ; " very nearly . you tell I just 
 now that you have money , and could therefore do as you please . I have 
 no money , and could not do as I please . " 
 " and you tell I also that I have no reason for think that he care 
 for I . " 
 " do I ? well ; - I suppose you have no reason . he do care for I . he 
 do love I . " 
 " he tell you so ? " 
 " yes ; - he tell I so . " 
 " and how do you answer he ? " 
 " I have that very morning become engaged to Mr. Kennedy . that be my 
 answer . " 
 " and what do he say when you tell he ? " 
 " I do not know . I can not remember . but he behave very well . " 
 " and now , - if he be to love I , you would grudge I his love ? " 
 " not for that reason , - not if I know myself . oh no ! I would not be so 
 selfish as that . " 
 " for what reason then ? " 
 " because I look upon it as write in heaven that you be to be 
 Oswald 's wife . " 
 " Heaven 's writing then be false , " say Violet , get up and 
 walk away . 
 in the meantime Phineas be very wretched at home . when he reach 
 his lodging after leave the House , - after his short conversation 
 with Mr. Monk , - he try to comfort himself with what that gentleman 
 have say to he . for a while , while he be walk , there have be 
 some comfort in Mr. Monk 's word . Mr. Monk have much experience , and 
 doubtless know what he be say , - and there might yet be hope . but 
 all this hope fade away when Phineas be in his own room . there 
 come upon he , as he look round they , an idea that he have no 
 business to be in Parliament , that he be an impostor , that he be 
 go about the world under false pretence , and that he would never 
 set himself aright , even unto himself , till he have go through some 
 terrible act of humiliation . he have be a cheat even to Mr. Quintus 
 Slide of the Banner , in accept an invitation to come among 
 they . he have be a cheat to Lady Laura , in that he have induce 
 she to think that he be fit to live with she . he be a cheat to 
 Violet Effingham , in assume that he be capable of make himself 
 agreeable to she . he be a cheat to Lord Chiltern when rid his 
 horse , and pretend to be a proper associate for a man of fortune . 
 why , - what be his income ? what his birth ? what his proper position ? 
 and now he have get the reward which all cheat deserve . then he go 
 to bed , and as he lie there , he think of Mary Flood Jones . have he 
 plight his troth to Mary , and then work like a slave under Mr. 
 Low 's auspex , - he would not have be a cheat . 
 it seem to he that he have hardly be asleep when the girl 
 come into his room in the morning . " Sir , " say she , " there be that 
 gentleman there . " 
 " what gentleman ? " 
 " the old gentleman . " 
 then Phineas know that Mr. Clarkson be in his sitting - room , and 
 that he would not leave it till he have see the owner of the room . 
 Nay , - Phineas be pretty sure that Mr. Clarkson would come into the 
 bedroom , if he be keep long wait . " damn the old gentleman , " say 
 Phineas in his wrath ; - and the maid - servant hear he say so . 
 in about twenty minute he go out into the sitting - room , with 
 his slipper on and in his dressing - gown . suffer under the 
 circumstance of such an emergency , how be any man to go through the 
 work of dress and washing with proper exactness ? as to the prayer 
 which he say on that morning , I think that no question should be 
 ask . he come out with a black cloud on his brow , and with his mind 
 half make up to kick Mr. Clarkson out of the room . Mr. Clarkson , when 
 he see he , move his chin round within his white cravat , as be a 
 custom with he , and put his thumb and forefinger on his lip , and 
 then shake his head . 
 " very bad , Mr. Finn ; very bad indeed ; very bad , be not   it ? " 
 " you come here in this way at all time in the day be very bad , " 
 say Phineas . 
 " and where would you have I go ? would you like to see I down in the 
 lobby of the House ? " 
 " to tell you the truth , Mr. Clarkson , I do not   want to see you 
 anywhere . " 
 " ah ; yes ; I daresay ! and that be what you call honest , be a 
 Parliament gent ! you have my money , and then you tell I you do not 
 want to see I any more ! " 
 " I have not have your money , " say Phineas . 
 " but let I tell you , " continue Mr. Clarkson , " that I want to see 
 you ; - and shall go on see you till the money be pay . " 
 " I have   not have any of your money , " say Phineas . 
 Mr. Clarkson again twitch his chin about on the top of his cravat 
 and smile . " Mr. Finn , " say he , show the bill , " be that your 
 name ? " 
 " yes , it be . " 
 " then I want my money . " 
 " I have no money to give you . " 
 " do be punctual now . why be not   you punctual ? I would do anything for you 
 if you be punctual . I would indeed . " Mr. Clarkson , as he say this , 
 sit down in the chair which have be place for our hero 's breakfast , 
 and cut a slice off the loaf , begin to butter it with great 
 composure . 
 " Mr. Clarkson , " say Phineas , " I can not ask you to breakfast here . I 
 be engage . " 
 " I will just take a bit of bread and butter all the same , " say 
 Clarkson . " where do you get your butter ? now I could tell you a woman 
 who would give it you cheap and a deal well than this . this be all 
 lard . shall I send she to you ? " 
 " no , " say Phineas . there be no tea ready , and therefore Mr. 
 Clarkson empty the milk into a cup and drink it . " after this , " say 
 Phineas , " I must beg , Mr. Clarkson , that you will never come to my 
 room any more . I shall not be at home to you . " 
 " the lobby of the House be the same thing to I , " say Mr. Clarkson . 
 " they know I there well . I wish you would be punctual , and then we would be 
 the good of friend . " after that Mr. Clarkson , have finish his 
 bread and butter , take his leave . 
 CHAPTER XXVIII 
 the second reading be carry 
 the debate on the bill be prolong during the whole of that week . 
 Lord Brentford , who love his seat in the Cabinet and the glory of 
 be a Minister , well even than he love his borough , have take 
 a gloomy estimate when he speak of twenty - seven defaulter , and of 
 the bill as certainly lose . man who be well able than he to make 
 estimate , - the Bonteens and Fitzgibbons on each side of the House , 
 and above all , the Ratlers and Robys , produce list from day to 
 day which vary now by three name in one direction , then by two 
 in another , and which fluctuate at last by unit only . they all 
 concur in declare that it would be a very near division . a great 
 effort be make to close the debate on the Friday , but it fail , and 
 the full tide of speech be carry on till the following Monday . on 
 that morning Phineas hear Mr. Ratler declare at the club that , as 
 far as his judgment go , the division at that moment be a fair 
 subject for a bet . " there be two man doubtful in the House , " say 
 Ratler , " and if one vote on one side and one on the other , or if 
 neither vote at all , it will be a tie . " Mr. Roby , however , the 
 whip on the other side , be quite sure that one at least of these 
 gentleman would go into his lobby , and that the other would not go 
 into Mr. Ratler 's lobby . I be inclined to think that the town be 
 generally inclined to put more confidence in the accuracy of Mr. Roby 
 than in that of Mr. Ratler ; and among bet man there certainly 
 be a point give by those who back the Conservatives . the odd , 
 however , be lose , for on the division the number in the two 
 lobby be equal , and the Speaker give his cast vote in favour 
 of the Government . the bill be read a second time , and be lose , as 
 a matter of course , in reference to any subsequent action . Mr. Roby 
 declare that even Mr. Mildmay could not go on with nothing but the 
 Speaker 's vote to support he . Mr. Mildmay have no doubt feel that he 
 could not go on with his bill from the moment in which Mr. Turnbull 
 have declare his opposition ; but he could not with propriety withdraw 
 it in deference to Mr. Turnbull 's opinion . 
 during the week Phineas have have his hand sufficiently full . twice he 
 have go to the potted peas inquiry ; but he have be at the office 
 of the People 's Banner more often than that . Bunce have be very 
 resolute in his determination to bring an action against the police 
 for false imprisonment , even though he spend every shilling of his 
 saving in do so . and when his wife , in the presence of Phineas , 
 beg that bygone might be bygone , remind he that spilt milk 
 could not be recover , he call she a mean - spirited woman . then 
 Mrs. Bunce weep a flood of tear , and tell her favourite lodger that 
 for her all comfort in this world be over . " drat the reformer , I 
 say . and I wish there be no Parliament ; so I do . what be the use of 
 all the voting , when it mean nothing but dry bread and cross word ? " 
 Phineas by no mean encourage his landlord in his litigious spirit , 
 advise he rather to keep his money in his pocket , and leave the 
 fighting of the battle to the column of the Banner , - which would 
 fight it , at any rate , with economy . but Bunce , though he delight 
 in the Banner , and show an unfortunate readiness to sit at the 
 foot of Mr. Quintus Slide , would have his action at law ; - in which 
 resolution Mr. Slide do , I fear , encourage he behind the back of 
 his well friend , Phineas Finn . 
 Phineas go with Bunce to Mr. Low 's chamber , - for Mr. Low have in 
 some way become acquainted with the law - stationer 's journeyman , - and 
 there some very good advice be give . " have you ask yourself what 
 be your object , Mr. Bunce ? " say Mr. Low . Mr. Bunce declare he have 
 ask himself that question , and have answer it . his object be 
 redress . " in the shape of compensation to yourself , " suggest Mr. 
 Low . no ; Mr. Bunce would not admit that he personally require any 
 compensation . the redress want be punishment to the man . " be it 
 for vengeance ? " ask Mr. Low . no ; it be not for vengeance , Mr. 
 Bunce declare . " it ought not to be , " continue Mr. Low ; " because , 
 though you think that the man exceed in his duty , you must feel 
 that he be do so through no personal ill - will to yourself . " 
 " what I want be , to have the fellow keep in their proper place , " 
 say Mr. Bunce . 
 " exactly ; - and therefore these thing , when they occur , be mention 
 in the press and in Parliament , - and the attention of a Secretary of 
 State be call to they . thank God , we do not   have very much of that 
 kind of thing in England . " 
 " maybe we shall have more if we do not   look to it , " say Bunce 
 stoutly . 
 " we always be look to it , " say Mr. Low ; - " look to it very 
 carefully . but I do not   think anything be to be do in that way by 
 indictment against a single man , whose conduct have be already 
 approve by the magistrate . if you want notoriety , Mr. Bunce , and 
 do not   mind what you pay for it ; or have get anybody else to pay for 
 it ; then indeed - " 
 " there be not   nobody to pay for it , " say Bunce , wax angry . 
 " then I certainly should not pay for it myself if I be you , " say 
 Mr. Low . 
 but Bunce be not to be counsel out of his intention . when he be 
 out in the square with Phineas he express great anger against Mr. 
 Low . " he do not   know what patriotism mean , " say the law scrivener . 
 " and then he talk to I about notoriety ! it have always be the 
 same way with them . if a man show a spark of public feeling , it be 
 all hambition . I do not   want no notoriety . I want to earn my bread 
 peaceable , and to be let alone when I be about my own business . I pay 
 rate for the police to look after rogue , not to haul folk about 
 and lock them up for day and night , who be do what they have a 
 legal right to do . " after that , Bunce go to his attorney , to the 
 great detriment of the business at the stationer 's shop , and Phineas 
 visit the office of the People 's Banner . there he write a leading 
 article about Bunce 's case , for which he be in due time to be pay 
 a guinea . after all , the People 's Banner might do more for he in 
 this way than ever would be do by Parliament . Mr. Slide , however , 
 and another gentleman at the Banner office , much old than Mr. 
 Slide , who announce himself as the actual editor , be anxious that 
 Phineas should rid himself of his heterodox political resolution 
 about the ballot . it be not that they care much about his own 
 opinion ; and when Phineas attempt to argue with the editor on the 
 merit of the ballot , the editor put he down very shortly . " we go in 
 for it , Mr. Finn , " he say . if Mr. Finn would go in for it too , the 
 editor seem to think that Mr. Finn might make himself very useful 
 at the Banner Office . Phineas stoutly maintain that this be 
 impossible , - and be therefore drive to confine his article in the 
 service of the people to those open subject on which his opinion 
 agree with those of the People 's Banner . this be his second 
 article , and the editor seem to think that , backward as he be 
 about the ballot , he be too useful an aid to be throw aside . a 
 member of Parliament be not now all that he be once , but still there 
 be a prestige in the letter affix to his name which make he loom 
 large in the eye of the world than other man . get into Parliament , 
 if it be but for the borough of Loughshane , and the People 's 
 banner all round will be glad of your assistance , as will also 
 company limit and unlimited to a very marvellous extent . Phineas 
 write his article and promise to look in again , and so they go 
 on . Mr. Quintus Slide continue to assure he that a " horgan " be 
 indispensable to he , and Phineas begin to accommodate his ear to 
 the sound which have at first be so disagreeable . he find that his 
 acquaintance , Mr. Slide , have idea of his own as to get into 
 the ' Ouse at some future time . " I always look upon the ' Ouse as my 
 oyster , and ' ere be my sword , " say Mr. Slide , brandish an old 
 quill pen . " and I feel that if once there I could get along . I do 
 indeed . what be it a man want ? it be only pluck , - that he should not 
 funk because a ' undred other man be look at he . " then Phineas 
 ask he whether he have any idea of a constituency , to which Mr. 
 Slide reply that he have no absolutely form intention . many 
 borough , however , would doubtless be set free from aristocratic 
 influence by the redistribution of seat which must take place , as 
 Mr. Slide declare , at any rate in the next session . then he name 
 the borough of Loughton ; and Phineas Finn , thinking of Saulsby , 
 thinking of the Earl , thinking of Lady Laura , and think of Violet , 
 walk away disgusted . would it not be well that the quiet town , 
 cluster close round the wall of Saulsby , should remain as it be , 
 than that it should be pollute by the presence of Mr. Quintus Slide ? 
 on the last day of the debate , at a few moment before four o'clock , 
 Phineas encounter another terrible misfortune . he have be at the 
 potted pea since twelve , and have on this occasion targe two or 
 three commissariat officer very tightly with question respect 
 cabbage and potato , and have ask whether the officer on board 
 a certain ship do not always eat preserve asparagus while the man 
 have not even a bean . I fear that he have be put up to this business 
 by Mr. Quintus Slide , and that he make himself nasty . there be , 
 however , so much nastiness of the kind go , that his little effort 
 make no great difference . the conservative member of the Committee , 
 on whose side of the House the inquiry have originate , do not 
 scruple to lay all manner of charge to officer whom , be they 
 themselves in power , they would be bind to support and would support 
 with all their energy . about a quarter before four the member of 
 the Committee have dismiss their last witness for the day , be 
 desirous of not lose their chance of seat on so important an 
 occasion , and hurry down into the lobby , - so that they might enter 
 the House before prayer . phinea here be button - hole by Barrington 
 Erle , who say something to he as to the approach division . they 
 be stand in front of the door of the House , almost in the middle 
 of the lobby , with a crowd of member around they , - on a spot which , 
 as frequenter know , be hallowed ground , and must not be tread by 
 stranger . he be in the act of answer Erle , when he be touch 
 on the arm , and on turn round , see Mr. Clarkson . " about that 
 little bill , Mr. Finn , " say the horrible man , turn his chin round 
 over his white cravat . " they always tell I at your lodging that 
 you be not   at home . " by this time a policeman be explain to Mr. 
 Clarkson with gentle violence that he must not stand there , - that he 
 must go aside into one of the corner . " I know all that , " say Mr. 
 Clarkson , retreat . " of course I do . but what be a man to do when a 
 gent will not   see he at home ? " Mr. Clarkson stand aside in his corner 
 quietly , give the policeman no occasion for further action against 
 he ; but in retreat he speak loud , and there be a lull of voice 
 around , and twenty member at least have hear what have be say . 
 Phineas Finn no doubt have his privilege , but Mr. Clarkson be 
 determined that the privilege should avail he as little as possible . 
 it be very hard . the real offender , the Lord of the Treasury , the 
 peer 's son , with a thousand a year pay by the country be not 
 treat with this cruel persecution . Phineas have in truth never take 
 a farthing from any one but his father ; and though doubtless he owe 
 something at this moment , he have no creditor of his own that be even 
 angry with he . as the world go he be a clear man , - but for this 
 debt of his friend Fitzgibbon . he leave Barrington Erle in the lobby , 
 and hurry into the House , blush up to the eye . he look for 
 Fitzgibbon in his place , but the Lord of the Treasury be not as yet 
 there . doubtless he would be there for the division , and Phineas 
 resolve that he would speak a bit of his mind before he let his 
 friend out of his sight . 
 there be some great speech make on that evening . Mr. Gresham 
 deliver an oration of which man say that it would be know in 
 England as long as there be any word remain of english 
 eloquence . in it he taunt Mr. Turnbull with be a recreant to 
 the people , of whom he call himself so often the champion . but Mr. 
 Turnbull be not in the least move . Mr. Gresham know well enough 
 that Mr. Turnbull be not to be move by any word ; - but the word 
 be not the less telling to the House and to the country . man , who 
 hear it , say that Mr. Gresham forget himself in that speech , forget 
 his party , forget his strategy , forget his long - draw scheme , - even 
 his love of applause , and think only of his cause . Mr. Daubeny 
 reply to he with equal genius , and with equal skill , - if not with 
 equal heart . Mr. Gresham have ask for the approbation of all present 
 and of all future reformer . Mr. Daubeny deny he both , - the one 
 because he would not succeed , and the other because he would not have 
 deserve success . then Mr. Mildmay make his reply , get up at 
 about three o'clock , and utter a prayer , - a futile prayer , - that 
 this his last work on behalf of his countryman might be successful . 
 his bill be read a second time , as I have say before , in obedience 
 to the cast vote of the Speaker , - but a majority such as that be 
 tantamount to a defeat . 
 there be , of course , on that night no declaration as to what 
 minister would do . without a meeting of the Cabinet , and without 
 some further consideration , though each might know that the bill 
 would be withdraw , they could not say in what way they would act . 
 but late as be the hour , there be many word on the subject before 
 member be in their bed . Mr. Turnbull and Mr. Monk leave the House 
 together , and perhaps no two gentleman in it have in former session 
 be more in the habit of walk home arm - in - arm and discuss what 
 each have hear and what each have say in that assembly . latterly 
 these two man have go strangely asunder in their path , - very 
 strangely for man who have for year walk so closely together . and 
 this separation have be mark by violent word speak against each 
 other , - by violent word , at least , speak against he in office by 
 the one who have never contaminate his hand by the Queen 's shilling . 
 and yet , on such an occasion as this , they be able to walk away 
 from the House arm - in - arm , and do not fly at each other 's throat by 
 the way . 
 " Singular enough , be it not , " say Mr. Turnbull , " that the thing 
 should have be so close ? " 
 " very odd , " say Mr. Monk ; " but man have say that it would be so all 
 the week . " 
 " Gresham be very fine , " say Mr. Turnbull . 
 " very fine , indeed . I never have hear anything like it before . " 
 " Daubeny be very powerful too , " say Mr. Turnbull . 
 " yes ; - no doubt . the occasion be great , and he answer to the spur . 
 but Gresham 's be the speech of the debate . " 
 " well ; - yes ; perhaps it be , " say Mr. Turnbull , who be think of 
 his own flight the other night , and who among his special friend have 
 be much praise for what he have then do . but of course he make 
 no allusion to his own doing , - or to those of Mr. Monk . in this way 
 they converse for some twenty minute , till they part ; but neither 
 of they interrogate the other as to what either might be call upon 
 to do in consequence of the division which have just be effect . 
 they might still be intimate friend , but the day of confidence 
 between they be pass . 
 Phineas have see Laurence Fitzgibbon enter the House , - which he do 
 quite late in the night , so as to be in time for the division . no 
 doubt he have din in the House , and have be all the evening in the 
 library , - or in the smoking - room . when Mr. Mildmay be on his leg 
 make his reply , Fitzgibbon have saunter in , not choose to wait 
 till he might be ring up by the bell at the last moment . Phineas be 
 near he as they pass by the teller , near he in the lobby , and 
 near he again as they all pass back into the House . but at the 
 last moment he think that he would miss his prey . in the crowd 
 as they leave the House he fail to get his hand upon his friend 's 
 shoulder . but he hurry down the member ' passage , and just at the 
 gate lead out into Westminster Hall he overtake Fitzgibbon walk 
 arm - in - arm with Barrington Erle . 
 " Laurence , " he say , take hold of his countryman 's arm with a 
 decide grasp , " I want to speak to you for a moment , if you please . " 
 " speak away , " say Laurence . then Phineas , look up into his face , 
 know very well that he have be - what the world call , dining . 
 Phineas remember at the moment that Barrington Erle have be close 
 to he when the odious money - lender have touch his arm and make 
 his inquiry about that " little bill . " he much wish to make Erle 
 understand that the debt be not his own , - that he be not in the 
 hand of usurer in reference to his own concern . but there be a 
 feeling within he that he still , - even still , - owe something to his 
 friendship to Fitzgibbon . " just give I your arm , and come on with I 
 for a minute , " say Phineas . " Erle will excuse we . " 
 " oh , blaze ! " say Laurence , " what be it you be after ? I be not   good 
 at private conference at three in the morning . we be all out , and 
 be not   that enough for ye ? " 
 " I have be dreadfully annoy to - night , " say Phineas , " and I 
 wish to speak to you about it . " 
 " Bedad , Finn , my boy , and there be a good many of we be 
 annoyed ; - eh , Barrington ? " 
 Phineas perceive clearly that though Fitzgibbon have be dining , 
 there be as much of cunning in all this as of wine , and he be 
 determined not to submit to such unlimited ill - usage . " my annoyance 
 come from your friend , Mr. Clarkson , who have the impudence to 
 address I in the lobby of the House . " 
 " and serve you right , too , Finn , my boy . why the devil do you sport 
 your oak to he ? he have tell I all about it . there be not   such a 
 patient little fellow as Clarkson anywhere , if you will only let he 
 have his own way . he will look in , as he call it , three time a week 
 for a whole season , and do nothing far . of course he do not   like 
 to be lock out . " 
 " be that the gentleman with whom the police interfere in the lobby ? " 
 Erle inquire . 
 " a confounded bill discounter to whom our friend here have introduce 
 I , - for his own purpose , " say Phineas . 
 " a very gentleman - like fellow , " say Laurence . " Barrington know 
 he , I daresay . look here , Finn , my boy , take my advice . ask he to 
 breakfast , and let he understand that the house will always be open 
 to he . " after this Laurence Fitzgibbon and Barrington Erle get into 
 a cab together , and be drive away . 
 CHAPTER XXIX 
 a Cabinet Meeting 
 and now will the Muses assist I while I sing an altogether new song ? 
 on the Tuesday the Cabinet meet at the First Lord 's official residence 
 in Downing Street , and I will attempt to describe what , accord to 
 the bewildered brain of a poor fictionist , be say or might have 
 be say , what be do or might have be do , on so august an 
 occasion . 
 the poor fictionist very frequently find himself to have be wrong 
 in his description of thing in general , and be tell so , roughly by 
 the critic , and tenderly by the friend of his bosom . he be move 
 to tell of thing of which he omit to learn the nature before he 
 tell of they - as should be do by a strictly honest fictionist . he 
 catch salmon in October ; or shoot his partridge in March . his 
 dahlia bloom in June , and his bird sing in the autumn . he open the 
 opera - house before Easter , and make Parliament sit on a Wednesday 
 evening . and then those terrible mesh of the Law ! how be a 
 fictionist , in these excited day , to create the needed bite 
 interest without legal difficulty ; and how again be he to steer his 
 little bark clear of so many rock , - when the rock and the shoal 
 have be purposely arrange to make the taking of a pilot on board a 
 necessity ? as to those law mesh , a benevolent pilot will , indeed , 
 now and again give a poor fictionist a help hand , - not use , 
 however , generally , with much discretion . but from whom be any 
 assistance to come in the august matter of a Cabinet assembly ? there 
 can be no such assistance . no man can tell aught but they who will 
 tell nothing . but then , again , there be this safety , that let the 
 story be ever so mistold , - let the fiction be ever so far remove 
 from the truth , no critic short of a Cabinet Minister himself can 
 convict the narrator of error . 
 it be a large dingy room , cover with a Turkey carpet , and 
 contain a dark polished mahogany dinner - table , on very heavy 
 carve leg , which an old messenger be prepare at two o'clock in 
 the day for the use of her Majesty 's Ministers . the table would have 
 be large enough for fourteen guest , and along the side far 
 from the fire , there be place some six heavy chair , good 
 comfortable chair , stuff at the back as well as the seat , - but on 
 the side nearer to the fire the chair be place irregularly ; and 
 there be four armchair , - two on one side and two on the other . 
 there be four window to the room , which look on to St. James 's 
 Park , and the curtain of the window be dark and heavy , - as become 
 the gravity of the purpose to which that chamber be appropriate . 
 in old day it have be the dining - room of one Prime Minister after 
 another . to Pitt it have be the abode of his own familiar prandial 
 Penates , and Lord Liverpool have be dull there among his dull 
 friend for long year after year . the Ministers of the present day 
 find it more convenient to live in private home , and , indeed , not 
 unfrequently carry their Cabinets with they . but , under Mr. Mildmay 's 
 rule , the meeting be generally hold in the old room at the 
 official residence . Thrice do the aged messenger move each armchair , 
 now a little this way and now a little that , and then look at they as 
 though something of the tendency of the come meeting might depend 
 on the comfort of its lead member . if Mr. Mildmay should find 
 himself to be quite comfortable , so that he could hear what be say 
 without a struggle to his ear , and see his colleague ' face clearly , 
 and feel the fire without burn his shin , it might be possible 
 that he would not insist upon resign . if this be so , how 
 important be the work now confide to the hand of that aged 
 messenger ! when his anxious eye have glance round the room some 
 half a dozen time , when he have touch each curtain , lay his 
 hand upon every chair , and dust certain paper which lie upon a 
 side - table , - and which have be lie there for two year , and at 
 which no one ever look or would look , - he gently creep away and 
 ensconce himself in an easy chair not far from the door of the 
 chamber . for it might be necessary to stop the attempt of a rash 
 intruder on those secret counsel . 
 very shortly there be hear the ring of various voice in the 
 passage , - the voice of man speak pleasantly , the voice of man 
 with whom it seem , from their tone , that thing be do well 
 in the world . and then a cluster of four or five gentleman enter 
 the room . at first sight they seem to be as ordinary gentleman as 
 you shall meet anywhere about Pall Mall on an afternoon . there be 
 nothing about their outward appearance of the august wiggery of 
 statecraft , nothing of the ponderous dignity of ministerial position . 
 that little man in the square - cut coat , - we may almost call it a 
 shooting - coat , - swing an umbrella and wear no glove , be no 
 less a person than the Lord Chancellor , - Lord Weazeling , - who make 
 a hundred thousand pound as Attorney - General , and be suppose 
 to be the good lawyer of his age . he be fifty , but he look to 
 be hardly over forty , and one might take he to be , from his 
 appearance , - perhaps a clerk in the War Office , well - to - do , and 
 popular among his brother - clerk . immediately with he be Sir Harry 
 Coldfoot , also a lawyer by profession , though he have never practise . 
 he have be in the House for nearly thirty year , and be now at the 
 Home Office . he be a stout , healthy , grey - haired gentleman , who 
 certainly do not wear the care of office on his face . perhaps , 
 however , no minister get more bully than he by the press , and man 
 say that he will be very willing to give up to some political enemy 
 the control of the police , and the onerous duty of judge in all 
 criminal appeal . behind these come our friend Mr. Monk , young Lord 
 Cantrip from the colony next door , than whom no smart young peer 
 now do honour to our hereditary legislature , and Sir Marmaduke 
 Morecombe , the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster . why Sir 
 Marmaduke have always be place in Mr. Mildmay 's Cabinets nobody 
 ever know . as Chancellor of the Duchy he have nothing to do , - and be 
 there anything , he would not do it . he rarely speak in the House , 
 and then do not speak well . he be a handsome man , or would be but 
 for an assumption of grandeur in the carriage of his eye , give to 
 his face a character of pomposity which he himself well deserve . he 
 be in the Guards when young , and have be in Parliament since he 
 cease to be young . it must be suppose that Mr. Mildmay have find 
 something in he , for he have be include in three successive 
 liberal cabinet . he have probably the virtue of be true to Mr. 
 Mildmay , and of be duly submissive to one whom he recognise as 
 his superior . 
 within two minute afterwards the Duke follow , with Plantagenet 
 Palliser . the Duke , as all the world know , be the Duke of St. 
 Bungay , the very front and head of the aristocratic old whig of the 
 country , - a man who have be thrice speak of as Prime Minister , and 
 who really might have fill the office have he not know himself to 
 be unfit for it . the Duke have be consult as to the making of 
 Cabinets for the last five - and - thirty year , and be even now not an 
 old man in appearance ; - a fussy , popular , clever , conscientious man , 
 whose digestion have be too good to make politic a burden to he , 
 but who have think seriously about his country , and be one who will 
 be sure to leave memoir behind he . he be bear in the semi - purple 
 of ministerial influence , and man say of he that he be honester 
 than his uncle , who be Canning 's friend , but not so great a man as 
 his grandfather , with whom Fox once quarrel , and whom Burke love . 
 Plantagenet Palliser , himself the heir to a dukedom , be the young 
 Chancellor of the Exchequer , of whom some statesman think much as 
 the rise star of the age . if industry , rectitude of purpose , and 
 a certain clearness of intellect may prevail , Planty Pall , as he be 
 familiarly call , may become a great Minister . 
 then come Viscount Thrift by himself ; - the First Lord of the 
 Admiralty , with the whole weight of a new iron - clothe fleet upon his 
 shoulder . he have undertake the Herculean task of cleanse the 
 dockyard , - and with it the less work of keep afloat a navy that 
 may be esteem by his countryman to be the good in the world . and he 
 think that he will do both , if only Mr. Mildmay will not resign ; - an 
 industrious , honest , self - deny nobleman , who work without cease 
 from morn to night , and who hop to rise in time to high thing , - to 
 the translating of Homer , perhaps , and the wearing of the Garter . 
 close behind he there be a ruck of Ministers , with the 
 much - honour grey - haired old Premier in the midst of they . there be 
 Mr. Gresham , the Foreign Minister , say to be the great orator 
 in Europe , on whose shoulder it be think that the mantle of Mr. 
 Mildmay would fall , - to be wear , however , quite otherwise than Mr. 
 Mildmay have wear it . for Mr. Gresham be a man with no feeling 
 for the past , void of historical association , hardly with 
 memory , - live altogether for the future which he be anxious to 
 fashion anew out of the vigour of his own brain . whereas , with Mr. 
 Mildmay , even his love of reform be an inherit passion for an 
 old - world Liberalism . and there be with they Mr. Legge Wilson , the 
 brother of a peer , Secretary at War , a great scholar and a polished 
 gentleman , very proud of his position as a Cabinet Minister , but 
 conscious that he have hardly earn it by political work . and Lord 
 Plinlimmon be with they , the Comptroller of India , - of all working 
 lord the most jaunty , the most pleasant , and the most popular , very 
 good at take chair at dinner , and make become speech at the 
 short notice , a man apparently very free and open in his way of 
 life , - but cautious enough in truth as to every step , know well 
 how hard it be to climb and how easy to fall . Mr. Mildmay enter 
 the room lean on Lord Plinlimmon 's arm , and when he make his way 
 up among the armchair upon the rug before the fire , the other 
 cluster around he with cheer look and kindly question . then 
 come the Privy Seal , our old friend Lord Brentford , last , - and 
 I would say least , but that the word of no councillor could go 
 for less in such an assemblage than will those of Sir Marmaduke 
 Morecombe , the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster . 
 Mr. Mildmay be soon seat in one of the armchair , while Lord 
 Plinlimmon lean against the table close at his elbow . Mr. Gresham 
 stand upright at the corner of the chimney - piece furth from Mr. 
 Mildmay , and Mr. Palliser at that near to he . the Duke take the 
 armchair close at Mr. Mildmay 's left hand . Lord Plinlimmon be , as I 
 have say , lean against the table , but the Lord Chancellor , who 
 be next to he , sit upon it . Viscount Thrift and Mr. Monk occupy 
 chair on the further side of the table , near to Mr. Mildmay 's end , 
 and Mr. Legge Wilson place himself at the head of the table , thus 
 join they as it be into a body . the Home Secretary stand before 
 the Lord Chancellor screen he from the fire , and the Chancellor 
 of the Duchy , after wait for a few minute as though in doubt , 
 take one of the vacant armchair . the young lord from the Colonies 
 stand a little behind the shoulder of his great friend from the 
 Foreign Office ; and the Privy Seal , after move about for a while 
 uneasily , take a chair behind the Chancellor of the Duchy . one 
 armchair be thus leave vacant , but there be no other comer . 
 " it be not so bad as I think it would be , " say the Duke , speak 
 aloud , but nevertheless address himself specially to his chief . 
 " it be bad enough , " say Mr. Mildmay , laugh . 
 " bad enough indeed , " say Sir Marmaduke Morecombe , without any 
 laughter . 
 " and such a good bill lose , " say Lord Plinlimmon . " the bad of 
 these failure be , that the same identical bill can never be bring 
 in again . " 
 " so that if the lose bill be good , the bill that will not be lose 
 can only be second good , " say the Lord Chancellor . 
 " I certainly do think that after the debate before Easter we should 
 not have come to shipwreck about the ballot , " say Mr. Mildmay . 
 " it be brew for we all along , " say Mr. Gresham , who then with a 
 gesture of his hand and a pressure of his lip withhold word which 
 he be nearly uttering , and which would not , probably , have be 
 complimentary to Mr. Turnbull . as it be , he turn half round and 
 say something to Lord Cantrip which be not audible to any one else 
 in the room . it be worthy of note , however , that Mr. Turnbull 's name 
 be not once mention aloud at that meeting . 
 " I be afraid it be brew all along , " say Sir Marmaduke Morecombe 
 gravely . 
 " well , gentleman , we must take it as we get it , " say Mr. Mildmay , 
 still smile . " and now we must consider what we shall do at once . " 
 then he pause as though expect that counsel would come to he 
 first from one colleague and then from another . but no such counsel 
 come , and probably Mr. Mildmay do not in the least expect that it 
 would come . 
 " we can not stay where we be , of course , " say the Duke . the Duke be 
 privileged to say as much as that . but though every man in the room 
 know that it must be so , no one but the Duke would have say it , 
 before Mr. Mildmay have speak plainly himself . 
 " no , " say Mr. Mildmay ; " I suppose that we can hardly stay where we 
 be . probably none of we wish it , gentleman . " then he look round 
 upon his colleague , and there come a sort of an assent , though there 
 be no speak word . the sound from Sir Marmaduke Morecombe be 
 loud than that from the other ; - but yet from he it be no more 
 than an attesting grunt . " we have two thing to consider , " continue 
 Mr. Mildmay , - and though he speak in a very low voice , every word be 
 hear by all present , - " two thing chiefly , that be ; the work of the 
 country and the Queen 's comfort . I propose to see her Majesty this 
 afternoon at five , - that be , in something less than two hour ' time , 
 and I hope to be able to tell the House by seven what have take place 
 between her Majesty and I . my friend , his grace , will do as much in 
 the House of Lords . if you agree with I , gentleman , I will explain 
 to the queen that it be not for the welfare of the country that we 
 should retain our place , and I will place your resignation and my 
 own in her Majesty 's hand . " 
 " you will advise her Majesty to send for Lord de Terrier , " say Mr. 
 Gresham . 
 " certainly ; - there will be no other course open to I . " 
 " or to she , " say Mr. Gresham . to this remark from the rise 
 Minister of the day , no word of reply be make ; but of those present 
 in the room three or four of the most experienced servant of the 
 Crown feel that Mr. Gresham have be imprudent . the Duke , who have . 
 ever be afraid of Mr. Gresham , tell Mr. Palliser afterwards that 
 such an observation should not have be make ; and Sir Harry Coldfoot 
 ponder upon it uneasily , and Sir Marmaduke Morecombe ask Mr. 
 Mildmay what he think about it . " time change so much , and with the 
 time the feeling of man , " say Mr. Mildmay . but I doubt whether Sir 
 Marmaduke quite understand he . 
 there be silence in the room for a moment or two after Mr. Gresham 
 have speak , and then Mr. Mildmay again address his friend . " of 
 course it may be possible that my Lord de Terrier may foresee 
 difficulty , or may find difficulty which will oblige he , either 
 at once , or after an attempt have be make , to decline the task which 
 her Majesty will probably commit to he . all of we , no doubt , know 
 that the arrangement of a government be not the most easy task in 
 the world ; and that it be not make the more easy by an absence of a 
 majority in the House of Commons . " 
 " he would dissolve , I presume , " say the Duke . 
 " I should say so , " continue Mr. Mildmay . " but it may not improbably 
 come to pass that her Majesty will feel herself oblige to send again 
 for some one or two of we , that we may tender to her Majesty the 
 advice which we owe to she ; - for I , for instance , or for my friend 
 the Duke . in such a matter she would be much guide probably by what 
 Lord de Terrier might have suggest to she . should this be so , and 
 should I be consult , my present feeling be that we should resume 
 our office so that the necessary business of the session should be 
 complete , and that we should then dissolve Parliament , and thus 
 ascertain the opinion of the country . in such case , however , we 
 should of course meet again . " 
 " I quite think that the course propose by Mr. Mildmay will be the 
 good , " say the Duke , who have no doubt already discuss the matter 
 with his friend the Prime Minister in private . no one else say a 
 word either of argument or disagreement , and the Cabinet Council be 
 break up . the old messenger , who have be asleep in his chair , stand 
 up and bow as the Ministers walk by he , and then go in and 
 rearrange the chair . 
 " he have as much idea of give up as you or I have , " say Lord 
 Cantrip to his friend Mr. Gresham , as they walk arm - in - arm together 
 from the Treasury Chambers across St. James 's Park towards the club . 
 " I be not sure that he be not right , " say Mr. Gresham . 
 " do you mean for himself or for the country ? " ask Lord Cantrip . 
 " for his future fame . they who have abdicate and have clung to their 
 abdication have always lose by it . Cincinnatus be bring back 
 again , and Charles V. be feel to have be foolish . the peach of 
 retire minister of which we hear so often have generally be 
 cultivate in a constrain seclusion ; - or at least the world so 
 believe . " they be talk probably of Mr. Mildmay , as to whom some 
 of his colleague have think it probable , know that he would now 
 resign , that he would have to - day declare his intention of lay 
 aside for ever the care of office . 
 Mr. Monk walk home alone , and as he go there be something of 
 a feeling of disappointment at heart , which make he ask himself 
 whether Mr. Turnbull might not have be right in rebuke he for 
 join the government . but this , I think , be in no way due to Mr. 
 Mildmay 's resignation , but rather to a conviction on Mr. Monk 's part 
 that that he have contribute but little to his country 's welfare by 
 sit in Mr. Mildmay 's Cabinet . 
 CHAPTER XXX 
 Mr. Kennedy 's Luck 
 after the holding of that Cabinet Council of which the author have 
 dare to attempt a slight sketch in the last chapter , there be 
 various visit make to the Queen , first by Mr. Mildmay , and then by 
 Lord de Terrier , afterwards by Mr. Mildmay and the Duke together , and 
 then again by Lord de Terrier ; and there be various explanation 
 make to Parliament in each House , and rival be very courteous to 
 each other , promising assistance ; - and at the end of it the old man 
 hold their seat . the only change make be effect by the retirement 
 of Sir Marmaduke Morecombe , who be raise to the peerage , and by 
 the selection of - Mr. Kennedy to fill his place in the Cabinet . Mr. 
 Kennedy during the late debate have make one of those speech , few 
 and far between , by which he have create for himself a parliamentary 
 reputation ; but , nevertheless , all man express their great 
 surprise , and no one could quite understand why Mr. Kennedy have be 
 make a Cabinet Minister . 
 " it be impossible to say whether he be pleased or not , " say Lady 
 Laura , speak of he to Phineas . " I be pleased , of course . " 
 " his ambition must be gratify , " say Phineas . 
 " it would be , if he have any , " say Lady Laura . 
 " I do not believe in a man lack ambition . " 
 " it be hard to say . there be man who by no mean wear their heart 
 upon their sleeve , and my husband be one of they . he tell I that it 
 would be unbecoming in he to refuse , and that be all he say to I 
 about it . " 
 the old man hold their seat , but they do so as it be only upon 
 further trial . Mr. Mildmay take the course which he have indicate to 
 his colleague at the Cabinet meeting . before all the explanation 
 and journeying be complete , April be over , and the much - need 
 whitsuntide holiday be come on . but little of the routine work 
 of the session have be do ; and , as Mr. Mildmay tell the House 
 more than once , the country would suffer be the Queen to dissolve 
 Parliament at this period of the year . the old Ministers would go on 
 with the business of the country , Lord de Terrier with his follower 
 have decline to take affair into their hand ; and at the close of 
 the session , which should be make as short as possible , writ should 
 be issue for new election . this be Mr. Mildmay 's programme , and it 
 be one of which no one dare to complain very loudly . 
 Mr. Turnbull , indeed , do speak a word of caution . he tell Mr. 
 Mildmay that he have lose his bill , good in other respect , because he 
 have refuse to introduce the ballot into his measure . let he promise 
 to be wise for the future , and to obey the manifested wish of the 
 country , and then all would be well with he . in answer to this , 
 Mr. Mildmay declare that to the good of his power of read the 
 country , his countryman have manifest no such wish ; and that if they 
 do so , if by the fresh election it should be show that the ballot 
 be in truth desire , he would at once leave the execution of their 
 wish to abler and young hand . Mr. Turnbull express himself 
 perfectly satisfied with the Minister 's answer , and say that the 
 come election would show whether he or Mr. Mildmay be right . 
 many man , and among they some of his colleague , think that Mr. 
 Mildmay have be imprudent . " no man ought ever to pledge himself 
 to anything , " say Sir Harry Coldfoot to the Duke ; - " that be , to 
 anything unnecessary . " the Duke , who be very true to Mr. Mildmay , 
 make no reply to this , but even he think that his old friend 
 have be betray into a promise too rapidly . but the pledge be 
 give , and some people already begin to make much of it . there 
 appear leader after leader in the People 's Banner urge the 
 constituency to take advantage of the Prime Minister 's word , and 
 to show clearly at the husting that they desire the ballot . " you 
 have well come over to we , Mr. Finn ; you have indeed , " say Mr. 
 Slide . " now be the time to do it , and show yourself a people 's friend . 
 you will have to do it soon or later , - whether or no . come to we and 
 we will be your horgan . " 
 but in those day Phineas be something less in love with Mr. Quintus 
 Slide than he have be at the time of the great debate , for he be 
 become more and more closely connect with people who in their 
 way of living and mode of expression be very unlike Mr. Slide . 
 this advice be give to he about the end of May , and at that 
 time Lord Chiltern be live with he in the lodging in Great 
 Marlborough Street . Miss Pouncefoot have temporarily vacate she 
 room on the first floor , and the Lord with the broken bone have 
 condescend to occupy they . " I do not   know that I like have a 
 Lord , " Bunce have say to his wife . " it will soon come to you not like 
 anybody decent anywhere , " Mrs. Bunce have reply ; " but I shall not   ask 
 any question about it . when you be waste so much time and money 
 at your dirty law proceeding , it be well that somebody should earn 
 something at home . " 
 there have be many discussion about the bringing of Lord Chiltern 
 up to London , in all of which Phineas have be concern . Lord 
 Brentford have think that his son have well remain down at the 
 Willingford Bull ; and although he say that the room be at his 
 son 's disposal should Lord Chiltern choose to come to London , still 
 he say it in such a way that Phineas , who go down to Willingford , 
 could not tell his friend that he would be make welcome in Portman 
 Square . " I think I shall leave those digging altogether , " Lord 
 Chiltern say to he . " my father annoy I by everything he say and 
 do , and I annoy he by say and do nothing . " then there come 
 an invitation to he from Lady Laura and Mr. Kennedy . would he come 
 to Grosvenor Place ? Lady Laura press this very much , though in 
 truth Mr. Kennedy have hardly do more than give a cold assent . but 
 Lord Chiltern would not hear of it . " there be some reason for my 
 go to my father 's house , " say he , " though he and I be not the 
 good friend in the world ; but there can be no reason for my go 
 to the house of a man I dislike so much as I do Robert Kennedy . " the 
 matter be settle in the manner tell above . Miss Pouncefoot 's room 
 be prepare for he at Mr. Bunce 's house , and Phineas Finn go 
 down to Willingford and bring he up . " I have   sell Bonebreaker , " he 
 say , - " to a young fellow whose neck will certainly be the sacrifice 
 if he attempt to ride he . I would have give he to you , Phineas , only 
 you would not   have know what to do with he . " 
 Lord Chiltern when he come up to London be still in bandage , 
 though , as the surgeon say , his bone seem to have be make to be 
 break and set again ; and his bandage of course be a sufficient 
 excuse for his visit the house neither of his father nor his 
 brother - in - law . but Lady Laura go to he frequently , and thus 
 become acquainted with our hero 's home and with Mrs. Bunce . and there 
 be message take from Violet to the man in bandage , some of which 
 lose nothing in the carrying . once Lady Laura try to make violet 
 think that it would be right , or rather not wrong , that they two 
 should go together to Lord Chiltern 's room . 
 " and would you have I tell my aunt , or would you have I not tell 
 she ? " Violet ask . 
 " I would have you do just as you please , " Lady Laura answer . 
 " so I shall , " Violet reply , " but I will do nothing that I should be 
 ashamed to tell any one . your brother profess to be in love with 
 I . " 
 " he be in love with you , " say Lady Laura . " even you do not pretend 
 to doubt his faith . " 
 " very well . in those circumstance a girl should not go to a man 's 
 room unless she mean to consider herself as engage to he , even 
 with his sister ; - not though he have break every bone in his skin . I 
 know what I may do , Laura , and I know what I may not ; and I will not   be 
 lead either by you or by my aunt . " 
 " may I give he your love ? " 
 " no ; - because you will give it in a wrong spirit . he know well enough 
 that I wish he well ; - but you may tell he that from I , if you 
 please . he have from I all those wish which one friend owe to 
 another . " 
 but there be other message send from Violet through Phineas Finn 
 which she word with more show of affection , - perhaps as much for 
 the discomfort of Phineas as for the consolation of Lord Chiltern . 
 " tell he to take care of himself , " say Violet , " and bid he not to 
 have any more of those wild brute that be not fit for any Christian 
 to ride . tell he that I say so . it be a great thing to be brave ; but 
 what be the use of be foolhardy ? " 
 the session be to be close at the end of June , to the great dismay 
 of London tradesman and of young lady who have not be entirely 
 successful in the early season . but before the old Parliament be 
 closed , and the writ for the new election be despatch , there 
 occur an incident which be of very much importance to Phineas 
 Finn . near the end of June , when the remain day of the session 
 be number by three or four , he have be din at Lord 
 Brentford 's house in Portman Square in company with Mr. Kennedy . but 
 Lady Laura have not be there . at this time he see Lord Brentford not 
 unfrequently , and there be always a word say about Lord Chiltern . 
 the father would ask how the son occupy himself , and Phineas would 
 hope , - though hitherto he have hop in vain , - that he would induce 
 the Earl to come and see Lord Chiltern . Lord Brentford could never be 
 bring to that ; but it be sufficiently evident that he would have 
 do so , have he not be afraid to descend so far from the altitude 
 of his paternal wrath . on this evening , at about eleven , Mr. Kennedy 
 and Phineas leave the house together , and walk from the Square 
 through Orchard Street into Oxford Street . here their way part , 
 but Phineas cross the road with Mr. Kennedy , as he be make some 
 reply to a second invitation to Loughlinter . Phineas , consider 
 what have be say before on the subject , think that the invitation 
 come late , and that it be not warmly word . he have , therefore , 
 decline it , and be in the act of decline it , when he cross the 
 road with Mr. Kennedy . in walk down Orchard Street from the Square 
 he have see two man stand in the shadow a few yard up a mew or 
 small alley that be there , but have think nothing of they . it be 
 just that period of the year when there be hardly any of the darkness 
 of night ; but at this moment there be symptom of come rain , and 
 heavy drop begin to fall ; and there be big cloud come and go 
 before the young moon . Mr. Kennedy have say that he would get a cab , 
 but he have see none as he cross Oxford Street , and have put up his 
 umbrella as he make his way towards Park Street . phinea as he leave 
 he distinctly perceive the same two figure on the other side of 
 Oxford Street , and then turn into the shadow of a butcher 's porch , 
 he see they cross the street in the wake of Mr. Kennedy . it be now 
 rain in earnest , and the few passenger who be out be scud 
 away quickly , this way and that . 
 it hardly occur to Phineas to think that any danger be imminent 
 to Mr. Kennedy from the man , but it do occur to he that he might as 
 well take some notice of the matter . Phineas know that Mr. Kennedy 
 would make his way down Park Street , that be his usual route from 
 Portman Square towards his own home , and know also that he himself 
 could again come across Mr. Kennedy 's track by go down North 
 Audley Street to the corner of Grosvenor Square , and thence by Brook 
 Street into Park Street . without much thought , therefore , he go 
 out of his own course down to the corner of the Square , hurry his 
 step till he be run , and then run along Brook Street , think 
 as he go of some special word that he might say to Mr. Kennedy as 
 an excuse , should he again come across his late companion . he reach 
 the corner of Park Street before that gentleman could have be there 
 unless he also have run ; but just in time to see he as he be come 
 on , - and also to see in the dark glimmering of the slight uncertain 
 moonlight that the two man be behind he . he retreat a step 
 backwards in the corner , resolve that when Mr. Kennedy come up , 
 they two would go on together ; for now it be clear that Mr. Kennedy 
 be follow . but Mr. Kennedy do not reach the corner . when he be 
 within two door of it , one of the man have follow he up quickly , 
 and have throw something round his throat from behind he . Phineas 
 understand well now that his friend be in the act of be 
 garrotte , and that his instant assistance be need . he rush 
 forward , and as the second ruffian have be close upon the footstep 
 of the first , there be almost instantaneously a concourse of the 
 four man . but there be no fight . the man who have already nearly 
 succeed in put Mr. Kennedy on to his back , make no attempt to 
 seize his prey when he find that so unwelcome an addition have join 
 the party , but instantly turn to fly . his companion be turn 
 also , but Phineas be too quick for he , and have seize on to his 
 collar , hold to he with all his power . " dash it all , " say the man , 
 " do not   yer see as how I be a - hurrying up to help the gen'leman 
 myself ? " Phineas , however , have not   see this , and hold on gallantly , 
 and in a couple of minute the first ruffian be back again upon the 
 spot in the custody of a policeman . " you have   do it uncommon neat , 
 sir , " say the policeman , compliment Phineas upon his performance . 
 " if the gen'leman be not   none the bad for it , it will have be a very 
 pretty evening 's amusement . " Mr. Kennedy be now lean against the 
 railing , and hitherto have be unable to declare whether he be 
 really injure or not , and it be not till a second policeman come up 
 that the hero of the night be at liberty to attend closely to his 
 friend . 
 Mr. Kennedy , when he be able to speak , declare that for a minute 
 or two he have think that his neck have be break ; and he be not 
 quite convinced till he find himself in his own house , that nothing 
 more serious have really happen to he than certain bruise round 
 his throat . the policeman be for a while anxious that at any 
 rate Phineas should go with he to the police - office ; but at last 
 consent to take the address of the two gentleman . when he 
 find that Mr. Kennedy be a member of Parliament , and that he be 
 designate as Right Honourable , his respect for the garrotter become 
 more great , and he begin to feel that the night be indeed a night 
 of great importance . he express unbounded admiration at Mr. Finn 's 
 success in his own line , and make repeat promise that the man 
 should be forthcoming on the morrow . could a cab be get ? of course a 
 cab could be get . a cab be get , and within a quarter of an hour of 
 the making of the attack , the two member of Parliament be on their 
 way to Grosvenor Place . 
 there be hardly a word speak in the cab , for Mr. Kennedy be in 
 pain . when , however , they reach the door in Grosvenor Place , 
 Phineas want to go , and leave his friend with the servant , but 
 this the Cabinet Minister would not allow . " of course you must see 
 my wife , " he say . so they go up - stair into the drawing - room , 
 and then upon the stair , by the light of the house , Phineas could 
 perceive that his companion 's face be bruise and black with dirt , 
 and that his cravat be go . 
 " I have be garrotte , " say the Cabinet Minister to his wife . 
 " what ? " 
 " simply that ; - or should have be , if he have not be there . how he 
 come there , God only know . " 
 the wife 's anxiety , and then her gratitude , need hardly be 
 describe , - nor the astonishment of the husband , which by no mean 
 decrease on reflection , at the opportune re - appearance in the nick 
 of time of the man whom three minute before the attack he have leave 
 in the act of go in the opposite direction . 
 " I have see the man , and think it well to run round by the corner 
 of Grosvenor Square , " say Phineas . 
 " may God bless you , " say Lady Laura . 
 " amen , " say the Cabinet Minister . 
 " I think he be bear to be my friend , " say Lady Laura . 
 the Cabinet Minister say nothing more that night . he be never give 
 to much talking , and the little accident which have just occur to 
 he do not tend to make word easy to he . but he press our hero 's 
 hand , and Lady Laura say that of course Phineas would come to they 
 on the morrow . Phineas remark that his first business must be to 
 go to the police - office , but he promise that he would come down to 
 Grosvenor Place immediately afterwards . then Lady Laura also press 
 his hand , and look - ; she look , I think , as though she think 
 that Phineas would only have do right have he repeat the offence 
 which he have commit under the waterfall of Loughlinter . 
 " garrotte ! " say Lord Chiltern , when Phineas tell he the story 
 before they go to bed that night . he have be smoke , sip 
 brandy - and - water , and wait for Finn 's return . " Robert Kennedy 
 garrotte ! " 
 " the fellow be in the act of do it . " 
 " and you stop he ? " 
 " yes ; - I get there just in time . be not   it lucky ? " 
 " you ought to be garrotte yourself . I should have lend the man a 
 hand have I be there . " 
 " how can you say anything so horrible ? but you be drink too much , 
 old fellow , and I shall lock the bottle up . " 
 " if there be no one in London drink more than I do , the wine 
 merchant would have a bad time of it . and so the new Cabinet 
 Minister have be garrotte in the street . of course I be sorry for 
 poor Laura 's sake . " 
 " luckily he be not much the bad for it ; - only a little bruised . " 
 " I wonder whether it be on the card he should be improve by 
 it ; - bad , except in the way of be strangle , he could not be . 
 however , as he be my brother - in - law , I be oblige to you for rescue 
 he . come , I will go to bed . I must say , if he be to be garrotte I 
 should like to have be there to see it . " that be the manner in 
 which Lord Chiltern receive the tiding of the terrible accident 
 which have occur to his near relative . 
 CHAPTER XXXI 
 Finn for Loughton 
 by three o'clock in the day after the little accident which be tell 
 in the last chapter , all the world know that Mr. Kennedy , the new 
 Cabinet Minister , have be garrotte , or half garrotte , and that 
 that child of fortune , Phineas Finn , have drop upon the scene out 
 of heaven at the exact moment of time , have take the two garrotter 
 prisoner , and save the Cabinet Minister 's neck and valuable , - if 
 not his life . " Bedad , " say Laurence Fitzgibbon , when he come to hear 
 this , " that fellow'll marry an heiress , and be Secretary for Oireland 
 yet . " a good deal be say about it to Phineas at the club , but a 
 word or two that be say to he by Violet Effingham be worth all 
 the rest . " why , what a Paladin you be ! but you succour man in 
 distress instead of maiden . " " that be my bad luck , " say Phineas . 
 " the other will come no doubt in time , " Violet reply ; " and then 
 you will get your reward . " he know that such word from a girl mean 
 nothing , - especially from such a girl as Violet Effingham ; but 
 nevertheless they be very pleasant to he . 
 " of course you will come to we at Loughlinter when Parliament be up ? " 
 Lady Laura say the same day . 
 " I do not   know really . you see I must go over to Ireland about my 
 re - election . " 
 " what have that to do with it ? you be only make out excuse . we 
 go down on the first of July , and the english election will not   begin 
 till the middle of the month . it will be August before the man of 
 Loughshane be ready for you . " 
 " to tell you the truth , Lady Laura , " say Phineas , " I doubt whether 
 the man of Loughshane , - or rather the man of Loughshane , will have 
 anything more to say to I . " 
 " what man do you mean ? " 
 " Lord Tulla . he be in a passion with his brother before , and I get 
 the advantage of it . since that he have pay his brother 's debt for 
 the fifteenth time , and of course be ready to fight any battle for 
 the forgive prodigal . thing be not as they be , and my father 
 tell I that he think I shall be beat . " 
 " that be bad news . " 
 " it be what I have a right to expect . " 
 every word of information that have come to Phineas about Loughshane 
 since Mr. Mildmay have decide upon a dissolution , have go towards 
 make he feel at first that there be a great doubt as to his 
 re - election , and at last that there be almost a certainty against 
 he . and as these tiding reach he they make he very unhappy . 
 since he have be in Parliament he have very frequently regret 
 that he have leave the shade of the Inns of Court for the glare of 
 Westminster ; and he have more than once make up his mind that he would 
 desert the glare and return to the shade . but now , when the moment 
 come in which such desertion seem to be compulsory on he , when 
 there would be no long a choice , the seat in Parliament be dearer 
 to he than ever . if he have go of his own free will , - so he tell 
 himself , - there would have be something of nobility in such going . 
 Mr. Low would have respect he , and even Mrs. Low might have take 
 he back to the friendship of her severe bosom . but he would go back 
 now as a cur with his tail between his leg , - kick out , as it be , 
 from Parliament . return to Lincoln 's inn soil with failure , 
 have accomplish nothing , have break down on the only occasion 
 on which he have dare to show himself on his leg , not have open 
 a single useful book during the two year in which he have sit in 
 Parliament , burden with Laurence Fitzgibbon 's debt , and not quite 
 free from debt of his own , how could he start himself in any way by 
 which he might even hope to win success ? he must , he tell himself , 
 give up all thought of practise in London and betake himself to 
 Dublin . he could not dare to face his friend in London as a young 
 briefless barrister . 
 on this evening , the evening subsequent to that on which Mr. Kennedy 
 have be attack , the House be sit in Committee of Ways and 
 Means , and there come on a discussion as to a certain vote for the 
 army . it have be know that there would be such discussion ; and Mr. 
 Monk have hear from Phineas a word or two now and again about the 
 potted pea , have recommend he to be ready with a few remark if he 
 wish to support the Government in the matter of that vote . Phineas 
 do so wish , have learn quite enough in the Committee Room 
 up - stair to make he believe that a large importation of the 
 potted pea from Holstein would not be for the advantage of the 
 army or navy , - or for that of the country at large . Mr. Monk have 
 make his suggestion without the slight allusion to the former 
 failure , - just as though Phineas be a practised speaker accustom 
 to be on his leg three or four time a week . " if I find a chance , I 
 will , " say Phineas , take the advice just as it be give . 
 soon after prayer , a word be say in the House as to the 
 ill - fortune which have befall the new Cabinet Minister . Mr. Daubeny 
 have ask Mr. Mildmay whether violent hand have not be lay in the 
 dead of night on the sacred throat , - the throat that should have be 
 sacred , - of the new Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster ; and have 
 express regret that the Ministry , - which be , he fear , in other 
 respect somewhat infirm , - should now have be far weaken by 
 this injury to that new bulwark with which it have endeavour to 
 support itself . the Prime Minister , answer his old rival in the 
 same strain , say that the calamity might have be very severe , 
 both to the country and to the Cabinet ; but that fortunately for the 
 community at large , a gallant young member of that House , - and he be 
 proud to say a supporter of the Government , - have appear upon the 
 spot at the nick of time ; - " as a god out of a machine , " say Mr. 
 Daubeny , interrupt he ; - " by no mean as a god out of a machine , " 
 continue Mr. Mildmay , " but as a real help in a very real trouble , 
 and succeed not only in save my right honourable friend , the 
 Chancellor of the Duchy , but in arrest the two malefactor who 
 attempt to rob he in the street . " then there be a cry of " name ; " 
 and Mr. Mildmay of course name the member for Loughshane . it so 
 happen that Phineas be not in the House , but he hear it all when 
 he come down to attend the Committee of Ways and Means . 
 then come on the discussion about provision in the army , the subject 
 be moot by one of Mr. Turnbull 's close ally . the gentleman 
 on the other side of the House who have move for the Potted Peas 
 Committee , be silent on the occasion , have feel that the result 
 of that committee have not be exactly what he have expect . the 
 evidence respect such of the Holstein pot pea as have be use 
 in this country be not very favourable to they . but , nevertheless , 
 the rebound from that committee , - the very fact that such a committee 
 have be make to sit , - give ground for a hostile attack . to attack 
 be so easy , when a complete refutation barely suffice to save the 
 Minister attack , - do not suffice to save he from future dim 
 memory of something have be wrong , - and bring down no disgrace 
 whatsoever on the promoter of the false charge . the promoter of the 
 false charge simply express his gratification at find that he 
 have be mislead by erroneous information . it be not customary for he 
 to express gratification at the fact , that out of all the mud which 
 he have throw , some will probably stick ! Phineas , when the time come , 
 do get on his leg , and speak perhaps two or three dozen word . the 
 doing so seem to come to he quite naturally . he have think very 
 little about it beforehand , - have resolve not to think of it . and 
 indeed the occasion be one of no great importance . the Speaker be 
 not in the chair , and the House be thin , and he intend to make no 
 speech , - merely to say something which he have to say . till he have 
 finish he hardly remember that he be do that , in attempt 
 to do which he have before fail so egregiously . it be not till he 
 sit down that he begin to ask himself whether the scene be swim 
 before his eye as it have do on former occasion ; as it have do 
 even when he have so much as thought of make a speech . now he be 
 astonish at the easiness of the thing , and as he leave the House 
 tell himself that he have overcome the difficulty just when the 
 victory could be of no avail to he . have he be more eager , more 
 constant in his purpose , he might at any rate have show the world 
 that he be fit for the place which he have presume to take before 
 he be cast out of it . 
 on the next morning he receive a letter from his father . Dr. Finn 
 have see Lord Tulla , have be send for to relieve his lordship in 
 a fit of the gout , and have be inform by the Earl that he mean to 
 fight the borough to the last man ; - have he say to the last shilling 
 he would have speak with perhaps more accuracy . " you see , doctor , 
 your son have have it for two year , as you may say for nothing , and I 
 think he ought to give way . he can not   expect that he be to go on there 
 as though it be his own . " and then his lordship , upon whom this 
 touch of the gout have come somewhat sharply , express himself with 
 considerable animation . the old doctor behave with much spirit . " I 
 tell the Earl , " he say , " that I could not undertake to say what you 
 might do ; but that as you have come forward at first with my sanction , 
 I could not withdraw it now . he ask I if I should support you with 
 money ; I say that I should to a moderate extent . ' by G - - , ' say 
 the Earl , ' a moderate extent will go a very little way , I can tell 
 you . ' since that he have have Duggin with he ; so , I suppose , I shall 
 not see he any more . you can do as you please now ; but , from what I 
 hear , I fear you will have no chance . " then with much bitterness of 
 spirit Phineas resolve that he would not interfere with Lord Tulla 
 at Loughshane . he would go at once to the Reform Club and explain his 
 reason to Barrington Erle and other there who would be interested . 
 but he first go to Grosvenor Place . here he be show up into Mr. 
 Kennedy 's room . Mr. Kennedy be up and seat in an arm - chair by an 
 open window look over into the Queen 's garden ; but he be in his 
 dressing - gown , and be to be regard as an invalid . and indeed as he 
 could not turn his neck , or think that he could not do so , he be 
 not very fit to go out about his work . let we hope that the affair 
 of the Duchy of Lancaster do not suffer materially by his absence . 
 we may take it for grant that with a man so sedulous as to all his 
 duty there be no arrear of work when the accident take place . he 
 put out his hand to Phineas , and say some word in a whisper , - some 
 word or two among which Phineas catch the sound of " potted 
 pea , " - and then continue to look out of the window . there be man 
 who be utterly prostrate by any bodily ailment , and it seem that 
 Mr. Kennedy be one of they . Phineas , who be full of his own bad 
 news , have intend to tell his sad story at once . but he perceive 
 that the neck of the Chancellor of the Duchy be too stiff to allow 
 of his take any interest in external matter , and so he refrain . 
 " what do the doctor say about it ? " say Phineas , perceive that 
 just for the present there could be only one possible subject for 
 remark . Mr. Kennedy be begin to describe in a long whisper what 
 the doctor do think about it , when Lady Laura come into the room . 
 of course they begin at first to talk about Mr. Kennedy . it would not 
 have be kind to he not to have do so . and Lady Laura make much 
 of the injury , as it behove a wife to do in such circumstance for 
 the sake both of the sufferer and of the hero . she declare she 
 conviction that have Phineas be a moment later her husband 's neck 
 would have be irredeemably break . 
 " I do not   think they ever do kill the people , " say Phineas . " at any 
 rate they do not   mean to do so . " 
 " I think they do , " say Lady Laura . 
 " I fancy not , " say Phineas , eager in the cause of truth . 
 " I think this man be very clumsy , " whisper Mr. Kennedy . 
 " perhaps he be a beginner , " say Phineas , " and that may make a 
 difference . if so , I be afraid we have interfere with his 
 education . " 
 then , by degree , the conversation get away to other thing , and Lady 
 Laura ask he after Loughshane . " I have   make up my mind to give it 
 up , " say he , smile as he speak . 
 " I be afraid there be but a bad chance , " say Lady Laura , smile 
 also . 
 " my father have behave so well ! " say Phineas . " he have write to say 
 he will find the money , if I determine to contest the borough . I mean 
 to write to he by to - night 's post to decline the offer . I have no 
 right to spend the money , and I should not   succeed if I do spend it . 
 of course it make I a little down in the mouth . " and then he smile 
 again . 
 " I have   get a plan of my own , " say Lady Laura . 
 " what plan ? " 
 " or rather it be not   mine , but papa 's . old Mr. Standish be go to 
 give up Loughton , and papa want you to come and try your luck 
 there . " 
 " Lady Laura ! " 
 " it be not   quite a certainty , you know , but I suppose it be as near a 
 certainty as anything leave . " and this come from a strong Radical 
 Reformer ! 
 " Lady Laura , I could not   accept such a favour from your father . " then 
 Mr. Kennedy nod his head very slightly and whisper , " yes , yes . " 
 " I could not   think of it , " say Phineas Finn . " I have no right to such 
 a favour . " 
 " that be a matter entirely for papa 's consideration , " say Lady 
 Laura , with an affectation of solemnity in her voice . " I think it have 
 always be feel that any politician may accept such an offer as that 
 when it be make to he , but that no politician should ask for it . my 
 father feel that he have to do the good he can with his influence in 
 the borough , and therefore he come to you . " 
 " it be not   that , " say Phineas , somewhat rudely . 
 " of course private feeling have their weight , " say Lady Laura . " it 
 be not probable that papa would have go to a perfect stranger . and 
 perhaps , Mr. Finn , I may own that Mr. Kennedy and I would both be 
 very sorry that you should not be in the House , and that that feel 
 on our part have have some weight with my father . " 
 " of course you will stand ? " whisper Mr. Kennedy , still look 
 straight out of the window , as though the slight attempt to turn 
 his neck would be fraught with danger to himself and the Duchy . 
 " Papa have desire I to ask you to call upon he , " say Lady Laura . 
 " I do not   suppose there be very much to be say , as each of you know 
 so well the other 's way of thinking . but you have well see he 
 to - day or to - morrow . " 
 of course Phineas be persuade before he leave Mr. Kennedy 's room . 
 indeed , when he come to think of it , there appear to he to be no 
 valid reason why he should not sit for Loughton . the favour be of 
 a kind that have prevail from time out of mind in England , between 
 the most respectable of the great land magnate , and young rise 
 liberal politician . Burke , Fox , and canning have all be place in 
 Parliament by similar influence . of course he , Phineas Finn , desire 
 earnestly , - long in his very heart of heart , - to extinguish all 
 such parliamentary influence , to root out for ever the last vestige 
 of close borough nomination ; but while the thing remain it be 
 well that the thing should contribute to the liberal than to the 
 conservative strength of the House , - and if to the liberal , how be 
 this to be achieve but by the acceptance of such influence by some 
 liberal candidate ? and if it be right that it should be accept 
 by any liberal candidate , - then , why not by he ? the logic of this 
 argument seem to he to be perfect . he feel something like a 
 sting of reproach as he tell himself that in truth this great offer 
 be make to he , not on account of the excellence of his politic , 
 but because he have be instrumental in save Lord Brentford 's 
 son - in - law from the violence of garrotter . but he crush these 
 qualm of conscience as be over - scrupulous , and , as he tell 
 himself , not practical . you must take the world as you find it , 
 with a struggle to be something more honest than those around you . 
 Phineas , as he preach to himself this sermon , declare to himself 
 that they who attempt more than this fly too high in the cloud 
 to be of service to man and woman upon earth . 
 as he do not see Lord Brentford that day he postpone write to his 
 father for twenty - four hour . on the follow morning he find the 
 Earl at home in Portman Square , have first discuss the matter 
 fully with Lord Chiltern . " do not scruple about I , " say Lord 
 Chiltern ; " you be quite welcome to the borough for I . " 
 " but if I do not stand , would you do so ? there be so many reason 
 which ought to induce you to accept a seat in Parliament ! " 
 " whether that be true or not , Phineas , I shall not accept my father 's 
 interest at Loughton , unless it be offer to I in a way in which 
 it never will be offer . you know I well enough to be sure that I 
 shall not change my mind . nor will he . and , therefore , you may go 
 down to Loughton with a pure conscience as far as I be concern . " 
 Phineas have his interview with the Earl , and in ten minute 
 everything be settle . on his way to Portman Square there have come 
 across his mind the idea of a grand effort of friendship . what if he 
 could persuade the father so to conduct himself towards his son , that 
 the son should consent to be a member for the borough ? and he do 
 say a word or two to this effect , set forth that Lord Chiltern 
 would condescend to become a legislator , if only his father would 
 condescend to acknowledge his son 's fitness for such work without 
 any comment on the son 's past life . but the Earl simply waive the 
 subject away with his hand . he could be as obstinate as his son . Lady 
 Laura have be the Mercury between they on this subject , and Lady 
 Laura have fail . he would not now consent to employ another Mercury . 
 very little , - hardly a word indeed , - be say between the Earl and 
 Phineas about politic . Phineas be to be the saulsby candidate at 
 Loughton for the next election , and be to come to Saulsby with the 
 Kennedys from Loughlinter , - either with the Kennedys or somewhat in 
 advance of they . " I do not say that there will be no opposition , " 
 say the Earl , " but I expect none . " he be very courteous , - nay , 
 he be kind , feel doubtless that his family owe a great debt 
 of gratitude to the young man with whom he be converse ; but , 
 nevertheless , there be not absent on his part a touch of that high 
 condescension which , perhaps , might be think to become the Earl , 
 the Cabinet Minister , and the great borough patron . Phineas , who 
 be sensitive , feel this and winced . he have never quite like Lord 
 Brentford , and could not bring himself to do so now in spite of the 
 kindness which the Earl be show he . 
 but he be very happy when he sit down to write to his father 
 from the club . his father have tell he that the money should be 
 forthcoming for the election at Loughshane , if he resolve to stand , 
 but that the chance of success would be very slight , - indeed that , in 
 his opinion , there would be no chance of success . nevertheless , his 
 father have evidently believe , when write , that Phineas would not 
 abandon his seat without a useless and expensive contest . he now 
 thank his father with many expression of gratitude , - declare his 
 conviction that his father be right about Lord Tulla , and then , 
 in the most modest language that he could use , go on to say that 
 he have find another borough open to he in England . he be go 
 to stand for Loughton , with the assistance of Lord Brentford , and 
 think that the election would probably not cost he above a couple 
 of hundred pound at the outside . then he write a very pretty note 
 to Lord Tulla , thank he for his former kindness , and tell 
 the Irish Earl that it be not his intention to interfere with the 
 borough of Loughshane at the next election . 
 a few day after this Phineas be very much surprised at a visit 
 that be make to he at his lodging . Mr. Clarkson , after that 
 scene in the lobby of the House , call again in Great Marlborough 
 Street , - and be admit . " you have well let he sit in your 
 armchair for half an hour or so , " Fitzgibbon have say ; and Phineas 
 almost believe that it would be well . the man be a terrible 
 nuisance to he , and he be begin to think that he have well 
 undertake to pay the debt by degree . it be , he know , quite on the 
 card that Mr. Clarkson should have he arrest while at Saulsby . 
 since that scene in the lobby Mr. Clarkson have be with he twice , 
 and there have be a preliminary conversation as to real payment . 
 Mr. Clarkson want a hundred pound down , and another bill for two 
 hundred and twenty at three month ' date . " think of my time and 
 trouble in come here , " Mr. Clarkson have urge when Phineas have 
 object to these term . " think of my time and trouble , and do be 
 punctual , Mr. Finn . " Phineas have offer he ten pound a quarter , 
 the payment to be mark on the back of the bill , a tender which Mr. 
 Clarkson have not seem to regard as strong evidence of punctuality . 
 he have not be angry , but have simply express his intention of 
 call again , - give Phineas to understand that business would 
 probably take he to the west of Ireland in the autumn . if only 
 business might not take he down either to Loughlinter or to Saulsby ! 
 but the strange visitor who come to Phineas in the midst of these 
 trouble put an end to they all . 
 the strange visitor be Miss Aspasia Fitzgibbon . " you will be very much 
 surprised at my come to your chamber , no doubt , " she say , as she 
 sit down in the chair which Phineas place for she . phinea could 
 only say that he be very proud to be so highly honour , and that he 
 hop she be well . " pretty well , I thank you . I have just come about 
 a little business , Mr. Finn , and I hope you will excuse I . " 
 " I be quite sure that there be no need for excuse , " say Phineas . 
 " Laurence , when he hear about it , will say that I have   be an 
 impertinent old fool ; but I never care what Laurence say , either 
 this way or that . I have   be to that Mr. Clarkson , Mr. Finn , and I have 
 pay he the money . " 
 " no ! " say Phineas . 
 " but I have , Mr. Finn . I happen to hear what occur that night at 
 the door of the House of Commons . " 
 " who tell you , Miss Fitzgibbon ? " 
 " never mind who tell I . I hear it . I know before that you have be 
 foolish enough to help Laurence about money , and so I put two and two 
 together . it be not   the first time I have have to do with Mr. Clarkson . 
 so I send to he , and I have   buy the bill . there it be . " and Miss 
 Fitzgibbon produce the document which bear the name of Phineas Finn 
 across the front of it . 
 " and do you pay he two hundred and fifty pound for it ? " 
 " not quite . I have a very hard tussle , and get it at last for two 
 hundred and twenty pound . " 
 " and do you do it yourself ? " 
 " all myself . if I have employ a lawyer I should have have to pay 
 two hundred and forty pound and five pound for cost . and now , 
 Mr. Finn , I hope you will not   have any more money engagement with my 
 brother Laurence . " Phineas say that he think he might promise that 
 he would have no more . " because , if you do , I shall not   interfere . if 
 Laurence begin to find that he could get money out of I in that way , 
 there would be no end to it . Mr. Clarkson would very soon be spend 
 his spare time in my drawing - room . good - bye , Mr. Finn . if Laurence 
 say anything , just tell he that he would well come to I . " then 
 Phineas be leave look at the bill . it be certainly a great relief 
 to he , - that he should be thus secure from the domiciliary visit 
 of Mr. Clarkson ; a great relief to he to be assure that Mr. 
 Clarkson would not find he out down at Loughton ; but nevertheless , 
 he have to suffer a pang of shame as he feel that Miss Fitzgibbon have 
 become acquainted with his poverty and have find herself oblige to 
 satisfy his pecuniary liability . 
 CHAPTER XXXII 
 Lady Laura Kennedy 's Headache 
 Phineas go down to Loughlinter early in July , take Loughton in 
 his way . he stay there one night at the inn , and be introduce to 
 sundry influential inhabitant of the borough by Mr. Grating , the 
 ironmonger , who be know by those who know Loughton to be a very 
 strong supporter of the Earl 's interest . Mr. Grating and about half a 
 dozen other of the tradesman of the town come to the inn , and meet 
 Phineas in the parlour . he tell they he be a good sound liberal and 
 a supporter of Mr. Mildmay 's Government , of which their neighbour the 
 Earl be so conspicuous an ornament . this be almost all that be 
 say about the Earl out loud ; but each individual man of Loughton 
 then present take an opportunity during the meeting of whispering 
 into Mr. Finn 's ear a word or two to show that he also be admit 
 to the secret council of the borough , - that he too could see the 
 inside of the arrangement . " of course we must support the Earl , " one 
 say . " never mind what you hear about a Tory candidate , Mr. Finn , " 
 whisper a second ; " the Earl can do what he please here . " and it 
 seem to Phineas that it be think by they all to be rather a fine 
 thing to be thus hold in the hand by an english nobleman . Phineas 
 could not but reflect much upon this as he lie in his bed at the 
 Loughton inn . the great political question on which the political 
 world be engross up in London be the enfranchisement of 
 Englishmen , - of Englishmen down to the rank of artisan and 
 labourer ; - and yet when he find himself in contact with individual 
 Englishmen , with man even very much above the artisan and the 
 labourer , he find that they rather like be bind hand and foot , 
 and be keep as tool in the political pocket of a rich man . 
 every one of those Loughton tradesman be proud of his own personal 
 subjection to the Earl ! 
 from Loughton he go to Loughlinter , have promise to be back in 
 the borough for the election . Mr. Grating would propose he , and he 
 be to be second by Mr. Shortribs , the butcher and grazi . Mention 
 have be make of a conservative candidate , and Mr. Shortribs have 
 seem to think that a good stand - up fight upon english principle , 
 with a clear understanding , of course , that victory should prevail 
 on the liberal side , would be a good thing for the borough . but the 
 Earl 's man of business see Phineas on the morning of his departure , 
 and tell he not to regard Mr. Shortribs . " they would all like it , " say 
 the man of business ; " and I daresay they will have enough of it when 
 this Reform Bill be pass ; but at present no one will be fool enough 
 to come and spend his money here . we have they all in hand too well 
 for that , Mr. Finn ! " 
 he find the great house at Loughlinter nearly empty . Mr. Kennedy 's 
 mother be there , and Lord Brentford be there , and Lord Brentford 's 
 private secretary , and Mr. Kennedy 's private secretary . at present 
 that be the entire party . Lady Baldock be expect there , with 
 her daughter and Violet Effingham ; but , as well as Phineas could 
 learn , they would not be at Loughlinter until after he have leave it . 
 there have come up lately a rumour that there would be an autumn 
 session , - that the Houses would sit through October and a part of 
 November , in order that Mr. Mildmay might try the feeling of the new 
 Parliament . if this be to be so , Phineas have resolve that , in the 
 event of his election at Loughton , he would not return to Ireland 
 till after this autumn session should be over . he give an account to 
 the Earl , in the presence of the Earl 's son - in - law , of what have take 
 place at Loughton , and the Earl express himself as satisfied . it 
 be manifestly a great satisfaction to Lord Brentford that he should 
 still have a borough in his pocket , and the more so because there 
 be so very few nobleman leave who have such property belong to 
 they . he be very careful in his speech , never say in so many 
 word that the privilege of return a member be his own ; but his 
 meaning be not the less clear . 
 those be dreary day at Loughlinter . there be fish , - if Phineas 
 choose to fish ; and he be tell that he could shoot a deer if he be 
 minded to go out alone . but it seem as though it be the intention 
 of the host that his guest should spend their time profitably . Mr. 
 Kennedy himself be shut up with book and paper all the morning , 
 and always take up a book after dinner . the Earl also would read a 
 little , - and then would sleep a good deal . Old Mrs. Kennedy sleep 
 also , and Lady Laura look as though she would like to sleep if 
 it be not that her husband 's eye be upon she . as it be , she 
 administer tea , Mr. Kennedy not like the practice of have it 
 hand round by a servant when none be there but member of the 
 family circle , and she read novel . Phineas get hold of a stiff bit 
 of read for himself , and try to utilise his time . he take Alison 
 in hand , and work his way gallantly through a couple of volume . 
 but even he , more than once or twice , find himself on the very verge 
 of slumber . then he would wake up and try to think about thing . why 
 be he , Phineas Finn , an Irishman from Killaloe , live in that great 
 house of Loughlinter as though he be one of the family , strive to 
 kill the hour , and feel that he be in some way subject to the 
 dominion of his host ? would it not be well for he to get up and go 
 away ? in his heart of heart he do not like Mr. Kennedy , though he 
 believe he to be a good man . and of what service to he be it to 
 like Lady Laura , now that Lady Laura be a possession in the hand of 
 Mr. Kennedy ? then he would tell himself that he owe his position in 
 the world entirely to Lady Laura , and that he be ungrateful to feel 
 himself ever dull in her society . and , moreover , there be something 
 to be do in the world beyond make love and be merry . Mr. 
 Kennedy could occupy himself with a blue book for hour together 
 without wince . so Phineas go to work again with his Alison , and 
 read away till he nod . 
 in those day he often wander up and down the Linter and across the 
 moor to the Linn , and so down to the lake . he would take a book with 
 he , and would seat himself down on spot which he love , and would 
 pretend to read ; - but I do not think that he get much advantage 
 from his book . he be think of his life , and try to calculate 
 whether the wonderful success which he have achieve would ever be of 
 permanent value to he . would he be near to earn his bread when 
 he should be member for Loughton than he have be when he be member 
 for Loughshane ? or be there before he any slight probability 
 that he would ever earn his bread ? and then he think of Violet 
 Effingham , and be angry with himself for remember at that moment 
 that Violet Effingham be the mistress of a large fortune . 
 once before when he be sit beside the Linter he have make up his 
 mind to declare his passion to Lady Laura ; - and he have do so on the 
 very spot . now , within a twelvemonth of that time , he make up his 
 mind on the same spot to declare his passion to Miss Effingham , and 
 he think his good mode of carry his suit would be to secure the 
 assistance of Lady Laura . Lady Laura , no doubt , have be very anxious 
 that her brother should marry Violet ; but Lord Chiltern , as Phineas 
 know , have ask for Violet 's hand twice in vain ; and , moreover , 
 Chiltern himself have declare to Phineas that he would never ask 
 for it again . Lady Laura , who be always reasonable , would surely 
 perceive that there be no hope of success for her brother . that 
 Chiltern would quarrel with he , - would quarrel with he to the 
 knife , - he do not doubt ; but he feel that no fear of such a quarrel 
 as that should deter he . he love Violet Effingham , and he must 
 indeed be pusillanimous if , love she as he do , he be deter 
 from express his love from any fear of a suitor whom she do not 
 favour . he would not willingly be untrue to his friendship for Lady 
 Laura 's brother . have there be a chance for Lord Chiltern he would 
 have abstain from put himself forward . but what be the use 
 of his abstaining , when by do so he could in no wise benefit 
 his friend , - when the result of his do so would be that some 
 interloper would come in and carry off the prize ? he would explain 
 all this to Lady Laura , and , if the prize would be kind to he , he 
 would disregard the anger of Lord Chiltern , even though it might be 
 anger to the knife . 
 as he be think of all this Lady Laura stand before he where he 
 be sit at the top of the fall . at this moment he remember 
 well all the circumstance of the scene when he have be there with 
 she at his last visit to Loughlinter . how thing have change since 
 then ! then he have love Lady Laura with all his heart , and he have now 
 already bring himself to regard she as a discreet matron whom to 
 love would be almost as unreasonable as though he be to entertain 
 a passion for the Lord Chancellor . the reader will understand how 
 thorough have be the cure effect by Lady Laura 's marriage and the 
 interval of a few month , when the swain be already prepared to make 
 this lady the depositary of his confidence in another matter of love . 
 " you be often here , I suppose ? " say Lady Laura , look down upon 
 he as he sit upon the rock . 
 " well ; - yes ; not very often ; I come here sometimes because the view 
 down upon the lake be so fine . " 
 " it be the prettiest spot about the place . I hardly ever get here 
 now . indeed this be only the second time that I have be up since 
 we have be at home , and then I come to bring papa here . " there be 
 a little wooden seat near to the rock upon which Phineas have be 
 lie , and upon this Lady Laura sit down . Phineas , with his eye 
 turn upon the lake , be consider how he might introduce the 
 subject of his love for Violet Effingham ; but he do not find the 
 matter very easy . he have just resolve to begin by say that Violet 
 would certainly never accept Lord Chiltern , when Lady Laura speak a 
 word or two which stop he altogether . " how well I remember , " she 
 say , " the day when you and I be here last autumn ! " 
 " so do I. you tell I then that you be go to marry Mr. Kennedy . 
 how much have happen since then ! " 
 " much indeed ! enough for a whole lifetime . and yet how slow the time 
 have go ! " 
 " I do not think it have be slow with I , " say Phineas . 
 " no ; you have be active . you have have your hand full of work . I 
 be begin to think that it be a great curse to have be bear a 
 woman . " 
 " and yet I have hear you say that a woman may do as much as a man . " 
 " that be before I have learn my lesson properly . I know well than 
 that now . oh dear ! I have no doubt it be all for the good as it be , 
 but I have a kind of wish that I might be allow to go out and milk 
 the cow . " 
 " and may you not milk the cow if you wish it , Lady Laura ? " 
 " by no mean ; - not only not milk they , but hardly look at they . at 
 any rate , I must not talk about they . " phinea of course understand 
 that she be complain of her husband , and hardly know how to reply 
 to she . he have be sharp enough to perceive already that Mr. Kennedy 
 be an autocrat in his own house , and he know Lady Laura well enough 
 to be sure that such masterdom would be very irksome to she . but he 
 have not imagine that she would complain to he . " it be so different 
 at Saulsby , " Lady Laura continue . " everything there seem to be my 
 own . " 
 " and everything here be your own . " 
 " yes , - accord to the prayer - book . and everything in truth be my 
 own , - as all the dainty at the banquet belong to Sancho the 
 Governor . " 
 " you mean , " say he , - and then he hesitate ; " you mean that Mr. 
 Kennedy stand over you , guard you for your own welfare , as the 
 doctor stand over Sancho and guard he ? " 
 there be a pause before she answer , - a long pause , during which he 
 be look away over the lake , and think how he might introduce 
 the subject of his love . but long as be the pause , he have not begin 
 when Lady Laura be again speak . " the truth be , my friend , " she 
 say , " that I have make a mistake . " 
 " a mistake ? " 
 " yes , Phineas , a mistake . I have blunder as fool blunder , think 
 that I be clever enough to pick my footstep aright without ask 
 counsel from any one . I have blunder and stumble and fall , and 
 now I be so bruised that I be not able to stand upon my foot . " the 
 word that strike he most in all this be his own christian name . she 
 have never call he Phineas before . he be aware that the circle 
 of his acquaintance have fall into a way of miscall he by his 
 christian name , as one observe to be do now and again in reference 
 to some special young man . Most of the man whom he call his friend 
 call he Phineas . even the Earl have do so more than once on 
 occasion in which the greatness of his position have drop for a 
 moment out of his mind . Mrs. Low have call he Phineas when she 
 regard he as her husband 's most cherished pupil ; and Mrs. Bunce 
 have call he Mr. Phineas . he have always be Phineas to everybody 
 at Killaloe . but still he be quite sure that Lady Laura have never so 
 call he before . nor would she have do so now in her husband 's 
 presence . he be sure of that also . 
 " you mean that you be unhappy ? " he say , still look away from she 
 towards the lake . 
 " yes , I do mean that . though I do not know why I should come and tell 
 you so , - except that I be still blunder and stumble , and have 
 fall into a way of hurt myself at every step . " 
 " you can tell no one who be more anxious for your happiness , " say 
 Phineas . 
 " that be a very pretty speech , but what would you do for my 
 happiness ? indeed , what be it possible that you should do ? I mean it 
 as no rebuke when I say that my happiness or unhappiness be a matter 
 as to which you will soon become perfectly indifferent . " 
 " why should you say so , Lady Laura ? " 
 " because it be natural that it should be so . you and Mr. Kennedy 
 might have be friend . not that you will be , because you be unlike 
 each other in all your way . but it might have be so . " 
 " and be not you and I to be friend ? " he ask . 
 " no . in a very few month you will not think of tell I what be 
 your desire or what your sorrow ; - and as for I , it will be out 
 of the question that I should tell mine to you . how can you be my 
 friend ? " 
 " if you be not quite sure of my friendship , Lady Laura , you would 
 not speak to I as you be speak now . " still he do not look at 
 she , but lie with his face support on his hand , and his eye 
 turn away upon the lake . but she , where she be sit , could see 
 he , and be aid by her sight in make comparison in her mind 
 between the two man who have be her lover , - between he whom she 
 have take and he whom she have leave . there be something in the hard , 
 dry , unsympathising , unchanging virtue of her husband which almost 
 revolt she . he have not a fault , but she have try he at every 
 point and have be able to strike no spark of fire from he . even by 
 disobey she could produce no heat , - only an access of firmness . 
 how would it have be with she have she throw all idea of fortune 
 to the wind , and link she lot to that of the young Phoebus who 
 be lie at her foot ? if she have ever love any one she have love 
 he . and she have not throw away her love for money . so she swear to 
 herself over and over again , try to console herself in her cold 
 unhappiness . she have marry a rich man in order that she might be 
 able to do something in the world ; - and now that she be this rich 
 man 's wife she find that she could do nothing . the rich man think 
 it to be quite enough for she to sit at home and look after his 
 welfare . in the meantime young Phoebus , - her Phoebus as he have 
 be once , - be think altogether of some one else . 
 " Phineas , " she say , slowly , " I have in you such perfect confidence 
 that I will tell you the truth ; - as one man may tell it to another . I 
 wish you would go from here . " 
 " what , at once ? " 
 " not to - day , or to - morrow . stay here now till the election ; but do 
 not return . he will ask you to come , and press you hard , and will be 
 hurt ; - for , strange to say , with all his coldness , he really like 
 you . he have a pleasure in see you here . but he must not have that 
 pleasure at the expense of trouble to I . " 
 " and why be it a trouble to you ? " he ask . man be such fool ; - so 
 awkward , so unready , with their wit ever behind the occasion by a 
 dozen second or so ! as soon as the word be utter , he know that 
 they should not have be speak . 
 " because I be a fool , " she say . " why else ? be not that enough for 
 you ? " 
 " Laura - , " he say . 
 " no , - no ; I will have none of that . I be a fool , but not such a fool 
 as to suppose that any cure be to be find there . " 
 " only say what I can do for you , though it be with my entire life , 
 and I will do it . " 
 " you can do nothing , - except to keep away from I . " 
 " be you earnest in tell I that ? " now at last he have turn 
 himself round and be look at she , and as he look he see the hat 
 of a man appear up the path , and immediately afterwards the face . 
 it be the hat and face of the laird of Loughlinter . " here be Mr. 
 Kennedy , " say Phineas , in a tone of voice not devoid of dismay and 
 trouble . 
 " so I perceive , " say Lady Laura . but there be no dismay or trouble 
 in the tone of her voice . 
 in the countenance of Mr. Kennedy , as he approach close , there be 
 not much to be read , - only , perhaps , some slight addition of gloom , 
 or rather , perhaps , of that frigid propriety of moral demeanour for 
 which he have always be conspicuous , which have grow upon he at his 
 marriage , and which have be greatly increase by the double action 
 of be make a Cabinet Minister and be garrotte . " I be glad that 
 your headache be well , " he say to his wife , who have rise from 
 her seat to meet he . Phineas also have rise , and be now look 
 somewhat sheepish where he stand . 
 " I come out because it be bad , " she say . " it irritate I so that 
 I could not stand the house any long . " 
 " I will send to Callender for Dr. Macnuthrie . " 
 " pray do nothing of the kind , Robert . I do not want Dr. Macnuthrie at 
 all . " 
 " where there be illness , medical advice be always expedient . " 
 " I be not ill . a headache be not illness . " 
 " I have think it be , " say Mr. Kennedy , very drily . 
 " at any rate , I would rather not have Dr. Macnuthrie . " 
 " I be sure it can not do you any good to climb up here in the heat of 
 the sun . have you be here long , Finn ? " 
 " all the morning ; - here , or hereabouts . I clamber up from the lake 
 and have a book in my pocket . " 
 " and you happen to come across he by accident ? " Mr. Kennedy 
 ask . there be something so simple in the question that its very 
 simplicity prove that there be no suspicion . 
 " yes ; - by chance , " say Lady Laura . " but every one at Loughlinter 
 always come up here . if any one ever be miss whom I want to 
 find , this be where I should look . " 
 " I be go on towards Linter forest to meet Blane , " say Mr. 
 Kennedy . Blane be the gamekeeper . " if you do not   mind the trouble , 
 Finn , I wish you would take Lady Laura down to the house . do not let she 
 stay out in the heat . I will take care that somebody go over to 
 callender for Dr. Macnuthrie . " then Mr. Kennedy go on , and Phineas 
 be leave with the charge of take Lady Laura back to the house . when 
 Mr. Kennedy 's hat have first appear come up the walk , Phineas 
 have be ready to proclaim himself prepare for any devotion in the 
 service of Lady Laura . indeed , he have begin to reply with criminal 
 tenderness to the indiscreet avowal which Lady Laura have make to 
 he . but he feel now , after what have just occur in the husband 's 
 presence , that any show of tenderness , - of criminal tenderness , - be 
 impossible . the absence of all suspicion on the part of Mr. Kennedy 
 have make Phineas feel that he be bind by all social law to refrain 
 from such tenderness . Lady Laura begin to descend the path before 
 he without a word ; - and go on , and on , as though she would have 
 reach the house without speak , have he not address she . " do 
 your head still pain you ? " he ask . 
 " of course it do . " 
 " I suppose he be right in say that you should not be out in the 
 heat . " 
 " I do not know . it be not worth while to think about that . he send 
 I in , and so of course I must go . and he tell you to take I , and 
 so of course you must take I . " 
 " would you wish that I should let you go alone ? " 
 " yes , I would . only he will be sure to find it out ; and you must not 
 tell he that you leave I at my request . " 
 " do you think that I be afraid of he ? " say Phineas . 
 " yes ; - I think you be . I know that I be , and that papa be ; and that 
 his mother hardly dare to call her soul her own . I do not know why 
 you should escape . " 
 " Mr. Kennedy be nothing to I . " 
 " he be something to I , and so I suppose I have well go on . and 
 now I shall have that horrid man from the little town paw I 
 and cover everything with snuff , and bid I take Scotch 
 physic , - which seem to increase in quantity and nastiness as dos 
 in England decrease . and he will stand over I to see that I take 
 it . " 
 " what ; - the doctor from Callender ? " 
 " no ; - but Mr. Kennedy will . if he advise I to have a hole in my 
 glove mend , he would ask I before he go to bed whether it be 
 do . he never forget anything in his life , and be never unmindful 
 of anything . that I think will do , Mr. Finn . you have bring I out 
 from the tree , and that may be take as bring I home . we shall 
 hardly get scold if we part here . remember what I tell you up 
 above . and remember also that it be in your power to do nothing else 
 for I . good - bye . " so he turn away towards the lake , and let Lady 
 Laura go across the wide lawn to the house by herself . 
 he have fail altogether in his intention of tell his friend of 
 his love for Violet , and have come to perceive that he could not for 
 the present carry out that intention . after what have pass it would 
 be impossible for he to go to Lady Laura with a passionate tale of 
 his longing for Violet Effingham . if he be even to speak to she of 
 love at all , it must be quite of another love than that . but he never 
 would speak to she of love ; nor , - as he feel quite sure , - would she 
 allow he to do so . but what astound he most as he think of the 
 interview which have just pass , be the fact that the Lady Laura 
 whom he have know , - whom he have think he have know , - should have 
 become so subject to such a man as Mr. Kennedy , a man whom he have 
 despise as be weak , irresolute , and without a purpose ! for the 
 day or two that he remain at Loughlinter , he watch the family 
 closely , and become aware that Lady Laura have be right when she 
 declare that her father be afraid of Mr. Kennedy . 
 " I shall follow you almost immediately , " say the Earl confidentially 
 to Phineas , when the candidate for the borough take his departure 
 from Loughlinter . " I do not   like to be there just when the election be 
 go on , but I will be at Saulsby to receive you the day afterwards . " 
 Phineas take his leave from Mr. Kennedy , with a warm expression of 
 friendship on the part of his host , and from Lady Laura with a mere 
 touch of the hand . he try to say a word ; but she be sullen , or , if 
 not , she put on some mood like to sullenness , and say never a word 
 to he . 
 on the day after the departure of Phineas Finn for Loughton Lady 
 Laura Kennedy still have a headache . she have complain of a headache 
 ever since she have be at Loughlinter , and Dr. Macnuthrie have be 
 over more than once . " I wonder what it be that ail you , " say she 
 husband , stand over she in her own sitting - room up - stair . it be 
 a pretty room , look away to the mountain , with just a glimpse of 
 the lake to be catch from the window , and it have be prepare for 
 she with all the skill and taste of an accomplished upholsterer . she 
 have select the room for herself soon after her engagement , and have 
 thank her future husband with her sweetest smile for give she 
 the choice . she have thank he and tell he that she always mean 
 to be happy , - so happy in that room ! he be a man not much give to 
 romance , but he think of this promise as he stand over she and 
 ask after her health . as far as he could see she have never be 
 even comfortable since she have be at Loughlinter . a shadow of the 
 truth come across his mind . perhaps his wife be bore . if so , what 
 be to be the future of his life and of her ? he go up to London 
 every year , and to Parliament , as a duty ; and then , during some 
 period of the recess , would have his house full of guest , - as 
 another duty . but his happiness be to consist in such hour as these 
 which seem to inflict upon his wife the penalty of a continual 
 headache . a shadow of the truth come upon he . what if his wife do 
 not like live quietly at home as the mistress of her husband 's 
 house ? what if a headache be always to be the result of a simple 
 performance of domestic duty ? 
 More than a shadow of truth have come upon Lady Laura herself . 
 the dark cloud create by the entire truth be upon she , make 
 everything black and wretche around she . she have ask herself a 
 question or two , and have discover that she have no love for her 
 husband , that the kind of life which he intend to exact from she 
 be insupportable to she , and that she have blunder and fall in 
 her entrance upon life . she perceive that her father have already 
 become weary of Mr. Kennedy , and that , lonely and sad as he would 
 be at Saulsby by himself , it be his intention to repudiate the 
 idea of make a home at Loughlinter . yes ; - she would be desert by 
 everyone , except of course by her husband ; and then - then she would 
 throw herself on some early morning into the lake , for life would be 
 insupportable . 
 " I wonder what it be that ail you , " say Mr. Kennedy . 
 " nothing serious . one can not   always help have a headache , you know . " 
 " I do not   think you take enough exercise , Laura . I would propose that 
 you should walk four mile every day after breakfast . I will always 
 be ready to accompany you . I have speak to Dr. Macnuthrie - " 
 " I hate Dr. Macnuthrie . " 
 " why should you hate Dr. Macnuthrie , Laura ? " 
 " how can I tell why ? I do . that be quite reason enough why you should 
 not send for he to I . " 
 " you be unreasonable , Laura . one choose a doctor on account of 
 his reputation in his profession , and that of Dr. Macnuthrie stand 
 high . " 
 " I do not want any doctor . " 
 " but if you be ill , my dear - " 
 " I be not ill . " 
 " but you say you have a headache . you have say so for the last ten 
 day . " 
 " have a headache be not be ill . I only wish you would not talk 
 of it , and then perhaps I should get rid of it . " 
 " I can not believe that . Headache in nine case out of ten come from 
 the stomach . " though he say this , - say it because it be the 
 common - place common - sense sort of thing to say , still at the very 
 moment there be the shadow of the truth before his eye . what if 
 this headache mean simple dislike to he , and to his mode of life ? 
 " it be nothing of that sort , " say Lady Laura , impatient at have 
 her ailment inquire into with so much accuracy . 
 " then what be it ? you can not think that I can be happy to hear you 
 complain of headache every day , - make it an excuse for absolute 
 idleness . " 
 " what be it that you want I to do ? " she say , jump up from her 
 seat . " set I a task , and if I do not   go mad over it , I will get through 
 it . there be the account book . give they to I . I do not   suppose I 
 can see the figure , but I will try to see they . " 
 " Laura , this be unkind of you , - and ungrateful . " 
 " of course ; - it be everything that be bad . what a pity that you do 
 not find it out last year ! oh dear , oh dear ! what be I to do ? " then 
 she throw herself down upon the sofa , and put both her hand up to 
 her temple . 
 " I will send for Dr. Macnuthrie at once , " say Mr. Kennedy , walk 
 towards the door very slowly , and speak as slowly as he walk . 
 " no ; - do no such thing , " she say , spring to her foot again and 
 intercept he before he reach the door . " if he come I will not 
 see he . I give you my word that I will not speak to he if he come . 
 you do not understand , " she say ; " you do not understand at all . " 
 " what be it that I ought to understand ? " he ask . 
 " that a woman do not like to be bother . " 
 he make no reply at once , but stand there twist the handle of the 
 door , and collect his thought . " yes , " say he at last ; " I be 
 begin to find that out ; - and to find out also what it be that 
 bother a woman , as you call it . I can see now what it be that make 
 your head ache . it be not the stomach . you be quite right there . it 
 be the prospect of a quiet decent life , to which would be attach 
 the performance of certain homely duty . Dr. Macnuthrie be a learn 
 man , but I doubt whether he can do anything for such a malady . " 
 " you be quite right , Robert ; he can do nothing . " 
 " it be a malady you must cure for yourself , Laura ; - and which be to 
 be cure by perseverance . if you can bring yourself to try - " 
 " but I can not bring myself to try at all , " she say . 
 " do you mean to tell I , Laura , that you will make no effort to do 
 your duty as my wife ? " 
 " I mean to tell you that I will not try to cure a headache by do 
 sum . that be all that I mean to say at this moment . if you will 
 leave I for awhile , so that I may lie down , perhaps I shall be able 
 to come to dinner . " he still hesitate , stand with the door in his 
 hand . " but if you go on scold I , " she continue , " what I shall 
 do be to go to bed directly you go away . " he hesitate for a moment 
 long , and then leave the room without another word . 
 CHAPTER XXXIII 
 Mr. Slide 's Grievance 
 our hero be elect member for Loughton without any trouble to he 
 or , as far as he could see , to any one else . he make one speech from 
 a small raise booth that be call a platform , and that be all 
 that he be call upon to do . Mr. Grating make a speech in propose 
 he , and Mr. Shortribs another in second he ; and these be all 
 the speech that be require . the thing seem to be so very easy 
 that he be afterwards almost offend when he be tell that the bill 
 for so insignificant a piece of work come to L247 13s . 9d . he have 
 see no occasion for spend even the odd forty - seven pound . but 
 then he be member for Loughton ; and as he pass the evening alone 
 at the inn , have din in company with Messrs. Grating , Shortribs , 
 and sundry other influential elector , he begin to reflect that , 
 after all , it be not so very great a thing to be a member of 
 Parliament . it almost seem that that which have come to he so 
 easily could not be of much value . 
 on the follow day he go to the castle , and be there when the 
 Earl arrive . they two be alone together , and the Earl be very 
 kind to he . " so you have no opponent after all , " say the great man 
 of Loughton , with a slight smile . 
 " not the ghost of another candidate . " 
 " I do not think there would be . they have try it once or twice and 
 have always fail . there be only one or two in the place who like 
 to go one way just because their neighbour go the other . but , in 
 truth , there be no conservative feeling in the place ! " 
 Phineas , although he be at the present moment the member for 
 Loughton himself , could not but enjoy the joke of this . could there 
 be any liberal feeling in such a place , or , indeed , any political 
 feeling whatsoever ? would not Messrs. Grating and Shortribs have do 
 just the same have it happen that Lord Brentford have be a tory 
 peer ? " they all seem to be very obliging , " say Phineas , in answer 
 to the Earl . 
 " yes , they be . there be not   a house in the town , you know , let 
 for long than seven year , and most of they merely from year to 
 year . and , do you know , I have not   a farmer on the property with a 
 lease , - not one ; and they do not   want lease . they know they be safe . 
 but I do like the people round I to be of the same way of thinking 
 as myself about politic . " 
 on the second day after dinner , - the last evening of Finn 's visit to 
 Saulsby , - the Earl fall suddenly into a confidential conversation 
 about his daughter and his son , and about Violet Effingham . so 
 sudden , indeed , and so confidential be the conversation , that 
 Phineas be almost silence for awhile . a word or two have be say 
 about Loughlinter , of the beauty of the place and of the vastness of 
 the property . " I be almost afraid , " say Lord Brentford , " that Laura 
 be not happy there . " 
 " I hope she be , " say Phineas . 
 " he be so hard and dry , and what I call exact . that be just the 
 word for it . now Laura have never be use to that . with I she 
 always have her own way in everything , and I always find her fit 
 to have it . I do not understand why her husband should treat she 
 differently . " 
 " perhaps it be the temper of the man . " 
 " Temper , yes ; but what a bad prospect be that for she ! and she , too , 
 have a temper , and so he will find if he try she too far . I can not 
 stand Loughlinter . I tell Laura so fairly . it be one of those house 
 in which a man can not call his hour his own . I tell Laura that I 
 could not undertake to remain there for above a day or two . " 
 " it be very sad , " say Phineas . 
 " yes , indeed ; it be sad for she , poor girl ; and very sad for I too . 
 I have no one else but Laura , - literally no one ; and now I be divide 
 from she ! it seem that she have be take as much away from I as 
 though her husband live in China . I have lose they both now ! " 
 " I hope not , my lord . " 
 " I say I have . as to Chiltern , I can perceive that he become more 
 and more indifferent to I every day . he think of I only as a man 
 in his way who must die some day and may die soon . " 
 " you wrong he , Lord Brentford . " 
 " I do not wrong he at all . why have he answer every offer I have 
 make he with so much insolence as to make it impossible for I to 
 put myself into further communion with he ? " 
 " he think that you have wrong he . " 
 " yes ; - because I have be unable to shut my eye to his mode of 
 live . I be to go on pay his debt , and take no other notice 
 whatsoever of his conduct ! " 
 " I do not think he be in debt now . " 
 " because his sister the other day spend every shilling of her fortune 
 in pay they . she give he L40,000 ! do you think she would have 
 marry Kennedy but for that ? I do not . I could not prevent she . I have 
 say that I would not cripple my remain year of life by raise 
 the money , and I could not go back from my word . " 
 " you and Chiltern might raise the money between you . " 
 " it would do no good now . she have marry Mr. Kennedy , and the money 
 be nothing to she or to he . chiltern might have put thing right by 
 marry Miss Effingham if he please . " 
 " I think he do his good there . " 
 " no ; - he do his bad . he ask she to be his wife as a man ask for 
 a railway - ticket or a pair of glove , which he buy with a price ; 
 and because she would not jump into his mouth he give it up . I do not 
 believe he even really want to marry she . I suppose he have some 
 disreputable connection to prevent it . " 
 " nothing of the kind . he would marry she to - morrow if he could . my 
 belief be that Miss Effingham be sincere in refuse he . " 
 " I do not   doubt her sincerity . " 
 " and that she will never change . " 
 " ah , well ; I do not   agree with you , and I daresay I know they both 
 well than you do . but everything go against I . I have set my 
 heart upon it , and therefore of course I shall be disappoint . what 
 be he go to do this autumn ? " 
 " he be yacht now . " 
 " and who be with he ? " 
 " I think the boat belong to Captain Colepepper . " 
 " the great blackguard in all England ! a man who shoot pigeon and 
 rid steeple - chase ! and the bad of Chiltern be this , that even if 
 he do not   like the man , and if he be tired of this sort of life , he 
 would go on just the same because he think it a fine thing not to 
 give way . " this be so true that Phineas do not dare to contradict 
 the statement , and therefore say nothing . " I have some faint hope , " 
 continue the Earl , " while Laura could always watch he ; because , in 
 his way , he be fond of his sister . but that be all over now . she 
 will have enough to do to watch herself ! " 
 Phineas have feel that the Earl have put he down rather sharply when 
 he have say that Violet would never accept Lord Chiltern , and he be 
 therefore not a little surprised when Lord Brentford speak again of 
 Miss Effingham the follow morning , hold in his hand a letter 
 which he have just receive from she . " they be to be at Loughlinter 
 on the tenth , " he say , " and she purpose to come here for a couple 
 of night on her way . " 
 " Lady Baldock and all ? " 
 " well , yes ; Lady Baldock and all . I be not very fond of Lady Baldock , 
 but I will put up with she for a couple of day for the sake of 
 have Violet . she be more like a child of my own now than anybody 
 else . I shall not see she all the autumn afterwards . I can not stand 
 Loughlinter . " 
 " it will be well when the house be full . " 
 " you will be there , I suppose ? " 
 " well , no ; I think not , " say Phineas . 
 " you have have enough of it , have you ? " Phineas make no reply to this , 
 but smile slightly . " by Jove , I do not   wonder at it , " say the Earl . 
 Phineas , who would have give all he have in the world to be stay 
 in the same country house with Violet Effingham , could not explain 
 how it have come to pass that he be oblige to absent himself . " I 
 suppose you be ask ? " say the Earl . 
 " oh , yes , I be ask . nothing can be kind than they be . " 
 " Kennedy tell I that you be come as a matter of course . " 
 " I explain to he after that , " say Phineas , " that I should not 
 return . I shall go over to Ireland . I have a deal of hard reading to 
 do , and I can get through it there without interruption . " 
 he go up from Saulsby to London on that day , and find himself 
 quite alone in Mrs. Bunce 's lodging . I mean not only that he be 
 alone at his lodging , but he be alone at his club , and alone in the 
 street . July be not quite over , and yet all the bird of passage 
 have migrate . Mr. Mildmay , by his short session , have half ruin the 
 London tradesman , and have change the summer mode of life of all 
 those who account themselves to be anybody . Phineas , as he sit alone 
 in his room , feel himself to be nobody . he have tell the Earl that 
 he be go to Ireland , and to Ireland he must go ; - because he have 
 nothing else to do . he have be ask indeed to join one or two 
 party in their autumn plan . Mr. Monk have want he to go to the 
 Pyrenees , and Lord Chiltern have suggest that he should join the 
 yacht ; - but neither plan suit he . it would have suit he to be 
 at Loughlinter with Violet Effingham , but Loughlinter be a barred 
 house to he . his old friend , Lady Laura , have tell he not to come 
 thither , explain , with sufficient clearness , her reason for 
 exclude he from the number of her husband 's guest . as he think 
 of it the past scene of his life become very marvellous to he . 
 twelve month since he would have give all the world for a word of 
 love from Lady Laura , and have barely dare to hope that such a word , 
 at some future day , might possibly be speak . now such a word have in 
 truth be speak , and it have come to be simply a trouble to he . she 
 have own to he , - for , in truth , such have be the meaning of she 
 warning to he , - that , though she have marry another man , she have 
 love and do love he . but in thinking of this he take no pride in 
 it . it be not till he have think of it long that he begin to ask 
 himself whether he might not be justify in gather from what 
 happen some hope that Violet also might learn to love he . he have 
 think so little of himself as to have be afraid at first to press 
 his suit with Lady Laura . might he not venture to think more of 
 himself , have learn how far he have succeed ? 
 but how be he to get at Violet Effingham ? from the moment at which 
 he have leave Saulsby he have be angry with himself for not have 
 ask Lord Brentford to allow he to remain there till after the 
 Baldock party should have go on to Loughlinter . the Earl , who be 
 very lonely in his house , would have consent at once . Phineas , 
 indeed , be drive to confess to himself that success with Violet 
 would at once have put an end to all his friendship with Lord 
 Brentford ; - as also to all his friendship with Lord Chiltern . he 
 would , in such case , be bind in honour to vacate his seat and give 
 back Loughton to his offended patron . but he would have give up much 
 more than his seat for Violet Effingham ! at present , however , he have 
 no mean of get at she to ask she the question . he could hardly 
 go to Loughlinter in opposition to the wish of Lady Laura . 
 a little adventure happen to he in London which somewhat relieve 
 the dulness of the day of the first week in August . he remain in 
 London till the middle of August , half resolve to rush down to 
 Saulsby when Violet Effingham should be there , - endeavour to 
 find some excuse for such a proceeding , but rack his brain in 
 vain , - and then there come about his little adventure . the adventure 
 be commence by the receipt of the following letter : - 
 Banner of the People Office , 
 3rd August , 186 - . 
 MY DEAR FINN , 
 I must say I think you have treat I badly , and without 
 that sort of brotherly fairness which we on the public 
 press expect from one another . however , perhaps we can 
 come to an understanding , and if so , thing may yet go 
 smoothly . give I a turn and I be not at all adverse to 
 give you one . will you come to I here , or shall I call 
 upon you ? 
 your always , Q. S. 
 Phineas be not only surprised , but disgusted also , at the receipt 
 of this letter . he could not imagine what be the deed by which he 
 have offend Mr. Slide . he think over all the circumstance of 
 his short connection with the People 's Banner , but could remember 
 nothing which might have create offence . but his disgust be great 
 than his surprise . he think that he have do nothing and say 
 nothing to justify Quintus Slide in call he " dear Finn . " he , 
 who have Lady Laura 's secret in his keeping ; he who hop to be the 
 possessor of Violet Effingham 's affection , - he to be call " dear 
 Finn " by such a one as Quintus Slide ! he soon make up his mind that 
 he would not answer the note , but would go at once to the People 's 
 Banner office at the hour at which Quintus Slide be always there . 
 he certainly would not write to " dear slide ; " and , until he have hear 
 something more of this cause of offence , he would not make an enemy 
 for ever by call the man " dear Sir . " he go to the office of the 
  People 's Banner , and find Mr. Slide ensconce in a little glass 
 cupboard , write an article for the next day 's copy . 
 " I suppose you be very busy , " say Phineas , insert himself with 
 some difficulty on to a little stool in the corner of the cupboard . 
 " not so particular but what I be glad to see you . you shoot , do not 
 you ? " 
 " Shoot ! " say Phineas . it could not be possible that Mr. Slide be 
 intend , after this abrupt fashion , to propose a duel with pistol . 
 " grouse and pheasant , and they sort of thing ? " ask Mr. Slide . 
 " oh , ah ; I understand . yes , I shoot sometimes . " 
 " be it the 12th or 20th for grouse in Scotland ? " 
 " the 12th , " say Phineas . " what make you ask that just now ? " 
 " I be do a letter about it , - advise man not to shoot too many of 
 the young bird , and show that they will have none next year if they 
 do . I have a fellow here just now who know all about it , and he put 
 down a lot ; but I forgot to make he tell I the day of beginning . 
 what be a good place to date from ? " 
 Phineas suggest Callender or Stirling . 
 " Stirling 's too much of a town , be not   it ? callender sound well for 
 game , I think . " 
 so the letter which be to save the young grouse be date from 
 Callender ; and Mr. Quintus Slide have write the word , throw down 
 his pen , come off his stool , and rush at once at his subject . 
 " well , now , Finn , " he say , " do not   you know that you have   treat I 
 badly about Loughton ? " 
 " treat you badly about Loughton ! " Phineas , as he repeat the 
 word , be quite in the dark as to Mr. Slide 's meaning . do Mr. Slide 
 intend to convey a reproach because Phineas have not personally send 
 some tiding of the election to the People 's Banner ? 
 " very badly , " say Mr. Slide , with his arm akimbo , - " very badly 
 indeed ! man on the press together do expect that they be to be 
 stick by , and not throw over . damn it , I say ; what be the good of a 
 brotherhood if it be not   to be brotherhood ? " 
 " upon my word , I do not   know what you mean , " say Phineas . 
 " do not   I tell you that I have Loughton in my heye ? " say Quintus . 
 " oh - h ! " 
 " it be very well to say ho , and look guilty , but do not   I tell you ? " 
 " I never hear such nonsense in my life . " 
 " nonsense ? " 
 " how on earth could you have stand for Loughton ? what interest would 
 you have there ? you could not even have find an elector to propose 
 you . " 
 " now , I will tell you what I will do , Finn . I think you have throw 
 I over most shabby , but I will not   stand about that . you shall have 
 Loughton this session if you will promise to make way for I after the 
 next election . if you will agree to that , we will have a special leader 
 to say how well Lord What's - his - name have do with the borough ; and 
 we will be your horgan through the whole session . " 
 " I never hear such nonsense in my life . in the first place , Loughton 
 be safe to be in the schedule of reduce borough . it will be throw 
 into the county , or join with a group . " 
 " I will stand the chance of that . will you agree ? " 
 " agree ! no ! it be the most absurd proposal that be ever make . you 
 might as well ask I whether I would agree that you should go to 
 heaven . go to heaven if you can , I should say . I have not the 
 slight objection . but it be nothing to I . " 
 " very well , " say Quintus Slide . " very well ! now we understand each 
 other , and that be all that I desire . I think that I can show you what 
 it be to come among gentleman of the press , and then to throw they 
 over . good morning . " 
 Phineas , quite satisfied at the result of the interview as regard 
 himself , and by no mean sorry that there should have arise a 
 cause of separation between Mr. Quintus Slide and his " dear Finn , " 
 shake off a little dust from his foot as he leave the office of the 
  People 's Banner , and resolve that in future he would attempt to 
 make no connection in that direction . as he return home he tell 
 himself that a member of Parliament should be altogether independent 
 of the press . on the second morning after his meeting with his late 
 friend , he see the result of his independence . there be a startling 
 article , a tremendous article , show the press necessity of 
 immediate reform , and prove the necessity by an illustration of 
 the borough - monger rottenness of the present system . when such 
 a patron as Lord Brentford , - himself a Cabinet Minister with a 
 sinecure , - could by his mere word put into the House such a stick as 
 Phineas Finn , - a man who have struggle to stand on his leg before 
 the Speaker , but have want both the courage and the capacity , 
 nothing far could surely be want to prove that the Reform Bill 
 of 1832 require to be supplement by some more energetic measure . 
 Phineas laugh as he read the article , and declare to himself that 
 the joke be a good joke . but , nevertheless , he suffer . Mr. Quintus 
 Slide , when he be really anxious to use his thong earnestly , could 
 generally raise a wale . 
 CHAPTER XXXIV 
 be he honest ? 
 on the 10th of August , Phineas Finn do return to Loughton . he go 
 down by the mail train on the night of the 10th , have telegraph 
 to the inn for a bed , and be up eat his breakfast in that 
 hospitable house at nine o'clock . the landlord and landlady with all 
 their staff be at a loss to imagine what have bring down their 
 member again so quickly to his borough ; but the reader , who will 
 remember that Lady Baldock with her daughter and Violet Effingham 
 be to pass the 11th of the month at Saulsby , may perhaps be able 
 to make a guess on the subject . 
 Phineas have be think of make this sudden visit to Loughton 
 ever since he have be up in town , but he could suggest to himself no 
 reason to be give to Lord Brentford for his sudden reappearance . the 
 Earl have be very kind to he , but he have say nothing which could 
 justify his young friend in run in and out of Saulsby Castle at 
 pleasure , without invitation and without notice . Phineas be so well 
 aware of this himself that often as he have half resolve during the 
 last ten day to return to Saulsby , so often have he determine that 
 he could not do so . he could think of no excuse . then the heaven 
 favour he , and he receive a letter from Lord Chiltern , in which 
 there be a message for Lord Brentford . " if you see my father , tell 
 he that I be ready at any moment to do what be necessary for raise 
 the money for Laura . " take this as his excuse he return to 
 Loughton . 
 as chance arrange it , he meet the Earl stand on the great step 
 before his own castle door . " what , Finn ; be this you ? I think you 
 be in Ireland . " 
 " not yet , my lord , as you see . " then he open his budget at once , 
 and blush at his own hypocrisy as he go on with his story . he 
 have , he say , feel the message from Chiltern to be so all - important 
 that he could not bring himself to go over to Ireland without 
 deliver it . he urge upon the Earl that he might learn from this 
 how anxious Lord Chiltern be to effect a reconciliation . when 
 it occur to he , he say , that there might be a hope of do 
 anything towards such an object , he could not go to Ireland leave 
 the good work behind he . in love and war all thing be fair . so he 
 declare to himself ; but as he do so he feel that his story be so 
 weak that it would hardly gain for he an admittance into the Castle . 
 in this he be completely wrong . the Earl , swallow the bait , put 
 his arm through that of the intruder , and , walk with he through 
 the path of the shrubbery , at length confess that he would be glad 
 to be reconcile to his son if it be possible . " let he come here , 
 and she shall be here also , " say the Earl , speak of Violet . to 
 this Phineas could say nothing out loud , but he tell himself that all 
 should be fair between they . he would take no dishonest advantage of 
 Lord Chiltern . he would give Lord Chiltern the whole message as it 
 be give to he by Lord Brentford . but should it so turn out that he 
 himself get an opportunity of say to Violet all that he have come 
 to say , and should it also turn out , - an event which he acknowledge 
 to himself to be most unlikely , - that Violet do not reject he , then 
 how could he write his letter to Lord Chiltern ? so he resolve that 
 the letter should be write before he see Violet . but how could he 
 write such a letter and instantly afterwards do that which would 
 be false to the spirit of a letter so write ? could he bid Lord 
 Chiltern come home to woo Violet Effingham , and instantly go forth 
 to woo she for himself ? he find that he could not do so , - unless he 
 tell the whole truth to Lord Chiltern . in no other way could he carry 
 out his project and satisfy his own idea of what be honest . 
 the Earl bade he send to the hotel for his thing . " the Baldock 
 people be all here , you know , but they go very early to - morrow . " 
 then Phineas declare that he also must return to London very early 
 on the morrow ; - but in the meantime he would go to the inn and fetch 
 his thing . the Earl thank he again and again for his generous 
 kindness ; and Phineas , blush as he receive the thank , go back 
 and write his letter to Lord Chiltern . it be an elaborate letter , 
 write , as regard the first and large portion of it , with word 
 intend to bring the prodigal son back to the father 's home . and 
 everything be say about Miss Effingham that could or should have 
 be say . then , on the last page , he tell his own story . " now , " he 
 say , " I must speak of myself : " - and he go on to explain to his 
 friend , in the plainest language that he could use , his own position . 
 " I have love she , " he say , " for six month , and I be here with 
 the express intention of ask she to take I . the chance be ten 
 to one that she refuse I . I do not deprecate your anger , - if you 
 choose to be angry . but I be endeavour to treat you well , and I 
 ask you to do the same by I . I must convey to you your father 's 
 message , and after do so I can not address myself to Miss Effingham 
 without tell you . I should feel myself to be false be I to do 
 so . in the event , - the probable , nay , almost certain event of my 
 be refuse , - I shall trust you to keep my secret . do not quarrel 
 with I if you can help it ; - but if you must I will be ready . " then 
 he post the letter and go up to the Castle . 
 he have only the one day for his action , and he know that Violet be 
 watch by Lady Baldock as by a dragon . he be tell that the Earl 
 be out with the young lady , and be show to his room . on go 
 to the drawing - room he find Lady Baldock , with whom he have be , 
 to a certain degree , a favourite , and be soon deeply engage in 
 a conversation as to the practicability of shut up all the 
 brewery and distillery by Act of Parliament . but lunch relieve 
 he , and bring the young lady in at two . Miss Effingham seem 
 to be really glad to see he , and even Miss Boreham , Lady Baldock 's 
 daughter , be very gracious to he . for the Earl have be speak 
 well of his young member , and Phineas have in a way grow into the 
 good grace of sober and discreet people . after lunch they be to 
 ride ; - the Earl , that is , and Violet . Lady Baldock and her daughter 
 be to have the carriage . " I can mount you , Finn , if you would like 
 it , " say the Earl . " of course he will like it , " say Violet ; " do you 
 suppose Mr. Finn will object to ride with I in Saulsby Woods ? it 
 will not   be the first time , will it ? " " Violet , " say Lady Baldock , " you 
 have the most singular way of talk . " " I suppose I have , " say 
 Violet ; " but I do not   think I can change it now . Mr. Finn know I too 
 well to mind it much . " 
 it be past five before they be on horseback , and up to that time 
 Phineas have not find himself alone with Violet Effingham for a 
 moment . they have sit together after lunch in the dining - room for 
 nearly an hour , and have saunter into the hall and knock about 
 the billiard ball , and then stand together at the open door of a 
 conservatory . but Lady Baldock or Miss Boreham have always be there . 
 nothing could be more pleasant than Miss Effingham 's word , or more 
 familiar than her manner to Phineas . she have express strong delight 
 at his success in get a seat in Parliament , and have talk to he 
 about the Kennedys as though they have create some special bond of 
 union between she and Phineas which ought to make they intimate . but , 
 for all that , she could not be get to separate herself from Lady 
 Baldock ; - and when she be tell that if she mean to ride she must go 
 and dress herself , she go at once . 
 but he think that he might have a chance on horseback ; and after 
 they have be out about half an hour , chance do favour he . for 
 awhile he ride behind with the carriage , calculate that by his so 
 do the Earl would be put off his guard , and would be dispose 
 after awhile to change place with he . and so it fall out . at a 
 certain fall of ground in the park , where the road turn round and 
 cross a bridge over the little river , the carriage come up with the 
 first two horse , and Lady Baldock speak a word to the Earl . then 
 Violet pull up , allow the vehicle to pass the bridge first , and 
 in this way she and Phineas be bring together , - and in this way 
 they ride on . but he be aware that he must greatly increase the 
 distance between they and the other of their party before he could 
 dare to plead his suit , and even be that do he feel that he would 
 not know how to plead it on horseback . 
 they have go on some half mile in this way when they reach a spot 
 on which a green ride lead away from the main road through the tree 
 to the left . " you remember this place , do you not ? " say Violet . 
 Phineas declare that he remember it well . " I must go round by the 
 woodman 's cottage . you will not   mind come ? " Phineas say that he would 
 not mind , and trot on to tell they in the carriage . 
 " where be she go ? " ask Lady Baldock ; and then , when Phineas 
 explain , she beg the Earl to go back to Violet . the Earl , 
 feel the absurdity of this , declare that Violet know her way very 
 well herself , and thus Phineas get his opportunity . 
 they ride on almost without speak for nearly a mile , canter 
 through the tree , and then they take another turn to the right , and 
 come upon the cottage . they ride to the door , and speak a word or two 
 to the woman there , and then pass on . " I always come here when I be 
 at Saulsby , " say Violet , " that I may teach myself to think kindly of 
 Lord Chiltern . " 
 " I understand it all , " say Phineas . 
 " he use to be so nice ; - and be so still , I believe , only that he have 
 teach himself to be so rough . will he ever change , do you think ? " 
 Phineas know that in this emergency it be his especial duty to be 
 honest . " I think he would be change altogether if we could bring he 
 here , - so that he should live among his friend . " 
 " do you think he would ? we must put our head together , and do it . 
 do not   you think that it be to be do ? " 
 Phineas reply that he think it be to be do . " I will tell you the 
 truth at once , Miss Effingham , " he say . " you can do it by a single 
 word . " 
 " yes ; - yes ; " she say ; " but I do not mean that ; - without that . it 
 be absurd , you know , that a father should make such a condition as 
 that . " Phineas say that he think it be absurd ; and then they ride 
 on again , canter through the wood . he have be bold to speak to 
 she about Lord Chiltern as he have do , and she have answer just as 
 he would have wish to be answer . but how could he press his suit 
 for himself while she be canter by his side ? 
 presently they come to rough ground over which they be force to 
 walk , and he be close by her side . " Mr. Finn , " she say , " I wonder 
 whether I may ask a question ? " 
 " any question , " he reply . 
 " be there any quarrel between you and Lady Laura ? " 
 " none . " 
 " or between you and he ? " 
 " no ; - none . we be great ally than ever . " 
 " then why be you not go to be at Loughlinter ? she have write to 
 I expressly say you would not be there . " 
 he pause a moment before he reply . " it do not suit , " he say at 
 last . 
 " it be a secret then ? " 
 " yes ; - it be a secret . you be not angry with I ? " 
 " angry ; no . " 
 " it be not a secret of my own , or I should not keep it from you . " 
 " perhaps I can guess it , " she say . " but I will not try . I will not 
 even think of it . " 
 " the cause , whatever it be , have be full of sorrow to I . I would 
 have give my left hand to have be at Loughlinter this autumn . " 
 " be you so fond of it ? " 
 " I should have be stay there with you , " he say . he pause , and 
 for a moment there be no word speak by either of they ; but he could 
 perceive that the hand in which she hold her whip be play with 
 her horse 's mane with a nervous movement . " when I find how it must 
 be , and that I must miss you , I rush down here that I might see 
 you for a moment . and now I be here I do not dare to speak to you of 
 myself . " they be now beyond the rock , and Violet , without speak 
 a word , again put her horse into a trot . he be by her side in a 
 moment , but he could not see her face . " have you not a word to say to 
 I ? " he ask . 
 " no ; - no ; - no ; " she reply , " not a word when you speak to I like 
 that . there be the carriage . come ; - we will join they . " then she 
 canter on , and he follow she till they reach the Earl and Lady 
 Baldock and Miss Boreham . " I have do my devotion now , " say Miss 
 Effingham , " and be ready to return to ordinary life . " 
 Phineas could not find another moment in which to speak to she . 
 though he spend the evening with she , and stand over she as she sing 
 at the Earl 's request , and press her hand as she go to bed , and 
 be up to see her start in the morning , he could not draw from she 
 either a word or a look . 
 CHAPTER XXXV 
 Mr. Monk upon Reform 
 Phineas Finn go to Ireland immediately after his return from 
 Saulsby , have say nothing far to Violet Effingham , and have 
 hear nothing far from she than what be record in the last 
 chapter . he feel very keenly that his position be unsatisfactory , 
 and brood over it all the autumn and early winter ; but he could 
 form no plan for improve it . a dozen time he think of write 
 to Miss Effingham , and ask for an explicit answer . he could not , 
 however , bring himself to write the letter , think that write 
 expression of love be always weak and vapid , - and deter also 
 by a conviction that Violet , if drive to reply in writing , would 
 undoubtedly reply by a refusal . fifty time he ride again in his 
 imagination his ride in Saulsby Wood , and he tell himself as often 
 that the syren 's answer to he , - her no , no , no , - have be , of all 
 possible answer , the most indefinite and provoking . the tone of her 
 voice as she gallop away from he , the bearing of her countenance 
 when he rejoin she , her manner to he when he see she start from 
 the Castle in the morning , all forbid he to believe that his word 
 to she have be take as an offence . she have reply to he with a 
 direct negative , simply with the word " no ; " but she have so say it 
 that there have hardly be any sting in the no ; and he have know at 
 the moment that whatever might be the result of his suit , he need not 
 regard Violet Effingham as his enemy . 
 but the doubt make his sojourn in Ireland very wearisome to he . 
 and there be other matter which tend also to his discomfort , 
 though he be not leave even at this period of his life without a 
 continuation of success which seem to be very wonderful . and , 
 first , I will say a word of his discomfort . he hear not a line from 
 Lord Chiltern in answer to the letter which he have write to his 
 lordship . from Lady Laura he do hear frequently . Lady Laura write to 
 he exactly as though she have never warn he away from Loughlinter , 
 and as though there have be no occasion for such warning . she send 
 he letter fill chiefly with politic , say something also of 
 the guest at Loughlinter , something of the game , and just a word 
 or two here and there of her husband . the letter be very good 
 letter , and he preserve they carefully . it be manifest to he that 
 they be intend to be good letter , and , as such , to be preserve . 
 in one of these , which he receive about the end of November , 
 she tell he that her brother be again in his old haunt , at the 
 Willingford Bull , and that he have send to Portman Square for all 
 property of his own that have be leave there . but there be no word 
 in that letter of Violet Effingham ; and though Lady Laura do speak 
 more than once of Violet , she always do so as though Violet be 
 simply a joint acquaintance of herself and her correspondent . there 
 be no allusion to the existence of any special regard on his part 
 for Miss Effingham . he have think that Violet might probably tell 
 her friend what have occur at Saulsby ; - but if she do so , Lady 
 Laura be happy in her power of reticence . our hero be disturb 
 also when he reach home by find that Mrs. Flood Jones and Miss 
 Flood Jones have retire from Killaloe for the winter . I do not know 
 whether he might not have be more disturb by the presence of the 
 young lady , for he would have find himself constrain to exhibit 
 towards she some tenderness of manner ; and any such tenderness of 
 manner would , in his exist circumstance , have be dangerous . but 
 he be make to understand that Mary Flood Jones have be take away 
 from Killaloe because it be think that he have ill - treat the 
 lady , and the accusation make he unhappy . in the middle of the heat 
 of the last session he have receive a letter from his sister , in 
 which some push question have be ask as to his then exist 
 feeling about poor Mary . this he have answer petulantly . nothing 
 more have be write to he about Miss Jones , and nothing be say 
 to he when he reach home . he could not , however , but ask after 
 Mary , and when he do ask , the accusation be make again in that 
 quietly severe manner with which , perhaps , most of we have be make 
 acquaint at some period of our life . " I think , Phineas , " say his 
 sister , " we have well say nothing about dear Mary . she be not here 
 at present , and probably you may not see she while you remain with 
 we . " " what be all that about ? " Phineas have demand , - understand 
 the whole matter thoroughly . then his sister have demurely refuse to 
 say a word far on the subject , and not a word far be say 
 about Miss Mary Flood Jones . they be at Floodborough , living , he 
 do not doubt , in a very desolate way , - and quite willing , he do not 
 doubt also , to abandon their desolation if he would go over there in 
 the manner that would become he after what have pass on one or two 
 occasion between he and the young lady . but how be he to do this 
 with such work on his hand as he have undertake ? now that he be in 
 Ireland , he think that he do love dear Mary very dearly . he feel 
 that he have two identity , - that he be , as it be , two separate 
 person , - and that he could , without any real faithlessness , be very 
 much in love with Violet Effingham in his position of man of fashion 
 and member of Parliament in England , and also warmly attach to dear 
 little Mary Flood Jones as an Irishman of Killaloe . he be aware , 
 however , that there be a prejudice against such fulness of heart , 
 and , therefore , resolve sternly that it be his duty to be constant 
 to Miss Effingham . how be it possible that he should marry dear 
 Mary , - he , with such extensive job of work on his hand ! it be not 
 possible . he must abandon all thought of make dear Mary his own . no 
 doubt they have be right to remove she . but , still , as he take his 
 solitary walk along the Shannon , and up on the hill that overhang 
 the lake above the town , he feel somewhat ashamed of himself , and 
 dream of give up Parliament , of leave Violet to some noble 
 suitor , - to Lord Chiltern , if she would take he , - and of go to 
 Floodborough with an honest proposal that he should be allow to 
 press Mary to his heart . Miss Effingham would probably reject he 
 at last ; whereas Mary , dear Mary , would come to his heart without 
 a scruple of doubt . dear Mary ! in these day of dream , he tell 
 himself that , after all , dear Mary be his real love . but , of course , 
 such day be day of dream only . he have letter in his pocket 
 from Lady Laura Kennedy which make it impossible for he to think in 
 earnest of give up Parliament . 
 and then there come a wonderful piece of luck in his way . there 
 live , or have live , in the town of Galway a very eccentric old lady , 
 one Miss Marian Persse , who be the aunt of Mrs. Finn , the mother 
 of our hero . with this lady Dr. Finn have quarrel persistently 
 ever since his marriage , because the lady have express her wish to 
 interfere in the management of his family , - offer to purchase such 
 right by favourable arrangement in reference to her will . this the 
 doctor have resent , and there have be quarrel . Miss Persse be not 
 a very rich old lady , but she think a good deal of her own money . 
 and now she die , leave L3,000 to her nephew Phineas Finn . another 
 sum of about equal amount she bequeath to a Roman catholic 
 seminary ; and thus be her worldly wealth divide . " she could not 
 have do well with it , " say the old doctor ; " and as far as we 
 be concern , the windfall be the more pleasant as be wholly 
 unexpected . " in these day the doctor be undoubtedly gratify by 
 his son 's success in life , and never say much about the law . phinea 
 in truth do do some work during the autumn , read blue - book , 
 read law book , read perhaps a novel or two at the same 
 time , - but shut himself up very carefully as he study , so that 
 his sister be make to understand that for a certain four hour in 
 the day not a sound be to be allow to disturb he . 
 on the receipt of his legacy he at once offer to repay his father 
 all money that have be advance he over and above his original 
 allowance ; but this the doctor refuse to take . " it come to the same 
 thing , Phineas , " he say . " what you have of your share now you can not 
 have hereaft . as regard my present income , it have only make I 
 work a little long than I have intend ; and I believe that the 
 later in life a man work , the more likely he be to live . " Phineas , 
 therefore , when he return to London , have his 3,000 in his pocket . 
 he owe some l500 ; and the remainder he would , of course , invest . 
 there have be some talk of an autumnal session , but Mr. Mildmay 's 
 decision have at last be against it . who can not understand that such 
 would be the decision of any Minister to whom be leave the slight 
 fraction of free will in the matter ? why should any Minister court 
 the danger of unnecessary attack , submit himself to unnecessary work , 
 and incur the odium of summon all his friend from their rest ? 
 in the midst of the doubt as to the new and old Ministry , when 
 the political needle be vacillate so tremulously on its pivot , 
 point now to one set of man as the come government and then to 
 another , vague suggestion as to an autumn session might be useful . 
 and they be throw out in all good faith . Mr. Mildmay , when he 
 speak on the subject to the Duke , be earnest in think that the 
 question of Reform should not be postpone even for six month . 
 " do not   pledge yourself , " say the Duke ; - and Mr. Mildmay do not 
 pledge himself . afterwards , when Mr. Mildmay find that he be 
 once more assuredly Prime Minister , he change his mind , and feel 
 himself to be under a fresh obligation to the Duke . Lord de Terrier 
 have altogether fail , and the country might very well wait till 
 February . the country do wait till February , somewhat to the 
 disappointment of Phineas Finn , who have become tired of blue - book 
 at Killaloe . the difference between his english life and his life at 
 home be so great , that it be hardly possible that he should not 
 become weary of the latter . he do become weary of it , but strove 
 gallantly to hide his weariness from his father and mother . 
 at this time the world be talk much about Reform , though Mr. 
 Mildmay have become placidly patient . the feeling be grow , and 
 Mr. Turnbull , with his friend , be do all he could to make it 
 grow fast . there be a certain amount of excitement on the subject ; 
 but the excitement have grow downward , from the leader to the 
 people , - from the self - institute leader of popular politic down , 
 by mean of the press , to the rank of work man , instead of 
 grow upwards , from the dissatisfaction of the mass , till it 
 express itself by this mouthpiece and that , choose by the people 
 themselves . there be no strong throb through the country , make 
 man feel that safety be to be have by reform , and could not be have 
 without Reform . but there be an understanding that the press and the 
 orator be too strong to be ignore , and that some new measure of 
 reform must be concede to they . the soon the concession be make , 
 the less it might be necessary to concede . and all man of all party 
 be agree on this point . that Reform be in itself odious to many 
 of those who speak of it freely , who offer themselves willingly to 
 be its promoter , be acknowledge . it be not only odious to Lord de 
 Terrier and to most of those who work with he , but be equally so 
 to many of Mr. Mildmay 's most constant supporter . the Duke have no 
 wish for Reform . indeed it be hard to suppose that such a Duke can 
 wish for any change in a state of thing that must seem to he to be 
 so salutary . Workmen be get full wage . farmer be pay 
 their rent . capitalist by the dozen be create capitalist by the 
 hundred . nothing be wrong in the country , but the over - dominant 
 spirit of speculative commerce ; - and there be nothing in Reform to 
 check that . why should the Duke want reform ? as for such man as Lord 
 Brentford , Sir Harry Coldfoot , Lord Plinlimmon , and Mr. Legge Wilson , 
 it be know to all man that they advocate Reform as we all of we 
 advocate doctor . some amount of doctoring be necessary for we . we 
 may hardly hope to avoid it . but let we have as little of the doctor 
 as possible . Mr. Turnbull , and the cheap press , and the rise spirit 
 of the loud among the people , make it manifest that something must 
 be concede . let we be generous in our concession . that be now the 
 doctrine of many , - perhaps of most of the lead politician of the 
 day . let we be generous . let we at any rate seem to be generous . let 
 we give with an open hand , - but still with a hand which , though open , 
 shall not bestow too much . the coach must be allow to run down the 
 hill . indeed , unless the coach go on run no journey will be 
 make . but let we have the drag on both the hind wheel . and we must 
 remember that coach run down hill without drag be apt to come 
 to serious misfortune . 
 but there be man , even in the Cabinet , who have other idea of 
 public service than that of drag the wheel of the coach . Mr. 
 Gresham be in earnest . Plantagenet Palliser be in earnest . that 
 exceedingly intelligent young nobleman Lord Cantrip be in earnest . 
 Mr. Mildmay throw , perhaps , as much of earnestness into the matter 
 as be compatible with his age and his full appreciation of the 
 manner in which the present cry for Reform have be arouse . he be 
 thoroughly honest , thoroughly patriotic , and thoroughly ambitious 
 that he should be write of hereafter as one who to the end of a 
 long life have work sedulously for the welfare of the people ; - but 
 he disbelieve in Mr. Turnbull , and in the bottom of his heart 
 indulge an aristocratic contempt for the penny press . and there be 
 no man in England more in earnest , more truly desirous of reform , 
 than Mr. Monk . it be his great political idea that political 
 advantage should be extend to the people , whether the people 
 clamour for they or do not clamour for they , - even whether they 
 desire they or do not desire they . " you do not ask a child whether 
 he would like to learn his lesson , " he would say . " at any rate , you 
 do not wait till he cry for his book . " when , therefore , man say to 
 he that there be no earnestness in the cry for Reform , that the cry 
 be a false cry , get up for factious purpose by interested person , 
 he would reply that the thing to be do should not be do in 
 obedience to any cry , but because it be demand by justice , and be 
 a debt due to the people . 
 our hero in the autumn have write to Mr. Monk on the politic of the 
 moment , and the following have be Mr. Monk 's reply : - 
 Longroyston , October 12 , 186 - . 
 MY DEAR FINN , 
 I be stay here with the Duke and Duchess of St. 
 Bungay . the house be very full , and Mr. Mildmay be 
 here last week ; but as I do not   shoot , and can not   play 
 billiard , and have no taste for charade , I be become 
 tired of the gaiety , and shall leave they to - morrow . 
 of course you know that we be not to have the autumn 
 session . I think that Mr. Mildmay be right . could we have 
 be sure of pass our measure , it would have be very 
 well ; but we could not have be sure , and failure with 
 our bill in a session convene for the express purpose of 
 pass it would have injure the cause greatly . we could 
 hardly have go on with it again in the spring . indeed , 
 we must have resign . and though I may truly say that I 
 would as lief have a good measure from Lord de Terrier 
 as from Mr. Mildmay , and that I be indifferent to my own 
 present personal position , still I think that we should 
 endeavour to keep our seat as long as we honestly 
 believe ourselves to be more capable of pass a good 
 measure than be our opponent . 
 I be astonish by the difference of opinion which 
 exist about reform , - not only as to the difference in 
 the extent and exact tendency of the measure that be 
 need , - but that there should be such a divergence of 
 idea as to the grand thing to be do and the grand 
 reason for do it . we be all agree that we want 
 reform in order that the House of Commons may be return 
 by a large proportion of the people than be at present 
 employ upon that work , and that each member when 
 return should represent a somewhat more equal section 
 of the whole constituency of the country than our 
 member generally do at present . all man confess that a 
 L50 county franchise must be too high , and that a borough 
 with less than two hundred register voter must be 
 wrong . but it seem to I that but few among we perceive , 
 or at any rate acknowledge , the real reason for change 
 these thing and reform what be wrong without delay . 
 one great authority tell we the other day that the sole 
 object of legislation on this subject should be to get 
 together the well possible 658 member of Parliament . 
 that to I would be a most repulsive idea if it be 
 not that by its very vagueness it become inoperative . 
 who shall say what be good ; or what characteristic 
 constitute excellence in a member of Parliament ? if 
 the gentleman mean excellence in general wisdom , or 
 in statecraft , or in skill in talking , or in private 
 character , or even excellence in patriotism , then I say 
 that he be utterly wrong , and have never touch with 
 his intellect the true theory of representation . one 
 only excellence may be acknowledge , and that be the 
 excellence of likeness . as a portrait should be like the 
 person portray , so should a representative House be 
 like the people whom it represent . nor in arrange 
 a franchise do it seem to I that we have a right 
 to regard any other view . if a country be unfit for 
 representative government , - and it may be that there be 
 still people unable to use properly that great of 
 all blessing , - the question as to what state policy may 
 be good for they be a different question . but if we do 
 have representation , let the representative assembly be 
 like the people , whatever else may be its virtue , - and 
 whatever else its vice . 
 another great authority have tell we that our House of 
 Commons should be the mirror of the people . I say , not 
 its mirror , but its miniature . and let the artist be 
 careful to put in every line of the expression of that 
 ever - move face . to do this be a great work , and the 
 artist must know his trade well . in America the work have 
 be do with so coarse a hand that nothing be show 
 in the picture but the broad , plain , unspeaking outline 
 of the face . as you look from the represent to the 
 representation you can not but acknowledge the likeness ; 
  - but there be in that portrait more of the body than of 
 the mind . the true portrait should represent more than 
 the body . with we , hitherto , there have be snatch 
 of the countenance of the nation which have be 
 inimitable , - a turn of the eye here and a curl of the lip 
 there , which have seem to denote a power almost divine . 
 there have be marvel on the canvas so beautiful that 
 one approach the work of remodelle it with awe . 
 but not only be the picture imperfect , - a thing of 
 snatch , - but with year it become less and still less 
 like its original . 
 the necessity for remodelle it be imperative , and we 
 shall be coward if we decline the work . but let we be 
 specially careful to retain as much as possible of those 
 line which we all acknowledge to be so faithfully 
 representative of our nation . to give to a bare numerical 
 majority of the people that power which the numerical 
 majority have in the United States , would not be to 
 achieve representation . the nation as it now exist would 
 not be know by such a portrait ; - but neither can it 
 now be know by that which exist . it seem to I that 
 they who be adverse to change , look back with an 
 unmeasured respect on what our old Parliaments have do 
 for we , ignore the majestic growth of the english people , 
 and forget the present in their worship of the past . they 
 think that we must be what we be , - at any rate , what 
 we be thirty year since . they have not , perhaps , go 
 into the house of artisan , or , if there , they have not 
 look into the breast of the man . with population vice 
 have increase , and these politician , with ear but 
 no eye , hear of drunkenness and sin and ignorance . 
 and then they declare to themselves that this wicked , 
 half - barbarous , idle people should be control and not 
 represent . a wicked , half - barbarous , idle people may be 
 control ; - but not a people thoughtful , educated , and 
 industrious . we must look to it that we do not endeavour 
 to carry our control beyond the wickedness and the 
 barbarity , and that we be ready to submit to control from 
 thoughtfulness and industry . 
 I hope we shall find you help at the good work early 
 in the spring . 
 your , always faithfully , 
 JOSHUA MONK . 
 Phineas be up in London before the end of January , but do not find 
 there many of those whom he wish to see . Mr. Low be there , and to 
 he he show Mr. Monk 's letter , think that it must be convince 
 even to Mr. Low . this he do in Mrs. Low 's drawing - room , know that 
 Mrs. Low would also condescend to discuss politic on an occasion . 
 he have din with they , and they have be glad to see he , and Mrs. 
 Low have be less severe than hitherto against the great sin of her 
 husband 's late pupil . she have condescend to congratulate he on 
 become member for an English borough instead of an irish one , and 
 have ask he question about Saulsby Castle . but , nevertheless , Mr. 
 Monk 's letter be not receive with that respectful admiration which 
 Phineas think that it deserve . Phineas , foolishly , have read it 
 out loud , so that the attack come upon he simultaneously from the 
 husband and from the wife . 
 " it be just the usual claptrap , " say Mr. Low , " only put into 
 language somewhat more grandiloquent than usual . " 
 " Claptrap ! " say Phineas . 
 " it be what I call downright radical nonsense , " say Mrs. Low , nod 
 her head energetically . " portrait indeed ! why should we want to have 
 a portrait of ignorance and ugliness ? what we all want be to have 
 thing quiet and orderly . " 
 " then you would well have a paternal government at once , " say Phineas . 
 " just so , " say Mr. Low , - " only that what you call a paternal 
 government be not always quiet and orderly . national order I take to 
 be submission to the law . I should not think it quiet and orderly if 
 I be send to Cayenne without be bring before a jury . " 
 " but such a man as you would not be send to Cayenne , " say Phineas , 
 " my next - door neighbour might be , - which would be almost as bad . let 
 he be send to Cayenne if he deserve it , but let a jury say that 
 he have deserve it . my idea of government be this , - that we want 
 to be govern by law and not by caprice , and that we must have a 
 legislature to make our law . if I think that Parliament as at 
 present establish make the law badly , I would desire a change ; 
 but I doubt whether we shall have they well from any change in 
 Parliament which Reform will give we . " 
 " of course not , " say Mrs. Low . " but we shall have a lot of beggar 
 put on horseback , and we all know where they ride to . " 
 then Phineas become aware that it be not easy to convince any man or 
 any woman on a point of politic , - not even though he who argue may 
 have an eloquent letter from a philosophical Cabinet Minister in his 
 pocket to assist he . 
 CHAPTER xxxvi 
 Phineas Finn make Progress 
 February be far advanced and the new Reform Bill have already be 
 bring forward , before Lady Laura Kennedy come up to town . Phineas 
 have of course see Mr. Kennedy and have hear from he tiding of 
 his wife . she be at Saulsby with Lady Baldock and Miss Boreham and 
 Violet Effingham , but be to be in London soon . Mr. Kennedy , as it 
 appear , do not quite know when he be to expect his wife ; and 
 Phineas think that he could perceive from the tone of the husband 's 
 voice that something be amiss . he could not however ask any 
 question except such as refer to the expected arrival . be 
 Miss Effingham to come to London with Lady Laura ? Mr. Kennedy 
 believe that Miss Effingham would be up before Easter , but he do 
 not know whether she would come with his wife . " woman , " he say , " be 
 so fond of mystery that one can never quite know what they intend to 
 do . " he correct himself at once however , perceive that he have 
 seem to say something against his wife , and explain that his 
 general accusation against the sex be not intend to apply to 
 Lady Laura . this , however , he do so awkwardly as to strengthen 
 the feeling with Phineas that something assuredly be wrong . " Miss 
 Effingham , " say Mr. Kennedy , " never seem to know her own mind . " 
 " I suppose she be like other beautiful girl who be pet on all 
 side , " say Phineas . " as for her beauty , I do not   think much of it , " 
 say Mr. Kennedy ; " and as for petting , I do not understand it in 
 reference to grow person . child may be pet , and dog , - though 
 that too be bad ; but what you call pet for grown person be I 
 think frivolous and almost indecent . " Phineas could not help think 
 of Lord Chiltern 's opinion that it would have be wise to have leave 
 Mr. Kennedy in the hand of the garrotter . 
 the debate on the second reading of the bill be to be commence 
 on the 1st of March , and two day before that Lady Laura arrive 
 in Grosvenor Place . Phineas get a note from she in three word to 
 say that she be at home and would see he if he call on Sunday 
 afternoon . the Sunday to which she allude be the last day of 
 February . Phineas be now more certain than ever that something 
 be wrong . have there be nothing wrong between Lady Laura and her 
 husband , she would not have rebel against he by ask visitor 
 to the house on a Sunday . he have nothing to do with that , however , 
 and of course he do as he be desire . he call on the Sunday , and 
 find Mrs. Bonteen sit with Lady Laura . " I be just in time for 
 the debate , " say Lady Laura , when the first greeting be over . 
 " you do not   mean to say that you intend to sit it out , " say Mrs. 
 Bonteen . 
 " every word of it , - unless I lose my seat . what else be there to be 
 do at present ? " 
 " but the place they give we be so unpleasant , " say Mrs. Bonteen . 
 " there be bad place even than the Ladies ' Gallery , " say 
 Lady Laura . " and perhaps it be as well to make oneself use to 
 inconvenience of all kind . you will speak , Mr. Finn ? " 
 " I intend to do so . " 
 " of course you will . the great speech will be Mr. Gresham 's , Mr. 
 Daubeny 's , and Mr. Monk 's . " 
 " Mr. Palliser intend to be very strong , " say Mrs. Bonteen . 
 " a man can not be strong or not as he like it , " say Lady Laura . " Mr. 
 Palliser I believe to be a most useful man , but he never can become 
 an orator . he be of the same class as Mr. Kennedy , - only of course 
 high in the class . " 
 " we all look for a great speech from Mr. Kennedy , " say Mrs. Bonteen . 
 " I have not the slight idea whether he will open his lip , " say 
 Lady Laura . immediately after that Mrs. Bonteen take she leave . 
 " I hate that woman like poison , " continue Lady Laura . " she be 
 always play a game , and it be such a small game that she play ! 
 and she contribute so little to society . she be not witty nor 
 well - inform , - not even sufficiently ignorant or ridiculous to be a 
 laughing - stock . one get nothing from she , and yet she have make she 
 foot good in the world . " 
 " I think she be a friend of your . " 
 " you do not think so ! you could not have think so ! how can you 
 bring such an accusation against I , know I as you do ? but never 
 mind Mrs. Bonteen now . on what day shall you speak ? " 
 " on Tuesday if I can . " 
 " I suppose you can arrange it ? " 
 " I shall endeavour to do so , as far as any arrangement can go . " 
 " we shall carry the second reading , " say Lady Laura . 
 " yes , " say Phineas ; " I think we shall ; but by the vote of man who 
 be determine so to pull the bill to piece in committee , that its 
 own parent will not know it . I doubt whether Mr. Mildmay will have 
 the temper to stand it . " 
 " they tell I that Mr. Mildmay will abandon the custody of the bill 
 to Mr. Gresham after his first speech . " 
 " I do not   know that Mr. Gresham 's temper be more enduring than Mr. 
 Mildmay 's , " say Phineas . 
 " well ; - we shall see . my own impression be that nothing would save 
 the country so effectually at the present moment as the removal of 
 Mr. Turnbull to a high and a well sphere . " 
 " let we say the House of Lords , " say Phineas . 
 " God forbid ! " say Lady Laura . 
 Phineas sit there for half an hour and then get up to go , have 
 speak no word on any other subject than that of politic . he long 
 to ask after Violet . he long to make some inquiry respect Lord 
 Chiltern . and , to tell the truth , he feel painfully curious to 
 hear Lady Laura say something about her own self . he could not but 
 remember what have be say between they up over the waterfall , and 
 how he have be warn not to return to Loughlinter . and then again , 
 do Lady Laura know anything of what have pass between he and 
 Violet ? " where be your brother ? " he say , as he rise from his chair . 
 " Oswald be in London . he be here not an hour before you come in . " 
 " where be he stay ? " 
 " at Moroni 's . he go down on Tuesday , I think . he be to see his 
 father to - morrow morning . " 
 " by agreement ? " 
 " yes ; - by agreement . there be a new trouble , - about money that they 
 think to be due to I . but I can not tell you all now . there have be 
 some word between Mr. Kennedy and papa . but I will not   talk about it . 
 you would find Oswald at Moroni 's at any hour before eleven 
 to - morrow . " 
 " do he say anything about I ? " ask Phineas . 
 " we mention your name certainly . " 
 " I do not ask from vanity , but I want to know whether he be angry 
 with I . " 
 " angry with you ! not in the least . I will tell you just what he say . 
 he say he should not wish to live even with you , but that he would 
 soon try it with you than with any man he ever know . " 
 " he have get a letter from I ? " 
 " he do not say so ; - but he do not say he have not . " 
 " I will see he to - morrow if I can . " and then Phineas prepare to go . 
 " one word , Mr. Finn , " say Lady Laura , hardly look he in the face 
 and yet make an effort to do so . " I wish you to forget what I say 
 to you at Loughlinter . " 
 " it shall be as though it be forget , " say Phineas . 
 " let it be absolutely forget . in such a case a man be bind to do 
 all that a woman ask he , and no man have a true spirit of chivalry 
 than yourself . that be all . look in when you can . I will not ask you 
 to dine here as yet , because we be so frightfully dull . do your good 
 on Tuesday , and then let we see you on Wednesday . good - bye . " 
 Phineas as he walk across the park towards his club make up his 
 mind that he would forget the scene by the waterfall . he have never 
 quite known what it have mean , and he would wipe it away from his 
 mind altogether . he acknowledge to himself that chivalry do demand 
 of he that he should never allow himself to think of Lady Laura 's 
 rash word to he . that she be not happy with her husband be very 
 clear to he ; - but that be altogether another affair . she might be 
 unhappy with her husband without indulge any guilty love . he have 
 never think it possible that she could be happy live with such a 
 husband as Mr. Kennedy . all that , however , be now past remedy , and 
 she must simply endure the mode of life which she have prepare for 
 herself . there be other man and woman in London tie together for 
 well and bad , in reference to whose union their friend know that 
 there would be no well ; - that it must be all bad . Lady Laura must 
 bear it , as it be bear by many another married woman . 
 on the Monday morning Phineas call at Moroni 's Hotel at ten 
 o'clock , but in spite of Lady Laura 's assurance to the contrary , he 
 find that Lord Chiltern be out . he have feel some palpitation at the 
 heart as he make his inquiry , know well the fiery nature of the 
 man he expect to see . it might be that there would be some actual 
 personal conflict between he and this half - mad lord before he get 
 back again into the street . what Lady Laura have say about she 
 brother do not in the estimation of Phineas make this at all the 
 less probable . the half - mad lord be so singular in his way that it 
 might well be that he should speak handsomely of a rival behind his 
 back and yet take he by the throat as soon as they be together , 
 face to face . and yet , as Phineas think , it be necessary that he 
 should see the half - mad lord . he have write a letter to which he have 
 receive no reply , and he consider it to be incumbent on he to 
 ask whether it have be receive and whether any answer to it be 
 intend to be give . he go therefore to Lord Chiltern at once , - as 
 I have say , with some feeling at his heart that there might be 
 violence , at any rate of word , before he should find himself again 
 in the street . but Lord Chiltern be not there . all that the porter 
 know be that Lord Chiltern intend to leave the house on the 
 follow morning . then Phineas write a note and leave it with the 
 porter . 
 DEAR CHILTERN , 
 I particularly want to see you with reference to a letter 
 I write to you last summer . I must be in the House to - day 
 from four till the debate be over . I will be at the Reform 
 Club from two till half - past three , and will come if you 
 will send for I , or I will meet you anywhere at any hour 
 to - morrow morning . 
 your , always , P. F. 
 no message come to he at the Reform Club , and he be in his seat in 
 the House by four o'clock . during the debate a note be bring to 
 he , which run as follow : - 
 I have get your letter this moment . of course we must 
 meet . I hunt on Tuesday , and go down by the early train ; 
 but I will come to town on Wednesday . we shall require to 
 be private , and I will therefore be at your room at one 
 o'clock on that day . - C. 
 Phineas at once perceive that the note be a hostile note , write 
 in an angry spirit , - write to one whom the writer do not at the 
 moment acknowledge to be his friend . this be certainly the case , 
 whatever Lord Chiltern may have say to his sister as to his 
 friendship for Phineas . phinea crush the note into his pocket , and 
 of course determine that he would be in his room at the hour name . 
 the debate be open by a speech from Mr. Mildmay , in which that 
 gentleman at great length and with much perspicuity explain his 
 notion of that measure of parliamentary Reform which he think to 
 be necessary . he be listen to with the great attention to the 
 close , - and perhaps , at the end of his speech , with more attention 
 than usual , as there have go abroad a rumour that the Prime Minister 
 intend to declare that this would be the last effort of his life 
 in that course . but , if he ever intend to utter such a pledge , his 
 heart misgave he when the time come for utter it . he merely say 
 that as the management of the bill in committee would be an affair 
 of much labour , and probably spread over many night , he would be 
 assist in his work by his colleague , and especially by his right 
 honourable friend the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs . it be 
 then understand that Mr. Gresham would take the lead should the bill 
 go into committee ; - but it be understand also that no resignation of 
 leadership have be make by Mr. Mildmay . 
 the measure now propose to the House be very much the same as that 
 which have be bring forward in the last session . the exist 
 theory of british representation be not to be change , but the 
 actual practice be to be bring near to the ideal theory . the 
 idea of manhood suffrage , and of electoral district , be to be as 
 for ever removed from the bulwark of the British Constitution . there 
 be to be county with agricultural constituency , purposely 
 arrange to be purely agricultural , whenever the nature of the 
 county would admit of its being so . no artificer at Reform , let 
 he be conservative or Liberal , can make Middlesex or Lancashire 
 agricultural ; but Wiltshire and Suffolk be to be preserve 
 inviolable to the plough , - and the apple of Devonshire be still 
 to have their sway . every town in the three kingdom with a certain 
 population be to have two member . but here there be much room 
 for cavil , - as all man know would be the case . who shall say what 
 be a town , or where shall be its limit ? bit of county might be 
 borrow , so as to lessen the Conservatism of the county without 
 endanger the Liberalism of the borough . and then there be the 
 borough with one member , - and then the group of little borough . 
 in the discussion of any such arrangement how easy be the picking 
 of hole ; how impossible the fabrication of a garment that shall be 
 impervious to such picking ! then again there be that great question 
 of the ballot . on that there be to be no mistake . Mr. Mildmay again 
 pledge himself to disappear from the Treasury bench should any 
 motion , clause , or resolution be carry by that House in favour of 
 the ballot . he speak for three hour , and then leave the carcass of 
 his bill to be fight for by the oppose army . 
 no reader of these page will desire that the speech in the debate 
 should be even indicate . it soon become know that the Conservatives 
 would not divide the House against the second reading of the bill . 
 they declare , however , very plainly their intention of so alter 
 the clause of the bill in committee , - or at least of attempt so 
 to do , - as to make the bill their bill , rather than the bill of their 
 opponent . to this Mr. Palliser reply that as long as nothing vital 
 be touch , the Government would only be too happy to oblige their 
 friend opposite . if anything vital be touch , the government 
 could only fall back upon their friend on that side . and in this way 
 man be very civil to each other . but Mr. Turnbull , who open the 
 debate on the Tuesday , thunder out an assurance to god and man 
 that he would divide the House on the second reading of the bill 
 itself . he do not doubt but that there be many good man and true 
 to go with he into the lobby , but into the lobby he would go if he 
 have no more than a single friend to support he . and he warn the 
 Sovereign , and he warn the House , and he warn the people of 
 England , that the measure of Reform now propose by a so - call 
 liberal Minister be a measure prepare in concert with the ancient 
 enemy of the people . he be very loud , very angry , and quite 
 successful in halloo down sundry attempt which be make to 
 interrupt he . " I find , " he say , " that there be many member here 
 who do not know I yet , - young member , probably , who be green from 
 the waste land and road - side of private life . they will know I 
 soon , and then , may be , there will be less of this foolish noise , 
 less of this elongation of unnecessary neck . our Rome must be 
 arouse to a sense of its danger by other voice than these . " he 
 be call to order , but it be rule that he have not be out of 
 order , - and he be very triumphant . Mr. Monk answer he , and it 
 be declare afterwards that Mr. Monk 's speech be one of the fine 
 piece of oratory that have ever be utter in that House . he make 
 one remark personal to Mr. Turnbull . " I quite agree with the right 
 honourable gentleman in the chair , " he say , " when he declare that 
 the honourable member be not out of order just now . we all of we 
 agree with he always on such point . the rule of our House have 
 be lay down with the utmost latitude , so that the course of our 
 debate may not be frivolously or too easily interrupt . but a 
 member may be so in order as to incur the displeasure of the House , 
 and to merit the reproach of his countryman . " this little duel 
 give great life to the debate ; but it be say that those two great 
 Reformers , Mr. Turnbull and Mr. Monk , could never again meet as 
 friend . 
 in the course of the debate on Tuesday , Phineas get upon his leg . 
 the reader , I trust , will remember that hitherto he have fail 
 altogether as a speaker . on one occasion he have lack even the 
 spirit to use and deliver an oration which he have prepare . on 
 a second occasion he have break down , - woefully , and past all 
 redemption , as say those who be not his friend , - unfortunately , 
 but not past redemption , as say those who be his true friend . 
 after that once again he have arise and say a few word which have 
 call for no remark , and have be speak as though he be in the 
 habit of address the House daily . it may be doubt whether there 
 be half - a - dozen man now present who recognise the fact that this 
 man , who be so well known to so many of they , be now about to 
 make another attempt at a first speech . Phineas himself diligently 
 attempt to forget that such be the case . he have prepare for 
 himself a few heading of what he intend to say , and on one or 
 two point have arrange his word . his hope be that even though 
 he should forget the word , he might still be able to cling to the 
 thread of his discourse . when he find himself again upon his leg 
 amidst those crowded seat , for a few moment there come upon he 
 that old sensation of awe . again thing grow dim before his eye , and 
 again he hardly know at which end of that long chamber the Speaker 
 be sit . but there arise within he a sudden courage , as soon as 
 the sound of his own voice in that room have make itself intimate to 
 his ear ; and after the first few sentence , all fear , all awe , be 
 go from he . when he read his speech in the report afterwards , he 
 find that he have stray very wide of his intended course , but he 
 have stray without tumble into ditch , or fall into sunken 
 pit . he have speak much from Mr. Monk 's letter , but have have the 
 grace to acknowledge whence have come his inspiration . he hardly know , 
 however , whether he have fail again or not , till Barrington Erle 
 come up to he as they be leave the House , with his old easy 
 press manner . " so you have get into form at last , " he say . " I 
 always think that it would come . I never for a moment believe 
 but that it would come soon or later . " Phineas Finn answer 
 not a word ; but he go home and lie awake all night triumphant . 
 the verdict of Barrington Erle suffice to assure he that he have 
 succeed . 
 CHAPTER XXXVII 
 A Rough Encounter 
 Phineas , when he wake , have two matter to occupy his mind , - his 
 success of the previous night , and his come interview with Lord 
 Chiltern . he stay at home the whole morning , know that nothing 
 could be do before the hour Lord Chiltern have name for his visit . 
 he read every word of the debate , studiously postpone the perusal 
 of his own speech till he should come to it in due order . and then he 
 write to his father , commence his letter as though his writing have 
 no reference to the affair of the previous night . but he soon find 
 himself compel to break into some mention of it . " I send you a 
  Times , " he say , " in order that you may see that I have have my 
 finger in the pie . I have hitherto abstain from put myself 
 forward in the House , partly through a base fear for which I despise 
 myself , and partly through a feeling of prudence that a man of my age 
 should not be in a hurry to gather laurel . this be literally true . 
 there have be the fear , and there have be the prudence . my wonder 
 be , that I have not incur more contempt from other because I have 
 be a coward . People have be so kind to I that I must suppose 
 they to have judge I more leniently than I have judge myself . " 
 then , as he be put up the paper , he look again at his own 
 speech , and of course read every word of it once more . as he do so 
 it occur to he that the reporter have be more than courteous to 
 he . the man who have follow he have be , he think , at any rate 
 as long - wind as himself ; but to this orator less than half a column 
 have be grant . to he have be grant ten line in big type , and 
 after that a whole column and a half . let Lord Chiltern come and do 
 his bad ! 
 when it want but twenty minute to one , and he be begin to 
 think in what way he have well answer the half - mad lord , should the 
 lord in his wrath be very mad , there come to he a note by the hand 
 of some messenger . he know at once that it be from Lady Laura , and 
 open it in hot haste it be as follow : - 
 DEAR MR . FINN , 
 we be all talk about your speech . my father be in 
 the gallery and hear it , - and say that he have to thank 
 I for send you to Loughton . that make I very happy . 
 Mr. Kennedy declare that you be eloquent , but too 
 short . that come from he be praise indeed . I have see 
 Barrington , who take pride to himself that you be his 
 political child . Violet say that it be the only speech 
 she ever read . I be there , and be delighted . I be sure 
 that it be in you to do it . 
 your , L. K. 
 I suppose we shall see you after the House be up , but 
 I write this as I shall barely have an opportunity of 
 speak to you then . I shall be in Portman Square , not 
 at home , from six till seven . 
 the moment in which Phineas refolde this note and put it into his 
 breast coat - pocket be , I think , the happy of his life . then , 
 before he have withdraw his hand from his breast , he remember that 
 what be now about to take place between he and Lord Chiltern would 
 probably be the mean of separate he altogether from Lady Laura 
 and her family . Nay , might it not render it necessary that he should 
 abandon the seat in Parliament which have be confer upon he by 
 the personal kindness of Lord Brentford ? let that be as it might . one 
 thing be clear to he . he would not abandon Violet Effingham till 
 he should be desire to do so in the plain language by Violet 
 Effingham herself . look at his watch he see that it be one 
 o'clock , and at that moment Lord Chiltern be announce . 
 Phineas go forward immediately with his hand out to meet his 
 visitor . " Chiltern , " he say , " I be very glad to see you . " but Lord 
 Chiltern do not take his hand . pass on to the table , with his hat 
 still on his head , and with a dark scowl upon his brow , the young 
 lord stand for a few moment perfectly silent . then he chuck a 
 letter across the table to the spot at which Phineas be stand . 
 Phineas , take up the letter , perceive that it be that which 
 he , in his great attempt to be honest , have write from the inn at 
 Loughton . " it be my own letter to you , " he say . 
 " yes ; it be your letter to I . I receive it oddly enough together 
 with your own note at Moroni 's , - on Monday morning . it have be 
 round the world , I suppose , and reach I only then . you must 
 withdraw it . " 
 " withdraw it ? " 
 " yes , sir , withdraw it . as far as I can learn , without ask any 
 question which would have commit myself or the young lady , you 
 have not act upon it . you have not yet do what you there threaten 
 to do . in that you have be very wise , and there can be no 
 difficulty in your withdraw the letter . " 
 " I certainly shall not withdraw it , Lord Chiltern . " 
 " do you remember - what - I once - tell you , - about myself and Miss 
 Effingham ? " this question he ask very slowly , pause between the 
 word , and look full into the face of his rival , towards whom he 
 have gradually come nearer . and his countenance , as he do so , be 
 by no means pleasant . the redness of his complexion have become more 
 ruddy than usual ; he still wear his hat as though with studied 
 insolence ; his right hand be clench ; and there be that look of 
 angry purpose in his eye which no man like to see in the eye of an 
 antagonist . Phineas be afraid of no violence , personal to himself ; 
 but he be afraid of , - of what I may , perhaps , good call " a row . " 
 to be tumble over the chair and table with his late friend and 
 present enemy in Mrs. Bunce 's room would be most unpleasant to he . 
 if there be to be blow he , too , must strike ; - and he be very 
 averse to strike Lady Laura 's brother , Lord Brentford 's son , Violet 
 Effingham 's friend . if need be , however , he would strike . 
 " I suppose I remember what you mean , " say Phineas . " I think you 
 declare that you would quarrel with any man who might presume to 
 address Miss Effingham . be it that to which you allude ? " 
 " it be that , " say Lord Chiltern . 
 " I remember what you say very well . if nothing else be to deter I 
 from ask Miss Effingham to be my wife , you will hardly think that 
 that ought to have any weight . the threat have no weight . " 
 " it be not speak as a threat , sir , and that you know as well as I 
 do . it be say from a friend to a friend , - as I think then . but it 
 be not the less true . I wonder what you can think of faith and truth 
 and honesty of purpose when you take advantage of my absence , - you , 
 whom I have tell a thousand time that I love she well than my own 
 soul ! you stand before the world as a rise man , and I stand before 
 the world as a man - damned . you have be choose by my father to sit 
 for our family borough , while I be an outcast from his house . you 
 have Cabinet Ministers for your friend , while I have hardly a decent 
 associate leave to I in the world . but I can say of myself that I 
 have never do anything unworthy of a gentleman , while this thing 
 that you be do be unworthy of the low man . " 
 " I have do nothing unworthy , " say Phineas . " I write to you 
 instantly when I have resolve , - though it be painful to I to have 
 to tell such a secret to any one . " 
 " you write ! yes ; when I be mile distant ; week , month away . but I 
 do not come here to bullyrag like an old woman . I get your letter 
 only on Monday , and know nothing of what have occur . be Miss 
 Effingham to be - your wife ? " Lord Chiltern have now come quite close 
 to Phineas , and Phineas feel that that clench fist might be in his 
 face in half a moment . Miss Effingham of course be not engage to 
 he , but it seem to he that if he be now so to declare , such 
 declaration would appear to have be draw from he by fear . " I ask 
 you , " say Lord Chiltern , " in what position you now stand towards 
 Miss Effingham . if you be not a coward you will tell I . " 
 " whether I tell you or not , you know that I be not a coward , " say 
 Phineas . 
 " I shall have to try , " say Lord Chiltern . " but if you please I will 
 ask you for an answer to my question . " 
 Phineas pause for a moment , think what honesty of purpose and 
 a high spirit would , when combine together , demand of he , and 
 together with these requirement he feel that he be bind to join 
 some feeling of duty towards Miss Effingham . Lord Chiltern be 
 stand there , fiery red , with his hand still clench , and his hat 
 still on , wait for his answer . " let I have your question again , " 
 say Phineas , " and I will answer it if I find that I can do so 
 without loss of self - respect . " 
 " I ask you in what position you stand towards Miss Effingham . mind , 
 I do not doubt at all , but I choose to have a reply from yourself . " 
 " you will remember , of course , that I can only answer to the good of 
 my belief . " 
 " answer to the good of your belief . " 
 " I think she regard I as an intimate friend . " 
 " have you say as an indifferent acquaintance , you would , I think , 
 have be near the mark . but we will let that be . I presume I 
 may understand that you have give up any idea of change that 
 position ? " 
 " you may understand nothing of the kind , Lord Chiltern . " 
 " why ; - what hope have you ? " 
 " that be another thing . I shall not speak of that ; - at any rate not 
 to you . " 
 " then , sir , - " and now Lord Chiltern advance another step and raise 
 his hand as though he be about to put it with some form of violence 
 on the person of his rival . 
 " stop , Chiltern , " say Phineas , step back , so that there be some 
 article of furniture between he and his adversary . " I do not choose 
 that there should be a riot here . " 
 " what do you call a riot , sir ? I believe that after all you be a 
 poltroon . what I require of you be that you shall meet I . will you 
 do that ? " 
 " you mean , - to fight ? " 
 " yes , - to fight ; to fight ; to fight . for what other purpose do you 
 suppose that I can wish to meet you ? " Phineas feel at the moment that 
 the fighting of a duel would be destructive to all his political 
 hope . few englishman fight duel in these day . they who do so 
 be always reckon to be fool . and a duel between he and Lord 
 Brentford 's son must , as he think , separate he from Violet , from 
 Lady Laura , from Lord Brentford , and from his borough . but yet how 
 could he refuse ? " what have you to think of , sir , when such an offer 
 as that be make to you ? " say the fiery - red lord . 
 " I have to think whether I have courage enough to refuse to make 
 myself an ass . " 
 " you say that you do not wish to have a riot . that be your way to 
 escape what you call - a riot . " 
 " you want to bully I , Chiltern . " 
 " no , sir ; - I simply want this , that you should leave I where you 
 find I , and not interfere with that which you have long know I 
 claim as my own . " 
 " but it be not your own . " 
 " then you can only fight I . " 
 " you have well send some friend to I , and I will name some one , 
 whom he shall meet . " 
 " of course I will do that if I have your promise to meet I . we 
 can be in Belgium in an hour or two , and back again in a few more 
 hour ; - that is , any one of we who may chance to be alive . 
 " I will select a friend , and will tell he everything , and will then 
 do as he bid I . " 
 " yes ; - some old steady - go buffer . Mr. Kennedy , perhaps . " 
 " it will certainly not be Mr. Kennedy . I shall probably ask Laurence 
 Fitzgibbon to manage for I in such an affair . " 
 " perhaps you will see he at once , then , so that Colepepper may 
 arrange with he this afternoon . and let I assure you , Mr. Finn , 
 that there will be a meeting between we after some fashion , let the 
 idea of your friend Mr. Fitzgibbon be what they may . " then Lord 
 Chiltern purpose to go , but turn again as he be go . " and 
 remember this , " he say , " my complaint be that you have be false to 
 I , - damnably false ; not that you have fall in love with this young 
 lady or with that . " then the fiery - red lord open the door for 
 himself and take his departure . 
 Phineas , as soon as he be alone , walk down to the House , at which 
 there be an early sitting . as he go there be one great question 
 which he have to settle with himself , - be there any justice in the 
 charge make against he that he have be false to his friend ? when he 
 have think over the matter at Saulsby , after rush down there that 
 he might throw himself at Violet 's foot , he have assure himself that 
 such a letter as that which he resolve to write to Lord Chiltern , 
 would be even chivalrous in its absolute honesty . he would tell his 
 purpose to Lord Chiltern the moment that his purpose be form ; - and 
 would afterwards speak of Lord Chiltern behind his back as one 
 dear friend should speak of another . have Miss Effingham show the 
 slight intention of accept Lord Chiltern 's offer , he would have 
 acknowledge to himself that the circumstance of his position make 
 it impossible that he should , with honour , become his friend 's rival . 
 but be he to be debar for ever from get that which he want 
 because Lord Chiltern want it also , - know , as he do so well , 
 that Lord Chiltern could not get the thing which he want ? all this 
 have be quite sufficient for he at Saulsby . but now the charge 
 against he that he have be false to his friend ring in his ear and 
 make he unhappy . it certainly be true that Lord Chiltern have not 
 give up his hope , and that he have speak probably more openly to 
 Phineas respect they than he have do to any other human being . if 
 it be true that he have be false , then he must comply with any 
 requisition which Lord Chiltern might make , - short of voluntarily 
 give up the lady . he must fight if he be ask to do so , even 
 though fighting be his ruin . 
 when again in the House yesterday 's scene come back upon he , and 
 more than one man come to he congratulate he . Mr. Monk take his 
 hand and speak a word to he . the old Premier nod to he . Mr. 
 Gresham greet he ; and Plantagenet Palliser openly tell he that 
 he have make a good speech . how sweet would all this have be have 
 there not be ever at his heart the remembrance of his terrible 
 difficulty , - the consciousness that he be about to be force into 
 an absurdity which would put an end to all this sweetness ! why be 
 the world in England so severe against duelling ? after all , as he 
 regard the matter now , a duel might be the good way , nay , the only 
 way out of a difficulty . if he might only be allow to go out with 
 Lord Chiltern the whole thing might be arrange . if he be not shoot 
 he might carry on his suit with Miss Effingham unfettere by any 
 impediment on that side . and if he be shoot , what matter be that 
 to any one but himself ? why should the world be so thin - skinned , - so 
 foolishly chary of human life ? 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon do not come to the House , and Phineas look for 
 he at both the club which he frequent , - leave a note at each as 
 he do not find he . he also leave a note for he at his lodging in 
 Duke Street . " I must see you this evening . I shall dine at the Reform 
 Club , - pray come there . " after that , Phineas go up to Portman 
 Square , in accordance with the instruction receive from Lady Laura . 
 there he see Violet Effingham , meet she for the first time since 
 he have part from she on the great step at Saulsby . of course 
 he speak to she , and of course she be gracious to he . but her 
 graciousness be only a smile and his speech be only a word . there 
 be many in the room , but not enough to make privacy possible , - as 
 it become possible at a crowded evening meeting . Lord Brentford 
 be there , and the Bonteens , and Barrington Erle , and Lady Glencora 
 Palliser , and Lord Cantrip with his young wife . it be manifestly a 
 meeting of Liberals , semi - social and semi - political ; - so arrange 
 that lady might feel that some interest in politic be allow 
 to they , and perhaps some influence also . afterwards Mr. Palliser 
 himself come in . Phineas , however , be most strike by find that 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon be there , and that Mr. Kennedy be not . in 
 regard to Mr. Kennedy , he be quite sure that have such a meeting 
 take place before Lady Laura 's marriage , Mr. Kennedy would have 
 be present . " I must speak to you as we go away , " say Phineas , 
 whisper a word into Fitzgibbon 's ear . " I have be leave note 
 for you all about the town . " " not a duel , I hope , " say Fitzgibbon . 
 how pleasant it be , - that meeting ; or would have be have there not 
 be that nightmare on his breast ! they all talk as though there 
 be perfect accord between they and perfect confidence . there be 
 there great man , - Cabinet Ministers , and beautiful woman , - the wife 
 and daughter of some of England 's high noble . and Phineas Finn , 
 throw back , now and again , a thought to Killaloe , find himself 
 among they as one of themselves . how could any Mr. Low say that he 
 be wrong ? 
 on a sofa near to he , so that he could almost touch her foot with 
 his , be sit Violet Effingham , and as he lean over from his 
 chair discuss some point in Mr. Mildmay 's bill with that most 
 inveterate politician , Lady Glencora , Violet look into his face and 
 smile . oh heaven ! if Lord Chiltern and he might only toss up as to 
 which of they should go to Patagonia and remain there for the next 
 ten year , and which should have Violet Effingham for a wife in 
 London ! 
 " come along , Phineas , if you mean to come , " say Laurence Fitzgibbon . 
 Phineas be of course bind to go , though Lady Glencora be still 
 talk Radicalism , and Violet Effingham be still smile ineffably . 
 VOLUME II 
 CHAPTER XXXVIII 
 the Duel 
 " I know it be a duel ; - bedad I do , " say Laurence Fitzgibbon , 
 stand at the corner of Orchard Street and Oxford Street , when 
 Phineas have half tell his story . " I be sure of it from the tone of 
 your voice , my boy . we must not   let it come off , that be all ; - not 
 if we can help it . " then Phineas be allow to proceed and finish 
 his story . " I do not   see any way out of it ; I do not , indeed , " say 
 Laurence . by this time Phineas have come to think that the duel be in 
 very truth the good way out of the difficulty . it be a bad way out , 
 but then it be a way ; - and he could not see any other . " as for ill 
 treat he , that be nonsense , " say Laurence . " what be the girl to 
 do , if one fellow may not   come on as soon as another fellow be down ? 
 but then , you see , a fellow never know when he be down himself , and 
 therefore he think that he be ill use . I will tell you what now . I 
 should not   wonder if we could not   do it on the sly , - unless one of you 
 be stupid enough to hit the other in an awkward place . if you be 
 certain of your hand now , the right shoulder be the good spot . " 
 Phineas feel very certain that he would not hit Lord Chiltern in an 
 awkward place , although he be by no mean sure of his hand . let come 
 what might , he would not aim at his adversary . but of this he have 
 think it proper to say nothing to Laurence Fitzgibbon . 
 and the duel do come off on the sly . the meeting in the drawing - room 
 in Portman Square , of which mention be make in the last chapter , 
 take place on a Wednesday afternoon . on the Thursday , Friday , Monday , 
 and Tuesday follow , the great debate on Mr. Mildmay 's bill be 
 continue , and at three on the Tuesday night the House divide . there 
 be a majority in favour of the Ministers , not large enough to permit 
 they to claim a triumph for their party , or even an ovation for 
 themselves ; but still sufficient to enable they to send their bill 
 into committee . Mr. Daubeny and Mr. Turnbull have again join 
 their force together in opposition to the ministerial measure . on 
 the Thursday Phineas have show himself in the House , but during 
 the remainder of this interesting period he be absent from his 
 place , nor be he see at the club , nor do any man know of his 
 whereabouts . I think that Lady Laura Kennedy be the first to miss 
 he with any real sense of his absence . she would now go to Portman 
 Square on the afternoon of every Sunday , - at which time her husband 
 be attend the second service of his church , - and there she would 
 receive those whom she call her father 's guest . but as her father 
 be never there on the Sundays , and as these gathering have be 
 create by herself , the reader will probably think that she be 
 obey her husband 's behest in regard to the Sabbath after a very 
 indifferent fashion . the reader may be quite sure , however , that Mr. 
 Kennedy know well what be be do in Portman Square . whatever 
 might be Lady Laura 's fault , she do not commit the fault of 
 disobey her husband in secret . there be , probably , a few word 
 on the subject ; but we need not go very closely into that matter at 
 the present moment . 
 on the Sunday which afford some rest in the middle of the great 
 reform debate Lady Laura ask for Mr. Finn , and no one could answer 
 her question . and then it be remember that Laurence Fitzgibbon 
 be also absent . Barrington Erle know nothing of Phineas , - have hear 
 nothing ; but be able to say that Fitzgibbon have be with Mr. 
 Ratler , the patronage secretary and liberal whip , early on Thursday , 
 express his intention of absent himself for two day . Mr. 
 Ratler have be wroth , bid he remain at his duty , and point 
 out to he the great importance of the moment . then Barrington Erle 
 quote Laurence Fitzgibbon 's reply . " my boy , " say Laurence to poor 
 Ratler , " the path of duty lead but to the grave . all the same ; I will 
 be in at the death , Ratler , my boy , as sure as the sun 's in heaven . " 
 not ten minute after the telling of this little story , Fitzgibbon 
 enter the room in Portman Square , and Lady Laura at once ask he 
 after Phineas . " Bedad , Lady Laura , I have be out of town myself for 
 two day , and I know nothing . " 
 " Mr. Finn have not be with you , then ? " 
 " with I ! no , - not with I . I have a job of business of my own which 
 take I over to Paris . and have Phinny flee too ? poor Ratler ! I 
 should not   wonder if it be not   an asylum he be in before the session be 
 over . " 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon certainly possess the rare accomplishment of 
 tell a lie with a good grace . have any man call he a liar he 
 would have consider himself to be not only insult , but injure 
 also . he believe himself to be a man of truth . there be , however , 
 in his estimation certain subject on which a man might depart as 
 wide as the pole be asunder from truth without subject himself 
 to any ignominy for falsehood . in deal with a tradesman as to his 
 debt , or with a rival as to a lady , or with any man or woman in 
 defence of a lady 's character , or in any such matter as that of a 
 duel , Laurence believe that a gentleman be bind to lie , and that 
 he would be no gentleman if he hesitate to do so . not the slight 
 prick of conscience disturb he when he tell Lady Laura that he 
 have be in Paris , and that he know nothing of Phineas Finn . but , in 
 truth , during the last day or two he have be in Flanders , and not in 
 Paris , and have stand as second with his friend Phineas on the sand 
 at Blankenberg , a little fishing - town some twelve mile distant 
 from bruge , and have leave his friend since that at an hotel at 
 Ostend , - with a wound just under the shoulder , from which a bullet 
 have be extract . 
 the manner of the meeting have be in this wise . Captain Colepepper 
 and Laurence Fitzgibbon have hold their meeting , and at this meeting 
 Laurence have take certain standing - ground on behalf of his friend , 
 and in obedience to his friend 's positive instruction ; - which be 
 this , that his friend could not abandon his right of address the 
 young lady , should he hereafter ever think fit to do so . let that 
 be grant , and Laurence would do anything . but then that could not 
 be grant , and Laurence could only shrug his shoulder . nor would 
 Laurence admit that his friend have be false . " the question lie in 
 a nutshell , " say Laurence , with that sweet Connaught brogue which 
 always come to he when he desire to be effective ; - " here it be . one 
 gentleman tell another that he be sweet upon a young lady , but that 
 the young lady have refuse he , and always will refuse he , for ever 
 and ever . that be the truth anyhow . be the second gentleman bind by 
 that not to address the young lady ? I say he be not bind . it would be a 
 d - - d hard tratement , Captain Colepepper , if a man 's mouth and all 
 the ardent affection of his heart be to be stop in that manner ! 
 by Jases , I do not   know who would like to be the friend of any man if 
 that be to be the way of it . " 
 Captain Colepepper be not very good at an argument . " I think they would 
 well see each other , " say colepepper , pull his thick grey 
 moustache . 
 " if you choose to have it so , so be it . but I think it the hard 
 thing in the world ; - I do indeed . " then they put their head together 
 in the most friendly way , and declare that the affair should , if 
 possible , be keep private . 
 on the Thursday night Lord Chiltern and Captain Colepepper go over 
 by Calais and Lille to bruge . Laurence Fitzgibbon , with his friend 
 Dr. O'Shaughnessy , cross by the direct boat from Dover to Ostend . 
 Phineas go to Ostend by Dover and Calais , but he take the day 
 route on Friday . it have all be arrange among they , so that there 
 might be no suspicion as to the job in hand . even O'Shaughnessy and 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon have leave London by separate train . they meet on 
 the sand at Blankenberg about nine o'clock on the Saturday morning , 
 have reach that village in different vehicle from Ostend and 
 bruge , and have meet quite unobserved amidst the sand - heap . but one 
 shot have be exchange , and Phineas have be wound in the right 
 shoulder . he have propose to exchange another shot with his left 
 hand , declare his capability of shoot quite as well with the 
 leave as with the right ; but to this both Colepepper and Fitzgibbon 
 have object . Lord Chiltern have offer to shake hand with his late 
 friend in a true spirit of friendship , if only his late friend would 
 say that he do not intend to prosecute his suit with the young lady . 
 in all these dispute the young lady 's name be never mention . 
 Phineas indeed have not once name Violet to Fitzgibbon , speak of 
 she always as the lady in question ; and though Laurence correctly 
 surmise the identity of the young lady , he never hint that he have 
 even guess her name . I doubt whether Lord Chiltern have be so wary 
 when alone with Captain Colepepper ; but then Lord Chiltern be , when 
 he speak at all , a very plain - speak man . of course his lordship 's 
 late friend Phineas would give no such pledge , and therefore Lord 
 Chiltern move off the ground and back to Blankenberg and Bruges , and 
 into Brussels , in still live enmity with our hero . Laurence and the 
 doctor take Phineas back to Ostend , and though the bullet be then in 
 his shoulder , Phineas make his way through Blankenberg after such a 
 fashion that no one there know what have occur . not a live soul , 
 except the five concern , be at that time aware that a duel have 
 be fight among the sand - hill . 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon make his way to Dover by the Saturday night 's 
 boat , and be able to show himself in Portman Square on the Sunday . 
 " know anything about Phinny Finn ? " he say afterwards to Barrington 
 Erle , in answer to an inquiry from that anxious gentleman . " not 
 a word ! I think you would well send the town - crier round after 
 he . " Barrington , however , do not feel quite so well assured of 
 Fitzgibbon 's truth as Lady Laura have do . 
 Dr. O'Shaughnessy remain during the Sunday and Monday at Ostend 
 with his patient , and the people at the inn only know that Mr. Finn 
 have sprain his shoulder badly ; and on the Tuesday they come back 
 to London again , via Calais and Dover . no bone have be break , and 
 Phineas , though his shoulder be very painful , bear the journey well . 
 O'Shaughnessy have receive a telegram on the Monday , tell he that 
 the division would certainly take place on the Tuesday , - and on the 
 Tuesday , at about ten in the evening , Phineas go down to the House . 
 " by - - , you be here , " say Ratler , take hold of he with an 
 affection that be too warm . " yes ; I be here , " say Phineas , wince 
 in agony ; " but be a little careful , there be a good fellow . I have   be 
 down in Kent and put my arm out . " 
 " put your arm out , have you ? " say Ratler , observe the sling for 
 the first time . " I be sorry for that . but you will stop and vote ? " 
 " yes ; - I will stop and vote . I have   come up for the purpose . but I hope 
 it will not   be very late . " 
 " there be both Daubeny and Gresham to speak yet , and at least three 
 other . I do not   suppose it will be much before three . but you be 
 all right now . you can go down and smoke if you like ! " in this way 
 Phineas Finn speak in the debate , and hear the end of it , vote for 
 his party , and fight his duel with Lord Chiltern in the middle of 
 it . 
 he do go and sit on a well - cushion bench in the smoking - room , and 
 then be interrogate by many of his friend as to his mysterious 
 absence . he have , he say , be down in Kent , and have have an accident 
 with his arm , by which he have be confine . when this questioner and 
 that perceive that there be some little mystery in the matter , the 
 questioner do not push their question , but simply entertain 
 their own surmise . one indiscreet questioner , however , do trouble 
 Phineas sorely , declare that there must have be some affair in 
 which a woman have have a part , and ask after the young lady of 
 Kent . this indiscreet questioner be Laurence Fitzgibbon , who , as 
 Phineas think , carry his spirit of intrigue a little too far . 
 Phineas stay and vote , and then he go painfully home to his 
 lodging . 
 how singular would it be if this affair of the duel should pass away , 
 and no one be a bit the wise but those four man who have be with 
 he on the sand at Blankenberg ! again he wonder at his own luck . 
 he have tell himself that a duel with Lord Chiltern must create 
 a quarrel between he and Lord Chiltern 's relation , and also 
 between he and Violet Effingham ; that it must banish he from 
 his comfortable seat for Loughton , and ruin he in regard to his 
 political prospect . and now he have fight his duel , and be back in 
 town , - and the thing seem to have be a thing of nothing . he have 
 not as yet see Lady Laura or Violet , but he have no doubt but they 
 both be as much in the dark as other people . the day might arrive , 
 he think , on which it would be pleasant for he to tell Violet 
 Effingham what have occur , but that day have not come as yet . 
 Whither Lord Chiltern have go , or what Lord Chiltern intend to 
 do , he have not any idea ; but he imagine that he should soon hear 
 something of her brother from Lady Laura . that Lord Chiltern should 
 say a word to Lady Laura of what have occur , - or to any other 
 person in the world , - he do not in the least suspect . there could 
 be no man more likely to be reticent in such matter than Lord 
 Chiltern , - or more sure to be guide by an almost exaggerated sense 
 of what honour require of he . nor do he doubt the discretion of 
 his friend Fitzgibbon ; - if only his friend might not damage the 
 secret by be too discreet . of the silence of the doctor and the 
 captain he be by no mean equally sure ; but even though they should 
 gossip , the gossiping would take so long a time in ooze out and 
 become recognise information , as to have lose much of its power 
 for injure he . be Lady Laura to hear at this moment that he 
 have be over to Belgium , and have fight a duel with Lord Chiltern 
 respect Violet , she would probably feel herself oblige to quarrel 
 with he ; but no such obligation would rest on she , if in the course 
 of six or nine month she should gradually have become aware that 
 such an encounter have take place . 
 Lord Chiltern , during their interview at the room in Great 
 Marlborough Street , have say a word to he about the seat in 
 Parliament ; - have express some opinion that as he , Phineas Finn , be 
 interfere with the view of the standish family in regard to Miss 
 Effingham , he ought not to keep the standish seat , which have be 
 confer upon he in ignorance of any such intended interference . 
 Phineas , as he think of this , could not remember Lord Chiltern 's 
 word , but there be present to he an idea that such have be their 
 purport . be he bind , in circumstance as they now exist , to give 
 up Loughton ? he make up his mind that he be not so bound unless 
 Lord Chiltern should demand from he that he should do so ; but , 
 nevertheless , he be uneasy in his position . it be quite true that 
 the seat now be his for this session by all parliamentary law , even 
 though the elector themselves might wish to be rid of he , and that 
 Lord Brentford could not even open his mouth upon the matter in a 
 tone more loud than that of a whisper . but Phineas , feel that 
 he have consent to accept the favour of a corrupt seat from Lord 
 Brentford , feel also that he be bind to give up the spoil if it 
 be demand from he . if it be demand from he , either by the 
 father or the son , it should be give up at once . 
 on the follow morning he find a lead article in the People 's 
 Banner devote solely to himself . " during the late debate , " - so run 
 a passage in the lead article , - " Mr. Finn , Lord Brentford 's irish 
 nominee for his pocket - borough at Loughton , do at last manage to 
 stand on his leg and open his mouth . if we be not mistaken , this 
 be Mr. Finn 's third session in Parliament , and hitherto he have be 
 unable to articulate three sentence , though he have on more than one 
 occasion make the attempt . for what special merit this young man have 
 be select for aristocratic patronage we do not know , - but that 
 there must be some merit recognisable by aristocratic eye , we 
 surmise . three year ago he be a raw young Irishman , live in 
 London as Irishmen only know how to live , earn nothing , and 
 apparently without mean ; and then suddenly he burst out as a member 
 of Parliament and as the friend of Cabinet Ministers . the possession 
 of one good gift must be accede to the honourable member for 
 Loughton , - he be a handsome young man , and look to be as strong as 
 a coal - porter . can it be that his promotion have spring from this ? be 
 this as it may , we should like to know where he have be during his 
 late mysterious absence from Parliament , and in what way he come by 
 the wound in his arm . even handsome young member of Parliament , 
 fete by title lady and their rich lord , be amenable to the 
 law , - to the law of this country , and to the law of any other 
 which it may suit they to visit for a while ! " 
 " infamous scoundrel ! " say Phineas to himself , as he read this . 
 " vile , low , disreputable blackguard ! " it be clear enough , however , 
 that Quintus Slide have find out something of his secret . if so , his 
 only hope would rest on the fact that his friend be not likely to 
 see the column of the People 's Banner . 
 CHAPTER XXXIX 
 Lady Laura be tell 
 by the time that Mr. Mildmay 's great bill be go into committee 
 Phineas be able to move about London in comfort , - with his arm , 
 however , still in a sling . there have be nothing more about he and 
 his wound in the People 's Banner , and he be begin to hope that 
 that nuisance would also be allow to die away . he have see Lady 
 Laura , - have din in Grosvenor Place , where he have be pet 
 to his heart 's content . his dinner have be cut up for he , and his 
 wound have be treat with the tender sympathy . and , singular to 
 say , no question be ask . he have be to Kent and have come by 
 an accident . no more than that be tell , and his dear sympathising 
 friend be content to receive so much information , and to ask for 
 no more . but he have not as yet see Violet Effingham , and he be 
 begin to think that this romance about Violet might as well be 
 bring to a close . he have not , however , as yet be able to go into 
 crowd room , and unless he go out to large party he could not 
 be sure that he would meet Miss Effingham . 
 at last he resolve that he would tell Lady Laura the whole 
 truth , - not the truth about the duel , but the truth about Violet 
 Effingham , and ask for her assistance . when make this resolution , I 
 think that he must have forget much that he have learn of his 
 friend 's character ; and by make it , I think that he show also 
 that he have not learn as much as his opportunity might have 
 teach he . he know Lady Laura 's obstinacy of purpose , he know she 
 devotion to her brother , and he know also how desirous she have be 
 that her brother should win Violet Effingham for himself . this 
 knowledge should , I think , have suffice to show he how improbable 
 it be that Lady Laura should assist he in his enterprise . but 
 beyond all this be the fact , - a fact as to the consequence of which 
 Phineas himself be entirely blind , beautifully ignorant , - that Lady 
 Laura have once condescend to love himself . Nay ; - she have go 
 farth than this , and have venture to tell he , even after her 
 marriage , that the remembrance of some feeling that have once dwelt in 
 her heart in regard to he be still a danger to she . she have warn 
 he from Loughlinter , and then have receive he in London ; - and now 
 he select she as his confidante in this love affair ! have he not 
 be beautifully ignorant and most modestly blind , he would surely 
 have place his confidence elsewhere . 
 it be not that Lady Laura Kennedy ever confess to herself the 
 existence of a vicious passion . she have , indeed , learn to tell 
 herself that she could not love her husband ; and once , in the 
 excitement of such silent announcement to herself , she have ask 
 herself whether her heart be quite a blank , and have answer herself 
 by desire Phineas Finn to absent himself from Loughlinter . during 
 all the subsequent winter she have scourge herself inwardly for her 
 own imprudence , her quite unnecessary folly in so do . what ! could 
 not she , Laura Standish , who from her early year of girlish 
 womanhood have resolve that she would use the world as man use it , 
 and not as woman do , - could not she have feel the slight shock of 
 a pass tenderness for a handsome youth without allow the 
 feeling to be a rock before her big enough and sharp enough for the 
 destruction of her entire barque ? could not she command , if not her 
 heart , at any rate her mind , so that she might safely assure herself 
 that , whether this man or any man be here or there , her course would 
 be unaltered ? what though Phineas Finn have be in the same house 
 with she throughout all the winter , could not she have so live with 
 he on term of friendship , that every deed and word and look of her 
 friendship might have be open to her husband , - or open to all 
 the world ? she could have do so . she tell herself that that be 
 not , - need not have be her great calamity . whether she could endure 
 the dull , monotonous control of her slow but imperious lord , - or 
 whether she must not rather tell he that it be not to be 
 endure , - that be her trouble . so she tell herself , and again 
 admit Phineas to her intimacy in London . but , nevertheless , 
 Phineas , have he not be beautifully ignorant and most blind to his 
 own achievement , would not have expect from Lady Laura Kennedy 
 assistance with Miss Violet Effingham . 
 Phineas know when to find Lady Laura alone , and he come upon her one 
 day at the favourable hour . the two first clause of the bill have 
 be pass after twenty fight and endless division . two point have 
 be settle , as to which , however , Mr. Gresham have be drive to 
 give way so far and to yield so much , that man declare that such 
 a bill as the Government could consent to call its own could never 
 be pass by that Parliament in that session . immediately on his 
 entrance into her room Lady Laura begin about the third clause . would 
 the House let Mr. Gresham have his way about the - ? Phineas stop 
 she at once . " my dear friend , " he say , " I have come to you in a 
 private trouble , and I want you to drop politic for half an hour . I 
 have come to you for help . " 
 " a private trouble , Mr. Finn ! be it serious ? " 
 " it be very serious , - but it be no trouble of the kind of which you 
 be think . but it be serious enough to take up every thought . " 
 " can I help you ? " 
 " indeed you can . whether you will or no be a different thing . " 
 " I would help you in anything in my power , Mr. Finn . do you not know 
 it ? " 
 " you have be very kind to I ! " 
 " and so would Mr. Kennedy . " 
 " Mr. Kennedy can not help I here . " 
 " what be it , Mr. Finn ? " 
 " I suppose I may as well tell you at once , - in plain language , I do 
 not know how to put my story into word that shall fit it . I love 
 Violet Effingham . will you help I to win she to be my wife ? " 
 " you love Violet Effingham ! " say Lady Laura . and as she speak the 
 look of her countenance towards he be so changed that he become at 
 once aware that from her no assistance might be expect . his eye 
 be not open in any degree to the second reason above give for 
 Lady Laura 's opposition to his wish , but he instantly perceive 
 that she would still cling to that destination of Violet 's hand which 
 have for year past be the favourite scheme of her life . " have you 
 not always know , Mr. Finn , what have be our hope for Violet ? " 
 Phineas , though he have perceive his mistake , feel that he must go 
 on with his cause . Lady Laura must know his wish soon or later , 
 and it be as well that she should learn they in this way as in 
 any other . " yes ; - but I have know also , from your brother 's own 
 lip , - and indeed from yours also , Lady Laura , - that Chiltern have 
 be three time refuse by Miss Effingham . " 
 " what do that matter ? do man never ask more than three time ? " 
 " and must I be debar for ever while he prosecute a hopeless 
 suit ? " 
 " yes ; - you of all man . " 
 " why so , Lady Laura ? " 
 " because in this matter you have be his choose friend , - and mine . 
 we have tell you everything , trust to you . we have believe in 
 your honour . we have think that with you , at any rate , we be 
 safe . " these word be very bitter to Phineas , and yet when he have 
 write his letter at Loughton , he have intend to be so perfectly 
 honest , chivalrously honest ! now Lady Laura speak to he and look 
 at he as though he have be most basely false - most untrue to that 
 noble friendship which have be lavish upon he by all her family . 
 he feel that he would become the prey of her most injurious thought 
 unless he could fully explain his idea , and he feel , also , that the 
 circumstance do not admit of his explain they . he could not take 
 up the argument on Violet 's side , and show how unfair it would be to 
 she that she should be debar from the homage due to she by any man 
 who really love she , because Lord Chiltern choose to think that he 
 still have a claim , - or at any rate a chance . and Phineas know well 
 of himself , - or think that he know well , - that he would not have 
 interfere have there be any chance for Lord Chiltern . Lord Chiltern 
 have himself tell he more than once that there be no such chance . 
 how be he to explain all this to Lady Laura ? " Mr. Finn , " say Lady 
 Laura , " I can hardly believe this of you , even when you tell it I 
 yourself . " 
 " listen to I , Lady Laura , for a moment . " 
 " certainly , I will listen . but that you should come to I for 
 assistance ! I can not understand it . man sometimes become hard than 
 stone . " 
 " I do not think that I be hard . " poor blind fool ! he be still 
 think only of Violet , and of the accusation make against he that 
 he be untrue to his friendship for Lord Chiltern . of that other 
 accusation which could not be express in open word he understand 
 nothing , - nothing at all as yet . 
 " hard and false , - capable of receive no impression beyond the 
 outside husk of the heart . " 
 " oh , Lady Laura , do not say that . if you could only know how true I 
 be in my affection for you all . " 
 " and how do you show it ? - by come in between Oswald and the only 
 mean that be open to we of reconcile he to his father ; - mean 
 that have be explain to you exactly as though you have be one of 
 ourselves . Oswald have treat you as a brother in the matter , tell 
 you everything , and this be the way you would repay he for his 
 confidence ! " 
 " can I help it , that I have learn to love this girl ? " 
 " yes , sir , - you can help it . what if she have be Oswald 's 
 wife ; - would you have love she then ? do you speak of love a woman 
 as if it be an affair of fate , over which you have no control ? I 
 doubt whether your passion be so strong as that . you have well put 
 aside your love for Miss Effingham . I feel assured that it will never 
 hurt you . " then some remembrance of what have pass between he and 
 Lady Laura Standish near the fall of the Linter , when he first 
 visit Scotland , come across his mind . " believe I , " she say with a 
 smile , " this little wound in your heart will soon be cure . " 
 he stand silent before she , look away from she , think over it 
 all . he certainly have believe himself to be violently in love with 
 Lady Laura , and yet when he have just now enter her drawing - room , he 
 have almost forget that there have be such a passage in his life . 
 and he have believe that she have forget it , - even though she 
 have counsel he not to come to Loughlinter within the last nine 
 month ! he have be a boy then , and have not know himself ; - but now 
 he be a man , and be proud of the intensity of his love . there come 
 upon he some pass throb of pain from his shoulder , remind he 
 of the duel , and he be proud also of that . he have be willing to 
 risk everything , - life , prospect , and position , - soon than abandon 
 the slight hope which be his of possess Violet Effingham . and now 
 he be tell that this wound in his heart would soon be cure , and 
 be tell so by a woman to whom he have once sing a song of another 
 passion . it be very hard to answer a woman in such circumstance , 
 because her womanhood give she so strong a ground of vantage ! Lady 
 Laura might venture to throw in his tooth the fickleness of his 
 heart , but he could not in reply tell she that to change a love be 
 well than to marry without love , - that to be capable of such a 
 change show no such inferiority of nature as do the capacity for 
 such a marriage . she could hit he with her argument ; but he could 
 only remember his , and think how violent might be the blow he could 
 inflict , - if it be not that she be a woman , and therefore 
 guard . " you will not help I then ? " he say , when they have both 
 be silent for a while . 
 " help you ? how should I help you ? " 
 " I want no other help than this , - that I might have have an 
 opportunity of meet Violet here , and of get from she some 
 answer . " 
 " have the question then never be ask already ? " say Lady Laura . 
 to this Phineas make no immediate reply . there be no reason why he 
 should show his whole hand to an adversary . " why do you not go to 
 Lady Baldock 's house ? " continue Lady Laura . " you be admit there . 
 you know Lady Baldock . go and ask she to stand your friend with her 
 niece . see what she will say to you . as far as I understand these 
 matter , that be the fair , honourable , open way in which gentleman 
 be will not to make their overture . " 
 " I would make mine to none but to herself , " say Phineas . 
 " then why have you make it to I , sir ? " demand Lady Laura . 
 " I have come to you as I would to my sister . " 
 " your sister ? Psha ! I be not your sister , Mr. Finn . nor , be I so , 
 should I fail to remember that I have a dearer brother to whom my 
 faith be pledge . look here . within the last three week Oswald have 
 sacrifice everything to his father , because he be determined that 
 Mr. Kennedy should have the money which he think be due to my 
 husband . he have enable my father to do what he will with Saulsby . 
 Papa will never hurt he ; - I know that . hard as papa be with he , he 
 will never hurt Oswald 's future position . Papa be too proud to do 
 that . Violet have hear what Oswald have do ; and now that he have 
 nothing of his own to offer she for the future but his bare title , 
 now that he have give papa power to do what he will with the 
 property , I believe that she would accept he instantly . that be her 
 disposition . " 
 Phineas again pause a moment before he reply . " let he try , " he 
 say . 
 " he be away , - in Brussels . " 
 " send to he , and bid he return . I will be patient , Lady Laura . let 
 he come and try , and I will bide my time . I confess that I have no 
 right to interfere with he if there be a chance for he . if there be 
 no chance , my right be as good as that of any other . " 
 there be something in this which make Lady Laura feel that she 
 could not maintain her hostility against this man on behalf of her 
 brother ; - and yet she could not force herself to be other than 
 hostile to he . her heart be sore , and it be he that have make 
 it sore . she have lecture herself , school herself with mental 
 sackcloth and ash , rebuke herself with heavy censure from day 
 to day , because she have find herself to be in danger of regard 
 this man with a perilous love ; and she have be constant in this 
 work of penance till she have be able to assure herself that the 
 sackcloth and ash have do their work , and that the danger be 
 past . " I like he still and love he well , " she have say to herself 
 with something almost of triumph , " but I have cease to think of he 
 as one who might have be my lover . " and yet she be now sick and 
 sore , almost beside herself with the agony of the wound , because this 
 man whom she have be able to throw aside from her heart have also 
 be able so to throw she aside . and she feel herself constrain to 
 rebuke he with what bitter word she might use . she have feel it 
 easy to do this at first , on her brother 's score . she have accuse he 
 of treachery to his friendship , - both as to Oswald and as to herself . 
 on that she could say cut word without subject herself to 
 suspicion even from herself . but now this power be take away from 
 she , and still she wish to wound he . she desire to taunt he 
 with his old fickleness , and yet to subject herself to no imputation . 
 " your right ! " she say . " what give you any right in the matter ? " 
 " simply the right of a fair field , and no favour . " 
 " and yet you come to I for favour , - to I , because I be her friend . 
 you can not win she yourself , and think I may help you ! I do not 
 believe in your love for she . there ! if there be no other reason , 
 and I could help you , I would not , because I think your heart be a 
 sham heart . she be pretty , and have money - " 
 " Lady Laura ! " 
 " she be pretty , and have money , and be the fashion . I do not wonder 
 that you should wish to have she . but , Mr. Finn , I believe that 
 Oswald really love she ; - and that you do not . his nature be deep 
 than your . " 
 he understand it all now as he listen to the tone of her voice , and 
 look into the line of her face . there be write there plainly 
 enough that spretae injuria formae of which she herself be conscious , 
 but only conscious . even his eye , blind as he have be , be 
 open , - and he know that he have be a fool . 
 " I be sorry that I come to you , " he say . 
 " it would have be well that you should not have do so , " she 
 reply . 
 " and yet perhaps it be well that there should be no misunderstanding 
 between we . " 
 " of course I must tell my brother . " 
 he pause but for a moment , and then he answer she with a sharp 
 voice , " he have be tell . " 
 " and who tell he ? " 
 " I do . I write to he the moment that I know my own mind . I owe it 
 to he to do so . but my letter miss he , and he only learn it the 
 other day . " 
 " have you see he since ? " 
 " yes ; - I have see he . " 
 " and what do he say ? how do he take it ? do he bear it from you 
 quietly ? " 
 " no , indeed ; " and Phineas smile as he speak . 
 " tell I , Mr. Finn ; what happen ? what be to be do ? " 
 " nothing be to be do . everything have be do . I may as well 
 tell you all . I be sure that for the sake of I , as well as of your 
 brother , you will keep our secret . he require that I should either 
 give up my suit , or that I should , - fight he . as I could not comply 
 with the one request , I find myself bind to comply with the other . " 
 " and there have be a duel ? " 
 " yes ; - there have be a duel . we go over to Belgium , and it be 
 soon settle . he wound I here in the arm . " 
 " suppose you have kill he , Mr. Finn ? " 
 " that , Lady Laura , would have be a misfortune so terrible that I 
 be bind to prevent it . " then he pause again , regret what he 
 have say . " you have surprise I , Lady Laura , into an answer that I 
 should not have make . I may be sure , - may I not , - that my word will 
 not go beyond yourself ? " 
 " yes ; - you may be sure of that . " this she say plaintively , with a 
 tone of voice and demeanour of body altogether different from that 
 which she lately bear . neither of they know what be take place 
 between they ; but she be , in truth , gradually submit herself 
 again to this man 's influence . though she rebuke he at every turn 
 for what he say , for what he have do , for what he propose to do , 
 still she could not teach herself to despise he , or even to cease to 
 love he for any part of it . she know it all now , - except that word 
 or two which have pass between Violet and Phineas in the ride of 
 Saulsby Park . but she suspect something even of that , feel sure 
 that the only matter on which Phineas would say nothing would be 
 that of his own success , - if success there have be . " and so you and 
 Oswald have quarrel , and there have be a duel . that be why you 
 be away ? " 
 " that be why I be away . " 
 " how wrong of you , - how very wrong ! have he be , - kill , how could 
 you have look we in the face again ? " 
 " I could not have look you in the face again . " 
 " but that be over now . and be you friend afterwards ? " 
 " no ; - we do not part as friend . have go there to fight with 
 he , - most unwillingly , - I could not afterwards promise he that I 
 would give up Miss Effingham . you say she will accept he now . let 
 he come and try . " she have nothing furth to say , - no other argument 
 to use . there be the soreness at her heart still present to she , 
 make she wretched , instigate she to hurt he if she know how to 
 do so , in spite of her regard for he . but she feel that she be weak 
 and powerless . she have shoot her arrow at he , - all but one , - and if 
 she use that , its poison point would wound herself far more surely 
 than it would touch he . " the duel be very silly , " he say . " you 
 will not speak of it . " 
 " no ; certainly not . " 
 " I be glad at least that I have tell you everything . " 
 " I do not know why you should be glad . I can not help you . " 
 " and you will say nothing to Violet ? " 
 " everything that I can say in Oswald 's favour . I will say nothing of 
 the duel ; but beyond that you have no right to demand my secrecy with 
 she . yes ; you have well go , Mr. Finn , for I be hardly well . and 
 remember this , - if you can forget this little episode about Miss 
 Effingham , so will I forget it also ; and so will Oswald . I can 
 promise for he . " then she smile and give he her hand , and he go . 
 she rise from her chair as he leave the room , and wait till she 
 hear the sound of the great door close behind he before she again 
 sit down . then , when he be go , - when she be sure that he be no 
 long there with she in the same house , - she lay her head down upon 
 the arm of the sofa , and burst into a flood of tear . she be no 
 long angry with Phineas . there be no further longing in her heart 
 for revenge . she do not now desire to injure he , though she have 
 do so as long as he be with she . Nay , - she resolve instantly , 
 almost instinctively , that Lord Brentford must know nothing of all 
 this , lest the political prospect of the young member for Loughton 
 should be injure . to have rebuke he , to rebuke he again and 
 again , would be only fair , - would at least be womanly ; but she 
 would protect he from all material injury as far as her power of 
 protection might avail . and why be she weep now so bitterly ? 
 of course she ask herself , as she rub away the tear with her 
 hand , - why should she weep ? she be not weak enough to tell herself 
 that she be weep for any injury that have be do to Oswald . 
 she get up suddenly from the sofa , and push away her hair from her 
 face , and push away the tear from her cheek , and then clench 
 her fist as she hold they out at full length from her body , and 
 stand , look up with her eye fix upon the wall . " Ass ! " she 
 exclaim . " Fool ! Idiot ! that I should not be able to crush it into 
 nothing and have do with it ! why should he not have she ? after all , 
 he be well than Oswald . oh , - be that you ? " the door of the room have 
 be open while she be stand thus , and her husband have enter . 
 " yes , - it be i. be anything wrong ? " 
 " very much be wrong . " 
 " what be it , Laura ? " 
 " you can not help I . " 
 " if you be in trouble you should tell I what it be , and leave it to 
 I to try to help you . " 
 " nonsense ! " she say , shake her head . 
 " Laura , that be uncourteous , - not to say undutiful also . " 
 " I suppose it be , - both . I beg your pardon , but I could not help 
 it . " 
 " Laura , you should help such word to I . " 
 " there be moment , Robert , when even a married woman must be 
 herself rather than her husband 's wife . it be so , though you can not 
 understand it . " 
 " I certainly do not understand it . " 
 " you can not make a woman subject to you as a dog be so . you may have 
 all the outside and as much of the inside as you can master . with a 
 dog you may be sure of both . " 
 " I suppose this mean that you have secret in which I be not to 
 share . " 
 " I have trouble about my father and my brother which you can not 
 share . my brother be a ruin man . " 
 " who ruin he ? " 
 " I will not talk about it any more . I will not speak to you of he or 
 of papa . I only want you to understand that there be a subject which 
 must be secret to myself , and on which I may be allow to shed 
 tear , - if I be so weak . I will not trouble you on a matter in which 
 I have not your sympathy . " then she leave he , stand in the middle 
 of the room , depress by what have occur , - but not think of it 
 as of a trouble which would do more than make he uncomfortable for 
 that day . 
 CHAPTER XL 
 Madame Max Goesler 
 Day after day , and clause after clause , the bill be fight in 
 committee , and few man fight with more constancy on the side of the 
 Ministers than do the member for Loughton . trouble though he be by 
 his quarrel with Lord Chiltern , by his love for Violet Effingham , by 
 the silence of his friend Lady Laura , - for since he have tell she of 
 the duel she have become silent to he , never write to he , and 
 hardly speak to he when she meet he in society , - nevertheless 
 Phineas be not so troubled but what he could work at his vocation . 
 now , when he would find himself upon his leg in the House , he would 
 wonder at the hesitation which have lately trouble he so sorely . he 
 would sit sometimes and speculate upon that dimness of eye , upon that 
 tendency of thing to go round , upon that obtrusive palpitation of 
 heart , which have afflict he so seriously for so long a time . the 
 House now be no more to he than any other chamber , and the member 
 no more than other man . he guard himself from oration , speak 
 always very shortly , - because he believe that policy and good 
 judgment require that he should be short . but word be very easy 
 to he , and he would feel as though he could talk for ever . and there 
 quickly come to he a reputation for practical usefulness . he be a 
 man with strong opinion , who could yet be submissive . and no man 
 seem to know how his reputation have come . he have make one good 
 speech after two or three failure . all who know he , his whole 
 party , have be aware of his failure ; and his one good speech have 
 be regard by many as no very wonderful effort . but he be a man 
 who be pleasant to other man , - not combative , not self - assert 
 beyond the point at which self - assertion cease to be a necessity of 
 manliness . nature have be very good to he , make he comely inside 
 and out , - and with this comeliness he have creep into popularity . 
 the secret of the duel be , I think , at this time , know to a great 
 many man and woman . so Phineas perceive ; but it be not , he think , 
 know either to Lord Brentford or to Violet Effingham . and in this 
 he be right . no rumour of it have yet reach the ear of either of 
 these person ; - and rumour , though she fly so fast and so far , be 
 often slow in reach those ear which would be most interested in 
 her tiding . some dim report of the duel reach even Mr. Kennedy , 
 and he ask his wife . " who tell you ? " say she , sharply . 
 " Bonteen tell I that it be certainly so . " 
 " Mr. Bonteen always know more than anybody else about everything 
 except his own business . " 
 " then it be not true ? " 
 Lady Laura pause , - and then she lie . " of course it be not true . I 
 should be very sorry to ask either of they , but to I it seem to be 
 the most improbable thing in life . " then Mr. Kennedy believe that 
 there have be no duel . in his wife 's word he put absolute faith , and 
 he think that she would certainly know anything that her brother 
 have do . as he be a man give to but little discourse , he ask no 
 further question about the duel either in the House or at the Clubs . 
 at first , Phineas have be greatly dismay when man have ask 
 he question tend to elicit from he some explanation of the 
 mystery ; - but by degree he become used to it , and as the tiding 
 which have get abroad do not seem to injure he , and as the 
 questioning be not push very closely , he become indifferent . 
 there come out another article in the People 's Banner in which Lord 
 C - - n and Mr. P - - s F - - n be speak of as glare example of 
 that aristocratic snobility , - that be the expressive word coin , 
 evidently with great delight , for the occasion , - which the rotten 
 state of London society in high quarter now produce . here be 
 a young lord , infamously notorious , quarrel with one of his 
 boon - companion , whom he have appoint to a private seat in the 
 House of Commons , fight duel , break the law , scandalise 
 the public , - and all this be do without punishment to the guilty ! 
 there be old story afloat , - so say the article - of what in a 
 former century have be do by Lord Mohuns and Mr. Bests ; but now , 
 in 186 - ,   c.   c.   c. and so the article go on . any reader may fill 
 in without difficulty the conclude indignation and virtuous appeal 
 for reform in social moral as well as Parliament . but Phineas have so 
 far progress that he have almost come to like this kind of thing . 
 certainly I think that the duel do he no harm in society . otherwise 
 he would hardly have be ask to a semi - political dinner at Lady 
 Glencora Palliser 's , even though he might have be invite to make 
 one of the five hundred guest who be crowd into her saloon 
 and staircase after the dinner be over . to have be one of the 
 five hundred be nothing ; but to be one of the sixteen be a great 
 deal , - be indeed so much that Phineas , not understand as yet the 
 advantage of his own comeliness , be at a loss to conceive why so 
 pleasant an honour be confer upon he . there be no man among the 
 eight man at the dinner - party not in Parliament , - and the only other 
 except Phineas not attach to the Government be Mr. Palliser 's 
 great friend , John Grey , the member for Silverbridge . there be four 
 Cabinet Ministers in the room , - the Duke , Lord Cantrip , Mr. Gresham , 
 and the owner of the mansion . there be also Barrington Erle and 
 young Lord Fawn , an Under - Secretary of State . but the wit and grace 
 of the lady present lend more of character to the party than even 
 the position of the man . Lady Glencora Palliser herself be a host . 
 there be no woman then in London well able to talk to a dozen 
 people on a dozen subject ; and then , moreover , she be still in 
 the flush of her beauty and the bloom of her youth . Lady Laura be 
 there ; - by what mean divide from her husband Phineas could not 
 imagine ; but Lady Glencora be good at such division . Lady Cantrip 
 have be allow to come with her lord ; - but , as be well understand , 
 Lord Cantrip be not so manifestly a husband as be Mr. Kennedy . 
 there be man who can not guard themselves from the assertion of 
 marital right at most inappropriate moment . now Lord Cantrip live 
 with his wife most happily ; yet you should pass hour with he and 
 she together , and hardly know that they know each other . one of the 
 Duke 's daughter be there , - but not the Duchess , who be know to be 
 heavy ; - and there be the beauteous Marchioness of Hartletop . Violet 
 Effingham be in the room also , - give Phineas a blow at the heart 
 as he see her smile . might it be that he could speak a word to she on 
 this occasion ? Mr. Grey have also bring his wife ; - and then there 
 be Madame Max Goesler . Phineas find that it be his fortune to take 
 down to dinner , - not Violet Effingham , but Madame Max Goesler . and , 
 when he be place at dinner , on the other side of he there sit Lady 
 Hartletop , who address the few word which she speak exclusively 
 to Mr. Palliser . there have be in former day matter difficult of 
 arrangement between those two ; but I think that those old passage 
 have now be forget by they both . Phineas be , therefore , drive 
 to depend exclusively on Madame Max Goesler for conversation , and 
 he find that he be not call upon to cast his seed into barren 
 ground . 
 up to that moment he have never hear of Madame Max Goesler . Lady 
 Glencora , in introduce they , have pronounce the lady 's name so 
 clearly that he have catch it with accuracy , but he could not surmise 
 whence she have come , or why she be there . she be a woman probably 
 something over thirty year of age . she have thick black hair , which 
 she wear in curl , - unlike anybody else in the world , - in curl which 
 hang down low beneath her face , cover , and perhaps intend to 
 cover , a certain thinness in her cheek which would otherwise have 
 take something from the charm of her countenance . her eye be 
 large , of a dark blue colour , and very bright , - and she use they in 
 a manner which be as yet hardly common with Englishwomen . she seem 
 to intend that you should know that she employ they to conquer 
 you , look as a knight may have look in olden day who enter a 
 chamber with his sword draw from the scabbard and in his hand . her 
 forehead be broad and somewhat low . her nose be not classically 
 beautiful , be broad at the nostril than beauty require , and , 
 moreover , not perfectly straight in its line . her lip be thin . 
 her tooth , which she endeavour to show as little as possible , be 
 perfect in form and colour . they who criticise she severely say , 
 however , that they be too large . her chin be well form , and 
 divide by a dimple which give to her face a softness of grace which 
 would otherwise have be much miss . but perhaps her great beauty 
 be in the brilliant clearness of her dark complexion . you might 
 almost fancy that you could see into it so as to read the different 
 line beneath the skin . she be somewhat tall , though by no mean 
 tall to a fault , and be so thin as to be almost meagre in her 
 proportion . she always wear her dress close up to her neck , and 
 never show the bareness of her arm . though she be the only woman 
 so clothe now present in the room , this singularity do not specially 
 strike one , because in other respect her apparel be so rich and 
 quaint as to make inattention to it impossible . the observer who do 
 not observe very closely would perceive that Madame Max Goesler 's 
 dress be unlike the dress of other woman , but see that it be 
 unlike in make , unlike in colour , and unlike in material , the 
 ordinary observer would not see also that it be unlike in form for 
 any other purpose than that of maintain its general peculiarity 
 of character . in colour she be abundant , and yet the fabric of 
 her garment be always black . my pen may not dare to describe the 
 tracery of yellow and ruby silk which go in and out through 
 the black lace , across her bosom , and round her neck , and over her 
 shoulder , and along her arm , and down to the very ground at her 
 foot , rob the black stuff of all its sombre solemnity , and 
 produce a brightness in which there be nothing gaudy . she wear 
 no vestige of crinoline , and hardly anything that could be call a 
 train . and the lace sleeve of her dress , with their bright tracery 
 of silk , be fit close to her arm ; and round her neck she wear 
 the small possible collar of lace , above which there be a short 
 chain of roman gold with a ruby pendant . and she have ruby in her 
 ear , and a ruby brooch , and ruby in the bracelet on her arm . 
 such , as regard the outward woman , be Madame Max Goesler ; and 
 Phineas , as he take his place by her side , think that fortune for 
 the nonce have do well with he , - only that he should have like it 
 so much well could he have be seat next to Violet Effingham ! 
 I have say that in the matter of conversation his morsel of seed be 
 not throw into barren ground . I do not know that he can truly be 
 say to have produce even a morsel . the subject be all moot 
 by the lady , and so great be her fertility in discourse that all 
 conversational grass seem to grow with she spontaneously . " Mr. 
 Finn , " she say , " what would I not give to be a member of the British 
 Parliament at such a moment as this ! " 
 " why at such a moment as this particularly ? " 
 " because there be something to be do , which , let I tell you , 
 senator though you be , be not always the case with you . " 
 " my experience be short , but it sometimes seem to I that there be 
 too much to be do . " 
 " too much of nothingness , Mr. Finn . be not that the case ? but now 
 there be a real fight in the list . the one great drawback to the 
 life of woman be that they can not act in politic . " 
 " and which side would you take ? " 
 " what , here in England ? " say Madame Max Goesler , - from which 
 expression , and from one or two other of a similar nature , Phineas 
 be lead into a doubt whether the lady be a countrywoman of his 
 or not . " indeed , it be hard to say . politically I should want to 
 out - turnbull Mr. Turnbull , to vote for everything that could be 
 vote for , - ballot , manhood suffrage , womanhood suffrage , unlimited 
 right of strike , tenant right , education of everybody , annual 
 parliament , and the abolition of at least the bench of bishop . " 
 " that be a strong programme , " say Phineas . 
 " it be strong , Mr. Finn , but that be what I should like . I think , 
 however , that I should be tempt to feel a dastard security in the 
 conviction that I might advocate my view without any danger of 
 see they carry out . for , to tell you the truth , I do not   at all 
 want to put down lady and gentleman . " 
 " you think that they would go with the bench of bishop ? " 
 " I do not   want anything to go , - that be , as far as real life be 
 concern . there be that dear good Bishop of Abingdon be the good 
 friend I have in the world , - and as for the Bishop of Dorchester , 
 I would walk from here to there to hear he preach . and I would soon hem 
 apron for they all myself than that they should want those pretty 
 decoration . but then , Mr. Finn , there be such a difference between 
 life and theory ; - be there not ? " 
 " and it be so comfortable to have theory that one be not bind to 
 carry out , " say Phineas . 
 " be not   it ? Mr. Palliser , do you live up to your political theory ? " 
 at this moment Mr. Palliser be sit perfectly silent between Lady 
 Hartletop and the Duke 's daughter , and he give a little spring in his 
 chair as this sudden address be make to he . " your House of Commons 
 theory , I mean , Mr. Palliser . Mr. Finn be say that it be 
 very well to have far advanced idea , - it do not matter how 
 far advanced , - because one be never call upon to act upon they 
 practically . " 
 " that be a dangerous doctrine , I think , " say Mr. Palliser . 
 " but pleasant , - so at least Mr. Finn say . " 
 " it be at least very common , " say Phineas , not care to protect 
 himself by a contradiction . 
 " for myself , " say Mr. Palliser gravely , " I think I may say that I 
 always be really anxious to carry into practice all those doctrine 
 of policy which I advocate in theory . " 
 during this conversation Lady Hartletop sit as though no word of it 
 reach her ear . she do not understand Madame Max Goesler , and by 
 no mean love she . Mr. Palliser , when he have make his little speech , 
 turn to the Duke 's daughter and ask some question about the 
 conservatory at Longroyston . 
 " I have call forth a word of wisdom , " say Madame Max Goesler , 
 almost in a whisper . 
 " yes , " say Phineas , " and teach a Cabinet Minister to believe that 
 I be a most unsound politician . you may have ruin my prospect for 
 life , Madame Max Goesler . " 
 " let I hope not . as far as I can understand the way of thing in 
 your government , the aspirant to office succeed chiefly by make 
 themselves uncommonly unpleasant to those who be in power . if a man 
 can hit hard enough he be sure to be take into the elysium of the 
 Treasury bench , - not that he may hit other , but that he may cease to 
 hit those who be there . I do not   think man be choose because they 
 be useful . " 
 " you be very severe upon we all . " 
 " indeed , as far as I can see , one man be as useful as another . but 
 to put aside joking , - they tell I that you be sure to become a 
 minister . " 
 Phineas feel that he blush . could it be that people say of he 
 behind his back that he be a man likely to rise high in political 
 position ? " your informant be very kind , " he reply awkwardly , 
 " but I do not know who they be . I shall never get up in the way you 
 describe , - that be , by abuse the man I support . " 
 after that Madame Max Goesler turn round to Mr. Grey , who be 
 sit on the other side of she , and Phineas be leave for a moment 
 in silence . he try to say a word to Lady Hartletop , but Lady 
 Hartletop only bow her head gracefully in recognition of the truth 
 of the statement he make . so he apply himself for a while to his 
 dinner . 
 " what do you think of Miss Effingham ? " say Madame Max Goesler , again 
 address he suddenly . 
 " what do I think about she ? " 
 " you know she , I suppose . " 
 " oh yes , I know she . she be closely connect with the Kennedys , who 
 be friend of mine . " 
 " so I have hear . they tell I that score of man be rave about 
 she . be you one of they ? " 
 " oh yes ; - I do not   mind be one of sundry score . there be nothing 
 particular in own to that . " 
 " but you admire she ? " 
 " of course I do , " say Phineas . 
 " ah , I see you be joke . I do amazingly . they say woman never do 
 admire woman , but I most sincerely do admire Miss Effingham . " 
 " be she a friend of your ? " 
 " oh no ; - I must not dare to say so much as that . I be with her last 
 winter for a week at Matching , and of course I meet she about at 
 people 's house . she seem to I to be the most independent girl I 
 ever know in my life . I do believe that nothing would make her marry 
 a man unless she love he and honour he , and I think it be so 
 very seldom that you can say that of a girl . " 
 " I believe so also , " say Phineas . then he pause a moment before he 
 continue to speak . " I can not say that I know Miss Effingham very 
 intimately , but from what I have see of she , I should think it very 
 probable that she may not marry at all . " 
 " very probably , " say Madame Max Goesler , who then again turn away 
 to Mr. Grey . 
 ten minute after this , when the moment be just at hand in which the 
 lady be to retreat , Madame Max Goesler again address Phineas , 
 look very full into his face as she do so . " I wonder whether the 
 time will ever come , Mr. Finn , in which you will give I an account 
 of that day 's journey to Blankenberg ? " 
 " to Blankenberg ! " 
 " yes ; - to Blankenberg . I be not ask for it now . but I shall look 
 for it some day . " then Lady Glencora rise from her seat , and Madame 
 Max Goesler go out with the other . 
 CHAPTER XLI 
 Lord Fawn 
 what have Madame Max Goesler to do with his journey to Blankenberg ? 
 think Phineas , as he sit for a while in silence between Mr. 
 Palliser and Mr. Grey ; and why should she , who be a perfect 
 stranger to he , have dare to ask he such a question ? but as the 
 conversation round the table , after the lady have go , soon drift 
 into politic and become general , Phineas , for a while , forget Madame 
 Max Goesler and the Blankenberg journey , and listen to the eager 
 word of Cabinet Ministers , now and again utter a word of his own , 
 and show that he , too , be as eager as other . but the session 
 in Mr. Palliser 's dining - room be not long , and Phineas soon find 
 himself make his way amidst a throng of come guest into the 
 room above . his object be to meet Violet Effingham , but , fail 
 that , he would not be unwilling to say a few more word to Madame Max 
 Goesler . 
 he first encounter Lady Laura , to whom he have not speak as yet , 
 and , find himself stand close to she for a while , he ask she 
 after his late neighbour . " do tell I one thing , Lady Laura ; - who be 
 Madame Max Goesler , and why have I never meet she before ? " 
 " that will be two thing , Mr. Finn ; but I will answer both question 
 as well as I can . you have not meet she before , because she be in 
 Germany last spring and summer , and in the year before that you be 
 not about so much as you have be since . still you must have see 
 she , I think . she be the widow of an austrian banker , and have live 
 the great part of her life at Vienna . she be very rich , and have a 
 small house in Park Lane , where she receive people so exclusively 
 that it have come to be think an honour to be invite by Madame Max 
 Goesler . her enemy say that her father be a German Jew , live in 
 England , in the employment of the viennese banker , and they say also 
 that she have be marry a second time to an austrian Count , to whom 
 she allow ever so much a year to stay away from she . but of all 
 this , nobody , I fancy , know anything . what they do know be that 
 Madame Max Goesler spend seven or eight thousand a year , and that 
 she will give no man an opportunity of even ask she to marry he . 
 People use to be shy of she , but she go almost everywhere now . " 
 " she have not be at Portman Square ? " 
 " oh no ; but then Lady Glencora be so much more advanced than we be ! 
 after all , we be but humdrum people , as the world go now . " 
 then Phineas begin to roam about the room , strive to find an 
 opportunity of engross five minute of Miss Effingham 's attention . 
 during the time that Lady Laura be give he the history of Madame 
 Max Goesler his eye have wander round , and he have perceive that 
 Violet be stand in the further corner of a large lobby on to 
 which the stair open , - so situated , indeed , that she could hardly 
 escape , because of the increase crowd , but on that very account 
 almost impossible to be reach . he could see , also , that she be 
 talk to Lord Fawn , an unmarried peer of something over thirty 
 year of age , with an unrivalled pair of whisker , a small estate , 
 and a rise political reputation . Lord Fawn have be talk to 
 Violet through the whole dinner , and Phineas be begin to think 
 that he should like to make another journey to Blankenberg , with the 
 object of meet his lordship on the sand . when Lady Laura have do 
 speaking , his eye be turn through a large open doorway towards 
 the spot on which his idol be stand . " it be of no use , my 
 friend , " she say , touch his arm . " I wish I could make you know 
 that it be of no use , because then I think you would be happy . " to 
 this Phineas make no answer , but go and roam about the room . why 
 should it be of no use ? would Violet Effingham marry any man merely 
 because he be a lord ? 
 some half - hour after this he have succeed in make his way up to 
 the place in which Violet be still stand , with Lord Fawn beside 
 she . " I have be make such a struggle to get to you , " he say . 
 " and now you be here , you will have to stay , for it be impossible to 
 get out , " she answer . " Lord Fawn have make the attempt half - a - dozen 
 time , but have fail grievously . " 
 " I have be quite content , " say Lord Fawn ; - " more than 
 content . " 
 Phineas feel that he ought to give some special reason to Miss 
 Effingham to account for his effort to reach she , but yet he have 
 nothing special to say . have Lord Fawn not be there , he would 
 immediately have tell she that he be wait for an answer to the 
 question he have ask she in Saulsby Park , but he could hardly do 
 this in presence of the noble Under - Secretary of State . she receive 
 he with her pleasant genial smile , look exactly as she have look 
 when he have part from she on the morning after their ride . she do 
 not show any sign of anger , or even of indifference at his approach . 
 but still it be almost necessary that he should account for his 
 search of she . " I have so long to hear from you how you get on at 
 Loughlinter , " he say . 
 " yes , - yes ; and I will tell you something of it some day , perhaps . 
 why do you not come to Lady Baldock 's ? " 
 " I do not even know that Lady Baldock be in town . " 
 " you ought to have know . of course she be in town . where do you 
 suppose I be live ? Lord Fawn be there yesterday , and can tell you 
 that my aunt be quite blooming . " 
 " Lady Baldock be bloom , " say Lord Fawn ; " certainly 
 blooming ; - that be , if evergreen may be say to bloom . " 
 " evergreen do bloom , as well as spring plant , Lord Fawn . you come 
 and see she , Mr. Finn ; - only you must bring a little money with you 
 for the female Protestant Unmarried Women 's Emigration Society . that 
 be my aunt 's present hobby , as Lord Fawn know to his cost . " 
 " I wish I may never spend half - a - sovereign bad . " 
 " but it be a perilous affair for I , as my aunt want I to go out 
 as a sort of lead protestant unmarried female emigrant pioneer 
 myself . " 
 " you do not   mean that , " say Lord Fawn , with much anxiety . 
 " of course you will go , " say Phineas . " I should , if I be you . " 
 " I be in doubt , " say Violet . 
 " it be such a grand prospect , " say he . " such an opening in life . so 
 much excitement , you know ; and such a useful career . " 
 " as if there be not plenty of opening here for Miss Effingham , " 
 say Lord Fawn , " and plenty of excitement . " 
 " do you think there be ? " say Violet . " you be much more civil than 
 Mr. Finn , I must say . " then Phineas begin to hope that he need not be 
 afraid of Lord Fawn . " what a happy man you be at dinner ! " continue 
 Violet , address herself to Phineas . 
 " I think Lord Fawn be the happy man . " 
 " you have Madame Max Goesler all to yourself for nearly two hour , and 
 I suppose there be not a creature in the room who do not envy you . 
 I do not   doubt that ever so much interest be make with Lady Glencora 
 as to take Madame Max down to dinner . Lord Fawn , I know , 
 intrigue . " 
 " Miss Effingham , really I must - contradict you . " 
 " and Barrington Erle beg for it as a particular favour . the Duke , 
 with a sigh , own that it be impossible , because of his cumbrous 
 rank ; and Mr. Gresham , when it be offer to he , declare that 
 he be fatigue with the business of the House , and not up to the 
 occasion . how much do she say to you ; and what do she talk about ? " 
 " the ballot chiefly , - that , and manhood suffrage . " 
 " ah ! she say something more than that , I be sure . Madame Max Goesler 
 never let any man go without entrance he . if you have anything 
 near your heart , Mr. Finn , Madame Max Goesler touch it , I be sure . " 
 now Phineas have two thing near his heart , - political promotion and 
 Violet Effingham , - and Madame Max Goesler have manage to touch they 
 both . she have ask he respect his journey to Blankenberg , and 
 have touch he very nearly in reference to Miss Effingham . " you know 
 Madame Max Goesler , of course ? " say Violet to Lord Fawn . 
 " oh yes , I know the lady ; - that is , as well as other people do . no 
 one , I take it , know much of she ; and it seem to I that the world 
 be become tired of she . a mystery be good for nothing if it remain 
 always a mystery . " 
 " and it be good for nothing at all when it be find out , " say 
 Violet . 
 " and therefore it be that Madame Max Goesler be a bore , " say Lord 
 Fawn . 
 " you do not find she a bore ? " say Violet . then Phineas , choose 
 to oppose Lord Fawn as well as he could on that matter , as on every 
 other , declare that he have find Madame Max Goesler most delightful . 
 " and beautiful , - be she not ? " say Violet . 
 " beautiful ! " exclaim Lord Fawn . 
 " I think she very beautiful , " say Phineas . 
 " so do I , " say Violet . " and she be a dear ally of mine . we be a 
 week together last winter , and swear an undying friendship . she tell 
 I ever so much about Mr. Goesler . " 
 " but she tell you nothing of her second husband ? " say Lord Fawn . 
 " now that you have run into scandal , I shall have do , " say Violet . 
 half an hour after this , when Phineas be prepare to fight his way 
 out of the house , he be again close to Madame Max Goesler . he have 
 not find a single moment in which to ask Violet for an answer to his 
 old question , and be retire from the field discomfit , but not 
 dispirit . Lord Fawn , he think , be not a serious obstacle in his 
 way . Lady Laura have tell he that there be no hope for he ; but 
 then Lady Laura 's mind on that subject be , he think , prejudice . 
 Violet Effingham certainly know what be his wish , and know 
 they , smile on he and be gracious to he . would she do so if his 
 pretension be thoroughly objectionable to she ? 
 " I see that you be successful this evening , " say Madame Max 
 Goesler to he . 
 " I be not aware of any success . " 
 " I call it great success to be able to make your way where you will 
 through such a crowd as there be here . you seem to I to be so stout 
 a cavalier that I shall ask you to find my servant , and bid he 
 get my carriage . will you mind ? " Phineas , of course , declare that 
 he would be delighted . " he be a german , and not in livery . but if 
 somebody will call out , he will hear . he be very sharp , and much more 
 attentive than your english footman . an Englishman hardly ever make 
 a good servant . " 
 " be that a compliment to we Britons ? " 
 " no , certainly not . if a man be a servant , he should be clever enough 
 to be a good one . " Phineas have now give the order for the carriage , 
 and , have return , be stand with Madame Max Goesler in the 
 cloak - room . " after all , we be surely the most awkward people in 
 the world , " she say . " you know Lord Fawn , who be talk to Miss 
 Effingham just now . you should have hear he try to pay I a 
 compliment before dinner . it be like a donkey walk a minuet , and 
 yet they say he be a clever man and can make speech . " could it be 
 possible that Madame Max Goesler 's ear be so sharp that she have 
 hear the thing which Lord Fawn have say of she ? 
 " he be a well - inform man , " say Phineas . 
 " for a lord , you mean , " say Madame Max Goesler . " but he be an oaf , 
 be he not ? and yet they say he be to marry that girl . " 
 " I do not think he will , " say Phineas , stoutly . 
 " I hope not , with all my heart ; and I hope that somebody else 
 may , - unless somebody else should change his mind . thank you ; I be so 
 much oblige to you . mind you come and call on I , - 193 , Park Lane . I 
 dare say you know the little cottage . " then he put Madame Max Goesler 
 into her carriage , and walk away to his club . 
 CHAPTER XLII 
 Lady Baldock do not send a card to Phineas Finn 
 Lady Baldock 's house in Berkeley Square be very stately , - a large 
 house with five front window in a row , and a big door , and a huge 
 square hall , and a fat porter in a round - top chair ; - but it be 
 dingy and dull , and could not have be paint for the last ten 
 year , or furnish for the last twenty . nevertheless , Lady Baldock 
 have " evening , " and people go to they , - though not such a crowd of 
 people as would go to the evening of Lady Glencora . now Mr. Phineas 
 Finn have not be ask to the evening of Lady Baldock for the 
 present season , and the reason be after this wise . 
 " yes , Mr. Finn , " Lady Baldock have say to her daughter , who , early in 
 the spring , be prepare the card . " you may send one to Mr. Finn , 
 certainly . " 
 " I do not   know that he be very nice , " say Augusta Boreham , whose eye 
 at Saulsby have be sharp perhaps than her mother 's , and who have 
 her suspicion . 
 but Lady Baldock do not like interference from her daughter . " Mr. 
 Finn , certainly , " she continue . " they tell I that he be a very 
 rise young man , and he sit for Lord Brentford 's borough . of course 
 he be a Radical , but we can not help that . all the rise young man 
 be Radicals now . I think he very civil at Saulsby . " 
 " but , mamma - " 
 " well ! " 
 " do not   you think that he be a little free with Violet ? " 
 " what on earth do you mean , Augusta ? " 
 " have you not fancy that he be - fond of she ? " 
 " good gracious , no ! " 
 " I think he be . and I have sometimes fancy that she be fond of he , 
 too . " 
 " I do not   believe a word of it , Augusta , - not a word . I should have 
 see it if it be so . I be very sharp in see such thing . they 
 never escape I . even Violet would not be such a fool as that . send 
 he a card , and if he come I shall soon see . " Miss Boreham quite 
 understand her mother , though she could never master she , - and the 
 card be prepare . Miss Boreham could never master her mother by her 
 own effort ; but it be , I think , by a little intrigue on her part 
 that Lady Baldock be master , and , indeed , altogether cow , in 
 reference to our hero , and that this victory be gain on that very 
 afternoon in time to prevent the sending of the card . 
 when the mother and daughter be at tea , before dinner , Lord Baldock 
 come into the room , and , after have be pat and pet and 
 praise by his mother , he take up all the card out of a china bowl 
 and run his eye over they . " Lord Fawn ! " he say , " the great ass 
 in all London ! Lady Hartletop ! you know she will not   come . " " I do not 
 see why she should not   come , " say Lady Baldock ; - " a mere country 
 clergyman 's daughter ! " " Julius Caesar Conway ; - a great friend of mine , 
 and therefore he always blackball my other friend at the club . Lord 
 Chiltern ; I think you be at dagger draw with Chiltern . " " they 
 say he be go to be reconcile to his father , Gustavus , and I do it 
 for Lord Brentford 's sake . and he will not   come , so it do not signify . 
 and I do believe that Violet have really refuse he . " " you be quite 
 right about his not come , " say Lord Baldock , continue to read 
 the card ; " Chiltern certainly will not   come . Count Sparrowsky ; - I 
 wonder what you know about Sparrowsky that you should ask he here . " 
 " he be ask about , Gustavus ; he be indeed , " plead Lady Baldock . " I 
 believe that Sparrowsky be a penniless adventurer . Mr. Monk ; well , 
 he be a Cabinet Minister . Sir Gregory Greeswing ; you mix your people 
 nicely at any rate . Sir Gregory Greeswing be the most old - fashioned 
 Tory in England . " " of course we be not political , Gustavus . " 
 " Phineas Finn . they come alternately , - one and one . 
 " Mr. Finn be ask everywhere , Gustavus . " 
 " I do not   doubt it . they say he be a very good sort of fellow . they 
 say also that Violet have find that out as well as other people . " 
 " what do you mean , Gustavus ? " 
 " I mean that everybody be say that this Phineas Finn be go to 
 set himself up in the world by marry your niece . he be quite right 
 to try it on , if he have a chance . " 
 " I do not   think he would be right at all , " say Lady Baldock , with 
 much energy . " I think he would be wrong , - shamefully wrong . they say 
 he be the son of an irish doctor , and that he have not   a shilling in 
 the world . " 
 " that be just why he would be right . what be such a man to do , but to 
 marry money ? he be a deuced good - look fellow , too , and will be sure 
 to do it . " 
 " he should work for his money in the city , then , or somewhere there . 
 but I do not   believe it , Gustavus ; I do not , indeed . " 
 " very well . I only tell you what I hear . the fact be that he and 
 Chiltern have already quarrel about she . if I be to tell you 
 that they have be over to Holland together and fight a duel about 
 she , you would not   believe that . " 
 " fought a duel about Violet ! People do not   fight duel now , and I 
 should not believe it . " 
 " very well . then send your card to Mr. Finn . " and , so say , Lord 
 Baldock leave the room . 
 Lady Baldock sit in silence for some time toast her toe at the 
 fire , and Augusta Boreham sit by , wait for order . she feel pretty 
 nearly sure that new order would be give if she do not herself 
 interfere . " you have well put by that card for the present , my 
 dear , " say Lady Baldock at last . " I will make inquiry . I do not 
 believe a word of what Gustavus have say . I do not   think that even 
 Violet be such a fool as that . but if rash and ill - natured people 
 have speak of it , it may be as well to be careful . " 
 " it be always well to be careful ; - be it not , mamma ? " 
 " not but what I think it very improper that these thing should be 
 say about a young woman ; and as for the story of the duel , I do not 
 believe a word of it . it be absurd . I dare say that Gustavus invent 
 it at the moment , just to amuse himself . " 
 the card of course be not send , and Lady Baldock at any rate put so 
 much faith in her son 's story as to make she feel it to be her duty 
 to interrogate her niece on the subject . Lady Baldock at this period 
 of her life be certainly not free from fear of Violet Effingham . 
 in the numerous encounter which take place between they , the aunt 
 seldom gain that amount of victory which would have completely 
 satisfied her spirit . she long to be dominant over her niece as she 
 be dominant over her daughter ; and when she find that she miss 
 such supremacy , she long to tell Violet to depart from out her 
 border , and be no long niece of her . but have she ever do so , 
 Violet would have go at the instant , and then terrible thing would 
 have follow . there be a satisfaction in turn out of door a 
 nephew or niece who be pecuniarily dependent , but when the youthful 
 relative be richly endow , the satisfaction be much diminish . it 
 be the duty of a guardian , no doubt , to look after the ward ; but if 
 this can not be do , the ward 's money should at least be hold with as 
 close a fist as possible . but Lady Baldock , though she know that she 
 would be sorely wound , poke about on her old body with the sharp 
 lance of disobedience , and strike with the cruel sword of satire , 
 if she take upon herself to scold or even to question Violet , 
 nevertheless would not abandon the pleasure of lecturing and 
 teaching . " it be my duty , " she would say to herself , " and though it 
 be take in a bad spirit , I will always perform my duty . " so she 
 perform her duty , and ask Violet Effingham some few question 
 respect Phineas Finn . " my dear , " she say , " do you remember 
 meet a Mr. Finn at Saulsby ? " 
 " a Mr. Finn , aunt ! why , he be a particular friend of mine . of course 
 I do , and he be at Saulsby . I have meet he there more than once . 
 do not   you remember that we be rid about together ? " 
 " I remember that he be there , certainly ; but I do not know that he 
 be a special - friend . " 
 " Most especial , aunt . a 1 , I may say ; - among young man , I mean . " 
 Lady Baldock be certainly the most indiscreet of old woman in such a 
 matter as this , and Violet the most provoking of young lady . Lady 
 Baldock , believe that there be something to fear , - as , indeed , 
 there be , much to fear , - should have be content to destroy the 
 card , and to keep the young lady away from the young gentleman , 
 if such keeping away be possible to she . but Miss Effingham be 
 certainly very wrong to speak of any young man as be a 1 . fond as 
 I be of Miss Effingham , I can not justify she , and must acknowledge 
 that she use the most offensive phrase she could find , on purpose to 
 annoy her aunt . 
 " Violet , " say Lady Baldock , bridle up , " I never hear such a word 
 before from the lip of a young lady . " 
 " not as a 1 ? I think it simply mean very good . " 
 " a 1 be a nobleman , " say Lady Baldock . 
 " no , aunt ; - a 1 be a ship , - a ship that be very good , " say Violet . 
 " and do you mean to say that Mr. Finn be , - be , - be , - very good ? " 
 " yes , indeed . you ask Lord Brentford , and Mr. Kennedy . you know he 
 save poor Mr. Kennedy from be throttle in the street . " 
 " that have nothing to do with it . a policeman might have do that . " 
 " then he would have be a 1 of policeman , - though a 1 do not mean 
 a policeman . " 
 " he would have do his duty , and so perhaps do Mr. Finn . " 
 " of course he do , aunt . it could not   have be his duty to stand 
 by and see Mr. Kennedy throttle . and he nearly kill one of the 
 man , and take the other prisoner with his own hand . and he make a 
 beautiful speech the other day . I read every word of it . I be so glad 
 he be a Liberal . I do like young man to be liberal . " now Lord Baldock 
 be a Tory , as have be all the Lord Baldocks , - since the first who 
 have be buy over from the whig in the time of George III at the 
 cost of a barony . 
 " you have nothing to do with politic , Violet . " 
 " why should not   I have something to do with politic , aunt ? " 
 " and I must tell you that your name be be very unpleasantly 
 mention in connection with that of this young man because of your 
 indiscretion . " 
 " what indiscretion ? " Violet , as she make her demand for a more direct 
 accusation , stand quite upright before her aunt , look the old 
 woman full in the face , - almost with her arm akimbo . 
 " call he a 1 , Violet . " 
 " People have be talk about I and Mr. Finn , because I just now , 
 at this very moment , call he a 1 to you ! if you want to scold I 
 about anything , aunt , do find out something less ridiculous than 
 that . " 
 " it be most improper language , - and if you use it to I , I be sure 
 you would to other . " 
 " to what other ? " 
 " to Mr. Finn , - and those sort of people . " 
 " call Mr. Finn a 1 to his face ! well , - upon my honour I do not   know 
 why I should not . Lord Chiltern say he rid beautifully , and if we 
 be talk about rid I might do so . " 
 " you have no business to talk to Lord Chiltern about Mr. Finn at 
 all . " 
 " have I not ? I think that perhaps the one sin might palliate 
 the other . you know , aunt , no young lady , let she be ever so 
 ill - dispose , can marry two objectionable young man , - at the same 
 time . " 
 " I say nothing about your marry Mr. Finn . " 
 " then , aunt , what do you mean ? " 
 " I mean that you should not allow yourself to be talk of with an 
 adventurer , a young man without a shilling , a person who have come 
 from nobody know where in the bog of Ireland . " 
 " but you use to ask he here . " 
 " yes , - as long as he know his place . but I shall not do so again . and 
 I must beg you to be circumspect . " 
 " my dear aunt , we may as well understand each other . I will not be 
 circumspect , as you call it . and if Mr. Finn ask I to marry he 
 to - morrow , and if I like he well enough , I would take he , - even 
 though he have be dig right out of a bog . not only because I like 
 he , - mind ! if I be unfortunate enough to like a man who be 
 nothing , I would refuse he in spite of my liking , - because he be 
 nothing . but this young man be not nothing . Mr. Finn be a fine 
 fellow , and if there be no other reason to prevent my marry he 
 than his be the son of a doctor , and come out of the bog , that 
 would not do so . now I have make a clean breast to you as regard 
 Mr. Finn ; and if you do not like what I have   say , aunt , you must 
 acknowledge that you have bring it on yourself . " 
 Lady Baldock be leave for a time speechless . but no card be send to 
 Phineas Finn . 
 CHAPTER XLIII 
 Promotion 
 Phineas get no card from Lady Baldock , but one morning he receive 
 a note from Lord Brentford which be of more importance to he than 
 any card could have be . at this time , bit by bit , the Reform 
 Bill of the day have nearly make its way through the committee , but 
 have be so mutilate as to be almost impossible of recognition 
 by its progenitor . and there be still a clause or two as to 
 the rearrangement of seat , respect which it be know that 
 there would be a combat , - probably combat , - carry on after the 
 internecine fashion . there be a certain clipping of county to be 
 do , as to which it be say that Mr. Daubeny have declare that 
 he would not yield till he be make to do so by the brute force of 
 majority ; - and there be another clause for the drafting of certain 
 superfluous member from little borough , and bestow they on 
 populous town at which they be much want , respect which 
 Mr. Turnbull have proclaim that the clause as it now stand be a 
 faineant clause , capable of do , and intend to do , no good in the 
 proper direction ; a clause put into the bill to gull ignorant folk 
 who have not eye enough to recognise the fact that it be faineant ; a 
 make - believe clause , - so say Mr. Turnbull , - to be detest on that 
 account by every true reformer bad than the old philistine bond 
 and Tory figment of representation , as to which there be at least 
 no hypocritical pretence of popular fitness . Mr. Turnbull have be 
 very loud and very angry , - have talk much of demonstration among 
 the people , and have almost threaten the House . the House in its 
 present mood do not fear any demonstration , - but it do fear that 
 Mr. Turnbull might help Mr. Daubeny , and that Mr. Daubeny might help 
 Mr. Turnbull . it be now May , - the middle of May , - and minister , who 
 have be at work on their Reform Bill ever since the beginning of the 
 session , be become weary of it . and then , should these odious 
 clause escape the threaten Turnbull - Daubeny alliance , - then there 
 be the House of Lords ! " what a pity we can not   pass our bill at the 
 Treasury , and have do with they ! " say Laurence Fitzgibbon . " yes , 
 indeed , " reply Mr. Ratler . " for myself , I be never so tired of a 
 session in my life . I would not   go through it again to be make , - no , 
 not to be make Chancellor of the Exchequer . " 
 Lord Brentford 's note to Phineas Finn be as follow : - 
 House of Lords , 16th May , 186 - . 
 MY DEAR MR . FINN , 
 you be no doubt aware that Lord Bosanquet 's death have 
 take Mr. Mottram into the Upper House , and that as 
 he be under - Secretary for the Colonies , and as the 
 Under - Secretary must be in the Lower House , the vacancy 
 must be fill up . 
 the heart of Phineas Finn at this moment be almost in his mouth . not 
 only to be select for political employment , but to be select at 
 once for an office so singularly desirable ! under - secretary , he 
 fancy , be pay two thousand a year . what would Mr. Low say now ? 
 but his great triumph soon receive a check . " Mr. Mildmay have speak 
 to I on the subject , " continue the letter , " and inform I that 
 he have offer the place at the colony to his old supporter , Mr. 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon . " Laurence Fitzgibbon ! 
 I be inclined to think that he could not have do well , 
 as Mr. Fitzgibbon have show great zeal for his party . this 
 will vacate the irish seat at the Treasury Board , and I be 
 commission by Mr. Mildmay to offer it to you . perhaps 
 you will do I the pleasure of call on I to - morrow 
 between the hour of eleven and twelve . 
 your very sincerely , 
 BRENTFORD . 
 Phineas be himself surprised to find that his first feeling on 
 read this letter be one of dissatisfaction . here be his golden 
 hope about to be realise , - hope as to the realisation of which 
 he have be quite despondent twelve month ago , - and yet he be 
 uncomfortable because he be to be postpone to Laurence Fitzgibbon . 
 have the new Under - Secretary be a man whom he have not know , whom he 
 have not learn to look down upon as inferior to himself , he would 
 not have mind it , - would have be full of joy at the promotion 
 propose for himself . but Laurence Fitzgibbon be such a poor 
 creature , that the idea of fill a place from which Laurence have 
 rise be distasteful to he . " it seem to be all a matter of favour 
 and convenience , " he say to himself , " without any reference to the 
 service . " his triumph would have be so complete have Mr. Mildmay 
 allow he to go into the high place at one leap . other man who 
 have make themselves useful have do so . in the first hour after 
 receive Lord Brentford 's letter , the idea of become a Lord of the 
 Treasury be almost displease to he . he have an idea that junior 
 lordship of the Treasury be generally bestow on young member 
 whom it be convenient to secure , but who be not good at do 
 anything . there be a moment in which he think that he would refuse 
 to be make a junior lord . 
 but during the night cooler reflection tell he that he have be 
 very wrong . he have take up politic with the express desire of 
 get his foot upon a rung of the ladder of promotion , and now , in 
 his third session , he be about to be successful . even as a junior 
 lord he would have a thousand a year ; and how long might he have sit 
 in chamber , and have wander about Lincoln 's Inn , and have loiter 
 in the court strive to look as though he have business , before he 
 would have earn a thousand a year ! even as a junior lord he could 
 make himself useful , and when once he should be know to be a good 
 working man , promotion would come to he . no ladder can be mount 
 without labour ; but this ladder be now open above his head , and he 
 already have his foot upon it . 
 at half - past eleven he be with Lord Brentford , who receive he 
 with the blandest smile and a pressure of the hand which be quite 
 cordial . " my dear Finn , " he say , " this give I the most sincere 
 pleasure , - the great pleasure in the world . our connection 
 together at Loughton of course make it doubly agreeable to I . " 
 " I can not be too grateful to you , Lord Brentford . " 
 " no , no ; no , no . it be all your own doing . when Mr. Mildmay ask 
 I whether I do not think you the most promising of the young 
 member on our side in your House , I certainly do say that I quite 
 concur . but I should be take too much on myself , I should be 
 act dishonestly , if I be to allow you to imagine that it be my 
 proposition . have he ask I to recommend , I should have name you ; 
 that I say frankly . but he do not . he do not . Mr. Mildmay name you 
 himself . ' do you think , ' he say , ' that your friend Finn would join 
 we at the Treasury ? ' I tell he that I do think so . ' and do you not 
 think , ' say he , ' that it would be a useful appointment ? ' then I 
 venture to say that I have no doubt whatever on that point ; - that I 
 know you well enough to feel confident that you would lend a strength 
 to the Liberal Government . then there be a few word say about 
 your seat , and I be commission to write to you . that be all . " 
 Phineas be grateful , but not too grateful , and bear himself very 
 well in the interview . he explain to Lord Brentford that of course 
 it be his object to serve the country , - and to be pay for his 
 service , - and that he consider himself to be very fortunate to be 
 select so early in his career for parliamentary place . he would 
 endeavour to do his duty , and could safely say of himself that he do 
 not wish to eat the bread of idleness . as he make this assertion , he 
 think of Laurence Fitzgibbon . Laurence Fitzgibbon have eat the 
 bread of idleness , and yet he be promote . but Phineas say nothing 
 to Lord Brentford about his idle friend . when he have make his little 
 speech he ask a question about the borough . 
 " I have already venture to write a letter to my agent at Loughton , 
 tell he that you have accept office , and that you will be 
 shortly there again . he will see Shortribs and arrange it . but if I 
 be you I should write to Shortribs and to Grating , - after I have 
 see Mr. Mildmay . of course you will not mention my name , " and the 
 Earl look very grave as he utter this caution . 
 " of course I will not , " say Phineas . 
 " I do not think you will find any difficulty about the seat , " say the 
 peer . " there never have be any difficulty at Loughton yet . I must 
 say that for they . and if we can scrape through with clause 72 we 
 shall be all right ; - shall we not ? " this be the clause as to which 
 so violent an opposition be expect from Mr. Turnbull , - a clause as 
 to which Phineas himself have feel that he would hardly know how to 
 support the Government , in the event of the committee be press 
 to a division upon it . could he , an ardent reformer , a reformer 
 at heart , - could he say that such a borough as Loughton should be 
 spar ; - that the arrangement by which Shortribs and Grating have send 
 he to Parliament , in obedience to Lord Brentford 's order , be in 
 due accord with the theory of a representative legislature ? in what 
 respect have Gatton and Old Sarum be bad than Loughton ? be he 
 not himself false to his principle in sit for such a borough 
 as Loughton ? he have speak to Mr. Monk , and Mr. Monk have tell he 
 that Rome be not build in a day , - and have tell he also that good 
 thing be most value and be more valuable when they come by 
 instalment . but then Mr. Monk himself enjoy the satisfaction of 
 sit for a popular Constituency . he be not personally prick 
 in the conscience by his own parliamentary position . now , however , 
  - now that Phineas have consent to join the Government , any such 
 consideration as these must be lay aside . he could no long be a 
 free agent , or even a free thinker . he have be quite aware of this , 
 and have teach himself to understand that member of Parliament in 
 the direct service of the Government be absolve from the necessity 
 of free - thinking . individual free - thinking be incompatible with the 
 position of a member of the Government , and unless such abnegation 
 be practise , no government would be possible . it be of course a 
 man 's duty to bind himself together with no other man but those with 
 whom , on matter of general policy , he could agree heartily ; - but 
 have find that he could so agree , he know that it would be his 
 duty as a subaltern to vote as he be direct . it would trouble his 
 conscience less to sit for Loughton and vote for an objectionable 
 clause as a member of the Government , than it would have do to give 
 such a vote as an independent member . in so resolving , he think 
 that he be simply act in accordance with the acknowledge rule 
 of parliamentary government . and therefore , when Lord Brentford speak 
 of Clause 72 , he could answer pleasantly , " I think we shall carry 
 it ; and , you see , in get it through committee , if we can carry 
 it by one , that be as good as a hundred . that be the comfort of 
 close - fighting in committee . in the open House we be almost as much 
 beat by a narrow majority as by a vote against we . " 
 " just so ; just so , " say Lord Brentford , delight to see that his 
 young pupil , - as he regard he , - understand so well the system of 
 parliamentary management . " by - the - bye , Finn , have you see Chiltern 
 lately ? " 
 " not quite lately , " say Phineas , blush up to his eye . 
 " or hear from he ? " 
 " no ; - nor hear from he . when last I hear of he he be in 
 Brussels . " 
 " ah , - yes ; he be somewhere on the Rhine now . I think that as you 
 be so intimate , perhaps you correspond with he . have you hear 
 that we have arrange about Lady Laura 's money ? " 
 " I have hear . Lady Laura have tell I . " 
 " I wish he would return , " say Lord Brentford sadly , - almost 
 solemnly . " as that great difficulty be over , I would receive he 
 willingly , and make my house pleasant to he , if I can do so . I be 
 most anxious that he should settle , and marry . could you not write 
 to he ? " Phineas , not dare to tell Lord Brentford that he have 
 quarrel with Lord Chiltern , - feeling that if he do so everything 
 would go wrong , - say that he would write to Lord Chiltern . 
 as he go away he feel that he be bind to get an answer from 
 Violet Effingham . if it should be necessary , he be willing to break 
 with Lord Brentford on that matter , - even though such breaking should 
 lose he his borough and his place ; - but not on any other matter . 
 CHAPTER XLIV 
 Phineas and his friend 
 our hero 's friend be , I think , almost more elated by our hero 's 
 promotion than be our hero himself . he never tell himself that it 
 be a great thing to be a junior lord of the Treasury , though he 
 acknowledge to himself that to have make a successful beginning 
 be a very great thing . but his friend be loud in their 
 congratulation , - or condolement as the case might be . 
 he have his interview with Mr. Mildmay , and , after that , one of 
 his first step be to inform Mrs. Bunce that he must change his 
 lodging . " the truth be , Mrs. Bunce , not that I want anything well ; 
 but that a well position will be advantageous to I , and that I 
 can afford to pay for it . " Mrs. Bunce acknowledge the truth of the 
 argument , with her apron up to her eye . " I have   get to be so fond of 
 look after you , Mr. Finn ! I have indeed , " say Mrs. Bunce . " it be 
 not just what you pay like , because another party will pay as much . 
 but we have   get so used to you , Mr. Finn , - have not   we ? " Mrs. Bunce be 
 probably not aware herself that the comeliness of her lodger have 
 please her feminine eye , and touch her feminine heart . have anybody 
 say that Mrs. Bunce be in love with Phineas , the scandal would have 
 be monstrous . and yet it be so , - after a fashion . and Bunce know 
 it , - after his fashion . " do not   be such an old fool , " he say , " cry 
 after he because he be six foot high . " " I be not   cry after he 
 because he be six foot high , " whine the poor woman ; - " but one do 
 like old face well than new , and a gentleman about one 's place 
 be pleasant . " " Gentleman be d - - d , " say Bunce . but his anger be 
 excited , not by his wife 's love for Phineas , but by the use of an 
 objectionable word . 
 bunce himself have be on very friendly term with Phineas , and they 
 two have have many discussion on matter of politic , Bunce take 
 up the cudgel always for Mr. Turnbull , and generally slip away 
 gradually into some account of his own martyrdom . for he have be a 
 martyr , have fail in obtain any redress against the policeman 
 who have imprison he so wrongfully . the People 's Banner 
 have fight for he manfully , and therefore there be a little 
 disagreement between he and Phineas on the subject of that great 
 organ of public opinion . and as Mr. Bunce think that his lodger 
 be very wrong to sit for Lord Brentford 's borough , subject be 
 sometimes touch which be a little galling to Phineas . 
 touch this promotion , Bunce have nothing but condolement to offer 
 to the new junior lord . " oh yes , " say he , in answer to an argument 
 from Phineas , " I suppose there must be lord , as you call them ; though 
 for the matter of that I can not   see as they be of any mortal use . " 
 " would not   you have the Government carry on ? " 
 " government ! well ; I suppose there must be government . but the less 
 of it the well . I be not against government ; - nor yet against law , 
 Mr. Finn ; though the less of they , too , the well . but what do 
 these lord do in the government ? lord indeed ! I will tell you what 
 they do , Mr. Finn . they wote ; that be what they do ! they wote hard ; 
 black or white , white or black . ai not   that true ? when you be a 
 ' lord , ' will you be able to wote against Mr. Mildmay to save your 
 very soul ? " 
 " if it come to be a question of soul - saving , Mr. Bunce , I shall not 
 save my place at the expense of my conscience . " 
 " not if you know it , you mean . but the bad of it be that a man 
 get so thick into the mud that he do not   know whether he be dirty or 
 clean . you will have to wote as you be tell , and of course you will think 
 it be right enough . ai not   you be among Parliament gent long enough 
 to know that that be the way it go ? " 
 " you think no honest man can be a member of the government ? " 
 " I do not   say that , but I think honesty be a deal easier away from them . 
 the fact be , Mr. Finn , it be all wrong with we yet , and will be till 
 we get it nigh to the great american model . if a poor man get into 
 Parliament , - you will excuse I , Mr. Finn , but I call you a poor man . " 
 " certainly , - as a member of Parliament I be a very poor man . " 
 " just so , - and therefore what do you do ? you go and lay yourself 
 out for government ! I be not say as how you be anyways wrong . a man 
 have to live . you have win way , and a good physiognomy of your 
 own , and be as big as a life - guardsman . " Phineas as he hear this 
 doubtful praise laugh and blush . " very well ; you make your 
 way with the big wig , lord and earl and they like , and you get 
 return for a rotten borough ; - you will excuse I , but that be about 
 it , be not   it ? - and then you go in for government ! a man may have 
 a mission to govern , such as Washington and Cromwell and the like 
 o ' they . but when I hear of Mr. Fitzgibbon a - governing , why then I 
 say , - d - - n it all . " 
 " there must be good and bad you know . " 
 " we have   get to change a deal yet , Mr. Finn , and we will do it . when a 
 young man as have liberal feeling get into Parliament , he should not 
 be snap up and bring into the govern business just because 
 he be poor and want a salary . they do not   do it that way in the 
 States ; and they will not   do it that way here long . it be the system as I 
 hat , and not you , Mr. Finn . well , good - bye , sir . I hope you will like 
 the govern business , and find it suit your health . " 
 these condolement from Mr. Bunce be not pleasant , but they set 
 he think . he feel assure that Bunce and Quintus Slide and Mr. 
 Turnbull be wrong . bunce be ignorant . Quintus Slide be dishonest . 
 Turnbull be greedy of popularity . for himself , he think that as a 
 young man he be fairly well informed . he know that he mean to be 
 true in his vocation . and he be quite sure that the object near 
 to his heart in politic be not self - aggrandisement , but the welfare 
 of the people in general . and yet he could not but agree with Bunce 
 that there be something wrong . when such man as Laurence Fitzgibbon 
 be call upon to act as governor , be it not to be expect 
 that the ignorant but still intelligent bunce of the population 
 should - 'd - - n it all " ? 
 on the evening of that day he go up to Mrs. Low 's , very sure that 
 he should receive some encouragement from she and from her husband . 
 she have be angry with he because he have put himself into a 
 position in which money must be spend and none could be make . the 
 Lows , especially Mrs. Low , have refuse to believe that any success 
 be within his reach . now that he have succeed , now that he be in 
 receipt of a salary on which he could live and save money , he would 
 be sure of sympathy from his old friend the Lows ! 
 but Mrs. Low be as severe upon he as Mr. Bunce have be , and 
 even from Mr. Low he could extract no real comfort . " of course I 
 congratulate you , " say Mr. Low coldly . 
 " and you , Mrs. Low ? " 
 " well , you know , Mr. Finn , I think you have begin at the wrong end . I 
 think so before , and I think so still . I suppose I ought not to say 
 so to a Lord of the Treasury , but if you ask I , what can I do ? " 
 " speak the truth out , of course . " 
 " exactly . that be what I must do . well , the truth be , Mr. Finn , that 
 I do not think it be a very good opening for a young man to be make 
 what they call a Lord of the Treasury , - unless he have get a private 
 fortune , you know , to support that kind of life . " 
 " you see , Phineas , a ministry be such an uncertain thing , " say Mr. 
 Low . 
 " of course it be uncertain ; - but as I do go into the House , it be 
 something to have succeed . " 
 " if you call that success , " say Mrs. Low . 
 " you do intend to go on with your profession , " say Mr. Low . he 
 could not tell they that he have change his mind , and that he mean 
 to marry Violet Effingham , who would much prefer a parliamentary life 
 for her husband to that of a work barrister . " I suppose that be 
 all give up now , " continue Mr. Low . 
 " just for the present , " say Phineas . 
 " yes ; - and for ever I fear , " say Mrs. Low , " you will never go back to 
 real work after fritter away your time as a Lord of the Treasury . 
 what sort of work must it be when just anybody can do it that it 
 suit they to lay hold of ? but of course a thousand a year be 
 something , though a man may have it for only six month . " 
 it come out in the course of the evening that Mr. Low be go 
 to stand for the borough vacate by Mr. Mottram , at which it be 
 consider that the Conservatives might possibly prevail . " you see , 
 after all , Phineas , " say Mr. Low , " that I be follow your step . " 
 " ah ; you be go into the House in the course of your profession . " 
 " just so , " say Mrs. Low . 
 " and be take the first step towards be a Tory 
 Attorney - General . " 
 " that be as may be , " say Mr. Low . " but it be the kind of thing a man 
 do after twenty year of hard work . for myself , I really do not 
 care much whether I succeed or fail . I should like to live to be a 
 Vice - Chancellor . I do not   mind say as much as that to you . but I be 
 not at all sure that Parliament be the good way to the Equity Bench . " 
 " but it be a grand thing to get into Parliament when you do it by 
 mean of your profession , " say Mrs. Low . 
 soon after that Phineas take his departure from the house , feel 
 sore and unhappy . but on the next morning he be receive in 
 Grosvenor Place with an amount of triumph which go far to 
 compensate he . Lady Laura have write to he to call there , and on 
 his arrival he find both Violet Effingham and Madame Max Goesler 
 with his friend . when Phineas enter the room his first feeling be 
 one of intense joy at see that Violet Effingham be present there . 
 then there be one of surprise that Madame Max Goesler should make 
 one of the little party . Lady Laura have tell he at Mr. Palliser 's 
 dinner - party that they , in Portman Square , have not as yet advanced 
 far enough to receive Madame Max Goesler , - and yet here be the lady 
 in Mr. Kennedy 's drawing - room . now Phineas would have think it more 
 likely that he should find she in Portman Square than in Grosvenor 
 Place . the truth be that Madame Goesler have be bring by Miss 
 Effingham , - with the consent , indeed , of Lady Laura , but with a 
 consent give with much of hesitation . " what be you afraid of ? " 
 Violet have ask . " I be afraid of nothing , " Lady Laura have answer ; 
 " but one have to choose one 's acquaintance in accordance with rule 
 which one do not   lay down very strictly . " " she be a clever woman , " 
 say Violet , " and everybody like she ; but if you think Mr. Kennedy 
 would object , of course you be right . " then Lady Laura have 
 consent , tell herself that it be not necessary that she should 
 ask her husband 's approval as to every new acquaintance she might 
 form . at the same time Violet have be tell that Phineas would be 
 there , and so the party have be make up . 
 " ' see the conquering hero come , ' say Violet in her cheery voice . 
 " I be so glad that Mr. Finn have be make a lord of something , " 
 say Madame Max Goesler . " I have the pleasure of a long political 
 discussion with he the other night , and I quite approve of he . " 
 " we be so much gratify , Mr. Finn , " say Lady Laura . " Mr. Kennedy 
 say that it be the good appointment they could have make , and papa 
 be quite proud about it . " 
 " you be Lord Brentford 's member ; be you not ? " ask Madame Max 
 Goesler . this be a question which Phineas do not quite like , and 
 which he be oblige to excuse by remember that the questioner have 
 live so long out of England as to be probably ignorant of the myth , 
 and theory , and system , and work of the British Constitution . 
 Violet Effingham , little as she know of politic , would never have 
 ask a question so imprudent . 
 but the question be turn off , and Phineas , with an easy grace , 
 submit himself to be pet , and congratulate , and purr 
 over , and almost caress by the three lady , their good - natured 
 enthusiasm be at any rate well than the satire of Bunce , or the 
 wisdom of Mrs. Low . Lady Laura have no misgiving as to Phineas be 
 fit for governing , and Violet Effingham say nothing as to the 
 short - live tenure of minister . Madame Max Goesler , though she have 
 ask an indiscreet question , thoroughly appreciate the advantage 
 of Government pay , and the prestige of Government power . " you be a 
 lord now , " she say , speak , as be customary with she , with the 
 slight possible foreign accent , " and you will be a president soon , 
 and then perhaps a secretary . the order of promotion seem odd , but I 
 be tell it be very pleasant . " 
 " it be pleasant to succeed , of course , " say Phineas , " let the 
 success be ever so little . " 
 " we know you would succeed , " say Lady Laura . " we be quite sure of 
 it . be we not , Violet ? " 
 " you always say so , my dear . for myself I do not venture to have 
 an opinion on such matter . will you always have to go to that big 
 building in the corner , Mr. Finn , and stay there from ten till four ? 
 will not   that be a bore ? " 
 " we have a half - holiday on Saturday , you know , " say Phineas . 
 " and do the Lords of the Treasury have to take care of the money ? " 
 ask Madame Max Goesler . 
 " only their own ; and they generally fail in do that , " say 
 Phineas . 
 he sit there for a considerable time , wonder whether Mr. Kennedy 
 would come in , and wonder also as to what Mr. Kennedy would say to 
 Madame Max Goesler when he do come in . he know that it be useless 
 for he to expect any opportunity , then or there , of be alone for 
 a moment with Violet Effingham . his only chance in that direction 
 would be in some crowded room , at some ball at which he might ask she 
 to dance with he ; but it seem that fate be very unkind to he , 
 and that no such chance come in his way . Mr. Kennedy do not appear , 
 and Madame Max Goesler with Violet go away , leave Phineas still 
 sit with Lady Laura . each of they say a kind word to he as 
 they go . " I do not   know whether I may dare to expect that a Lord of 
 the Treasury will come and see I ? " say Madame Max Goesler . then 
 Phineas make a second promise that he would call in Park Lane . Violet 
 blush as she remember that she could not ask he to call at Lady 
 Baldock 's . " good - bye , Mr. Finn , " she say , give he her hand . 
 " I be so very glad that they have choose you ; and I do hope that , as 
 Madame Max say , they will make you a secretary and a president , and 
 everything else very quickly , - till it will come to your turn to 
 be make other people . " " he be very nice , " say Madame Goesler to 
 Violet as she take her place in the carriage . " he bear be pet 
 and spoilt without be either awkward or conceited . " " on the whole , 
 he be rather nice , " say Violet ; " only he have not get a shilling in 
 the world , and have to make himself before he will be anybody . " " he 
 must marry money , of course , " say Madame Max Goesler . 
 " I hope you be content ? " say Lady Laura , rise from her chair 
 and come opposite to he as soon as they be alone . 
 " of course I be content . " 
 " I be not , - when I first hear of it . why do they promote that 
 empty - head countryman of yours to a place for which he be quite 
 unfit ? I be not content . but then I be more ambitious for you than 
 you be for yourself . " he sit without answer she for awhile , and 
 she stand wait for his reply . " have you nothing to say to I ? " she 
 ask . 
 " I do not know what to say . when I think of it all , I be lose in 
 amazement . you tell I that you be not content ; - that you be 
 ambitious for I . why be it that you should feel any interest in the 
 matter ? " 
 " be it not reasonable that we should be interested for our friend ? " 
 " but when you and I last part here in this room you be hardly my 
 friend . " 
 " be I not ? you wrong I there ; - very deeply . " 
 " I tell you what be my ambition , and you resent it , " say Phineas . 
 " I think I say that I could not help you , and I think I say also 
 that I think you would fail . I do not know that I show much 
 resentment . you see , I tell she that you be here , that she might 
 come and meet you . you know that I wish my brother should succeed . 
 I wish it before I ever know you . you can not expect that I should 
 change my wish . " 
 " but if he can not succeed , " plead Phineas . 
 " who be to say that ? have a woman never be win by devotion and 
 perseverance ? besides , how can I wish to see you go on with a suit 
 which must sever you from my father , and injure your political 
 prospect ; - perhaps fatally injure they ? it seem to I now that my 
 father be almost the only man in London who have not hear of this 
 duel . " 
 " of course he will hear of it . I have half make up my mind to tell 
 he myself . " 
 " do not do that , Mr. Finn . there can be no reason for it . but I 
 do not ask you to come here to - day to talk to you about Oswald or 
 Violet . I have give you my advice about that , and I can do no more . " 
 " Lady Laura , I can not take it . it be out of my power to take it . " 
 " very well . the matter shall be what you member of Parliament call 
 an open question between we . when papa ask you to accept this place 
 at the Treasury , do it ever occur to you to refuse it ? " 
 " it do ; - for half an hour or so . " 
 " I hop you would , - and yet I know that I be wrong . I think that 
 you should count yourself to be worth more than that , and that you 
 should , as it be , assert yourself . but then it be so difficult 
 to draw the line between proper self - assertion and proper 
 self - denial ; - to know how high to go up the table , and how low to 
 go down . I do not doubt that you have be right , - only make they 
 understand that you be not as other junior lord ; - that you have 
 be willing to be a junior lord , or anything else for a purpose ; 
 but that the purpose be something high than that of fetch and 
 carry in Parliament for Mr. Mildmay and Mr. Palliser . " 
 " I hope in time to get beyond fetch and carry , " say Phineas . 
 " of course you will ; and know that , I be glad that you be in 
 office . I suppose there will be no difficulty about Loughton . " 
 then Phineas laugh . " I hear , " say he , " that Mr. Quintus Slide , 
 of the People 's Banner , have already go down to canvass the 
 elector . " 
 " Mr. Quintus Slide ! to canvass the elector of Loughton ! " and Lady 
 Laura draw herself up and speak of this unseemly intrusion on her 
 father 's borough , as though the vulgar man who have be name have 
 force his way into the very drawing - room in Portman Square . at that 
 moment Mr. Kennedy come in . " do you hear what Mr. Finn tell I ? " she 
 say . " he have hear that Mr. Quintus Slide have go down to Loughton 
 to stand against he . " 
 " and why not ? " say Mr. Kennedy . 
 " my dear ! " ejaculate Lady Laura . 
 " Mr. Quintus Slide will no doubt lose his time and his money ; - but he 
 will gain the prestige of have stand for a borough , which will be 
 something for he on the staff of the People 's Banner , " say Mr. 
 Kennedy . 
 " he will get that horrid man Vellum to propose he , " say Lady Laura . 
 " very likely , " say Mr. Kennedy . " and the less any of we say about 
 it the well . Finn , my dear fellow , I congratulate you heartily . 
 nothing for a long time have give I great pleasure than hear 
 of your appointment . it be equally honourable to yourself and to Mr. 
 Mildmay . it be a great step to have gain so early . " 
 Phineas , as he thank his friend , could not help ask himself what 
 his friend have do to be make a Cabinet Minister . little as he , 
 Phineas , himself have do in the House in his two session and a 
 half , Mr. Kennedy have hardly do more in his fifteen or twenty . but 
 then Mr. Kennedy be possess of almost miraculous wealth , and own 
 half a county , whereas he , Phineas , own almost nothing at all . 
 of course no Prime Minister would offer a junior lordship at the 
 Treasury to a man with L30,000 a year . soon after this Phineas take 
 his leave . " I think he will do well , " say Mr. Kennedy to his wife . 
 " I be sure he will do well , " reply Lady Laura , almost scornfully . 
 " he be not quite such a black swan with I as he be with you ; but 
 still I think he will succeed , if he take care of himself . it be 
 astonish how that absurd story of his duel with Chiltern have get 
 about . " 
 " it be impossible to prevent people talk , " say Lady Laura . 
 " I suppose there be some quarrel , though neither of they will tell 
 you . they say it be about Miss Effingham . I should hardly think that 
 Finn could have any hope in that direction . " 
 " why should he not have hope ? " 
 " because he have neither position , nor money , nor birth , " say Mr. 
 Kennedy . 
 " he be a gentleman . " say Lady Laura ; " and I think he have position . I 
 do not see why he should not ask any girl to marry he . " 
 " there be no understanding you , Laura , " say Mr. Kennedy , angrily . " I 
 think you have quite other hope about Miss Effingham . " 
 " so I have ; but that have nothing to do with it . you speak of Mr. Finn 
 as though he would be guilty of some crime be he to ask Violet 
 Effingham to be his wife . in that I disagree with you . Mr. Finn be - " 
 " you will make I sick of the name of Mr. Finn . " 
 " I be sorry that I offend you by my gratitude to a man who save your 
 life . " Mr. Kennedy shake his head . he know that the argument use 
 against he be false , but he do not know how to show that he know 
 that it be false . " perhaps I have well not mention his name any 
 more , " continue Lady Laura . 
 " nonsense ! " 
 " I quite agree with you that it be nonsense , Robert . " 
 " all I mean to say be , that if you go on as you do , you will turn his 
 head and spoil he . do you think I do not know what be go on among 
 you ? " 
 " and what be go on among we , - as you call it ? " 
 " you be take this young man up and put he on a pedestal and 
 worship he , just because he be well - looking , and rather clever 
 and decently behave . it be always the way with woman who have nothing 
 to do , and who can not be make to understand that they should have 
 duty . they can not live without some kind of idolatry . " 
 " have I neglect my duty to you , Robert ? " 
 " yes , - you know you have ; - in go to those reception at your 
 father 's house on Sundays . " 
 " what have that to do with Mr. Finn ? " 
 " Psha ! " 
 " I begin to think I have well tell Mr. Finn not to come here any 
 more , since his presence be disagreeable to you . all the world know 
 how great be the service he do you , and it will seem to be very 
 ridiculous . People will say all manner of thing ; but anything will 
 be well than that you should go on as you have do , - accuse your 
 wife of idolatry towards - a young man , because - he be - well - looking . " 
 " I never say anything of the kind . " 
 " you do , Robert . " 
 " I do not . I do not speak more of you than of a lot of other . " 
 " you accuse I personally , say that because of my idolatry I have 
 neglect my duty ; but really you make such a jumble of it all , with 
 papa 's visitor , and Sunday afternoon , that I can not follow what be 
 in your mind . " 
 then Mr. Kennedy stand for awhile , collect his thought , so that 
 he might unravel the jumble , if that be possible to he ; but 
 find that it be not possible , he leave the room , and close the 
 door behind he . 
 then Lady Laura be leave alone to consider the nature of the 
 accusation which her husband have bring against she ; or the nature 
 rather of the accusation which she have choose to assert that her 
 husband have imply . for in her heart she know that he have make no 
 such accusation , and have intend to make none such . the idolatry of 
 which he have speak be the idolatry which a woman might show to her 
 cat , her dog , her picture , her china , her furniture , her carriage and 
 horse , or her pet maid - servant . such be the idolatry of which Mr. 
 Kennedy have speak ; - but be there no other worship in her heart , 
 bad , more pernicious than that , in reference to this young man ? 
 she have school herself about he very severely , and have come to 
 various resolution . she have find out and confess to herself that 
 she do not , and could not , love her husband . she have find out and 
 confess to herself that she do love , and could not help love , 
 Phineas Finn . then she have resolve to banish he from her presence , 
 and have go the length of tell he so . after that she have 
 perceive that she have be wrong , and have determine to meet he as 
 she meet other man , - and to conquer her love . then , when this could 
 not be do , when something almost like idolatry grow upon she , she 
 determine that it should be the idolatry of friendship , that she 
 would not sin even in thought , that there should be nothing in her 
 heart of which she need be ashamed ; - but that the one great object 
 and purport of her life should be the promotion of this friend 's 
 welfare . she have just begin to love after this fashion , have teach 
 herself to believe that she might combine something of the pleasure 
 of idolatry towards her friend with a full complement of duty towards 
 her husband , when Phineas come to she with his tale of love for 
 Violet Effingham . the lesson which she get then be a very rough 
 one , - so hard that at first she could not bear it . her anger at his 
 love for her brother 's wish - for bride be lose in she dismay that 
 Phineas should love any one after have once love she . but by 
 sheer force of mind she have conquer that dismay , that feeling of 
 desolation at her heart , and have almost teach herself to hope that 
 Phineas might succeed with Violet . he wish it , - and why should he 
 not have what he wish , - he , whom she so fondly idolise ? it be not 
 his fault that he and she be not man and wife . she have choose to 
 arrange it otherwise , and be she not bind to assist he now in the 
 present object of his reasonable wish ? she have get over in her 
 heart that difficulty about her brother , but she could not quite 
 conquer the other difficulty . she could not bring herself to plead 
 his cause with Violet . she have not bring herself as yet to do it . 
 and now she be accuse of idolatry for Phineas by her husband , - she 
 with " a lot of other , " in which lot Violet be of course include . 
 would it not be well that they two should be bring together ? 
 would not her friend 's husband still be her friend ? would she not 
 then forget to love he ? would she not then be safe than she be 
 now ? 
 as she sit alone struggle with her difficulty , she have not as yet 
 forget to love he , - nor be she as yet safe . 
 CHAPTER XLV 
 Miss Effingham 's Four Lovers 
 one morning early in June Lady Laura call at Lady Baldock 's house 
 and ask for Miss Effingham . the servant be show she into 
 the large drawing - room , when she again ask specially for Miss 
 Effingham . " I think Miss Effingham be there , " say the man , open 
 the door . Miss Effingham be not there . Lady Baldock be sit 
 all alone , and Lady Laura perceive that she have be catch in 
 the net which she specially wish to avoid . now Lady Baldock have 
 not actually or openly quarrel with Lady Laura Kennedy or with 
 Lord Brentford , but she have conceive a strong idea that her niece 
 Violet be countenance in all impropriety by the standish family 
 generally , and that therefore the standish family be to be regard 
 as a family of enemy . there be doubtless in her mind considerable 
 confusion on the subject , for she do not know whether Lord Chiltern 
 or Mr. Finn be the suitor whom she most fear , - and she be aware , 
 after a sort of muddle fashion , that the claim of these two wicked 
 young man be antagonistic to each other . but they be both 
 regard by she as emanation from the same source of iniquity , 
 and , therefore , without go deeply into the machination of Lady 
 Laura , - without resolve whether Lady Laura be injure she by 
 press her brother as a suitor upon Miss Effingham , or by press 
 a rival of her brother , - still she become aware that it be her duty 
 to turn a cold shoulder on those two house in Portman Square and 
 Grosvenor Place . but her difficulty in do this be very great , 
 and it may be say that Lady Baldock be place in an unjust and 
 cruel position . before the end of May she have propose to leave 
 London , and to take her daughter and Violet down to Baddingham , - or 
 to Brighton , if they prefer it , or to Switzerland . " Brighton in 
 June ! " Violet have exclaim . " would not a month among the glacier be 
 delightful ! " Miss Boreham have say . " do not   let I keep you in town , 
 aunt , " Violet reply ; " but I do not think I shall go till other 
 people go . I can have a room at Laura Kennedy 's house . " then Lady 
 Baldock , whose position be hard and cruel , resolve that she would 
 stay in town . here she have in her hand a ward over whom she have no 
 positive power , and yet in respect to whom her duty be imperative ! 
 her duty be imperative , and Lady Baldock be not the woman to 
 neglect her duty ; - and yet she know that the doing of her duty would 
 all be in vain . Violet would marry a shoe - black out of the street if 
 she be so minded . it be of no use that the poor lady have provide 
 herself with two string , two most excellent string , to she 
 bow , - two string either one of which should have content Miss 
 Effingham . there be Lord Fawn , a young peer , not very rich 
 indeed , - but still with mean sufficient for a wife , a rise 
 man , and in every way respectable , although a Whig . and there 
 be Mr. Appledom , one of the rich commoner in England , a 
 fine conservative too , with a seat in the House , and everything 
 appropriate . he be fifty , but look hardly more than thirty - five , 
 and be , - so at least Lady Baldock frequently assert , - violently in 
 love with Violet Effingham . why have not the law , or the executor , or 
 the Lord Chancellor , or some power levy for the protection of the 
 propriety , make Violet absolutely subject to her guardian till she 
 should be make subject to a husband ? 
 " yes , I think she be at home , " say Lady Baldock , in answer to Lady 
 Laura 's inquiry for Violet . " at least , I hardly know . she seldom 
 tell I what she mean to do , - and sometimes she will walk out quite 
 alone ! " a most imprudent old woman be Lady Baldock , always open 
 her hand to her adversary , unable to control herself in the 
 scolding of people , either before their face or behind their back , 
 even at moment in which such scolding be most injurious to her own 
 cause . " however , we will see , " she continue . then the bell be rung , 
 and in a few minute Violet be in the room . in a few minute more 
 they be up - stair together in Violet 's own room , in spite of the 
 openly - display wrath of Lady Baldock . " I almost wish she have never 
 be bear , " say Lady Baldock to her daughter . " oh , mamma , do not 
 say that . " " I certainly do wish that I have never see she . " " indeed 
 she have be a grievous trouble to you , mamma , " say Miss Boreham , 
 sympathetically . 
 " Brighton ! what nonsense ! " say Lady Laura . 
 " of course it be nonsense . Fancy go to Brighton ! and then they 
 have propose Switzerland . if you could only hear Augusta talk in 
 rapture of a month among the glacier ! and I feel so ungrateful . I 
 believe they would spend three month with I at any horrible place 
 that I could suggest , - at Hong Kong if I be to ask it , - so intent 
 be they on take I away from metropolitan danger . " 
 " but you will not go ? " 
 " no ! - I will not   go . I know I be very naughty ; but I can not   help feel 
 that I can not be good without be a fool at the same time . I must 
 either fight my aunt , or give way to she . if I be to yield , what a 
 life I should have ; - and I should despise myself after all . " 
 " and what be the special danger to be fear now ? " 
 " I do not   know ; - you , I fancy . I tell she that if she go , I should 
 go to you . I know that would make her stay . " 
 " I wish you would come to I , " say Lady Laura . 
 " I should not   think of it really , - not for any length of time . " 
 " why not ? " 
 " because I should be in Mr. Kennedy 's way . " 
 " you would not   be in his way in the least . if you would only be down 
 punctually for morning prayer , and go to church with he on Sunday 
 afternoon , he would be delighted to have you . " 
 " what do he say about Madame Max come ? " 
 " not a word . I do not   think he quite know who she be then . I fancy he 
 have inquire since , by something he say yesterday . " 
 " what do he say ? " 
 " nothing that matter ; - only a word . I have not   come here to talk 
 about Madame Max Goesler , - nor yet about Mr. Kennedy . " 
 " whom have you come to talk about ? " ask Violet , laugh a little , 
 with something of increase colour in her cheek , though she could 
 not be say to blush . 
 " a lover of course , " say Lady Laura . 
 " I wish you would leave I alone with my lover . you be as bad or 
 bad than my aunt . she , at any rate , vary her prescription . she 
 have become sick of poor Lord Fawn because he be a Whig . " 
 " and who be her favourite now ? " 
 " Old Mr. Appledom , - who be really a most unexceptionable old party , 
 and whom I like of all thing . I really think I could consent to be 
 Mrs. Appledom , to get rid of my trouble , - if he do not dye his 
 whisker and have his coat pad . " 
 " he would give up those little thing if you ask he . " 
 " I should not   have the heart to do it . besides , this be not   his time of 
 the year for make proposal . his love fever , which be of a very low 
 kind , and intermit annually , never come on till the autumn . it be a 
 rural malady , against which he be proof while among his club ! " 
 " well , Violet , - I be like your aunt . " 
 " like Lady Baldock ? " 
 " in one respect . I , too , will vary my prescription . " 
 " what do you mean , Laura ? " 
 " just this , - that if you like to marry Phineas Finn , I will say that 
 you be right . " 
 " Heaven and earth ! and why be I to marry Phineas Finn ? " 
 " only for two reason ; because he love you , and because - " 
 " no , - I deny it . I do not . " 
 " I have come to fancy that you do . " 
 " keep your fancy more under control then . but upon my word I can not 
 understand this . he be your great friend . " 
 " what have that to do with it ? " demand Lady Laura . 
 " and you have throw over your brother , Laura ? " 
 " you have throw he over . be he to go on for ever ask and be 
 refuse ? " 
 " I do not know why he should not , " say Violet , ' see how very 
 little trouble it give he . half an hour once in six month do it 
 all for he , allow he time for come and go in a cab . " 
 " Violet , I do not understand you . have you refuse Oswald so often 
 because he do not pass hour on his knee before you ? " 
 " no , indeed ! his nature would be alter very much for the bad 
 before he could do that . " 
 " why do you throw it in his tooth then that he do not give you more 
 of his time ? " 
 " why have you come to tell I to marry Mr. Phineas Finn ? that be what 
 I want to know . Mr. Phineas Finn , as far as I be aware , have not a 
 shilling in the world , - except a month 's salary now due to he from 
 the Government . Mr. Phineas Finn I believe to be the son of a country 
 doctor in Ireland , - with about seven sister . Mr. Phineas Finn be a 
 Roman Catholic . Mr. Phineas Finn be , - or be a short time ago , - in 
 love with another lady ; and Mr. Phineas Finn be not so much in 
 love at this moment but what he be able to intrust his cause to an 
 ambassador . none short of a royal suitor should ever do that with 
 success . " 
 " has he never plead his cause to you himself ? " 
 " my dear , I never tell gentleman 's secret . it seem that if he have , 
 his success be so trifle that he have think he have well trust 
 some one else for the future . " 
 " he have not trust I . he have not give I any commission . " 
 " then why have you come ? " 
 " because , - I hardly know how to tell his story . there have be 
 thing about Oswald which make it almost necessary that Mr. Finn 
 should explain himself to I . " 
 " I know it all ; - about their fighting . foolish young man ! I be not 
 a bit obliged to either of they , - not a bit . only fancy , if my aunt 
 know it , what a life she would lead I ! Gustavus know all about it , 
 and I feel that I be live at his mercy . why be they so 
 wrong - headed ? " 
 " I can not answer that , - though I know they well enough to be sure 
 that Chiltern be the one in fault . " 
 " it be so odd that you should have throw your brother over . " 
 " I have not throw my brother over . will you accept Oswald if he ask 
 you again ? " 
 " no , " almost shout Violet . 
 " then I hope that Mr. Finn may succeed . I want he to succeed in 
 everything . there ; - you may know it all . he be my Phoebus Apollo . " 
 " that be flattering to I , - look at the position in which you 
 desire to place your Phoebus at the present moment . " 
 " come , Violet , I be true to you , and let I have a little truth from 
 you . this man love you , and I think be worthy of you . he do not 
 love I , but he be my friend . as his friend , and believe in his 
 worth , I wish for his success beyond almost anything else in the 
 world . listen to I , Violet . I do not   believe in those reason which 
 you give I just now for not become this man 's wife . " 
 " nor do I. " 
 " I know you do not . look at I . I , who have less of real heart than 
 you , I who think that I could trust myself to satisfy my mind and 
 my ambition without care for my heart , I have marry for what you 
 call position . my husband be very rich , and a Cabinet Minister , and 
 will probably be a peer . and he be willing to marry I at a time 
 when I have not a shilling of my own . " 
 " he be very generous . " 
 " he have ask for it since , " say Lady Laura . " but never mind . I have 
 not come to talk about myself ; - otherwise than to bid you not do what 
 I have do . all that you have say about this man 's want of money 
 and of family be nothing . " 
 " nothing at all , " say Violet . " mere word , - fit only for such people 
 as my aunt . " 
 " well then ? " 
 " well ? " 
 " if you love he - ! " 
 " ah ! but if I do not ? you be very close in inquire into my 
 secret . tell I , Laura ; - be not this young Crichton once a lover of 
 your own ? " 
 " Psha ! and do you think I can not keep a gentleman 's secret as well as 
 you ? " 
 " what be the good of any secret , Laura , when we have be already so 
 open ? he try his ' prentice hand on you ; and then he come to I . let 
 we watch he , and see who will be the third . I too like he well enough 
 to hope that he will land himself safely at last . " 
 CHAPTER XLVI 
 the Mousetrap 
 Phineas have certainly no desire to make love by an ambassador , - at 
 second - hand . he have give no commission to Lady Laura , and be , as 
 the reader be aware , quite ignorant of what be be do and say 
 on his behalf . he have ask no more from Lady Laura than an 
 opportunity of speak for himself , and that he have ask almost 
 with a conviction that by so ask he would turn his friend into an 
 enemy . he have read but little of the working of Lady Laura 's heart 
 towards himself , and have no idea of the assistance she be anxious to 
 give he . she have never tell he that she be willing to sacrifice 
 her brother on his behalf , and , of course , have not tell he that she 
 be willing also to sacrifice herself . nor , when she write to he one 
 June morning and tell he that Violet would be find in Portman 
 Square , alone , that afternoon , - name an hour , and explain that 
 Miss Effingham would be there to meet herself and her father , but 
 that at such an hour she would be certainly alone , - do he even then 
 know how much she be prepared to do for he . the short note be 
 sign " L. , " and then there come a long postscript . " ask for I , " she 
 say in a postscript . " I shall be there later , and I have tell they 
 to bid you wait . I can give you no hope of success , but if you choose 
 to try , - you can do so . if you do not come , I shall know that you 
 have change your mind . I shall not think the bad of you , and your 
 secret will be safe with I . I do that which you have ask I to 
 do , - simply because you have ask it . burn this at once , - because I 
 ask it . " Phineas destroy the note , tear it into atom , the 
 moment that he have read it and re - read it . of course he would go to 
 Portman Square at the hour name . of course he would take his chance . 
 he be not buoy up by much of hope ; - but even though there be no 
 hope , he would take his chance . 
 when Lord Brentford have first tell Phineas of his promotion , he have 
 also ask the new Lord of the Treasury to make a certain 
 communication on his behalf to his son . this Phineas have find 
 himself oblige to promise to do ; - and he have do it . the letter have 
 be difficult enough to write , - but he have write it . after have 
 make the promise , he have find himself bind to keep it . 
 " Dear Lord Chiltern , " he have commence , " I will not think that there 
 be anything in our late encounter to prevent my so address you . I 
 now write at the instance of your father , who have hear nothing of 
 our little affair . " then he explain at length Lord Brentford 's 
 wish as he understand they . " pray come home , " he say , finish 
 his letter . " Touching V. E. , I feel that I be bind to tell you that 
 I still mean to try my fortune , but that I have no ground for hop 
 that my fortune will be good . since the day on the sand , I have 
 never meet she but in society . I know you will be glad to hear that my 
 wound be nothing ; and I think you will be glad to hear that I have 
 get my foot on to the ladder of promotion . - your always , 
 " PHINEAS FINN . " 
 now he have to try his fortune , - that fortune of which he have tell 
 Lord Chiltern that he have no reason for hop that it would be good . 
 he go direct from his office at the Treasury to Portman Square , 
 resolve that he would take no trouble as to his dress , simply 
 wash his hand and brush his hair as though he be go down 
 to the House , and he knock at the Earl 's door exactly at the hour 
 name by Lady Laura . 
 " Miss Effingham , " he say , " I be so glad to find you alone . " 
 " yes , " she say , laugh . " I be alone , - a poor unprotected female . 
 but I fear nothing . I have strong reason for believe that Lord 
 Brentford be somewhere about . and Pomfret the butler , who have know 
 I since I be a baby , be a host in himself . " 
 " with such ally you can have nothing to fear , " he reply , 
 attempt to carry on her little jest . 
 " nor even without they , Mr. Finn . we unprotecte female in these 
 day be so self - reliant that our natural protector fall off from 
 we , find themselves to be no long want . now with you , - what 
 can I fear ? " 
 " nothing , - as I hope . " 
 " there use to be a time , and that not so long ago either , when young 
 gentleman and lady be think to be very dangerous to each other 
 if they be leave alone . but propriety be less rampant now , and upon 
 the whole virtue and moral , with discretion and all that kind of 
 thing , have be the gainer . do not   you think so ? " 
 " I be sure of it . " 
 " all the same , but I do not   like to be catch in a trap , Mr. Finn . " 
 " in a trap ? " 
 " yes ; - in a trap . be there no trap here ? if you will say so , I will 
 acknowledge myself to be a dolt , and will beg your pardon . " 
 " I hardly know what you call a trap . " 
 " you be tell that I be here ? " 
 he pause a moment before he reply . " yes , I be tell . " 
 " I call that a trap . " 
 " be I to blame ? " 
 " I do not   say that you set it , - but you use it . " 
 " Miss Effingham , of course I have use it . you must know , - I think 
 you must know that I have that to say to you which have make I long 
 for such an opportunity as this . " 
 " and therefore you have call in the assistance of your friend . " 
 " it be true . " 
 " in such matter you should never talk to any one , Mr. Finn . if you 
 can not fight your own battle , no one can fight it for you . " 
 " Miss Effingham , do you remember our ride at Saulsby ? " 
 " very well ; - as if it be yesterday . " 
 " and do you remember that I ask you a question which you have never 
 answer ? " 
 " I do answer it , - as well as I know how , so that I might tell you a 
 truth without hurt you . " 
 " it be necessary , - be necessary that I should be hurt sorely , or 
 make perfectly happy . Violet Effingham , I have come to you to ask you 
 to be my wife ; - to tell you that I love you , and to ask for your love 
 in return . whatever may be my fate , the question must be ask , and 
 an answer must be give . I have not hop that you should tell I 
 that you love I - " 
 " for what then have you hop ? " 
 " for not much , indeed ; - but if for anything , then for some chance 
 that you might tell I so hereafter . " 
 " if I love you , I would tell you so now , - instantly . I give you my 
 word of that . " 
 " can you never love I ? " 
 " what be a woman to answer to such a question ? no ; - I believe never . 
 I do not think I shall ever wish you to be my husband . you ask I to 
 be plain , and I must be plain . " 
 " be it because - ? " he pause , hardly know what the question be 
 which he propose to himself to ask . 
 " it be for no because , - for no cause except that simple one which 
 should make any girl refuse any man whom she do not love . Mr. 
 Finn , I could say pleasant thing to you on any other subject than 
 this , - because I like you . " 
 " I know that I have nothing to justify my suit . " 
 " you have everything to justify it ; - at least I be bind to presume 
 that you have . if you love I , - you be justify . " 
 " you know that I love you . " 
 " I be sorry that it should ever have be so , - very sorry . I can only 
 hope that I have not be in fault . " 
 " will you try to love I ? " 
 " no ; - why should I try ? if any trying be necessary , I would try 
 rather not to love you . why should I try to do that which would 
 displease everybody belong to I ? for yourself , I admit your right 
 to address I , - and tell you frankly that it would not be in vain , if 
 I love you . but I tell you as frankly that such a marriage would not 
 please those whom I be bind to try to please . " 
 he pause a moment before he speak far . " I shall wait , " he say , 
 " and come again . " 
 " what be I to say to that ? do not tease I , so that I be drive to 
 treat you with lack of courtesy . Lady Laura be so much attach to 
 you , and Mr. Kennedy , and Lord Brentford , - and indeed I may say , 
 I myself also , that I trust there may be nothing to mar our good 
 fellowship . come , Mr. Finn , - say that you will take an answer , and 
 I will give you my hand . " 
 " give it I , " say he . she give he her hand , and he put it up to his 
 lip and press it . " I will wait and come again , " he say . " I will 
 assuredly come again . " then he turn from she and go out of the 
 house . at the corner of the square he see Lady Laura 's carriage , but 
 do not stop to speak to she . and she also see he . 
 " so you have have a visitor here , " say Lady Laura to Violet . 
 " yes ; - I have be catch in the trap . " 
 " poor mouse ! and have the cat make a meal of you ? " 
 " I fancy he have , after his fashion . there be cat that eat their mouse 
 without play , - and cat that play with their mouse , and then eat 
 they ; and cat again which only play with their mouse , and do not   care 
 to eat they . Mr. Finn be a cat of the latter kind , and have have his 
 afternoon 's diversion . " 
 " you wrong he there . " 
 " I think not , Laura . I do not mean to say that he would not have 
 like I to accept he . but , if I can see inside his bosom , such a 
 little job as that he have now do will be look back upon as one of 
 the past pleasure of his life ; - not as a pain . " 
 CHAPTER XLVII 
 Mr. Mildmay 's Bill 
 it will be necessary that we should go back in our story for a very 
 short period in order that the reader may be tell that Phineas Finn 
 be duly re - elect at Loughton after his appointment at the Treasury 
 Board . there be some little trouble at Loughton , and something 
 more of expense than he have before encounter . Mr. Quintus Slide 
 absolutely come down , and be propose by Mr. Vellum for the borough . 
 Mr. Vellum be a gentleman learn in the law , and hostile to the 
 interest of the noble owner of Saulsby , be able to raise a little 
 trouble against our hero . Mr. Slide be propose by Mr. Vellum , and 
 second by Mr. Vellum 's clerk , - though , as it afterwards appear , 
 Mr. Vellum 's clerk be not in truth an elector , - and go to the poll 
 like a man . he receive three vote , and at twelve o'clock withdraw . 
 this in itself could hardly have afford compensation for the 
 expense which Mr. Slide or his backer must have encounter ; - but 
 he have an opportunity of make a speech , every word of which be 
 report in the People 's Banner ; and if the speech be make in the 
 language give in the report , Mr. Slide be really possess of some 
 oratorical power . Most of those who read the speech in the column 
 of the People 's Banner be probably not aware how favourable an 
 opportunity of retouch his sentence in type have be give to Mr. 
 Slide by the fact of his connection with the newspaper . the speech 
 have be very severe upon our hero ; and though the speaker have 
 be so hoot and pelt at Loughton as to have be altogether 
 inaudible , - so maltreated that in point of fact he have not be able 
 to speak above a tenth part of his speech at all , - nevertheless the 
 speech do give Phineas a certain amount of pain . why Phineas should 
 have read it who can tell ? but who be there that abstain from 
 read that which be print in abuse of himself ? 
 in the speech as it be print Mr. Slide declare that he have no 
 thought of be return for the borough . he know too well how 
 the borough be manage , what slave the elector be ; - how they 
 groan under a tyranny from which hitherto they have be unable 
 to release themselves . of course the Earl 's nominee , his lacquey , 
 as the honourable gentleman might be call , would be return . 
 the Earl could order they to return whichever of his lacquey he 
 please . - there be something peculiarly pleasing to the democratic 
 ear in the word lacquey ! any one serve a big man , whatever 
 the service may be , be the big man 's lacquey in the People 's 
 Banner . - the speech throughout be very bitter . Mr. Phineas Finn , 
 who have previously serve in Parliament as the lacquey of an Irish 
 earl , and have be turn off by he , have now fall into the service 
 of the English earl , and be the lacquey choose for the present 
 occasion . but he , Quintus Slide , who boast himself to be a man 
 of the people , - he could tell they that the day of their thraldom 
 be come to an end , and that their enfranchisement be near at 
 hand . that friend of the people , Mr. Turnbull , have a clause in his 
 breech - pocket which he would either force down the unwilling throat 
 of Mr. Mildmay , or else drive the imbecile Premier from office by 
 carry it in his tooth . Loughton , as Loughton , must be destroy , 
 but it should be bear again in a well birth as a part of a 
 real electoral district , send a real member , choose by a real 
 constituency , to a real Parliament . in those day , - and they would 
 come soon , - Mr. Quintus Slide rather think that Mr. Phineas Finn 
 would be find " nowhere , " and he rather think also that when he 
 show himself again , as he certainly should do , in the midst of that 
 democratic electoral district as the popular candidate for the honour 
 of represent it in Parliament , that democratic electoral district 
 would accord to he a reception very different from that which he 
 be now receive from the Earl 's lacquey in the parliamentary 
 village of Loughton . a pretty bit of fiction than these sentence 
 as compose a part of any speech deliver , or propose to be 
 deliver , at Loughton , Phineas think he have never see . and when 
 he read at the close of the speech that though the Earl 's hire 
 bully do their bad , the remark of Mr. Slide be receive by 
 the people with reiterate cheering , he throw himself back in his 
 chair at the Treasury and roar . the poor fellow have be three 
 minute on his leg , have receive three rotten egg , and one dead 
 dog , and have retire . but not the half of the speech as print in 
 the People 's Banner have be quote . the sin of Phineas , who in 
 spite of his inability to open his mouth in public have be make 
 a Treasury hack by the aristocratic influence , - " by aristocratic 
 influence not confine to the male sex , " - be describe at great 
 length , and in such language that Phineas for a while be fool enough 
 to think that it would be his duty to belabour Mr. Slide with a 
 horsewhip . this notion , however , do not endure long with he , and 
 when Mr. Monk tell he that thing of that kind come as a matter of 
 course , he be comfort . 
 but he find it much more difficult to obtain comfort when he weigh 
 the argument bring forward against the abomination of such a 
 borough as that for which he sit , and reflect that if Mr. Turnbull 
 bring forward his clause , he , Phineas Finn , would be bind to vote 
 against the clause , know the clause to be right , because he be a 
 servant of the Government . the argument , even though they appear 
 in the People 's Banner , be true argument ; and he have on one 
 occasion admit their truth to his friend Lady Laura , - in the 
 presence of that great Cabinet Minister , her husband . " what business 
 have such a man as that down there ? be there a single creature who 
 want he ? " Lady Laura have say . " I do not   suppose anybody do want 
 Mr. Quintus Slide , " Phineas have reply ; " but I be disposed to think 
 the elector should choose the man they do want , and that at present 
 they have no choice leave to they . " " they be quite satisfied , " say 
 Lady Laura , angrily . " then , Lady Laura , " continue Phineas , " that 
 alone should be sufficient to prove that their privilege of return 
 a member to Parliament be too much for they . we can not   defend it . " 
 " it be defend by tradition , " say Mr. Kennedy . " and by its great 
 utility , " say Lady Laura , bow to the young member who be 
 present , and forget that very useless old gentleman , her cousin , 
 who have sit for the borough for many year . " in this country it 
 do not   do to go too fast , " say Mr. Kennedy . " and then the mixture 
 of vulgarity , falsehood , and pretence ! " say Lady Laura , shudder 
 as her mind recur to the fact that Mr. Quintus Slide have 
 contaminate Loughton by his presence . " I be tell that they hardly 
 let he leave the place alive . " 
 whatever Mr. Kennedy and Lady Laura might think about Loughton 
 and the general question of small borough , it be find by the 
 Government , to their great cost , that Mr. Turnbull 's clause be a 
 reality . after two month of hard work , all question of franchise 
 have be settle , rating and renting , new and newfangled , fancy 
 franchise and those which no one fancy , franchise for borough 
 and franchise for county , franchise single , dual , three - corner , 
 and four - side , - by various clause to which the Committee of the 
 whole House have agree after some score of division , - the matter 
 of the franchise have be settle . no doubt there be the House 
 of Lords , and there might yet be shipwreck . but it be generally 
 believe that the Lords would hardly look at the bill , - that they 
 would not even venture on an amendment . the Lords would only be too 
 happy to let the matter be settle by the Commons themselves . but 
 then , after the franchise , come redistribution . how sick of the 
 subject be all member of the Government , no one could tell who 
 do not see their weary face . the whole House be sick , have be 
 whip into various lobby , night after night , during the heat of 
 the summer , for week past . redistribution ! why should there be any 
 redistribution ? they have get , or would get , a beautiful franchise . 
 could they not see what that would do for they ? why redistribute 
 anything ? but , alas , it be too late to go back to so bless an idea 
 as that ! redistribution they must have . but there should be as little 
 redistribution as possible . man be sick of it all , and would not be 
 exigeant . something should be do for overgrown county ; - something 
 for new town which have prosper in brick and mortar . it would 
 be easy to crush up a peccant borough or two , - a borough that have 
 be discover in its sin . and a few borough now bless with 
 two member might consent to be bless only with one . fifteen 
 small clause might settle the redistribution , in spite of Mr. 
 Turnbull , - if only Mr. Daubeny would be good - natured . 
 neither the weather , which be very hot , nor the tedium of the 
 session , which have be very great , nor the anxiety of Ministers , 
 which be very pressing , have any effect in impair the energy 
 of Mr. Turnbull . he be as instant , as oratorical , as hostile , as 
 indignant about redistribution as he have be about the franchise . he 
 have be sure then , and he be sure now , that Ministers desire to 
 burke the question , to deceive the people , to produce a bill that 
 should be no bill . he bring out his clause , - and make Loughton 
 his instance . " would the honourable gentleman who sit low on 
 the Treasury bench , - who at this moment be in sweet confidential 
 intercourse with the right honourable gentleman now President of the 
 Board of Trade , who have once be a friend of the people , - would the 
 young Lord of the Treasury get up in his place and tell they that 
 no peer of Parliament have at present a voice in send a member to 
 their House of Commons , - that no peer would have a voice if this 
 bill , as propose by the Government , be pass in its present 
 useless , ineffectual , conservative , and most dishonest form ? " 
 Phineas , who reply to this , and who tell Mr. Turnbull that he 
 himself could not answer for any peer , - but that he think it 
 probable that most peer would , by their opinion , somewhat influence 
 the opinion of some elector , - be think to have get out of his 
 difficulty very well . but there be the clause of Mr. Turnbull to be 
 deal with , - a clause directly disfranchise seven single - wing 
 borough , of which Loughton be of course one , - a clause to which the 
 Government must either submit or object . submission would be certain 
 defeat in one way , and objection would be as certain defeat in 
 another , - if the gentleman on the other side be not dispose to 
 assist the minister . it be say that the Cabinet be divide . 
 Mr. Gresham and Mr. Monk be for let the seven borough go . 
 Mr. Mildmay could not bring himself to obey Mr. Turnbull , and Mr. 
 Palliser support he . when Mr. Mildmay be tell that Mr. Daubeny 
 would certainly go into the same lobby with Mr. Turnbull respect 
 the seven borough , he be report to have say that in that case 
 Mr. Daubeny must be prepare with a government . Mr. Daubeny make a 
 beautiful speech about the seven borough ; - the seven sin , and seven 
 star , and seven church , and seven lamp . he would make no party 
 question of this . gentleman who usually act with he would vote 
 as their own sense of right or wrong direct they ; - from which 
 expression of a special sanction it be consider that these 
 gentleman be not accustomed to exercise the privilege now accord 
 to they . but in regard the question as one of right and wrong , and 
 in look at what he believe to be both the wish of the country and 
 its interest , he , Mr. Daubeny , - he , himself , be simply a humble 
 member of that House , - must support the clause of the honourable 
 gentleman . almost all those to whom have be surrender the 
 privilege of use their own judgment for that occasion only , use it 
 discreetly , - as their chief have use it himself , - and Mr. Turnbull 
 carry his clause by a majority of fifteen . it be then 3 a.m. , 
 and Mr. Gresham , rise after the division , say that his right 
 honourable friend the First Lord of the Treasury be too tired 
 to return to the House , and have request he to state that the 
 Government would declare their purpose at 6 p.m. on the following 
 evening . 
 Phineas , though he have make his little speech in answer to Mr. 
 Turnbull with good - humour flippancy , have record his vote in 
 favour of the seven borough with a sore heart . much as he dislike 
 Mr. Turnbull , he know that Mr. Turnbull be right in this . he have 
 speak to Mr. Monk on the subject , as it be ask Mr. Monk 's 
 permission to throw up his office , and vote against Mr. Mildmay . but 
 Mr. Monk be angry with he , tell he that his conscience be of 
 that restless , uneasy sort which be neither useful nor manly . " we 
 all know , " say Mr. Monk , " and none well than Mr. Mildmay , that 
 we can not justify such a borough as Loughton by the theory of our 
 parliamentary representation , - any more than we can justify the 
 fact that Huntingdonshire should return as many member as the East 
 Riding . there must be compromise , and you should trust to other who 
 have study the matter more thoroughly than you , to say how far the 
 compromise should go at the present moment . " 
 " it be the influence of the peer , not the paucity of the elector , " 
 say Phineas . 
 " and have no peer any influence in a county ? would you disfranchise 
 Westmoreland ? believe I , Finn , if you want to be useful , you must 
 submit yourself in such matter to those with whom you act . " 
 Phineas have no answer to make , but he be not happy in his mind . and 
 he be the less happy , perhaps , because he be very sure that Mr. 
 Mildmay would be beat . Mr. Low in these day harass he sorely . 
 Mr. Low be very keen against such borough as Loughton , declare 
 that Mr. Daubeny be quite right to join his standard to that of Mr. 
 Turnbull on such an issue . Mr. Low be the reformer now , and Phineas 
 find himself oblige to fight a lose battle on behalf of an 
 acknowledge abuse . he never go near Bunce ; but , unfortunately for 
 he , Bunce catch he once in the street and show he no mercy . 
 " Slide be a little ' eavy on you in the Banner the other day , - eh , 
 Mr. Finn ? - too ' eavy , as I tell he . " 
 " Mr. Slide can be just as heavy as he please , Bunce . " 
 " that be in course . the press be free , thank God , - as yet . but it 
 be not   any good rattle away at the Earl 's little borough when it be 
 sure to go . of course it will go , Mr. Finn . " 
 " I think it will . " 
 " the whole seven on them . the ' ouse could not   but do it . they tell I 
 it be all Mr. Mildmay 's own work , stick out for keep on them . 
 he be very old , and so we will forgive he . but he must go , Mr. Finn . " 
 " we shall know all about that soon , Bunce . " 
 " if you do not   get another seat , Mr. Finn , I suppose we shall see you 
 back at the Inn . I hope we may . it be well than be member for 
 Loughton , Mr. Finn ; - you may be sure of that . " and then Mr. Bunce 
 pass on . 
 Mr. Turnbull carry his clause , and Loughton be doom . Loughton 
 and the other six deadly sin be anathematize , exorcise , and 
 finally get rid of out of the world by the voice of the gentleman 
 who have be proclaim the beauty of such pleasant vice all their 
 life , and who in their heart hat all change that tend towards 
 popular representation . but not the less be Mr. Mildmay beat ; 
 and , in accordance with the promise make by his first lieutenant 
 immediately after the vote be take , the Prime Minister come forward 
 on the next evening and make his statement . he have already put his 
 resignation into the hand of her Majesty , and her Majesty have 
 graciously accept it . he be very old , and feel that the time have 
 come in which it behove he to retire into that leisure which he 
 think he have , perhaps , earn . he have hop to carry this bill as 
 the last act of his political life ; but he be too old , too stiff , as 
 he say , in his prejudice , to bend far than he have bend already , 
 and he must leave the completion of the matter in other hand . her 
 Majesty have send for Mr. Gresham , and Mr. Gresham have already see 
 her Majesty . Mr. Gresham and his other colleague , though they 
 dissent from the clause which have be carry by the united 
 effort of gentleman opposite to he , and of gentleman below he on 
 his own side of the House , be young man than he , and would , for 
 the country 's sake , - and for the sake of her Majesty , - endeavour 
 to carry the bill through . there would then , of course , be a 
 dissolution , and the future Government would , no doubt , depend on 
 the choice of the country . from all which it be understand that Mr. 
 Gresham be to go on with the bill to a conclusion , whatever might be 
 the division carry against he , and that a new Secretary of State 
 for Foreign Affairs must be choose . phinea understand , also , that 
 he have lose his seat at Loughton . for the borough of Loughton there 
 would never again be an election . " if I have be Mr. Mildmay , I would 
 have throw the bill up altogether , " Lord Brentford say afterwards ; 
 " but of course it be not for I to interfere . " 
 the session be protract for two month after that , - beyond the 
 time at which grouse should have be shoot , - and by the 23rd of 
 August become the law of the land . " I shall never get over it , " say 
 Mr. Ratler to Mr. Finn , seat one terribly hot evening on a bench 
 behind the Cabinet Ministers , - " never . I do not   suppose such a session 
 for work be ever know before . think what it be to have to keep 
 man together in August , with the thermometer at 81 degress , and the 
 river stink like , - like the very mischief . " Mr. Ratler , however , 
 do not die . 
 on the last day of the session Laurence Fitzgibbon resign . Rumours 
 reach the ear of Phineas as to the cause of this , but no certain 
 cause be tell he . it be say that Lord Cantrip have insist upon 
 it , Laurence have by mischance be call upon for some official 
 statement during an unfortunate period of absence . there be , 
 however , a mystery about it ; - but the mystery be not half so 
 wonderful as the triumph to Phineas , when Mr. Gresham offer he the 
 place . 
 " but I shall have no seat , " say Phineas . 
 " we shall none of we have seat to - morrow , " say Mr. Gresham . 
 " but I shall be at a loss to find a place to stand for . " 
 " the election will not come on till November , and you must look about 
 you . both Mr. Monk and Lord Brentford seem to think you will be in 
 the House . " 
 and so the bill be carry , and the session be end . 
 CHAPTER XLVIII 
 " the Duke " 
 by the middle of September there be assemble a large party at 
 Matching Priory , a country mansion belong to Mr. Plantagenet 
 Palliser . the man have certainly be choose in reference to their 
 political feeling and position , - for there be not a guest in 
 the house who have vote for Mr. Turnbull 's clause , or the wife 
 or daughter , or sister of any one who have so vote . indeed , in 
 these day politic run so high that among politician all social 
 gathering be bring together with some reference to the state 
 of party . Phineas be invite , and when he arrive at Matching he 
 find that half the Cabinet be there . Mr. Kennedy be not there , nor 
 be Lady Laura . Mr. Monk be there , and the Duke , - with the Duchess , 
 and Mr. Gresham , and Lord Thrift ; Mrs. Max Goesler be there also , 
 and Mrs. Bonteen , - Mr. Bonteen be detain somewhere out of 
 the way ; and Violet Effingham be expect in two day , and Lord 
 Chiltern at the end of the week . Lady Glencora take an opportunity 
 of impart this latter information to Phineas very soon after his 
 arrival ; and Phineas , as he watch her eye and her mouth while she 
 speak , be quite sure that Lady Glencora know the story of the duel . 
 " I shall be delighted to see he again , " say Phineas . " that be 
 all right , " say Lady Glencora . there be also there Mr. and Mrs. 
 Grey , who be great friend of the Pallisers , - and on the very day 
 on which Phineas reach Matching , at half an hour before the time 
 for dressing , the Duke of Omnium arrive . now , Mr. Palliser be the 
 Duke 's nephew and heir , - and the Duke of Omnium be a very great 
 person indeed . I hardly know why it should have be so , but the Duke 
 of Omnium be certainly a great man in public estimation than the 
 other duke then present , - the Duke of St. Bungay . the Duke of St. 
 Bungay be a useful man , and have be so all his life , sit in 
 Cabinets and serve his country , constant as any peer in the House 
 of Lords , always ready to take on his own shoulder any troublesome 
 work require of he , than whom Mr. Mildmay , and Mr. Mildmay 's 
 predecessor at the head of the liberal party , have have no more devoted 
 adherent . but the Duke of Omnium have never yet do a day 's work on 
 behalf of his country . they both wear the Garter , the Duke of St. 
 Bungay have earn it by service , the Duke of Omnium have be 
 decorate with the blue ribbon , - because he be Duke of Omnium . the 
 one be a moral , good man , a good husband , a good father , and a good 
 friend . the other , - do not bear quite so high a reputation . but man 
 and woman think but little of the Duke of St. Bungay , while the 
 other duke be regard with an almost reverential awe . I think the 
 secret lie in the simple fact that the Duke of Omnium have not be 
 common in the eye of the people . he have contrive to envelope 
 himself in something of the ancient mystery of wealth and rank . 
 within three minute of the Duke 's arrival Mrs. Bonteen , with an air 
 of great importance , whisper a word to Phineas . " he have come . he 
 arrive exactly at seven ! " 
 " who have come ? " Phineas ask . 
 " the Duke of Omnium ! " she say , almost reprimand he by her tone 
 of voice for his indifference . " there have be a great doubt whether 
 or no he would show himself at last . Lady Glencora tell I that he 
 never will pledge himself . I be so glad he have come . " 
 " I do not   think I ever see he , " say Phineas . 
 " oh , I have see he , - a magnificent - look man ! I think it be so 
 very nice of Lady Glencora get he to meet we . it be very rarely 
 that he will join in a great party , but they say Lady Glencora can do 
 anything with he since the heir be bear . I suppose you have hear 
 all about that . " 
 " no , " say Phineas ; " I have hear nothing of the heir , but I know 
 that there be three or four baby . " 
 " there be no heir , you know , for a year and a half , and they be 
 all au desespoir ; and the Duke be very nearly quarrel with his 
 nephew ; and Mr. Palliser - ; you know it have very nearly come to a 
 separation . " 
 " I do not   know anything at all about it , " say Phineas , who be not 
 very fond of the lady who be give he the information . 
 " it be so , I can assure you ; but since the boy be bear Lady Glencora 
 can do anything with the Duke . she make he go to Ascot last spring , 
 and he present she with the favourite for one of the race on the 
 very morning the horse run . they say he give three thousand pound 
 for he . " 
 " and do Lady Glencora win ? " 
 " no ; - the horse lose ; and Mr. Palliser have never know what to do 
 with he since . but it be very pretty of the Duke ; - be it not ? " 
 Phineas , though he have intend to show to Mrs. Bonteen how little he 
 think about the Duke of Omnium , - how small be his respect for a 
 great peer who take no part in politic , - could not protect himself 
 from a certain feeling of anxiety as to the aspect and gait and word 
 of the man of whom people think so much , of whom he have hear so 
 often , and of whom he have see so little . he tell himself that the 
 Duke of Omnium should be no more to he than any other man , but yet 
 the Duke of Omnium be more to he than other man . when he come 
 down into the drawing - room he be angry with himself , and stand 
 apart ; - and be then angry with himself again because he stand apart . 
 why should he make a difference in his own bearing because there be 
 such a man in the company ? and yet he could not avoid it . when he 
 enter the room the Duke be stand in a large bow - window , and two 
 or three lady and two or three man be stand round he . phinea 
 would not go near the group , tell himself that he would not 
 approach a man so grand as be the Duke of Omnium . he see Madame Max 
 Goesler among the party , and after a while he see her retreat . as she 
 retreat , Phineas know that some word from Madame Max Goesler have 
 not be receive with the graciousness which she have expect . there 
 be the prettiest smile in the world on the lady 's face , and she 
 take a corner on a sofa with an air of perfect satisfaction . but yet 
 Phineas know that she have receive a wound . 
 " I call twice on you in London , " say Phineas , come up close to 
 she , " but be not fortunate enough to find you ! " 
 " yes ; - but you come so late in the season as to make it impossible 
 that there should be any arrangement for our meeting . what can any 
 woman do when a gentleman call on she in August ? " 
 " I come in July . " 
 " yes , you do ; on the 31st . I keep the most accurate record of all 
 such thing , Mr. Finn . but let we hope that we may have well luck 
 next year . in the meantime , we can only enjoy the good thing that 
 be go . " 
 " socially , or politically , Madame Goesler ? " 
 " oh , socially . how can I mean anything else when the Duke of Omnium 
 be here ? I feel so much tall at be in the same house with he . 
 do not you ? but you be a spoilt child of fortune , and perhaps you 
 have meet he before . " 
 " I think I once see the back of a hat in the park , and somebody tell 
 I that the Duke 's head be inside it . " 
 " and you have never see he but that once ? " 
 " never but that once , - till now . " 
 " and do not you feel elated ? " 
 " of course I do . for what do you take I , Madame Goesler ? " 
 " I do , - immensely . I believe he to be a fool , and I never hear of 
 his do a kind act to anybody in my life . " 
 " not when he give the racehorse to Lady Glencora ? " 
 " I wonder whether that be true . do you ever hear of such an 
 absurdity ? as I be say , I do not   think he ever do anything 
 for anybody ; - but then , you know , to be Duke of Omnium ! it be not 
 necessary , - be it , - that a Duke of Omnium should do anything except 
 be Duke of Omnium ? " 
 at this moment Lady Glencora come up to Phineas , and take he across 
 to the Duke . the Duke have express a desire to be introduce to he . 
 Phineas , half - pleased and half - disgusted , have no alternative , and 
 follow Lady Glencora . the Duke shake hand with he , and make a 
 little bow , and say something about the garrotter , which Phineas , 
 in his confusion , do not quite understand . he try to reply as he 
 would have reply to anybody else , but the weight of the Duke 's 
 majesty be too much for he , and he bungle . the Duke make another 
 little bow , and in a moment be speak a word of condescension 
 to some other favour individual . Phineas retreat altogether 
 disgusted , - hat the Duke , but hat himself bad ; but he would 
 not retreat in the direction of Madame Max Goesler . it might suit 
 that lady to take an instant little revenge for her discomfiture , but 
 it do not suit he to do so . the question with he would be , whether 
 in some future part of his career it might not be his duty to assist 
 in put down Dukes of Omnium . 
 at dinner Phineas sit between Mrs. Bonteen and the Duchess of St. 
 Bungay , and do not find himself very happy . at the other end of the 
 table the Duke , - the great Duke , be seat at Lady Glencora 's right 
 hand , and on his other side Fortune have place Madame Max Goesler . 
 the great interest which Phineas have during the dinner be in 
 watch the operation , - the triumphantly successful operation of 
 that lady . before dinner she have be wound by the Duke . the Duke 
 have not condescend to accord the honour of his little bow of 
 graciousness to some little flattering morsel of wit which the lady 
 have utter on his behoof . she have say a sharp word or two in her 
 momentary anger to Phineas ; but when Fortune be so good to she in 
 that matter of her place at dinner , she be not fool enough to throw 
 away her chance . throughout the soup and fish she be very quiet . 
 she say a word or two after her first glass of champagne . the Duke 
 refuse two dish , one after another , and then she glide into 
 conversation . by the time that he have his roast mutton before he she 
 be in full play , and as she eat her peach , the Duke be bend over 
 she with his most gracious smile . 
 " do not   you think the session be very long , Mr. Finn ? " say the 
 Duchess to Phineas . 
 " very long indeed , Duchess , " say Phineas , with his attention still 
 fix on Madame Max Goesler . 
 " the Duke find it very troublesome . " 
 " I daresay he do , " say Phineas . that duke and that duchess be no 
 more than any other man and any other man 's wife . the session have 
 not be long to the Duke of St. Bungay than to all the public 
 servant . Phineas have the great possible respect for the Duke of 
 St. Bungay , but he could not take much interest in the wailing of 
 the Duchess on her husband 's behalf . 
 " and thing do seem to be so very uncomfortable now , " say the 
 Duchess , - think partly of the resignation of Mr. Mildmay , and 
 partly of the fact that her own old peculiar maid who have live with 
 she for thirty year have retire into private life . 
 " not so very bad , Duchess , I hope , " say Phineas , observe that at 
 this moment Madame Max Goesler 's eye be brilliant with triumph . 
 then there come upon he a sudden ambition , - that he would like to 
 " cut out " the Duke of Omnium in the estimation of Madame Max Goesler . 
 the brightness of Madame Max Goesler 's eye have not be throw away 
 upon our hero . 
 Violet Effingham come at the appoint time , and , to the surprise of 
 Phineas , be bring to Matching by Lord Brentford . phinea at first 
 think that it be intend that the Earl and his son should meet 
 and make up their quarrel at Mr. Palliser 's house . but Lord Brentford 
 stay only one night , and Phineas on the next morning hear the 
 whole history of his come and go from Violet . " I have almost 
 be on my knee to he to stay , " she say . " indeed , I do go on my 
 knee , - actually on my knee . " 
 " and what do he say ? " 
 " he put his arm round I and kiss I , and , - and , - I can not tell you 
 all that he say . but it end in this , - that if Chiltern can be make 
 to go to Saulsby , fat calf without stint will be kill . I shall 
 do all I can to make he go ; and so must you , Mr. Finn . of course 
 that silly affair in foreign part be not to make any difference 
 between you two . " 
 Phineas smile , and say he would do his good , and look up into her 
 face , and be just able to talk to she as though thing be go 
 comfortably with he . but his heart be very cold . as Violet have 
 speak to he about Lord Chiltern there have come upon he , for the 
 first time , - for the first time since he have know that Lord Chiltern 
 have be refuse , - an idea , a doubt , whether even yet Violet might 
 not become Lord Chiltern 's wife . his heart be very sad , but he 
 struggle on , - declare that it be incumbent on they both to bring 
 together the father and son . 
 " I be so glad to hear you say so , Mr. Finn , " say Violet . " I really 
 do believe that you can do more towards it than any one else . Lord 
 Chiltern would think nothing of my advice , - would hardly speak to I 
 on such a subject . but he respect you as well as like you , and not 
 the less because of what have occur . " 
 how be it that Violet should know aught of the respect or liking 
 feel by this reject suitor for that other suitor , - who have also 
 be reject ? and how be it that she be thus able to talk of one 
 of they to the other , as though neither of they have ever come forward 
 with such a suit ? Phineas feel his position to be so strange as to be 
 almost burdensome . he have tell Violet , when she have refuse he , very 
 plainly , that he should come again to she , and ask once more for the 
 great gift which he covet . but he could not ask again now . in the 
 first place , there be that in her manner which make he sure that 
 be he to do so , he would ask in vain ; and then he feel that she be 
 place a special confidence in he , against which he would commit a 
 sin be he to use her present intimacy with he for the purpose of 
 make love . they two be to put their shoulder together to help 
 Lord Chiltern , and while do so he could not continue a suit which 
 would be feel by both of they to be hostile to Lord Chiltern . there 
 might be opportunity for a chance word , and if so the chance word 
 should be speak ; but he could not make a deliberate attack , such as 
 he have make in Portman Square . Violet also probably understand that 
 she have not now be catch in a mousetrap . 
 the Duke be to spend four day at Matching , and on the third 
 day , - the day before Lord Chiltern be expect , - he be to be see 
 rid with Madame Max Goesler by his side . Madame Max Goesler be 
 know as a perfect horsewoman , - one indeed who be rather fond of 
 go a little fast on horseback , and who ride well to hound . but 
 the Duke seldom move out of a walk , and on this occasion Madame Max 
 be as steady in her seat and almost as slow as the mount ghost 
 in Don Juan . but it be say by some there , especially by Mrs. 
 Bonteen , that the conversation between they be not slow . and on the 
 next morning the Duke and Madame Max Goesler be together again 
 before luncheon , stand on a terrace at the back of the house , 
 look down on a party who be play croquet on the lawn . 
 " do you never play ? " say the Duke . 
 " oh yes ; - one do everything a little . " 
 " I be sure you would play well . why do you not play now ? " 
 " no ; - I shall not play now . " 
 " I should like to see you with your mallet . " 
 " I be sorry your grace can not be gratify . I have play croquet 
 till I be tired of it , and have come to think it be only fit for 
 boy and girl . the great thing be to give they opportunity for 
 flirting , and it do that . " 
 " and do you never flirt , Madame Goesler ? " 
 " never at croquet , Duke . " 
 " and what with you be the choice time ? " 
 " that depend on so many thing , - and so much on the choose person . 
 what do you recommend ? " 
 " ah , - I be so ignorant . I can recommend nothing . " 
 " what do you say to a mountain - top at dawn on a summer day ? " ask 
 Madame Max Goesler . 
 " you make I shiver , " say the Duke . 
 " or a boat on a lake on a summer evening , or a good lead after hound 
 with nobody else within three field , or the bottom of a salt - mine , 
 or the deck of an ocean steamer , or a military hospital in time of 
 war , or a railway journey from Paris to Marseilles ? " 
 " Madame Max Goesler , you have the most uncomfortable idea . " 
 " I have no doubt your Grace have try each of they , - successfully . 
 but perhaps , after all , a comfortable chair over a good fire , in a 
 pretty room , beat everything . " 
 " I think it do , - certainly , " say the Duke . then he whisper 
 something at which Madame Max Goesler blush and smile , and 
 immediately after that she follow those who have already go in 
 to lunch . 
 Mrs. Bonteen have be hover round the spot on the terrace on which 
 the Duke and Madame Max Goesler have be stand , look on with 
 envious eye , meditate some attack , some interruption , some excuse 
 for an interpolation , but her courage have fail she and she have 
 not dare to approach . the Duke have know nothing of the hover 
 propinquity of Mrs. Bonteen , but Madame Goesler have see and have 
 understand it all . 
 " Dear Mrs. Bonteen , " she say afterwards , " why do you not come and 
 join we ? the Duke be so pleasant . " 
 " two be company , and three be none , " say Mrs. Bonteen , who in her 
 anger be hardly able to choose her word quite as well as she might 
 have do have she be more cool . 
 " our friend Madame Max have make quite a new conquest , " say Mrs. 
 Bonteen to Lady Glencora . 
 " I be so pleased , " say Lady Glencora , with apparently unaffected 
 delight . " it be such a great thing to get anybody to amuse my uncle . 
 you see everybody can not talk to he , and he will not talk to 
 everybody . " 
 " he talk enough to she in all conscience , " say Mrs. Bonteen , who 
 be now more angry than ever . 
 CHAPTER XLIX 
 the Duellists Meet 
 Lord Chiltern arrive , and Phineas be a little nervous as to their 
 meeting . he come back from shoot on the day in question , and be 
 tell by the servant that Lord Chiltern be in the house . Phineas go 
 into the billiard - room in his knickerbocker , think probably that 
 he might be there , and then into the drawing - room , and at last into 
 the library , - but Lord Chiltern be not to be find . at last he come 
 across Violet . 
 " have you see he ? " he ask . 
 " yes ; - he be with I half an hour since , walk round the garden . " 
 " and how be he ? come ; - tell I something about he . " 
 " I never know he to be more pleasant . he would give no promise about 
 Saulsby , but he do not say that he would not go . " 
 " do he know that I be here ? " 
 " yes ; - I tell he so . I tell he how much pleasure I should have in 
 see you two together , - as friend . " 
 " and what do he say ? " 
 " he laugh , and say you be the good fellow in the world . you see 
 I be oblige to be explicit . " 
 " but why do he laugh ? " Phineas ask . 
 " he do not tell I , but I suppose it be because he be think of 
 a little trip he once take to Belgium , and he perceive that I know 
 all about it . " 
 " I wonder who tell you . but never mind . I do not mean to ask any 
 question . as I do not like that our first meeting should be before 
 all the people in the drawing - room , I will go to he in his own 
 room . " 
 " do , do ; - that will be so nice of you . " 
 Phineas send his card up by a servant , and in a few minute be 
 stand with his hand on the lock of Lord Chiltern 's door . the last 
 time he have see this man , they have meet with pistol in their hand 
 to shoot at each other , and Lord Chiltern have in truth do his very 
 good to shoot his opponent . the cause of quarrel be the same between 
 they as ever . Phineas have not give up Violet , and have no intention 
 of give she up . and he have receive no intimation whatever from his 
 rival that there be to be a truce between they . Phineas have indeed 
 write in friendship to Lord Chiltern , but he have receive no 
 answer ; - and nothing of certainty be to be gather from the report 
 which Violet have just make . it might well be that Lord Chiltern 
 would turn upon he now in his wrath , and that there would be some 
 scene which in a strange house would be obviously objectionable . 
 nevertheless he have resolve that even that would be well than a 
 chance encounter among stranger in a drawing - room . so the door be 
 open and the two man meet . 
 " well , old fellow , " say Lord Chiltern , laugh . then all doubt be 
 over , and in a moment Phineas be shake his former , - and present 
 friend , warmly by the hand . " so we have   come to be an Under - Secretary 
 have we ? - and all that kind of thing . " 
 " I have to get into harness , - when the harness offer itself , " say 
 Phineas . 
 " I suppose so . it be a deuce of a bore , be not   it ? " 
 " I always like work , you know . " 
 " I think you like hunt well . you use to ride as if you do . 
 there be Bonebreaker back again in the stable for you . that poor fool 
 who buy he could do nothing with he , and I let he have his 
 money back . " 
 " I do not   see why you should have do that . " 
 " because I be the big fool of the two . do you remember when that 
 brute get I down under the bank in the river ? that be about the 
 near touch I ever have . Lord bless I ; - how he do squeeze I ! so 
 here you be ; - stay with the Pallisers , - one of a Government party 
 I suppose . but what be you go to do for a seat , my friend ? " 
 " do not   talk about that yet , Chiltern . " 
 " a sore subject , - be not   it ? I think they have be quite right , you 
 know , to put Loughton into the melting - pot , - though I be sorry enough 
 for your sake . " 
 " quite right , " say Phineas . 
 " and yet you vote against it , old chap ? but , come ; I be not go to 
 be down upon you . so my father have be here ? " 
 " yes ; - he be here for a day or two . " 
 " Violet have just be tell I . you and he be as good friend as 
 ever ? " 
 " I trust we be . " 
 " he never hear of that little affair ? " and Lord Chiltern nod his 
 head , intend to indicate the direction of Blankenberg . 
 " I do not think he have yet . " 
 " so Violet tell I . of course you know that she have hear all about 
 it . " 
 " I have reason to suppose as much . " 
 " and so do Laura . " 
 " I tell she myself , " say Phineas . 
 " the deuce you do ! but I daresay it be for the good . it be a pity 
 you have not proclaim it at Charing Cross , and then nobody would 
 have believe a word about it . of course my father will hear it some 
 day . " 
 " you be go to Saulsby , I hope , Chiltern ? " 
 " that question be easy ask than answer . it be quite true that 
 the great difficulty have be get over . Laura have have her money . and 
 if my father will only acknowledge that he have wrong I throughout , 
 from begin to end , I will go to Saulsby to - morrow ; - and would cut 
 you out at Loughton the next day , only that Loughton be not Loughton 
 any long . " 
 " you can not expect your father to do that . " 
 " no ; - and therefore there be a difficulty . so you have   have that awfully 
 ponderous Duke here . how do you get on with he ? " 
 " admirably . he condescend to do something which he call shake 
 hand with I . " 
 " he be the great old dust out , " say Lord Chiltern , 
 disrespectfully . " do he take any notice of Violet ? " 
 " not that I observe . " 
 " he ought not to be allow into the same room with she . " after that 
 there be a short pause , and Phineas feel some hesitation in speak 
 of Miss Effingham to Lord Chiltern . " and how do you get on with she ? " 
 ask Lord Chiltern . here be a question for a man to answer . the 
 question be so hard to be answer , that Phineas do not at first 
 make any attempt to answer it . " you know exactly the ground that I 
 stand on , " continue Lord Chiltern . " she have refuse I three time . 
 have you be more fortunate ? " 
 Lord Chiltern , as he ask his question , look full into Finn 's face 
 in a manner that be irresistible . his look be not one of anger nor 
 even of pride . it be not , indeed , without a strong dash of fun . but 
 such as it be it show Phineas that Lord Chiltern intend to have 
 an answer . " no , " say he at last , " I have not be more fortunate . " 
 " perhaps you have change your mind , " say his host . 
 " no ; - I have not change my mind , " say Phineas , quickly . 
 " how stand it then ? come ; - let we be honest to each other . I tell 
 you down at Willingford that I would quarrel with any man who 
 attempt to cut I out with Violet Effingham . you make up your mind 
 that you would do so , and therefore I quarrel with you . but we 
 can not   always be fight duel . " 
 " I hope we may not have to fight another . " 
 " no ; - it would be absurd , " say Lord Chiltern . " I rather think that 
 what we do be absurd . but upon my life I do not see any other way 
 out of it . however , that be over . how be it to be now ? " 
 " what be I to say in answer to that ? " ask Phineas . 
 " just the truth . you have ask she , I suppose ? " 
 " yes ; - I have ask she . " 
 " and she have refuse you ? " 
 " yes ; - she have refuse I . " 
 " and you mean to ask she again ? " 
 " I shall ; - if I ever think that there be a chance . indeed , Chiltern , 
 I believe I shall whether I think that I have any chance or not . " 
 " then we start fairly , Finn . I certainly shall do so . I believe 
 I once tell you that I never would ; - but that be long before I 
 suspect that you would enter for the same plate . what a man say on 
 such a matter when he be down in the mouth go for nothing . now we 
 understand each other , and you have well go and dress . the bell ring 
 nearly half an hour ago , and my fellow be hang about outside the 
 door . " 
 the interview have in one respect be very pleasant to Phineas , and 
 in another it have be very bitter . it be pleasant to he to know 
 that he and Lord Chiltern be again friend . it be a delight to 
 he to feel that this half - savage but high - spirited young nobleman , 
 who have be so anxious to fight with he and to shoot he , be 
 nevertheless ready to own that he have behave well . Lord Chiltern 
 have in fact acknowledge that though he have be anxious to blow 
 out our hero 's brain , he be aware all the time that our hero be 
 a good sort of fellow . Phineas understand this , and feel that it 
 be pleasant . but with this understanding , and accompany this 
 pleasure , there be a conviction in his heart that the distance 
 between Lord Chiltern and Violet would daily grow to be less and 
 still less , - and that Lord Chiltern could afford to be generous . if 
 Miss Effingham could teach herself to be fond of Lord Chiltern , what 
 have he , Phineas Finn , to offer in opposition to the claim of such a 
 suitor ? 
 that evening Lord Chiltern take Miss Effingham out to dinner . Phineas 
 tell himself that this be of course so arrange by Lady Glencora , 
 with the express view of serve the Saulsby interest . it be almost 
 nothing to he at the moment that Madame Max Goesler be intrust 
 to he . he have his ambition respect Madame Max Goesler ; but that 
 for the time be in abeyance . he could hardly keep his eye off Miss 
 Effingham . and yet , as he well know , his observation of she must be 
 quite useless . he know beforehand , with absolute accuracy , the manner 
 in which she would treat her lover . she would be kind , genial , 
 friendly , confidential , nay , affectionate ; and yet her manner would 
 mean nothing , would give no clue to her future decision either for or 
 against Lord Chiltern . it be , as Phineas think , a peculiarity with 
 Violet Effingham that she could treat she reject lover as dear 
 familiar friend immediately after her rejection of they . 
 " Mr. Finn , " say Madame Max Goesler , " your eye and ear be 
 tell - tale of your passion . " 
 " I hope not , " say Phineas , " as I certainly do not wish that any one 
 should guess how strong be my regard for you . " 
 " that be prettily turn , - very prettily turn ; and show more 
 readiness of wit than I give you credit for under your present 
 suffering . but of course we all know where your heart be . man do not 
 undertake perilous journey to Belgium for nothing . " 
 " that unfortunate journey to Belgium ! but , dear Madame Max , really 
 nobody know why I go . " 
 " you meet Lord Chiltern there ? " 
 " oh yes ; - I meet Lord Chiltern there . " 
 " and there be a duel ? " 
 " Madame Max , - you must not ask I to criminate myself ! " 
 " of course there be , and of course it be about Miss Effingham , and 
 of course the lady think herself bind to refuse both the gentleman 
 who be so very wicked , and of course - " 
 " well , - what follow ? " 
 " ah ! if you have not wit enough to see , I do not think it can be my 
 duty to tell you . but I wish to caution you as a friend that your 
 eye and ear should be more under your command . " 
 " you will go to Saulsby ? " Violet say to Lord Chiltern . 
 " I can not possibly tell as yet , " say he , frown . 
 " then I can tell you that you ought to go . I do not care a bit for 
 your frown . what do the fifth commandment say ? " 
 " if you have no well argument than the commandment , Violet - " 
 " there can be none well . do you mean to say that the commandment 
 be nothing to you ? " 
 " I mean to say that I shall not   go to Saulsby because I be tell in the 
 twentieth chapter of Exodus to honour my father and mother , - and that 
 I should not   believe anybody who tell I that he do anything because 
 of the commandment . " 
 " oh , Lord Chiltern ! " 
 " People be so prejudiced and so used to humbug that for the most 
 part they do not in the least know their own motif for what they 
 do . I will go to Saulsby to - morrow , - for a reward . " 
 " for what reward ? " say Violet , blushing . 
 " for the only one in the world that could tempt I to do anything . " 
 " you should go for the sake of duty . I should not even care to see 
 you go , much as I long for it , if that feeling do not take you 
 there . " 
 it be arrange that Phineas and Lord Chiltern be to leave matching 
 together . Phineas be to remain at his office all October , and in 
 November the general election be to take place . what he have hitherto 
 hear about a future seat be most vague , but he be to meet Ratler 
 and Barrington Erle in London , and it have be understand that 
 Barrington Erle , who be now at Saulsby , be to make some inquiry as 
 to that group of borough of which Loughton at this moment form 
 one . but as Loughton be the small of four borough , and as one of 
 the four have for many year have a representative of its own , Phineas 
 fear that no success would be find there . in his present agony 
 he begin to think that there might be a strong plea make for a 
 few private seat in the House of Commons , and that the propriety 
 of throw Loughton into the melting - pot be , after all , open to 
 question . he and Lord Chiltern be to return to London together , 
 and Lord Chiltern , accord to his present scheme , be to proceed 
 at once to Willingford to look after the cub - hunting . nothing that 
 either Violet or Phineas could say to he would induce he to 
 promise to go to Saulsby . when Phineas press it , he be tell by 
 Lord Chiltern that he be a fool for his pain , - by which Phineas 
 understand perfectly well that when Lord Chiltern do go to Saulsby , 
 he , Phineas , be to take that as strong evidence that everything be 
 over for he as regard Violet Effingham . when Violet express she 
 eagerness that the visit should be make , she be stop with an 
 assurance that she could have it do at once if she please . let he 
 only be enable to carry with he the tiding of his betrothal , and 
 he would start for his father 's house without an hour 's delay . but 
 this authority Violet would not give he . when he answer she after 
 this fashion she could only tell he that he be ungenerous . " at any 
 rate I be not false , " he reply on one occasion . " what I say be the 
 truth . " 
 there be a very tender parting between Phineas and Madame Max 
 Goesler . she have learn from he pretty nearly all his history , and 
 certainly know more of the reality of his affair than any of those 
 in London who have be his most staunch friend . " of course you will 
 get a seat , " she say as he take his leave of she . " if I understand 
 it at all , they never throw over an ally so useful as you be . " 
 " but the intention be that in this matter nobody shall any long 
 have the power of throw over , or of not throw over , anybody . " 
 " that be all very well , my friend ; but cake will still be hot in the 
 mouth , even though Mr. Daubeny turn purist , with Mr. Turnbull to help 
 he . if you want any assistance in find a seat you will not go to 
 the People 's Banner , - even yet . " 
 " certainly not to the People 's Banner . " 
 " I do not   quite understand what the franchise be , " continue Madame 
 Max Goesler . 
 " household in borough , " say Phineas with some energy . 
 " very well ; - household in borough . I daresay that be very fine and 
 very liberal , though I do not   comprehend it in the least . and you want 
 a borough . very well . you will not   go to the household . I do not   think 
 you will ; - not at first , that be . " 
 " where shall I go then ? " 
 " oh , - to some great patron of a borough ; - or to a club ; - or perhaps 
 to some great firm . the household will know nothing about it till 
 they be tell . be not that it ? " 
 " the truth be , Madame Max , I do not know where I shall go . I be like 
 a child lose in a wood . and you may understand this ; - if you do not 
 see I in Park Lane before the end of January , I shall have perish 
 in the wood . " 
 " then I will come and find you , - with a troop of householder . you 
 will come . you will be there . I do not believe in death come 
 without sign . you be full of life . " as she speak , she have hold 
 of his hand , and there be nobody near they . they be in a little 
 book - room inside the library at Matching , and the door , though not 
 latch , be nearly closed . Phineas have flatter himself that Madame 
 Goesler have retreat there in order that this farewell might be 
 speak without interruption . " and , Mr. Finn ; - I wonder whether I may 
 say one thing , " she continue . 
 " you may say anything to I , " he reply . 
 " no , - not in this country , in this England . there be thing one 
 may not say here , - that be taboo by a sort of consent , - and that 
 without any reason . " she pause again , and Phineas be at a loss to 
 think what be the subject on which she be about to speak . could she 
 mean - ? no ; she could not mean to give he any outward plain - speak 
 sign that she be attach to he . it be the peculiar merit of this 
 man that he be not vain , though much be do to he to fill he 
 with vanity ; and as the idea cross his brain , he hat himself 
 because it have be there . 
 " to I you may say anything , Madame Goesler , " he say , - " here in 
 England , as plainly as though we be in Vienna . " 
 " but I can not say it in English , " she say . then in French , blushing 
 and laugh as she speak , - almost stammer in spite of her usual 
 self - confidence , - she tell he that accident have make she rich , full 
 of money . money be a drug with she . money she know be want , even 
 for householder . would he not understand she , and come to she , and 
 learn from she how faithful a woman could be ? 
 he still be hold she by the hand , and he now raise it to 
 his lip and kiss it . " the offer from you , " he say , " be as 
 high - minded , as generous , and as honourable as its acceptance by I 
 would be mean - spirit , vile , and ignoble . but whether I fail or 
 whether I succeed , you shall see I before the winter be over . " 
 CHAPTER L 
 again successful 
 Phineas also say a word of farewell to Violet before he leave 
 Matching , but there be nothing peculiar in her little speech to he , 
 or in his to she . " of course we shall see each other in London . do not 
 talk of not be in the House . of course you will be in the House . " 
 then Phineas have shake his head and smile . where be he to find 
 a requisite number of householder prepare to return he ? but as 
 he go up to London he tell himself that the air of the House of 
 Commons be now the very breath of his nostril . life to he without 
 it would be no life . to have come within the reach of the good thing 
 of political life , to have make his mark so as to have almost insure 
 future success , to have be the pet young official aspirant of 
 the day , - and then to sink down into the miserable platitude of 
 private life , to undergo daily attendance in law - court without 
 a brief , to listen to man who have come to be much below he in 
 estimation and social intercourse , to sit in a wretched chamber up 
 three pair of stair at Lincoln 's Inn , whereas he be now at this 
 moment provide with a gorgeous apartment look out into the Park 
 from the Colonial Office in Downing Street , to be attend by a 
 mongrel between a clerk and an errand boy at 17s . 6d . a week instead 
 of by a private secretary who be the son of an earl 's sister , and 
 be pet by countess ' daughter innumerable , - all this would 
 surely break his heart . he could have do it , so he tell himself , 
 and could have take glory in do it , have not these other thing 
 come in his way . but the other thing have come . he have run the risk , 
 and have throw the dice . and now when the game be so nearly win , 
 must it be that everything should be lose at last ? 
 he know that nothing be to be gain by melancholy look at his 
 club , or by show of wretchedness at his office . London be very 
 empty ; but the approach election still keep some there who 
 otherwise would have be look after the first flush of pheasant . 
 Barrington Erle be there , and be not long in ask Phineas what 
 be his view . 
 " ah ; - that be so hard to say . Ratler tell I that he would be look 
 about . " 
 " Ratler be very well in the House , " say Barrington , " but he be of no 
 use for anything beyond it . I suppose you be not bring up at the 
 London University ? " 
 " oh no , " say Phineas , remember the glory of Trinity . 
 " because there would have be an opening . what do you say to 
 Stratford , - the new Essex borough ? " 
 " Broadbury the brewer be there already ! " 
 " yes ; - and ready to spend any money you like to name . let I see . 
 Loughton be group with Smotherem , and Walker be a deal too strong 
 at Smotherem to hear of any other claim . I do not   think we could dare 
 to propose it . there be the Chelsea hamlet , but it will take a wack 
 of money . " 
 " I have not get a wack of money , " say Phineas , laugh . 
 " that be the devil of it . I think , if I be you , I should hark back 
 upon some place in Ireland . could not   you get Laurence to give you up 
 his seat ? " 
 " what ! fitzgibbon ? " 
 " yes . he have not a ghost of a chance of get into office again . 
 nothing on earth would induce he to look at a paper during all those 
 week he be at the Colonial Office ; and when Cantrip speak to he , 
 all he say be , ' ah , bother ! ' cantrip do not like it , I can tell 
 you . " 
 " but that would not   make he give up his seat . " 
 " of course you would have to arrange it . " by which Phineas understand 
 Barrington Erle to mean that he , Phineas , be in some way to give to 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon some adequate compensation for the surrender of 
 his position as a county member . 
 " I be afraid that be out of the question , " say Phineas . " if he be to 
 go , I should not get it . " 
 " would you have a chance at Loughshane ? " 
 " I be think of try it , " say Phineas . 
 " of course you know that Morris be very ill . " this Mr. Morris be 
 the brother of Lord Tulla , and be the sit member of Loughshane . 
 " upon my word I think I should try that . I do not   see where we be to 
 put our hand on a seat in England . I do not   indeed . " Phineas , as 
 he listen to this , could not help think that Barrington Erle , 
 though he have certainly express a great deal of solicitude , be not 
 as true a friend as he use to be . perhaps he , Phineas , have rise too 
 fast , and Barrington Erle be begin to think that he might as 
 well be out of the way . 
 he write to his father , ask after the borough , and ask after 
 the health of Mr. Morris . and in his letter he tell his own story 
 very plainly , - almost pathetically . he perhaps have be wrong to 
 make the attempt which he have make . he begin to believe that he have 
 be wrong . but at any rate he have make it so far successfully , and 
 failure now would be doubly bitter . he think that the party to 
 which he belong must now remain in office . it would hardly be 
 possible that a new election would produce a House of Commons 
 favourable to a conservative ministry . and with a liberal ministry 
 he , Phineas , would be sure of his place , and sure of an official 
 income , - if only he could find a seat . it be all very true , and be 
 almost pathetic . the old doctor , who be inclined to be proud of his 
 son , be not unwilling to make a sacrifice . Mrs. Finn declare before 
 her daughter that if there be a seat in all Ireland , Phineas ought 
 to have it . and Mary Flood Jones stand by listen , and wonder 
 what Phineas would do if he lose his seat . would he come back and 
 live in County Clare , and be like any other girl 's lover ? poor Mary 
 have come to lose her ambition , and to think that girl whose lover 
 stay at home be the happy . nevertheless , she would have walk 
 all the way to Lord Tulla 's house and back again , might that have 
 avail to get the seat for Phineas . then there come an express over 
 from Castlemorris . the doctor be want at once to see Mr. Morris . 
 Mr. Morris be very bad with gout in his stomach . accord to the 
 messenger it be suppose that Mr. Morris be die . before Dr. Finn 
 have have an opportunity of answer his son 's letter , Mr. Morris , the 
 late member for Loughshane , have be gather to his father . 
 Dr. Finn understand enough of election for Parliament , and of the 
 nature of borough , to be aware that a candidate 's chance of success 
 be very much improve by be early in the field ; and he be aware , 
 also , that the death of Mr. Morris would probably create various 
 aspirant for the honour of represent loughshane . but he could 
 hardly address the Earl on the subject while the dead body of the 
 late member be lie in the house at Castlemorris . the bill which 
 have pass in the late session for reform the constitution of the 
 House of Commons have not touch Ireland , a future measure have 
 be promise to the Irish for their comfort ; and loughshane 
 therefore be , as to Lord Tulla 's influence , the same as it have ever 
 be . he have not there the plenary power which the other lord have 
 hold in his hand in regard to Loughton ; - but still the Castlemorris 
 interest would go a long way . it might be possible to stand against 
 it , but it would be much more desirable that the candidate should 
 have it at his back . Dr. Finn be fully alive to this as he sit 
 opposite to the old lord , say now a word about the old lord 's gout 
 in his leg and arm , and then about the gout in the stomach , which 
 have carry away to another world the lamented late member for the 
 borough . 
 " Poor Jack ! " say Lord Tulla , piteously . " if I have know it , I need not 
 have pay over two thousand pound for he last year ; - need I , 
 doctor ? " 
 " no , indeed , " say Dr. Finn , feel that his patient might perhaps 
 approach the subject of the borough himself . 
 " he never would live by any rule , you know , " say the desolate 
 brother . 
 " very hard to guide ; - be he not , my lord ? " 
 " the very devil . now , you see , I do do what I be tell pretty 
 well , - do not   I , doctor ? " 
 " sometimes . " 
 " by George , I do nearly always . I do not   know what you mean by 
 sometimes . I have   be drink brandy - and - water till I be sick of it , 
 to oblige you , and you tell I about - sometimes . you doctor expect 
 a man to be a slave . have not   I keep it out of my stomach ? " 
 " thank God , yes . " 
 " it be all very well thank God , but I should have go as poor Jack 
 have go , if I have not   be the most careful man in the world . he be 
 drink champagne ten day ago ; - would do it , you know . " Lord Tulla 
 could talk about himself and his own ailment by the hour together , 
 and Dr. Finn , who have think that his noble patient be approach 
 the subject of the borough , be begin again to feel that the 
 double interest of the gout that be present , and the gout that have 
 pass away , would be too absorbing . he , however , could say but 
 little to direct the conversation . 
 " Mr. Morris , you see , live more in London than you do , and be 
 subject to temptation . " 
 " I do not   know what you call temptation . have not   I the temptation of a 
 bottle of wine under my nose every day of my life ? " 
 " no doubt you have . " 
 " and I do not   drink it . I hardly ever take above a glass or two of 
 brown sherry . by George ! when I think of it , I wonder at my own 
 courage . I do , indeed . " 
 " but a man in London , my lord - " 
 " why the deuce would he go to London ? by - the - bye , what be I to do 
 about the borough now ? " 
 " let my son stand for it , if you will , my lord . " 
 " they have   clean sweep away Brentford 's seat at Loughton , have not   they ? 
 ha , ha , ha ! what a nice game for he , - to have be force to help to 
 do it himself ! there be nobody on earth I pity so much as a radical 
 peer who be oblige to work like a nigger with a spade to shovel away 
 the ground from under his own foot . as for I , I do not   care who sit 
 for Loughshane . I do care for poor Jack while he be alive . I do not 
 think I shall interfere any long . I be glad it last Jack 's time . " 
 Lord Tulla have probably already forget that he himself have throw 
 Jack over for the last session but one . 
 " Phineas , my lord , " begin the father , " be now under - Secretary of 
 State . " 
 " oh , I have   no doubt he be a very fine fellow ; - but you see , he be an 
 out - and - out Radical . " 
 " no , my lord . " 
 " then how can he serve with such man as Mr. Gresham and Mr. Monk ? 
 they have   turn out poor old Mildmay among they , because he be not fast 
 enough for they . do not   tell I . " 
 " my anxiety , of course , be for my boy 's prospect . he seem to have 
 do so well in Parliament . " 
 " why do not   he stand for Marylebone or Finsbury ? " 
 " the money , you know , my lord ! " 
 " I shall not   interfere here , doctor . if he come , and the people then 
 choose to return he , I shall say nothing . they may do just as they 
 please . they tell I Lambert St. George , of Mockrath , be go to 
 stand . if he do , it be the d - - piece of impudence I ever hear 
 of . he be a tenant of my own , though he have a lease for ever ; and 
 his father never own an acre of land in the county till his uncle 
 die . " then the doctor know that , with a little management , the 
 lord 's interest might be secure for his son . 
 Phineas come over and stand for the borough against Mr. Lambert 
 St. George , and the contest be sharp enough . the gentry of the 
 neighbourhood could not understand why such a man as Lord Tulla 
 should admit a liberal candidate to succeed his brother . no one 
 canvass for the young Under - Secretary with more persistent zeal 
 than do his father , who , when Phineas first speak of go into 
 Parliament , have produce so many good argument against that perilous 
 step . Lord Tulla 's agent stand aloof , - desolate with grief at the 
 death of the late member . at such a moment of family affliction , Lord 
 Tulla , he declare , could not think of such a matter as the borough . 
 but it be know that Lord Tulla be dreadfully jealous of Mr. 
 Lambert St. George , whose property in that part of the county be now 
 nearly equal to his own , and who see much more company at Mockrath 
 than be ever entertain at Castlemorris . a word from Lord 
 Tulla , - so say the Conservatives of the county , - would have put 
 Mr. St. George into the seat ; but that word be not speak , and 
 the Conservatives of the neighbourhood swear that Lord Tulla be a 
 renegade . the contest be very sharp , but our hero be return by a 
 majority of seventeen vote . 
 again successful ! as he think of it he remember story of great 
 general who be say to have chain Fortune to the wheel of their 
 chariot , but it seem to he that the goddess have never serve 
 any general with such staunch obedience as she have display in his 
 cause . have not everything go well with he ; - so well , as almost to 
 justify he in expect that even yet Violet Effingham would become 
 his wife ? dear , dear Violet ! if he could only achieve that , no 
 general , who ever lead an army across the Alps , would be his equal 
 either in success or in the reward of success . then he question 
 himself as to what he would say to Miss Flood Jones on that very 
 night . he be to meet dear little Mary Flood Jones that evening at a 
 neighbour 's house . his sister Barbara have so tell he in a tone of 
 voice which he quite understand to imply a caution . " I shall be so 
 glad to see she , " Phineas have reply . 
 " if there ever be an angel on earth , it be Mary , " say Barbara Finn . 
 " I know that she be as good as gold , " say Phineas . 
 " Gold ! " reply Barbara , - " gold indeed ! she be more precious than 
 refined gold . but , Phineas , perhaps you have well not single she out 
 for any special attention . she have think it wisest to meet you . " 
 " of course , " say Phineas . " why not ? " 
 " that be all , Phineas . I have nothing more to say . man of course be 
 different from girl . " 
 " that be true , Barbara , at any rate . " 
 " do not   laugh at I , Phineas , when I be think of nothing but of you 
 and your interest , and when I be make all manner of excuse for 
 you because I know what must be the distraction of the world in 
 which you live . " Barbara make more than one attempt to renew the 
 conversation before the evening come , but Phineas think that he have 
 have enough of it . he do not like be tell that excuse be make 
 for he . after all , what have he do ? he have once kiss Mary Flood 
 Jones behind the door . 
 " I be so glad to see you , Mary , " he say , come and take a chair 
 by her side . he have be specially warn not to single Mary out for 
 his attention , and yet there be the chair leave vacant as though it 
 be expect that he would fall into it . 
 " thank you . we do not happen to meet last year , do we , - Mr. Finn ? " 
 " do not call I Mr. Finn , Mary . " 
 " you be such a great man now ! " 
 " not at all a great man . if you only know what little man we 
 understrapper be in London you would hardly speak to I . " 
 " but you be something - of State now ; - be you not ? " 
 " well ; - yes . that be the name they give I . it simply mean that if 
 any member want to badger some one in the House about the Colonies , 
 I be the man to be badger . but if there be any credit to be have , I 
 be not the man who be to have it . " 
 " but it be a great thing to be in Parliament and in the government 
 too . " 
 " it be a great thing for I , Mary , to have a salary , though it may 
 only be for a year or two . however , I will not deny that it be 
 pleasant to have be successful . " 
 " it have be very pleasant to we , Phineas . Mamma have be so much 
 rejoice . " 
 " I be so sorry not to see she . she be at Floodborough , I suppose . " 
 " oh , yes ; - she be at home . she do not like come out at night in 
 winter . I have be stay here you know for two day , but I go home 
 to - morrow . " 
 " I will ride over and call on your mother . " then there be a pause in 
 the conversation for a moment . " do it not seem odd , Mary , that we 
 should see so little of each other ? " 
 " you be so much away , of course . " 
 " yes ; - that be the reason . but still it seem almost unnatural . I 
 often wonder when the time will come that I shall be quietly at home 
 again . I have to be back in my office in London this day week , and 
 yet I have not have a single hour to myself since I have be at 
 Killaloe . but I will certainly ride over and see your mother . you 
 will be at home on Wednesday I suppose . " 
 " yes , - I shall be at home . " 
 upon that he get up and go away , but again in the evening he find 
 himself near she . perhaps there be no position more perilous to a 
 man 's honesty than that in which Phineas now find himself ; - that , 
 namely , of know himself to be quite love by a girl whom he almost 
 love himself . of course he love Violet Effingham ; and they who talk 
 good of love protest that no man or woman can be in love with two 
 person at once . Phineas be not in love with Mary Flood Jones ; but 
 he would have like to take she in his arm and kiss she ; - he would 
 have like to gratify she by swear that she be dearer to he than 
 all the world ; he would have like to have an episode , - and do , 
 at the moment , think that it might be possible to have one life in 
 London and another life altogether different at Killaloe . " dear 
 Mary , " he say as he press her hand that night , " thing will get 
 themselves settle at last , I suppose . " he be behave very ill to 
 she , but he do not mean to behave ill . 
 he ride over to Floodborough , and see Mrs. Flood Jones . Mrs. Flood 
 Jones , however , receive he very coldly ; and Mary do not appear . 
 Mary have communicate to her mother her resolution as to her future 
 life . " the fact be , mamma , I love he . I can not help it . if he ever 
 choose to come for I , here I be . if he do not , I will bear it as 
 well as I can . it may be very mean of I , but it be true . " 
 CHAPTER LI 
 Troubles at Loughlinter 
 there be a dull house at Loughlinter during the great part of 
 this autumn . a few man go down for the grouse shoot late in the 
 season ; but they stay but a short time , and when they go Lady 
 Laura be leave alone with her husband . Mr. Kennedy have explain to 
 his wife , more than once , that though he understand the duty of 
 hospitality and enjoy the performance of they , he have not marry 
 with the intention of live in a whirlwind . he be disposed to think 
 that the whirlwind have hitherto be too predominant , and have say so 
 very plainly with a good deal of marital authority . this autumn and 
 winter be to be devoted to the cultivation of proper relation 
 between he and his wife . " do that mean Darby and Joan ? " his wife 
 have ask he , when the proposition be make to she . " it mean mutual 
 regard and esteem , " reply Mr. Kennedy in his most solemn tone , 
 " and I trust that such mutual regard and esteem between we may yet 
 be possible . " when Lady Laura show he a letter from her brother , 
 receive some week after this conversation , in which Lord Chiltern 
 express his intention of come to Loughlinter for Christmas , he 
 return the note to his wife without a word . he suspect that she 
 have make the arrangement without ask he , and be angry ; but he 
 would not tell she that her brother would not be welcome at his 
 house . " it be not my doing , " she say , when she see the frown on his 
 brow . 
 " I say nothing about anybody 's do , " he reply . 
 " I will write to Oswald and bid he not come , if you wish it . of 
 course you can understand why he be come . " 
 " not to see I , I be sure , " say Mr. Kennedy . 
 " nor I , " reply Lady Laura . " he be come because my friend Violet 
 Effingham will be here . " 
 " Miss Effingham ! why be I not tell of this ? I know nothing of Miss 
 Effingham 's come . " 
 " Robert , it be settle in your own presence last July . " 
 " I deny it . " 
 then Lady Laura rise up , very haughty in her gait and with something 
 of fire in her eye , and silently leave the room . Mr. Kennedy , when he 
 find himself alone , be very unhappy . look back in his mind to 
 the summer week in London , he remember that his wife have tell 
 Violet that she be to spend her Christmas at Loughlinter , that he 
 himself have give a muttered assent and that Violet , - as far as he 
 could remember , - have make no reply . it have be one of those thing 
 which be so often mention , but not settle . he feel that he have 
 be strictly right in deny that it have be ' settle " in his 
 presence ; - but yet he feel that he have be wrong in contradict 
 his wife so peremptorily . he be a just man , and he would apologise 
 for his fault ; but he be an austere man , and would take back the 
 value of his apology in additional austerity . he do not see his wife 
 for some hour after the conversation which have be narrate , but 
 when he do meet she his mind be still full of the subject . " Laura " , 
 he say , " I be sorry that I contradict you . " 
 " I be quite used to it , Robert . " 
 " no ; - you be not use to it . " she smile and bow her head . " you 
 wrong I by say that you be use to it . " then he pause a moment , 
 but she say not a word , - only smile and bow her head again . " I 
 remember , " he continue , " that something be say in my presence to 
 Miss Effingham about she come here at Christmas . it be so slight , 
 however , that it have pass out of my memory till recall by an 
 effort . I beg your pardon . " 
 " that be unnecessary , Robert . " 
 " it be , dear . " 
 " and do you wish that I should put she off , - or put Oswald off , - or 
 both ? my brother never yet have see I in your house . " 
 " and whose fault have that be ? " 
 " I have say nothing about anybody 's fault , Robert . I merely 
 mention a fact . will you let I know whether I shall bid he stay 
 away ? " 
 " he be welcome to come , - only I do not like assignation for 
 love - making . " 
 " Assignations ! " 
 " clandestine meeting . Lady Baldock would not wish it . " 
 " Lady Baldock ! do you think that Violet would exercise any secrecy in 
 the matter , - or that she will not tell Lady Baldock that Oswald will 
 be here , - as soon as she know it herself ? " 
 " that have nothing to do with it . " 
 " surely , Robert , it must have much to do with it . and why should not 
 these two young people meet ? the acknowledge wish of all the family 
 be that they should marry each other . and in this matter , at any 
 rate , my brother have behave extremely well . " Mr. Kennedy say 
 nothing far at the time , and it become an understanding that 
 Violet Effingham be to be a month at Loughlinter , stay from the 
 20th of December to the 20th of January , and that Lord Chiltern be 
 to come there for Christmas , - which with he would probably mean 
 three day . 
 before Christmas come , however , there be various other source of 
 uneasiness at Loughlinter . there have be , as a matter of course , 
 great anxiety as to the election . with Lady Laura this anxiety have 
 be very strong , and even Mr. Kennedy have be warm with some 
 amount of fire as the announcement reach he of the success 
 and of the failure . the english return come first , - and then 
 the Scotch , which be quite as interesting to Mr. Kennedy as the 
 English . his own seat be quite safe , - be not contest ; but some 
 neighbouring seat be source of great solicitude . then , when this 
 be over , there be the tiding from Ireland to be receive ; and 
 respect one special borough in Ireland , Lady Laura evince more 
 solicitude than her husband approve . there be much danger for the 
 domestic bliss of the house of Loughlinter , when thing come to such 
 a pass , and such word be speak , as the election at Loughshane 
 produce . 
 " he be in , " say Lady Laura , open a telegram . 
 " who be in ? " say Mr. Kennedy , with that frown on his brow to which 
 his wife be now well accustom . though he ask the question , he 
 know very well who be the hero to whom the telegram refer . 
 " our friend Phineas Finn , " say Lady Laura , speak still with an 
 excited voice , - with a voice that be intend to display excitement . 
 if there be to be a battle on this matter , there should be a battle . 
 she would display all her anxiety for her young friend , and fle 
 it in her husband 's face if he choose to take it as an injury . 
 what , - should she endure reproach from her husband because she 
 regard the interest of the man who have save his life , of the man 
 respect whom she have suffer so many heart - struggle , and as to 
 whom she have at last come to the conclusion that he should ever be 
 regard as a second brother , love equally with the eld brother ? 
 she have do her duty by her husband , - so at least she have assure 
 herself ; - and should he dare to reproach she on this subject , she 
 would be ready for the battle . and now the battle come . " I be glad 
 of this , " she say , with all the eagerness she could throw into her 
 voice . " I be , indeed , - and so ought you to be . " the husband 's brow 
 grow blacker and blacker , but still he say nothing . he have long 
 be too proud to be jealous , and be now too proud to express his 
 jealousy , - if only he could keep the expression back . but his wife 
 would not leave the subject . " I be so thankful for this , " she say , 
 press the telegram between her hand . " I be so afraid he would 
 fail ! " 
 " you over - do your anxiety on such a subject , " at last he say , 
 speak very slowly . 
 " what do you mean , Robert ? how can I be over - anxious ? if it concern 
 any other dear friend that I have in the world , it would not be an 
 affair of life and death . to he it be almost so . I would have walk 
 from here to London to get he his election . " and as she speak she 
 hold up the clench fist of her left hand , and shake it , while she 
 still hold the telegram in her right hand . 
 " Laura , I must tell you that it be improper that you should speak 
 of any man in those term ; - of any man that be a stranger to your 
 blood . " 
 " a stranger to my blood ! what have that to do with it ? this man be my 
 friend , be your friend ; - save your life , have be my brother 's good 
 friend , be love by my father , - and be love by I , very dearly . tell 
 I what you mean by improper ! " 
 " I will not have you love any man , - very dearly . " 
 " Robert ! " 
 " I tell you that I will have no such expression from you . they be 
 unseemly , and be use only to provoke I . " 
 " be I to understand that I be insult by an accusation ? if so , let 
 I beg at once that I may be allow to go to Saulsby . I would rather 
 accept your apology and retractation there than here . " 
 " you will not go to Saulsby , and there have be no accusation , and 
 there will be no apology . if you please there will be no more mention 
 of Mr. Finn 's name between we , for the present . if you will take my 
 advice you will cease to think of he extravagantly ; - and I must 
 desire you to hold no far direct communication with he . " 
 " I have hold no communication with he , " say Lady Laura , advance a 
 step towards he . but Mr. Kennedy simply point to the telegram in 
 her hand , and leave the room . now in respect to this telegram there 
 have be an unfortunate mistake . I be not prepared to say that there 
 be any reason why Phineas himself should not have send the news of 
 his success to Lady Laura ; but he have not do so . the piece of paper 
 which she still hold crush in her hand be in itself very innocent . 
 " Hurrah for the Loughshanes . Finny have do the trick . " such be 
 the word write on the slip , and they have be send to Lady Laura 
 by her young cousin , the clerk in the office who act as private 
 secretary to the Under - Secretary of State . Lady Laura resolve that 
 her husband should never see those innocent but rather undignified 
 word . the occasion have become one of importance , and such word be 
 unworthy of it . besides , she would not condescend to defend herself 
 by bring forward a telegram as evidence in her favour . so she 
 burn the morsel of paper . 
 Lady Laura and Mr. Kennedy do not meet again till late that evening . 
 she be ill , she say , and would not come down to dinner . after 
 dinner she write he a note . " Dear Robert , I think you must regret 
 what you say to I . if so , pray let I have a line from you to that 
 effect . your affectionately , L. " when the servant hand it to he , 
 and he have read it , he smile and thank the girl who have bring 
 it , and say he would see her mistress just now . anything would be 
 well than that the servant should know that there be a quarrel . 
 but every servant in the house have know all about it for the last 
 three hour . when the door be close and he be alone , he sit 
 finger the note , think deeply how he should answer it , or 
 whether he would answer it at all . no ; he would not answer it ; - not 
 in writing . he would give his wife no write record of his 
 humiliation . he have not act wrongly . he have say nothing more than 
 now , upon mature consideration , he think that the circumstance 
 demand . but yet he feel that he must in some sort withdraw the 
 accusation which he have make . if he do not withdraw it , there be no 
 know what his wife might do . about ten in the evening he go up 
 to she and make his little speech . " my dear , I have come to answer 
 your note . " 
 " I think you would have write to I a line . " 
 " I have come instead , Laura . now , if you will listen to I for one 
 moment , I think everything will be make smooth . " 
 " of course I will listen , " say Lady Laura , know very well that 
 her husband 's moment would be rather tedious , and resolve that she 
 also would have her moment afterwards . 
 " I think you will acknowledge that if there be a difference of 
 opinion between you and I as to any question of social intercourse , 
 it will be well that you should consent to adopt my opinion . " 
 " you have the law on your side . " 
 " I be not speak of the law . " 
 " well ; - go on , Robert . I will not interrupt you if I can help it . " 
 " I be not speak of the law . I be speak simply of convenience , 
 and of that which you must feel to be right . if I wish that your 
 intercourse with any person should be of such or such a nature it 
 must be good that you should comply with my wish . " he pause for 
 her assent , but she neither assent nor dissent . " as far as I can 
 understand the position of a man and wife in this country , there be 
 no other way in which life can be make harmonious . " 
 " life will not run in harmony . " 
 " I expect that ours shall be make to do so , Laura . I need hardly say 
 to you that I intend to accuse you of no impropriety of feeling in 
 reference to this young man . " 
 " no , Robert ; you need hardly say that . indeed , to speak my own mind , 
 I think that you need hardly have allude to it . I might go far , 
 and say that such an allusion be in itself an insult , - an insult now 
 repeat after hour of deliberation , - an insult which I will not 
 endure to have repeat again . if you say another word in any way 
 suggest the possibility of improper relation between I and Mr. 
 Finn , either as to deed or thought , as God be above I , I will 
 write to both my father and my brother , and desire they to take I 
 from your house . if you wish I to remain here , you have well be 
 careful ! " as she be make this speech , her temper seem to rise , 
 and to become hot , and then hotter , till it glow with a red heat . 
 she have be cool till the word insult , use by herself , have convey 
 back to she a strong impression of her own wrong , - or perhaps I 
 should rather say a strong feeling of the necessity of become 
 indignant . she be stand as she speak , and the fire flash from 
 her eye , and he quail before she . the threat which she have hold 
 out to he be very dreadful to he . he be a man terribly in fear 
 of the world 's good opinion , who lack the courage to go through a 
 great and harass trial in order that something well might come 
 afterwards . his married life have be unhappy . his wife have not 
 submit either to his will or to his way . he have that great desire 
 to enjoy his full right , so strong in the mind of weak , ambitious 
 man , and he have tell himself that a wife 's obedience be one of those 
 right which he could not abandon without injury to his self - esteem . 
 he have think about the matter , slowly , as be his will not , and have 
 resolve that he would assert himself . he have assert himself , and 
 his wife tell he to his face that she would go away and leave he . 
 he could detain she legally , but he could not do even that without 
 the fact of such forcible detention be know to all the world . 
 how be he to answer she now at this moment , so that she might not 
 write to her father , and so that his self - assertion might still be 
 maintain ? 
 " Passion , Laura , can never be right . " 
 " would you have a woman submit to insult without passion ? I at any 
 rate be not such a woman . " then there be a pause for a moment . " if 
 you have nothing else to say to I , you have well leave I . I be far 
 from well , and my head be throb . " 
 he come up and take her hand , but she snatch it away from he . 
 " Laura , " he say , " do not let we quarrel . " 
 " I certainly shall quarrel if such insinuation be repeat . " 
 " I make no insinuation . " 
 " do not repeat they . that be all . " 
 he be cow and leave she , have first attempt to get out of the 
 difficulty of his position by make much of her alleged illness , and 
 by offer to send for Dr. Macnuthrie . she positively refuse to see 
 Dr. Macnuthrie , and at last succeed in induce he to quit the 
 room . 
 this have occur about the end of November , and on the 20th of 
 December Violet Effingham reach Loughlinter . life in Mr. Kennedy 's 
 house have go quietly during the intervene three week , but not 
 very pleasantly . the name of Phineas Finn have not be mention . 
 Lady Laura have triumph ; but she have no desire to acerbate her 
 husband by any unpalatable allusion to her victory . and he be quite 
 willing to let the subject die away , if only it would die . on some 
 other matter he continue to assert himself , take his wife to 
 church twice every Sunday , use long family prayer than she 
 approve , read an additional sermon himself every Sunday evening , 
 call upon she for weekly attention to elaborate household 
 account , ask for her personal assistance in much local visiting , 
 initiate she into his favourite method of family life in the 
 country , till sometimes she almost long to talk again about Phineas 
 Finn , so that there might be a rupture , and she might escape . but she 
 husband assert himself within bound , and she submit , long 
 for the coming of Violet Effingham . she could not write to her father 
 and beg to be take away , because her husband would read a sermon to 
 she on Sunday evening . 
 to Violet , very shortly after her arrival , she tell her whole story . 
 " this be terrible , " say Violet . " this make I feel that I never 
 will be marry . " 
 " and yet what can a woman become if she remain single ? the curse be 
 to be a woman at all . " 
 " I have always feel so proud of the privilege of my sex , " say 
 Violet . 
 " I never have find they , " say the other ; " never . I have try to 
 make the good of its weakness , and this be what I have come to ! I 
 suppose I ought to have love some man . " 
 " and do you never love any man ? " 
 " no ; - I think I never do , - not as people mean when they speak of 
 love . I have feel that I would consent to be cut in little piece for 
 my brother , - because of my regard for he . " 
 " ah , that be nothing . " 
 " and I have feel something of the same thing for another , - a longing 
 for his welfare , a delight to hear he praise , a charm in his 
 presence , - so strong a feeling for his interest , that be he to go 
 to wrack and ruin , I too , should , after a fashion , be wrack and 
 ruin . but it have not be love either . " 
 " do I know whom you mean ? may I name he ? it be Phineas Finn . " 
 " of course it be Phineas Finn . " 
 " do he ever ask you , - to love he ? " 
 " I fear he would do so , and therefore accept Mr. Kennedy 's offer 
 almost at the first word . " 
 " I do not quite understand your reasoning , Laura . " 
 " I understand it . I could have refuse he nothing in my power to 
 give he , but I do not wish to be his wife . " 
 " and he never ask you ? " 
 Lady Laura pause a moment , think what reply she should make ; - and 
 then she tell a fib . " no ; he never ask I . " but Violet do not 
 believe the fib . Violet be quite sure that Phineas have ask Lady 
 Laura Standish to be his wife . " as far as I can see , " say Violet , 
 " Madame Max Goesler be his present passion . " 
 " I do not believe it in the least , " say Lady Laura , fire up . 
 " it do not much matter , " say Violet . 
 " it would matter very much . you know , you , - you ; you know whom he 
 love . and I do believe that soon or later you will be his wife . " 
 " never . " 
 " yes , you will . have you not love he you would never have 
 condescend to accuse he about that woman . " 
 " I have not accuse he . why should he not marry Madame Max Goesler ? 
 it would be just the thing for he . she be very rich . " 
 " never . you will be his wife . " 
 " Laura , you be the most capricious of woman . you have two dear 
 friend , and you insist that I shall marry they both . which shall I 
 take first ? " 
 " Oswald will be here in a day or two , and you can take he if you 
 like it . no doubt he will ask you . but I do not think you will . " 
 " no ; I do not think I shall . I shall knock under to Mr. Mill , and 
 go in for woman 's right , and look forward to stand for some female 
 borough . Matrimony never seem to I to be very charming , and 
 upon my word it do not become more alluring by what I find at 
 Loughlinter . " 
 it be thus that Violet and Lady Laura discuss these matter 
 together , but Violet have never show to her friend the card in her 
 hand , as Lady Laura have show those which she hold . Lady Laura have 
 in fact tell almost everything that there be to tell , - have speak 
 either plainly with true word , or equally plainly with word that 
 be not true . Violet Effingham have almost come to love Phineas 
 Finn ; - but she never tell her friend that it be so . at one time 
 she have almost make up her mind to give herself and all her wealth 
 to this adventurer . he be a well man , she think , than Lord 
 Chiltern ; and she have come to persuade herself that it be almost 
 imperative on she to take the one or the other . though she could 
 talk about remain unmarried , she know that that be practically 
 impossible . all those around she , - those of the Baldock as well as 
 those of the Brentford faction , - would make such a life impossible 
 to she . besides , in such a case what could she do ? it be all very 
 well to talk of disregard the world and of set up a house for 
 herself ; - but she be quite aware that that project could not be use 
 far than for the purpose of scar her amiable aunt . and if not 
 that , - then could she content herself to look forward to a joint life 
 with Lady Baldock and Augusta Boreham ? she might , of course , oblige 
 her aunt by take Lord Fawn , or oblige her aunt equally by take 
 Mr. Appledom ; but she be strongly of opinion that either Lord 
 Chiltern or Phineas would be preferable to these . think over it 
 always she have come to feel that it must be either Lord Chiltern or 
 Phineas ; but she have never whisper her thought to man or woman . on 
 her journey to Loughlinter , where she then know that she be to meet 
 Lord Chiltern , she endeavour to persuade herself that it should be 
 Phineas . but Lady Laura have mar it all by that ill - tell fib . there 
 have be a moment before in which Violet have feel that Phineas have 
 sacrifice something of that truth of love for which she give he 
 credit to the glance of Madame Goesler 's eye ; but she have rebuke 
 herself for the idea , accuse herself not only of a little jealousy , 
 but of foolish vanity . be he , whom she have reject , not to speak to 
 another woman ? then come the blow from Lady Laura , and Violet know 
 that it be a blow . this gallant lover , this young Crichton , this 
 unassuming but ardent lover , have simply take up with she as soon as 
 he have fail with her friend . Lady Laura have be most enthusiastic 
 in her expression of friendship . such platonic regard might be all 
 very well . it be for Mr. Kennedy to look to that . but , for herself , 
 she feel that such expression be hardly compatible with her idea 
 of have her lover all to herself . and then she again remember 
 Madame Goesler 's bright blue eye . 
 Lord Chiltern come on Christmas eve , and be receive with open arm 
 by his sister , and with that painful , irritate affection which 
 such a girl as Violet can show to such a man as Lord Chiltern , when 
 she will not give he that other affection for which his heart be 
 pant . the two man be civil to each other , - but very cold . they 
 call each other Kennedy and Chiltern , but even that be not do 
 without an effort . on the Christmas morning Mr. Kennedy ask his 
 brother - in - law to go to church . " it be a kind of thing I never do , " 
 say Lord Chiltern . Mr. Kennedy give a little start , and look a 
 look of horror . Lady Laura show that she be unhappy . Violet 
 Effingham turn away her face , and smile . 
 as they walk across the park Violet take Lord Chiltern 's part . " he 
 only mean that he do not go to church on Christmas day . " 
 " I do not   know what he mean , " say Mr. Kennedy . 
 " we need not speak of it , " say Lady Laura . 
 " certainly not , " say Mr. Kennedy . 
 " I have be to church with he on Sundays myself , " say Violet , 
 perhaps not reflect that the practice of early year have little 
 to do with the young man 's life at present . 
 Christmas day and the next day pass without any sign from Lord 
 Chiltern , and on the day after that he be to go away . but he be not 
 to leave till one or two in the afternoon . not a word have be say 
 between the two woman , since he have be in the house , on the subject 
 of which both of they be think . very much have be say of 
 the expediency of his go to Saulsby , but on this matter he have 
 decline to make any promise . sit in Lady Laura 's room , in the 
 presence of both of they , he have refuse to do so . " I be bad to 
 drive , " he say , turn to Violet , " and you have well not try to 
 drive I . " 
 " why should not you be drive as well as another ? " she answer , 
 laugh . 
 CHAPTER LII 
 the First Blow 
 Lord Chiltern , though he have pass two entire day in the house with 
 Violet without renew his suit , have come to Loughlinter for the 
 express purpose of do so , and have his plan perfectly fix in his 
 own mind . after breakfast on that last morning he be up - stair with 
 his sister in her own room , and immediately make his request to she . 
 " Laura , " he say , " go down like a good girl , and make Violet come up 
 here . " she stand a moment look at he and smile . " and , mind , " he 
 continue , " you be not to come back yourself . I must have Violet 
 alone . " 
 " but suppose Violet will not come ? young lady do not generally wait 
 upon young man on such occasion . " 
 " no ; - but I rank she so high among young woman , that I think she will 
 have common sense enough to teach she that , after what have pass 
 between we , I have a right to ask for an interview , and that it may 
 be more conveniently have here than in the wilderness of the house 
 below . " 
 whatever may have be the argument use by her friend , Violet do 
 come . she reach the door all alone , and open it bravely . she have 
 promise herself , as she come along the passage , that she would not 
 pause with her hand on the lock for a moment . she have first go to 
 her own room , and as she leave it she have look into the glass with 
 a hurried glance , and have then rest for a moment , - think that 
 something should be do , that her hair might be smooth , or a 
 ribbon set straight , or the chain arrange under her brooch . a girl 
 would wish to look well before her lover , even when she mean to 
 refuse he . but her pause be but for an instant , and then she go 
 on , have touch nothing . she shake her head and press her hand 
 together , and go on quick and open the door , - almost with a 
 little start . " Violet , this be very good of you , " say Lord Chiltern , 
 stand with his back to the fire , and not move from the spot . 
 " Laura have tell I that you think I would do as much as this for 
 you , and therefore I have do it . " 
 " thank , dearest . it be the old story , Violet , and I be so bad at 
 word ! " 
 " I must have be bad at word too , as I have not be able to make 
 you understand . " 
 " I think I have understand . you be always clear - speak , and I , 
 though I can not talk , be not muddle - pated . I have understand . but 
 while you be single there must be yet hope ; - unless , indeed , you 
 will tell I that you have already give yourself to another man . " 
 " I have not do that . " 
 " then how can I not hope ? Violet , I would if I could tell you all my 
 feeling plainly . once , twice , thrice , I have say to myself that I 
 would think of you no more . I have try to persuade myself that I be 
 well single than married . " 
 " but I be not the only woman . " 
 " to I you be , - absolutely , as though there be none other on the 
 face of God 's earth . I live much alone ; but you be always with I . 
 should you marry any other man , it will be the same with I still . if 
 you refuse I now I shall go away , - and live wildly . " 
 " Oswald , what do you mean ? " 
 " I mean that I will go to some distant part of the world , where I 
 may be kill or live a life of adventure . but I shall do so simply 
 in despair . it will not be that I do not know how much well and 
 great should be the life at home of a man in my position . " 
 " then do not talk of go . " 
 " I can not stay . you will acknowledge , Violet , that I have never lie 
 to you . I be think of you day and night . the more indifferent you 
 show yourself to I , the more I love you . violet , try to love I . " he 
 come up to she , and take she by both her hand , and tear be in his 
 eye . " say you will try to love I . " 
 " it be not that , " say Violet , look away , but still leave she 
 hand with he . 
 " it be not what , dear ? " 
 " what you call , - try . " 
 " it be that you do not wish to try ? " 
 " Oswald , you be so violent , so headstrong . I be afraid of you , - as 
 be everybody . why have you not write to your father , as we have 
 ask you ? " 
 " I will write to he instantly , now , before I leave the room , and 
 you shall dictate the letter to he . by heaven , you shall ! " he have 
 drop her hand when she call he violent ; but now he take they 
 again , and still she permit it . " I have postpone it only till I 
 have speak to you once again . " 
 " no , Lord Chiltern , I will not dictate to you . " 
 " but will you love I ? " she pause and look down , have even now 
 not withdraw her hand from he . but I do not think he know how much 
 he have gain . " you use to love I , - a little , " he say . 
 " indeed , - indeed , I do . " 
 " and now ? be it all change now ? " 
 " no , " she say , retreat from he . 
 " how be it , then ? Violet , speak to I honestly . will you be my wife ? " 
 she do not answer he , and he stand for a moment look at she . 
 then he rush at she , and , seize she in his arm , kiss she all 
 over , - her forehead , her lip , her cheek , then both her hand , and 
 then her lip again . " by G - - , she be my own ! " he say . then he go 
 back to the rug before the fire , and stand there with his back turn 
 to she . Violet , when she find herself thus desert , retreat to 
 a sofa , and sit herself down . she have no negative to produce now in 
 answer to the violent assertion which he have pronounce as to his 
 own success . it be true . she have doubt , and doubt , - and still 
 doubt . but now she must doubt no long . of one thing she be quite 
 sure . she could love he . as thing have now go , she would make 
 he quite happy with assurance on that subject . as to that other 
 question , - that fearful question , whether or not she could trust 
 he , - on that matter she have well at present say nothing , and 
 think as little , perhaps , as might be . she have take the jump , and 
 therefore why should she not be gracious to he ? but how be she to 
 be gracious to a lover who stand there with his back turn to she ? 
 after the interval of a minute or two he remember himself , and 
 turn round . see she seat , he approach she , and go down on 
 both knee close at her foot . then he take her hand again , for the 
 third time , and look up into her eye . 
 " Oswald , you on your knee ! " she say . 
 " I would not bend to a princess , " he say , " to ask for half her 
 throne ; but I will kneel here all day , if you will let I , in thank 
 for the gift of your love . I never kneel to beg for it . " 
 " this be the man who can not make speech . " 
 " I think I could talk now by the hour , with you for a listener . " 
 " oh , but I must talk too . " 
 " what will you say to I ? " 
 " nothing while you be kneel . it be not natural that you should 
 kneel . you be like Samson with his lock shorn , or Hercules with a 
 distaff . " 
 " be that well ? " he say , as he get up and put his arm round her 
 waist . 
 " you be in earnest ? " she ask . 
 " in earnest . I hardly think that that would be doubt . do you not 
 believe I ? " 
 " I do believe you . and you will be good ? " 
 " ah , - I do not know that . " 
 " try , and I will love you so dearly . Nay , I do love you dearly . I do . 
 I do . " 
 " say it again . " 
 " I will say it fifty time , - till your ear be weary with it " ; - and 
 she do say it to he , after her own fashion , fifty time . 
 " this be a great change , " he say , get up after a while and 
 walk about the room . 
 " but a change for the well ; - be it not , Oswald ? " 
 " so much for the well that I hardly know myself in my new joy . but , 
 Violet , we will have no delay , - will we ? no shilly - shallying . what be 
 the use of wait now that it be settle ? " 
 " none in the least , Lord Chiltern . let we say , - this day 
 twelvemonth . " 
 " you be laugh at I , Violet . " 
 " remember , sir , that the first thing you have to do be to write to 
 your father . " 
 he instantly go to the writing - table and take up paper and pen . 
 " come along , " he say . " you be to dictate it . " but this she refuse 
 to do , tell he that he must write his letter to his father out of 
 his own head , and out of his own heart . " I can not write it , " he say , 
 throw down the pen . " my blood be in such a tumult that I can not 
 steady my hand . " 
 " you must not be so tumultuous , Oswald , or I shall have to live in a 
 whirlwind . " 
 " oh , I shall shake down . I shall become as steady as an old stager . 
 I will go as quiet in harness by - and - by as though I have be break 
 to it a four - year - old . I wonder whether Laura could not write this 
 letter . " 
 " I think you should write it yourself , Oswald . " 
 " if you bid I I will . " 
 " bid you indeed ! as if it be for I to bid you . do you not know that 
 in these new trouble you be undertake you will have to bid I in 
 everything , and that I shall be bind to do your bidding ? do it not 
 seem to be dreadful ? my wonder be that any girl can ever accept any 
 man . " 
 " but you have accept I now . " 
 " yes , indeed . " 
 " and you repent ? " 
 " no , indeed , and I will try to do your bidding ; - but you must not be 
 rough to I , and outrageous , and fierce , - will you , Oswald ? " 
 " I will not at any rate be like Kennedy be with poor Laura . " 
 " no ; - that be not your nature . " 
 " I will do my good , dear . and you may at any rate be sure of this , 
 that I will love you always . so much good of myself , if it be good , I 
 can say . " 
 " it be very good , " she answer ; " the good of all good word . and now 
 I must go . and as you be leave Loughlinter I will say good - bye . 
 when be I to have the honour and felicity of behold your lordship 
 again ? " 
 " say a nice word to I before I be off , Violet . " 
 " I , - love , - you , - well , - than all the world beside ; and I mean , - to 
 be your wife , - some day . be not those twenty nice word ? " 
 he would not prolong his stay at Loughlinter , though he be ask 
 to do so both by Violet and his sister , and though , as he confess 
 himself , he have no special business elsewhere . " it be no use mince 
 the matter . I do not   like Kennedy , and I do not   like be in his 
 house , " he say to Violet . and then he promise that there should be 
 a party get up at Saulsby before the winter be over . his plan be 
 to stop that night at Carlisle , and write to his father from thence . 
 " your blood , perhaps , will not   be so tumultuous at Carlisle , " say 
 Violet . he shake his head and go on with his plan . he would then 
 go on to London and down to Willingford , and there wait for his 
 father 's answer . " there be no reason why I should lose more of 
 the hunting than necessary . " " pray do not   lose a day for I , " say 
 Violet . as soon as he hear from his father , he would do his father 's 
 bidding . " you will go to Saulsby , " say Violet ; " you can hunt at 
 Saulsby , you know . " 
 " I will go to Jericho if he ask I , only you will have to go with 
 I . " " I think we be to go to , - Belgium , " say Violet . 
 " and so that be settle at last , " say Violet to Laura that night . 
 " I hope you do not regret it . " 
 " on the contrary , I be as happy as the moment be long . " 
 " my fine girl ! " 
 " I be happy because I love he . I have always love he . you have 
 know that . " 
 " indeed , no . " 
 " but I have , after my fashion . I be not tumultuous , as he call 
 himself . since he begin to make eye at I when he be nineteen - " 
 " Fancy Oswald make eye ! " 
 " oh , he do , and mouth too . but from the beginning , when I be a 
 child , I have know that he be dangerous , and I have think that 
 he would pass on and forget I after a while . and I could have live 
 without he . Nay , there have be moment when I think I could 
 learn to love some one else . " 
 " Poor Phineas , for instance . " 
 " we will mention no name . Mr. Appledom , perhaps , more likely . he 
 have be my most constant lover , and then he would be so safe ! your 
 brother , Laura , be dangerous . he be like the bad ice in the park 
 where they stick up the pole . he have have a pole stick upon he ever 
 since he be a boy . " 
 " yes ; - give a dog a bad name and hang he . " 
 " remember that I do not love he a bit the less on that 
 account ; - perhaps the well . a sense of danger do not make I 
 unhappy , though the threaten evil may be fatal . I have enter 
 myself for my forlorn hope , and I mean to stick to it . now I must go 
 and write to his worship . only think , - I never write a love - letter 
 yet ! " 
 nothing more shall be say about Miss Effingham 's first love - letter , 
 which be , no doubt , creditable to her head and heart ; but there be 
 two other letter send by the same post from Loughlinter which shall 
 be submit to the reader , as they will assist the telling of the 
 story . one be from Lady Laura Kennedy to her friend Phineas Finn , 
 and the other from Violet to her aunt , Lady Baldock . no letter be 
 write to Lord Brentford , as it be think desirable that he should 
 receive the first intimation of what have be do from his son . 
 respect the letter to Phineas , which shall be first give , Lady 
 Laura think it right to say a word to her husband . he have be of 
 course tell of the engagement , and have reply that he could have 
 wish that the arrangement could have be make elsewhere than at 
 his house , know as he do that Lady Baldock would not approve 
 of it . to this Lady Laura have make no reply , and Mr. Kennedy have 
 condescend to congratulate the bride - elect . when Lady Laura 's 
 letter to Phineas be complete she take care to put it into the 
 letter - box in the presence of her husband . " I have write to Mr. 
 Finn , " she say , " to tell he of this marriage . " 
 " why be it necessary that he should be tell ? " 
 " I think it be due to he , - from certain circumstance . " 
 " I wonder whether there be any truth in what everybody be say 
 about their fight a duel ? " ask Mr. Kennedy . his wife make no 
 answer , and then he continue - " you tell I of your own knowledge 
 that it be untrue . " 
 " not of my own knowledge , Robert . " 
 " yes ; - of your own knowledge . " then Mr. Kennedy walk away , and be 
 certain that his wife have deceive he about the duel . there have 
 be a duel , and she have know it ; and yet she have tell he that the 
 report be a ridiculous fabrication . he never forget anything . he 
 remember at this moment the word of the falsehood , and the look 
 of her face as she tell it . he have believe she implicitly , but he 
 would never believe she again . he be one of those man who , in spite 
 of their experience of the world , of their experience of their own 
 life , imagine that lip that have once lie can never tell the 
 truth . 
 Lady Laura 's letter to Phineas be as follow : 
 Loughlinter , December 28th , 186 - . 
 MY DEAR FRIEND , 
 Violet Effingham be here , and Oswald have just leave we . 
 it be possible that you may see he as he pass through 
 London . but , at any rate , I think it well to let you know 
 immediately that she have accept he , - at last . if there 
 be any pang in this to you , be sure that I will grieve 
 for you . you will not wish I to say that I regret that 
 which be the dear wish of my heart before I know you . 
 lately , indeed , I have be tear in two way . you will 
 understand what I mean , and I believe I need say nothing 
 more ; - except this , that it shall be among my prayer that 
 you may obtain all thing that may tend to make you happy , 
 honourable , and of high esteem . 
 your most sincere friend 
 LAURA kennedy . 
 even though her husband should read the letter , there be nothing in 
 that of which she need be ashamed . but he do not read the letter . 
 he simply speculate as to its content , and inquire within himself 
 whether it would not be for the welfare of the world in general , and 
 for the welfare of himself in particular , that husband should demand 
 to read their wife ' letter . 
 and this be Violet 's letter to her aunt : - 
 MY dear aunt , 
 the thing have come at last , and all your trouble will be 
 soon over ; - for I do believe that all your trouble have 
 come from your unfortunate niece . at last I be go to 
 be marry , and thus take myself off your hand . Lord 
 Chiltern have just be here , and I have accept he . I be 
 afraid you hardly think so well of Lord Chiltern as I do ; 
 but then , perhaps , you have not know he so long . you do 
 know , however , that there have be some difference between 
 he and his father . I think I may take upon myself to say 
 that now , upon his engagement , this will be settle . I 
 have the inexpressible pleasure of feel sure that Lord 
 Brentford will welcome I as his daughter - in - law . tell the 
 news to Augusta with my good love . I will write to she in 
 a day or two . I hope my cousin Gustavus will condescend 
 to give I away . of course there be nothing fix about 
 time ; - but I should say , perhaps , in nine year . 
 your affectionate niece , 
 violet effingham . 
 Loughlinter , Friday . 
 " what do she mean about nine year ? " say Lady Baldock in her 
 wrath . 
 " she be joke , " say the mild Augusta . 
 " I believe she would - joke , if I be go to be bury , " say Lady 
 Baldock . 
 CHAPTER LIII 
 show how Phineas Bore the blow 
 when Phineas receive Lady Laura Kennedy 's letter , he be sit in 
 his gorgeous apartment in the Colonial Office . it be gorgeous in 
 comparison with the very dingy room at Mr. Low 's to which he have be 
 accustomed in his early day , - and somewhat gorgeous also as compare 
 with the lodging he have so long inhabit in Mr. Bunce 's house . the 
 room be large and square , and look out from three window on to 
 St. James 's Park . there be in it two very comfortable arm - chair 
 and a comfortable sofa . and the office table at which he sit be of 
 old mahogany , shin brightly , and seem to be fit up with every 
 possible appliance for official comfort . this stand near one of the 
 window , so that he could sit and look down upon the park . and there 
 be a large round table cover with book and newspaper . and the 
 wall of the room be bright with map of all the colony . and 
 there be one very interesting map , - but not very bright , - show 
 the american colony , as they use to be . and there be a little 
 inner closet in which he could brush his hair and wash his hand ; and 
 in the room adjoining there sit , - or ought to have sit , for he be 
 often absent , vex the mind of Phineas , - the Earl 's nephew , his 
 private secretary . and it be all very gorgeous . often as he look 
 round upon it , think of his old bedroom at Killaloe , of his little 
 garret at Trinity , of the dingy chamber in Lincoln 's Inn , he would 
 tell himself that it be very gorgeous . he would wonder that anything 
 so grand have fall to his lot . 
 the letter from Scotland be bring to he in the afternoon , have 
 reach London by some day - mail from Glasgow . he be sit at his 
 desk with a heap of paper before he refer to a contemplated 
 railway from Halifax , in Nova Scotia , to the foot of the Rocky 
 Mountains . it have become his business to get up the subject , and then 
 discuss with his principal , Lord Cantrip , the expediency of advise 
 the Government to lend a company five million of money , in order 
 that this railway might be make . it be a big subject , and the 
 contemplation of it gratify he . it require that he should look 
 forward to great event , and exercise the wisdom of a statesman . what 
 be the chance of these colony be swallow up by those other 
 region , - once colony , - of which the map that hang in the corner 
 tell so eloquent a tale ? and if so , would the five million ever be 
 repay ? and if not swallow up , be the colony worth so great an 
 adventure of national money ? could they repay it ? would they do so ? 
 should they be make to do so ? Mr. Low , who be now a Q.C. and in 
 Parliament , would not have great subject than this before he , 
 even if he should come to be Solicitor General . Lord Cantrip have 
 specially ask he to get up this matter , - and he be get it up 
 sedulously . once in nine year the harbour of Halifax be block up 
 by ice . he have just jot down the fact , which be material , when 
 Lady Laura 's letter be bring to he . he read it , and put 
 it down by his side very gently , go back to his map as though 
 the thing would not so trouble his mind as to disturb his work . he 
 absolutely write , automatically , certain word of a note about the 
 harbour , after he have receive the information . a horse will gallop 
 for some score of yard , after his back have be break , before 
 he know of his great ruin ; - and so it be with Phineas Finn . his 
 back be break , but , nevertheless , he gallop , for a yard or two . 
 " close in 1860 - 61 for thirteen day . " then he begin to be aware that 
 his back be break , and that the writing of any more note about the 
 ice in Halifax harbour be for the present out of the question . " I 
 think it well to let you know immediately that she have accept he . " 
 these be the word which he read the oftenest . then it be all 
 over ! the game be play out , and all his victory be as nothing 
 to he . he sit for an hour in his gorgeous room thinking of it , and 
 various be the answer which he give during the time to various 
 message ; - but he would see nobody . as for the colony , he do not 
 care if they revolt to - morrow . he would have part with every 
 colony belong to Great Britain to have get the hand of Violet 
 Effingham for himself . now , - now at this moment , he tell himself with 
 oath that he have never love any one but Violet Effingham . 
 there have be so much to make such a marriage desirable ! I should 
 wrong my hero deeply be I to say that the weight of his sorrow be 
 occasion by the fact that he have lose an heiress . he would never 
 have think of look for Violet Effingham have he not first learn 
 to love she . but as the idea open itself out to he , everything 
 have seem to be so suitable . have Miss Effingham become his wife , 
 the mouth of the Lows and of the Bunces would have be stop 
 altogether . Mr. Monk would have come to his house as his familiar 
 guest , and he would have be connect with half a score of peer . 
 a seat in Parliament would be simply his proper place , and even 
 under - Secretaryships of State might soon come to be below he . he 
 be play a great game , but hitherto he have play it with so much 
 success , - with such wonderful luck ! that it have seem to he that 
 all thing be within his reach . nothing more have be want to 
 he than Violet 's hand for his own comfort , and Violet 's fortune to 
 support his position ; and these , too , have almost seem to be within 
 his grasp . his goddess have indeed refuse he , - but not with disdain . 
 even Lady Laura have talk of his marriage as not improbable . all the 
 world , almost , have hear of the duel ; and all the world have smile , 
 and seem to think that in the real fight Phineas Finn would be 
 the victor , - that the lucky pistol be in his hand . it have never 
 occur to any one to suppose , - as far as he could see , - that he be 
 presume at all , or push himself out of his own sphere , in ask 
 Violet Effingham to be his wife . no ; - he would trust his luck , would 
 persevere , and would succeed . such have be his resolution on that 
 very morning , - and now there have come this letter to dash he to the 
 ground . 
 there be moment in which he declare to himself that he would not 
 believe the letter , - not that there be any moment in which there 
 be in his mind the slight spark of real hope . but he would tell 
 himself that he would still persevere . Violet might have be drive 
 to accept that violent man by violent influence , - or it might be 
 that she have not in truth accept he , that Chiltern have simply so 
 assert . or , even if it be so , do woman never change their mind ? 
 the manly thing would be to persevere to the end . have he not before 
 be successful , when success seem to be as far from he ? but he 
 could buoy himself up with no real hope . even when these idea be 
 present to his mind , he know , - he know well , - at those very moment , 
 that his back be break . 
 some one have come in and light the candle and draw down the 
 blind while he be sit there , and now , as he look at his 
 watch , he find that it be past five o'clock . he be engage to dine 
 with Madame Max Goesler at eight , and in his agony he half - resolve 
 that he would send an excuse . Madame Max would be full of wrath , as 
 she be very particular about her little dinner - party ; - but , what 
 do he care now about the wrath of Madame Max Goesler ? and yet only 
 this morning he have be congratulate himself , among his other 
 success , upon her favour , and have laugh inwardly at his own 
 falseness , - his falseness to Violet Effingham , - as he do so . he 
 have say something to himself jocosely about lover ' perjury , the 
 remembrance of which be now very bitter to he . he take up a sheet 
 of note - paper and scrawl an excuse to Madame Goesler . news from the 
 country , he say , make it impossible that he should go out to - night . 
 but he do not send the note . at about half - past five he open the 
 door of his private secretary 's room and find the young man fast 
 asleep , with a cigar in his mouth . " Halloa , Charles , " he say . 
 " all right ! " Charles Standish be a first cousin of Lady Laura 's , 
 and , have be in the office before Phineas have join it , and 
 be a great favourite with his cousin , have of course become the 
 Under - Secretary 's private secretary . " I be all here , " say Charles 
 Standish , get up and shake himself . 
 " I be go . just tie up those paper , - exactly as they be . I shall 
 be here early to - morrow , but I shall not   want you before twelve . good 
 night , Charles . " 
 " Ta , ta , " say his private secretary , who be very fond of his 
 master , but not very respectful , - unless upon express occasion . 
 then Phineas go out and walk across the park ; but as he go he 
 become quite aware that his back be break . it be not the less 
 break because he sing to himself little song to prove to himself 
 that it be whole and sound . it be break , and it seem to he now 
 that he never could become an Atlas again , to bear the weight of the 
 world upon his shoulder . what do anything signify ? all that he have 
 do have be part of a game which he have be play throughout , 
 and now he have be beat in his game . he absolutely ignore his 
 old passion for Lady Laura as though it have never be , and regard 
 himself as a model of constancy , - as a man who have love , not wisely 
 perhaps , but much too well , - and who must now therefore suffer a 
 living death . he hat Parliament . he hat the Colonial Office . 
 he hat his friend Mr. Monk ; and he especially hat Madame Max 
 Goesler . as to Lord Chiltern , - he believe that Lord Chiltern have 
 obtain his object by violence . he would see to that ! yes ; - let the 
 consequence be what they might , he would see to that ! 
 he go up by the Duke of York 's column , and as he pass the 
 Athenaeum he see his chief , Lord Cantrip , stand under the portico 
 talk to a bishop . he would have go on unnoticed , have it be 
 possible ; but Lord Cantrip come down to he at once . " I have put your 
 name down here , " say his lordship . 
 " what be the use ? " say Phineas , who be profoundly indifferent at 
 this moment to all the club in London . 
 " it can not   do any harm , you know . you will come up in time . and if you 
 should get into the ministry , they will let you in at once . " 
 " Ministry ! " ejaculate Phineas . but Lord Cantrip take the tone of 
 voice as simply suggestive of humility , and suspect nothing of that 
 profound indifference to all minister and ministerial honour which 
 Phineas have intend to express . " by - the - bye , " say Lord Cantrip , 
 put his arm through that of the Under - Secretary , " I want to 
 speak to you about the guarantee . we shall be in the devil 's own 
 mess , you know - " and so the Secretary of State go on about the 
 Rocky Mountain Railroad , and Phineas strove hard to bear his burden 
 with his broken back . he be oblige to say something about the 
 guarantee , and the railway , and the frozen harbour , - and something 
 especially about the difficulty which would be find , not in the 
 measure themselves , but in the natural pugnacity of the Opposition . 
 in the fabrication of garment for the national wear , the great 
 thing be to produce garment that shall , as far as possible , defy 
 hole - picking . it may be , and sometimes be , the case , that garment 
 so fabricated will be good also for wear . Lord Cantrip , at the 
 present moment , be very anxious and very ingenious in the stopping 
 of hole ; and he think that perhaps his Under - Secretary be too 
 much prone to the indulgence of large philanthropical view without 
 sufficient thought of the hole - picker . but on this occasion , by 
 the time that he reach Brooks 's , he have be enable to convince 
 his Under - Secretary , and though he have always think well of his 
 Under - Secretary , he think well of he now than ever he have do . 
 Phineas during the whole time have be meditate what he could do 
 to Lord Chiltern when they two should meet . could he take he by the 
 throat and smite he ? " I happen to know that Broderick be work as 
 hard at the matter as we be , " say Lord Cantrip , stop opposite 
 to the club . " he move for paper , you know , at the end of last 
 session . " now Mr. Broderick be a gentleman in the House look for 
 promotion in a Conservative Government , and of course would oppose 
 any measure that could be bring forward by the Cantrip - Finn 
 Colonial Administration . then Lord Cantrip slip into the club , and 
 Phineas go on alone . 
 a spark of his old ambition with reference to Brooks 's be the first 
 thing to make he forget his misery for a moment . he have ask Lord 
 Brentford to put his name down , and be not sure whether it have be 
 do . the threat of Mr. Broderick 's opposition have be of no use 
 towards the strengthening of his broken back , but the sight of Lord 
 Cantrip hurrying in at the coveted door do do something . " a man 
 can not   cut his throat or blow his brain out , " he say to himself ; 
 " after all , he must go on and do his work . for heart will break , yet 
 brokenly live on . " thereupon he go home , and after sit for an 
 hour over his own fire , and look wistfully at a little treasure 
 which he have , - a treasure obtain by some slight fraud at Saulsby , 
 and which he now chuck into the fire , and then instantly again 
 pull out of it , soil but unscorched , - he dress himself for 
 dinner , and go out to Madame Max Goesler 's . upon the whole , he be 
 glad that he have not send the note of excuse . a man must live , even 
 though his heart be break , and live he must dine . 
 Madame Max Goesler be fond of give little dinner at this period 
 of the year , before London be crowd , and when her guest might 
 probably not be call away by subsequent social arrangement . her 
 number seldom exceed six or eight , and she always speak of these 
 entertainment as be of the humble kind . she send out no big 
 card . she prefer to catch her people as though by chance , when 
 that be possible . " dear Mr. Jones . Mr. Smith be come to tell 
 I about some sherry on Tuesday . will you come and tell I too ? I 
 daresay you know as much about it . " and then there be a studious 
 absence of parade . the dish be not very numerous . the bill of 
 fare be simply write out once , for the mistress , and so circulate 
 round the table . not a word about the thing to be eat or the 
 thing to be drunk be ever speak at the table , - or at least no such 
 word be ever speak by Madame Goesler . but , nevertheless , they who 
 know anything about dinner be aware that Madame Goesler give very 
 good dinner indeed . Phineas Finn be begin to flatter himself 
 that he know something about dinner , and have be hear to assert 
 that the soup at the cottage in Park Lane be not to be beat in 
 London . but he care for no soup to - day , as he slowly make his way up 
 Madame Goesler 's staircase . 
 there have be one difficulty in the way of Madame Goesler 's 
 dinner - party which have require some patience and great ingenuity 
 in its management . she must either have lady , or she must not have 
 they . there be a great allurement in the latter alternative ; but she 
 know well that if she give way to it , all prospect of general society 
 would for she be closed , - and for ever . this have be in the early 
 day of her widowhood in Park Lane . she care but little for woman 's 
 society ; but she know well that the society of gentleman without 
 woman would not be that which she desire . she know also that she 
 might as effectually crush herself and all her aspiration by 
 bring to her house indifferent woman , - woman lack something 
 either in character , or in position , or in talent , - as by have none 
 at all . thus there have be a great difficulty , and sometimes she have 
 think that the thing could not be do at all . " these English be 
 so stiff , so hard , so heavy ! " and yet she would not have care to 
 succeed elsewhere than among the English . by degree , however , the 
 thing be do . her prudence equal her wit , and even suspicious 
 people have come to acknowledge that they could not put their finger 
 on anything wrong . when Lady Glencora Palliser have once din at 
 the cottage in Park Lane , Madame Max Goesler have tell herself that 
 henceforth she do not care what the suspicious people say . since 
 that the Duke of Omnium have almost promise that he would come . if 
 she could only entertain the Duke of Omnium she would have do 
 everything . 
 but there be no Duke of Omnium there to - night . at this time the Duke 
 of Omnium be , of course , not in London . but Lord Fawn be there ; and 
 our old friend Laurence Fitzgibbon , who have - resign his place at 
 the Colonial Office ; and there be Mr. and Mrs. Bonteen . they , with 
 our hero , make up the party . no one doubt for a moment to what 
 source Mr. Bonteen owe his dinner . Mrs. Bonteen be good - look , 
 could talk , be sufficiently proper , and all that kind of thing , - and 
 do as well as any other woman at this time of year to keep Madame 
 Max Goesler in countenance . there be never any sitting after dinner 
 at the cottage ; or , I should rather say , there be never any sitting 
 after Madame Goesler go ; so that the two lady could not weary 
 each other by be alone together . Mrs. Bonteen understand quite 
 well that she be not require there to talk to her hostess , and be 
 as willing as any woman to make herself agreeable to the gentleman 
 she might meet at Madame Goesler 's table . and thus Mr. and Mrs. 
 Bonteen not unfrequently din in Park Lane . 
 " now we have only to wait for that horrible man , Mr. Fitzgibbon , " 
 say Madame Max Goesler , as she welcome Phineas . " he be always 
 late . " 
 " what a blow for I ! " say Phineas . 
 " no , - you be always in good time . but there be a limit beyond which 
 good time end , and be shamefully late at once begin . but here he 
 be . " and then , as Laurence Fitzgibbon enter the room , Madame 
 Goesler ring the bell for dinner . 
 Phineas find himself place between his hostess and Mr. Bonteen , and 
 Lord Fawn be on the other side of Madame Goesler . they be hardly 
 seat at the table before some one state it as a fact that Lord 
 Brentford and his son be reconcile . now Phineas know , or think 
 that he know , that this could not as yet be the case ; and indeed such 
 be not the case , though the father have already receive the son 's 
 letter . but Phineas do not choose to say anything at present about 
 Lord Chiltern . 
 " how odd it be , " say Madame Goesler ; " how often you english father 
 quarrel with your son ! " 
 " how often we english son quarrel with our father rather , " say 
 Lord Fawn , who be know for the respect he have always pay to the 
 fifth commandment . 
 " it all come from entail and primogeniture , and old - fashion 
 english prejudice of that kind , " say Madame Goesler . " Lord Chiltern 
 be a friend of your , Mr. Finn , I think . " 
 " they be both friend of mine , " say Phineas . 
 " ah , yes ; but you , - you , - you and Lord Chiltern once do something 
 odd together . there be a little mystery , be there not ? " 
 " it be very little of a mystery now , " say Fitzgibbon . 
 " it be about a lady ; - be it not ? " say Mrs. Bonteen , affect to 
 whisper to her neighbour . 
 " I be not at liberty to say anything on the subject , " say 
 Fitzgibbon ; " but I have no doubt Phineas will tell you . " 
 " I do not   believe this about Lord Brentford , " say Mr. Bonteen . " I 
 happen to know that Chiltern be down at Loughlinter three day ago , 
 and that he pass through London yesterday on his way to the place 
 where he hunt . the Earl be at Saulsby . he would have go to Saulsby 
 if it be true . " 
 " it all depend upon whether Miss Effingham will accept he , " say 
 Mrs. Bonteen , look over at Phineas as she speak . 
 as there be two of Violet Effingham 's suitor at table , the subject 
 be become disagreeably personal ; and the more so , as every one of 
 the party know or surmise something of the fact of the case . the 
 cause of the duel at Blankenberg have become almost as public as the 
 duel , and Lord Fawn 's courtship have not be altogether hide from 
 the public eye . he on the present occasion might probably be able to 
 carry himself well than Phineas , even presume he to be equally 
 eager in his love , - for he know nothing of the fatal truth . but he 
 be unable to hear Mrs. Bonteen 's statement with indifference , and 
 show his concern in the matter by his reply . " any lady will be much 
 to be pity , " he say , " who do that . Chiltern be the last man in 
 the world to whom I would wish to trust the happiness of a woman for 
 whom I care . " 
 " Chiltern be a very good fellow , " say Laurence Fitzgibbon . 
 " just a little wild , " say Mrs. Bonteen . 
 " and never have a shilling in his pocket in his life , " say she 
 husband . 
 " I regard he as simply a madman , " say Lord Fawn . 
 " I do so wish I know he , " say Madame Max Goesler . " I be fond of 
 madman , and man who have not   shilling , and who be a little wild , 
 could you not bring he here , Mr. Finn ? " 
 Phineas do not know what to say , or how to open his mouth without 
 show his deep concern . " I shall be happy to ask he if you wish 
 it , " he reply , as though the question have be put to he in 
 earnest ; " but I do not see so much of Lord Chiltern as I use to do . " 
 " you do not believe that Violet Effingham will accept he ? " ask 
 Mrs. Bonteen . 
 he pause a moment before he speak , and then make his answer in a 
 deep solemn voice , - with a seriousness which he be unable to 
 repress . " she have accept he , " he say . 
 " do you mean that you know it ? " say Madame Goesler . 
 " yes ; - I mean that I know it . " 
 have anybody tell he beforehand that he would openly make this 
 declaration at Madame Goesler 's table , he would have say that of 
 all thing it be the most impossible . he would have declare that 
 nothing would have induce he to speak of Violet Effingham in his 
 exist frame of mind , and that he would have have his tongue cut 
 out before he speak of she as the promise bride of his rival . and 
 now he have declare the whole truth of his own wretchedness and 
 discomfiture . he be well aware that all of they there know why he 
 have fight the duel at Blankenberg ; - all , that is , except perhaps 
 Lord Fawn . and he feel as he make the statement as to Lord Chiltern 
 that he blush up to his forehead , and that his voice be strange , 
 and that he be tell the tale of his own disgrace . but when the 
 direct question have be ask he he have be unable to refrain from 
 answer it directly . he have think of turn it off with some 
 jest or affectation of drollery , but have fail . at the moment he have 
 be unable not to speak the truth . 
 " I do not   believe a word of it , " say Lord Fawn , - who also forget 
 himself . 
 " I do believe it , if Mr. Finn say so , " say Mrs. Bonteen , who rather 
 like the confusion she have cause . 
 " but who could have tell you , Finn ? " ask Mr. Bonteen . 
 " his sister , Lady Laura , tell I so , " say Phineas . 
 " then it must be true , " say Madame Goesler . 
 " it be quite impossible , " say Lord Fawn . " I think I may say that 
 I know that it be impossible . if it be so , it would be a most 
 shameful arrangement . every shilling she have in the world would 
 be swallow up . " now , Lord Fawn in make his proposal have be 
 magnanimous in his offer as to settlement and pecuniary provision 
 generally . 
 for some minute after that Phineas do not speak another word , and 
 the conversation generally be not so brisk and bright as it be 
 expect to be at Madame Goesler 's . Madame Max Goesler herself 
 thoroughly understand our hero 's position , and feel for he . she 
 would have encourage no questioning about Violet Effingham have 
 she think that they would have lead to such a result , and now she 
 exert herself to turn the mind of her guest to other subject . 
 at last she succeed ; and after a while , too , Phineas himself be 
 able to talk . he drink two or three glass of wine , and dash 
 away into politic , take the early opportunity in his power of 
 contradict Lord Fawn very plainly on one or two matter . Laurence 
 Fitzgibbon be of course of opinion that the ministry could not stay 
 in long . since he have leave the Government the minister have make 
 wonderful mistake , and he speak of they quite as an enemy might 
 speak . " and yet , Fitz , " say Mr. Bonteen , " you use to be so staunch 
 a supporter . " 
 " I have see the error of my way , I can assure you , " say Laurence . 
 " I always observe , " say Madame Max Goesler , " that when any of 
 you gentleman resign , - which you usually do on some very trivial 
 matter , - the resign gentleman become of all foe the bitter . 
 somebody go on very well with his friend , agree most cordially 
 about everything , till he find that his public virtue can not swallow 
 some little detail , and then he resign . or some one , perhaps , on the 
 other side have attack he , and in the melee he be hurt , and so he 
 resign . but when he have resign , and make his parting speech full 
 of love and gratitude , I know well after that where to look for the 
 bitter hostility to his late friend . yes , I be begin to 
 understand the way in which politic be do in England . " 
 all this be rather severe upon Laurence Fitzgibbon ; but he be a man 
 of the world , and bear it well than Phineas have bear his defeat . 
 the dinner , take altogether , be not a success , and so Madame 
 Goesler understand . Lord Fawn , after he have be contradict by 
 Phineas , hardly open his mouth . Phineas himself talk rather too 
 much and rather too loudly ; and Mrs. Bonteen , who be well enough 
 incline to flatter Lord Fawn , contradict he . " I make a mistake , " 
 say Madame Goesler afterwards , " in have four member of Parliament 
 who all of they be or have be in office . I never will have two man 
 in office together again . " this she say to Mrs. Bonteen . " my dear 
 Madame Max , " say Mrs. Bonteen , " your resolution ought to be that you 
 will never again have two claimant for the same young lady . " 
 in the drawing - room up - stair Madame Goesler manage to be alone for 
 three minute with Phineas Finn . " and it be as you say , my friend ? " 
 she ask . her voice be plaintive and soft , and there be a look of 
 real sympathy in her eye . Phineas almost feel that if they two have 
 be quite alone he could have tell she everything , and have weep at 
 her foot . 
 " yes , " he say , " it be so . " 
 " I never doubt it when you have declare it . may I venture to say 
 that I wish it have be otherwise ? " 
 " it be too late now , Madame Goesler . a man of course be a fool to 
 show that he have any feeling in such a matter . the fact be , I hear 
 it just before I come here , and have make up my mind to send you an 
 excuse . I wish I have now . " 
 " do not say that , Mr. Finn . " 
 " I have make such an ass of myself . " 
 " in my estimation you have do yourself honour . but if I may venture 
 to give you counsel , do not speak of this affair again as though you 
 have be personally concerned in it . in the world now - a - day the only 
 thing disgraceful be to admit a failure . " 
 " and I have fail . " 
 " but you need not admit it , Mr. Finn . I know I ought not to say as 
 much to you . " 
 " I , rather , be deeply indebted to you . I will go now , Madame Goesler , 
 as I do not wish to leave the house with Lord Fawn . " 
 " but you will come and see I soon . " then Phineas promise that he 
 would come soon ; and feel as he make the promise that he would have 
 an opportunity of talk over his love with his new friend at any 
 rate without fresh shame as to his failure . 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon go away with Phineas , and Mr. Bonteen , have 
 send his wife away by herself , walk off towards the club with Lord 
 Fawn . he be very anxious to have a few word with Lord Fawn . Lord 
 Fawn have evidently be annoy by Phineas , and Mr. Bonteen do not 
 at all love the young under - Secretary . " that fellow have become the 
 most consummate puppy I ever meet , " say he , as he link himself on 
 to the lord , " Monk , and one or two other among they , have contrive 
 to spoil he altogether . " 
 " I do not   believe a word of what he say about Lord Chiltern , " say 
 Lord Fawn . 
 " about his marriage with Miss Effingham ? " 
 " it would be such an abominable shame to sacrifice the girl , " say 
 Lord Fawn . " only think of it . everything be go . the man be a 
 drunkard , and I do not   believe he be any more reconciled to his father 
 than you be . Lady Laura Kennedy must have have some object in say 
 so . " 
 " perhaps an invention of Finn 's altogether , " say Mr. Bonteen . " those 
 irish fellow be just the man for that kind of thing . " 
 " a man , you know , so violent that nobody can hold he , " say Lord 
 Fawn , thinking of Chiltern . 
 " and so absurdly conceited , " say Mr. Bonteen , thinking of Phineas . 
 " a man who have never do anything , with all his advantage in the 
 world , - and never will . " 
 " he will not   hold his place long , " say Mr. Bonteen . 
 " whom do you mean ? " 
 " Phineas Finn . " 
 " oh , Mr. Finn . I be talk of Lord Chiltern . I believe Finn to be 
 a very good sort of a fellow , and he be undoubtedly clever . they say 
 cantrip like he amazingly . he will do very well . but I do not   believe 
 a word of this about Lord Chiltern . " then Mr. Bonteen feel himself to 
 be snub , and soon afterwards leave Lord Fawn alone . 
 CHAPTER LIV 
 Consolation 
 on the day follow Madame Goesler 's dinner party , Phineas , though 
 he be early at his office , be not able to do much work , still 
 feel that as regard the reality of the world , his back 
 be break . he might no doubt go on learning , and , after a time , 
 might be able to exert himself in a perhaps useful , but altogether 
 uninteresting kind of way , do his work simply because it be 
 there to be do , - as the carter or the tailor do his ; - and from 
 the same cause , know that a man must have bread to live . but as 
 for ambition , and the idea of do good , and the love of work for 
 work 's sake , - as for the elastic spring of delicious and beneficent 
 labour , - all that be over for he . he would have work from day 
 till night , and from night till day , and from month till month 
 throughout the year to have secure for Violet Effingham the 
 assurance that her husband 's position be worthy of her own . but now 
 he have no motive for such work as this . as long as he take the public 
 pay , he would earn it ; and that be all . 
 on the next day thing be a little well with he . he receive a 
 note in the morning from Lord Cantrip say that they two be to 
 see the Prime Minister that evening , in order that the whole question 
 of the railway to the Rocky Mountains might be understand , and 
 Phineas be drive to his work . before the time of the meeting come 
 he have once more lose his own identity in great idea of colonial 
 welfare , and have plan and people a mighty region on the Red 
 River , which should have no sympathy with american democracy . when 
 he wait upon Mr. Gresham in the afternoon he say nothing about 
 the mighty region ; indeed , he leave it to Lord Cantrip to explain 
 most of the propose arrangement , - speak only a word or two here 
 and there as occasion require . but he be aware that he have so far 
 recover as to be able to save himself from lose ground during the 
 interview . 
 " he be about the first Irishman we have   have that have be worth his 
 salt , " say Mr. Gresham to his colleague afterwards . 
 " that other Irishman be a terrible fellow , " say Lord Cantrip , 
 shake his head . 
 on the fourth day after his sorrow have befall he , Phineas go 
 again to the cottage in Park Lane . and in order that he might not be 
 balk in his search for sympathy he write a line to Madame Goesler 
 to ask if she would be at home . " I will be at home from five to 
 six , - and alone . - M. M. G. " that be the answer from Marie Max 
 Goesler , and Phineas be of course at the cottage a few minute 
 after five . it be not , I think , surprising that a man when he want 
 sympathy in such a calamity as that which have now befall Phineas 
 Finn , should seek it from a woman . woman sympathise most effectually 
 with man , as man do with woman . but it be , perhaps , a little odd that 
 a man when he want consolation because his heart have be break , 
 always like to receive it from a pretty woman . one would be dispose 
 to think that at such a moment he would be profoundly indifferent 
 to such a matter , that no delight could come to he from female 
 beauty , and that all he would want would be the softness of a simply 
 sympathetic soul . but he generally want a soft hand as well , and an 
 eye that can be bright behind the mutual tear , and lip that shall 
 be young and fresh as they express their concern for his sorrow . all 
 these thing be add to Phineas when he go to Madame Goesler in 
 his grief . 
 " I be so glad to see you , " say Madame Max . 
 " you be very good - natured to let I come . " 
 " no ; - but it be so good of you to trust I . but I be sure you would 
 come after what take place the other night . I see that you be 
 pain , and I be so sorry for it . " 
 " I make such a fool of myself . " 
 " not at all . and I think that you be right to tell they when the 
 question have be ask . if the thing be not to be keep a secret , it 
 be well to speak it out . you will get over it quick in that way 
 than in any other . I have never see the young lord , myself . " 
 " oh , there be nothing amiss about he . as to what Lord Fawn say , the 
 half of it be simply exaggeration , and the other half be 
 misunderstood . " 
 " in this country it be so much to be a lord , " say Madame Goesler . 
 Phineas think a moment of that matter before he reply . all the 
 standish family have be very good to he , and Violet Effingham have 
 be very good . it be not the fault of any of they that he be now 
 wretched and back - break . he have meditate much on this , and have 
 resolve that he would not even think evil of they . " I do not in my 
 heart believe that that have have anything to do with it , " he say . 
 " but it have , my friend , - always . I do not know your Violet 
 Effingham . " 
 " she be not mine . " 
 " well ; - I do not know this Violet that be not yours . I have meet she , 
 and do not specially admire she . but then the taste of man and 
 woman about beauty be never the same . but I know she be one that 
 always live with lord and countess . a girl who always live with 
 countess feel it to be hard to settle down as a plain mistress . " 
 " she have have plenty of choice among all sort of man . it be not the 
 title . she would not have accept Chiltern unless she have - . but 
 what be the use of talk of it ? " 
 " they have know each other long ? " 
 " oh , yes , - as child . and the Earl desire it of all thing . " 
 " ah ; - then he arrange it . " 
 " not exactly . nobody could arrange anything for Chiltern , - nor , as 
 far as that go , for Miss Effingham . they arrange it themselves , I 
 fancy . " 
 " you have ask she ? " 
 " yes ; - twice . and she have refuse he more than twice . I have nothing 
 for which to blame she ; but yet I have think , - I have think - " 
 " she be a jilt then ? " 
 " no ; - I will not let you say that of she . she be no jilt . but I think 
 she have be strangely ignorant of her own mind . what be the use of 
 talk of it , Madame Goesler ? " 
 " none ; - only sometimes it be well to speak a word , than to keep 
 one 's sorrow to oneself . " 
 " so it be ; - and there be not one in the world to whom I can speak 
 such a word , except yourself . be not that odd ? I have sister , but 
 they have never hear of Miss Effingham , and would be quite 
 indifferent . " 
 " perhaps they have some other favourite . " 
 " ah ; - well . that do not matter , and my good friend here in London 
 be Lord Chiltern 's own sister . " 
 " she know of your attachment ? " 
 " oh , yes . " 
 " and she tell you of Miss Effingham 's engagement . be she glad of 
 it ? " 
 " she have always desire the marriage . and yet I think she would have 
 be satisfied have it be otherwise . but of course her heart must 
 be with her brother . I need not have trouble myself to go to 
 Blankenberg after all . " 
 " it be for the good , perhaps . everybody say you behave so well . " 
 " I could not but go , as thing be then . " 
 " what if you have - shoot he ? " 
 " there would have be an end of everything . she would never have 
 see I after that . indeed I should have shoot myself next , feel 
 that there be nothing else leave for I to do . " 
 " ah ; - you English be so peculiar . but I suppose it be good not to 
 shoot a man . and , Mr. Finn , there be other lady in the world 
 pretty than Miss Violet Effingham . no ; - of course you will not 
 admit that now . just at this moment , and for a month or two , she 
 be peerless , and you will feel yourself to be of all man the most 
 unfortunate . but you have the ball at your foot . I know no one so 
 young who have get the ball at his foot so well . I call it nothing to 
 have the ball at your foot if you be bear with it there . it be so 
 easy to be a lord if your father be one before you , - and so easy 
 to marry a pretty girl if you can make she a countess . but to make 
 yourself a lord , or to be as good as a lord , when nothing have be 
 bear to you , - that I call very much . and there be woman , and pretty 
 woman too , Mr. Finn , who have spirit enough to understand this , and 
 to think that the man , after all , be more important than the lord . " 
 then she sing the old well - wear verse of the Scotch song with 
 wonderful spirit , and with a clearness of voice and knowledge of 
 music for which he have hitherto never give her credit . 
 " a prince can mak ' a belted knight , 
 a marquis , duke , and a ' that ; 
 but an honest man 's aboon his might , 
 guid faith he mauna fa ' that . " 
 " I do not know that you sing , Madame Goesler . " 
 " only now and then when something specially require it . and I be 
 very fond of Scotch song . I will sing to you now if you like it . " 
 then she sing the whole song , - " a man 's a man for a ' that , " she 
 say as she finish . " even though he can not get the special bit of 
 paint Eve 's flesh for which his heart have have a craving . " then she 
 sing again : - 
 " there be maiden in Scotland more lovely by far , 
 who would gladly be bride to the young Lochinvar . " 
 " but young Lochinvar get his bride , " say Phineas . 
 " take the spirit of the line , Mr. Finn , which be true ; and not the 
 tale as it be tell , which be probably false . I often think that Jock 
 of Hazledean , and young Lochinvar too , probably live to repent their 
 bargain . we will hope that Lord Chiltern may not do so . " 
 " I be sure he never will . " 
 " that be all right . and as for you , do you for a while think of your 
 politic , and your speech , and your colony , rather than of your 
 love . you be at home there , and no Lord Chiltern can rob you of 
 your success . and if you be down in the mouth , come to I , and I 
 will sing you a Scotch song . and , look you , the next time I ask you 
 to dinner I will promise you that Mrs. Bonteen shall not be here . 
 good - bye . " she give he her hand , which be very soft , and leave it 
 for a moment in his , and he be console . 
 Madame Goesler , when she be alone , throw herself on to her chair 
 and begin to think of thing . in these day she would often ask 
 herself what in truth be the object of her ambition , and the aim of 
 her life . now at this moment she have in her hand a note from the Duke 
 of Omnium . the Duke have allow himself to say something about a 
 photograph , which have justify she in writing to he , - or which she 
 have take for such justification . and the Duke have reply . " he would 
 not , " he say , " lose the opportunity of wait upon she in person 
 which the presentation of the little gift might afford he . " it would 
 be a great success to have the Duke of Omnium at her house , - but to 
 what would the success reach ? what be her definite object , - or have 
 she any ? in what way could she make herself happy ? she could not say 
 that she be happy yet . the hour with she be too long and the day 
 too many . 
 the Duke of Omnium should come , - if he would . and she be quite 
 resolve as to this , - that if the Duke do come she would not be 
 afraid of he . heaven and earth ! what would be the feeling of such 
 a woman as she , be the world to greet she some fine morning as 
 Duchess of Omnium ! then she make up her mind very resolutely on one 
 subject . should the Duke give she any opportunity she would take 
 a very short time in let he know what be the extent of her 
 ambition . 
 CHAPTER LV 
 Lord Chiltern at Saulsby 
 Lord Chiltern do exactly as he say he would do . he write to his 
 father as he pass through Carlisle , and at once go on to his 
 hunting at Willingford . but his letter be very stiff and ungainly , 
 and it may be doubt whether Miss Effingham be not wrong in 
 refuse the offer which he have make to she as to the dictation of 
 it . he begin his letter , " my Lord , " and do not much improve the 
 style as he go on with it . the reader may as well see the whole 
 letter ; - 
 Railway Hotel , Carlisle , 
 December 27 , 186 - . 
 my LORD , 
 I be now on my way from Loughlinter to London , and write 
 this letter to you in compliance with a promise make by 
 I to my sister and to Miss Effingham . I have ask Violet 
 to be my wife , and she have accept I , and they think 
 that you will be pleased to hear that this have be do . 
 I shall be , of course , oblige , if you will instruct Mr. 
 Edwards to let I know what you would propose to do in 
 regard to settlement . Laura think that you will wish to 
 see both Violet and myself at Saulsby . for myself , I can 
 only say that , should you desire I to come , I will do 
 so on receive your assurance that I shall be treat 
 neither with fat calf nor with reproach . I be not 
 aware that I have deserve either . 
 I be , my lord , yours affect . , 
 CHILTERN . 
 P.S. - my address will be " the Bull , Willingford . " 
 that last word , in which he half - declare himself to be join in 
 affectionate relation to his father , cause he a world of trouble . 
 but he could find no term for express , without a circumlocution 
 which be disagreeable to he , exactly that position of feel 
 towards his father which really belong to he . he would have 
 write " yours with affection , " or " yours with deadly enmity , " or 
 " yours with respect , " or " your with most profound indifference , " 
 exactly in accordance with the state of his father 's mind , if he have 
 only know what be that state . he be afraid of go beyond his 
 father in any offer of reconciliation , and be firmly fix in his 
 resolution that he would never be either repentant or submissive 
 in regard to the past . if his father have wish for the future , 
 he would comply with they if he could do so without unreasonable 
 inconvenience , but he would not give way a single point as to thing 
 do and go . if his father should choose to make any reference to 
 they , his father must prepare for battle . 
 the Earl be of course disgust by the pertinacious obstinacy of his 
 son 's letter , and for an hour or two swear to himself that he would 
 not answer it . but it be natural that the father should yearn for the 
 son , while the son 's feeling for the father be of a very much weak 
 nature . here , at any rate , be that engagement make which he have 
 ever desire . and his son have make a step , though it be so very 
 unsatisfactory a step , towards reconciliation . when the old man read 
 the letter a second time , he skip that reference to fat calf 
 which have be so peculiarly distasteful to he , and before the 
 evening have pass he have answer his son as follow ; - 
 Saulsby , December 29 , 186 - . 
 MY DEAR CHILTERN , 
 I have receive your letter , and be truly delighted to hear that dear 
 Violet have accept you as her husband . her fortune will be very 
 material to you , but she herself be well than any fortune . you have 
 long know my opinion of she . I shall be proud to welcome she as a 
 daughter to my house . 
 I shall of course write to she immediately , and will endeavour to 
 settle some early day for she come here . when I have do so , I 
 will write to you again , and can only say that I will endeavour to 
 make Saulsby comfortable to you . 
 your affectionate father , 
 BRENTFORD . 
 richard , the groom , be still here . you have perhaps well write to 
 he direct about your horse . 
 by the middle of February arrangement have all be make , and Violet 
 meet her lover at his father 's house . she in the meantime have be 
 with her aunt , and have undergo a good deal of mild unceasing 
 persecution . " my dear Violet , " say her aunt to she on her arrival 
 at Baddingham , speak with a solemnity that ought to have be 
 terrible to the young lady , " I do not know what to say to you . " 
 " say ' how d'you do ? ' aunt , " say Violet . 
 " I mean about this engagement , " say Lady Baldock , with an increase 
 of awe - inspire severity in her voice . 
 " say nothing about it at all , if you do not   like it , " say Violet . 
 " how can I say nothing about it ? how can I be silent ? or how be I to 
 congratulate you ? " 
 " the least say , perhaps , the soon mend , " and Violet smile as 
 she speak . 
 " that be very well , and if I have no duty to perform , I would be 
 silent . but , Violet , you have be leave in my charge . if I see you 
 shipwreck in life , I shall ever tell myself that the fault have be 
 partly mine . " 
 " Nay , aunt , that will be quite unnecessary . I will always admit that 
 you do everything in your power to - to - to - make I run straight , as 
 the sporting man say . " 
 " sporting man ! oh , Violet . " 
 " and you know , aunt , I still hope that I shall be find to have keep 
 on the right side of the post . you will find that poor Lord Chiltern 
 be not so black as he be paint . " 
 " but why take anybody that be black at all ? " 
 " I like a little shade in the picture , aunt . " 
 " look at Lord Fawn . " 
 " I have look at he . " 
 " a young nobleman begin a career of useful official life , that 
 will end in - ; there be no knowing what it may end in . " 
 " I daresay not ; - but it never could have begin or end in my being 
 Lady Fawn . " 
 " and Mr. Appledom ! " 
 " poor Mr. Appledom . I do like Mr. Appledom . but , you see , aunt , I 
 like Lord Chiltern so much well . a young woman will go by her 
 feeling . " 
 " and yet you refuse he a dozen time . " 
 " I never count the time , aunt ; but not quite so many as that . " 
 the same thing be repeat over and over again during the month that 
 Miss Effingham remain at Baddingham , but Lady Baldock have no power 
 of interfere , and Violet bear her persecution bravely . her future 
 husband be generally speak of as " that violent young man , " and 
 hint be throw out as to the personal injury to which his wife 
 might be possibly subject . but the threaten bride only laugh , 
 and speak of these come danger as part of the general lot of 
 married woman . " I daresay , if the truth be know , my uncle Baldock 
 do not always keep his temper , " she once say . now , the truth be , 
 as Violet well know , that " my uncle Baldock " have be dumb as a sheep 
 before the shearer in the hand of his wife , and have never be 
 know to do anything improper by those who have be most intimate 
 with he even in his early day . " your uncle Baldock , miss , " say 
 the outraged aunt , " be a nobleman as different in his manner of 
 life from Lord Chiltern as chalk from cheese . " " but then come the 
 question , which be the cheese ? " say Violet . Lady Baldock would not 
 argue the question any far , but stalk out of the room . 
 Lady Laura Kennedy meet they at Saulsby , have have something of a 
 battle with her husband before she leave her home to do so . when she 
 tell he of her desire to assist at this reconciliation between her 
 father and brother , he reply by point out that her first duty 
 be at Loughlinter , and before the interview be end have come to 
 express an opinion that that duty be very much neglect . she in the 
 meantime have declare that she would go to Saulsby , or that she would 
 explain to her father that she be forbid by her husband to do 
 so . " and I also forbid any such communication , " say Mr. Kennedy . in 
 answer to which , Lady Laura tell he that there be some marital 
 command which she should not consider it to be her duty to obey . 
 when matter have come to this pass , it may be conceive that both Mr. 
 Kennedy and his wife be very unhappy . she have almost resolve that 
 she would take step to enable she to live apart from her husband ; 
 and he have begin to consider what course he would pursue if such 
 step be take . the wife be subject to her husband by the law 
 both of God and man ; and Mr. Kennedy be one who think much of 
 such law . in the meantime , Lady Laura carry her point and go to 
 Saulsby , leave her husband to go up to London and begin the session 
 by himself . 
 Lady Laura and Violet be both at Saulsby before Lord Chiltern 
 arrive , and many be the consultation which be hold between they 
 as to the good mode in which thing might be arrange . Violet be of 
 opinion that there have well be no arrangement , that Lord Chiltern 
 should be allow to come in and take his father 's hand , and sit down 
 to dinner , - and that so thing should fall into their place . Lady 
 Laura be rather in favour of some scene . but the interview have take 
 place before either of they be able to say a word . Lord Chiltern , 
 on his arrival , have go immediately to his father , take the Earl 
 very much by surprise , and have come off well in the encounter . 
 " my lord , " say he , walk up to his father with his hand out , " I be 
 very glad to come back to Saulsby . " he have write to his sister to 
 say that he would be at Saulsby on that day , but have name no hour . 
 he now appear between ten and eleven in the morning , and his father 
 have as yet make no preparation for he , - have arrange no appropriate 
 word . he have walk in at the front door , and have ask for the 
 Earl . the Earl be in his own morning - room , - a gloomy room , full of 
 dark book and dark furniture , and thither Lord Chiltern have at 
 once go . the two woman still be sit together over the fire in 
 the breakfast - room , and know nothing of his arrival . 
 " Oswald ! " say his father , " I hardly expect you so early . " 
 " I have come early . I come across country , and sleep at Birmingham . I 
 suppose Violet be here . " 
 " yes , she be here , - and Laura . they will be very glad to see you . so 
 be I. " and the father take the son 's hand for the second time . 
 " thank you , sir , " say Lord Chiltern , look his father full in the 
 face . 
 " I have be very much pleased by this engagement , " continue the 
 Earl . 
 " what do you think I must be , then ? " say the son , laugh . " I 
 have be at it , you know , off and on , ever so many year ; and have 
 sometimes think I be quite a fool not to get it out of my head . 
 but I could not   get it out of my head . and now she talk as though it 
 be she who have be in love with I all the time ! " 
 " perhaps she be , " say the father . 
 " I do not   believe it in the least . she may be a little so now . " 
 " I hope you mean that she always shall be so . " 
 " I shall not   be the bad husband in the world , I hope ; and I be quite 
 sure I shall not   be the good . I will go and see she now . I suppose I 
 shall find she somewhere in the house . I think it well to see you 
 first . " 
 " stop half a moment , Oswald , " say the Earl . and then Lord Brentford 
 do make something of a shambling speech , in which he express a 
 hope that they two might for the future live together on friendly 
 term , forget the past . he ought to have be prepare for the 
 occasion , and the speech be poor and shamble . but I think that it 
 be more useful than it might have be , have it be utter roundly 
 and with that paternal and almost majestic effect which he would have 
 achieve have he be thoroughly prepared . but the roundness and the 
 majesty would have go against the grain with his son , and there 
 would have be a danger of some outbreak . as it be , Lord Chiltern 
 smile , and mutter some word about thing be " all right , " and 
 then make his way out of the room . " that be a great deal well than I 
 have hop , " he say to himself ; " and it have all come from my go in 
 without be announce . " but there be still a fear upon he that 
 his father even yet might prepare a speech , and speak it , to the 
 great peril of their mutual comfort . 
 his meeting with Violet be of course pleasant enough . now that she 
 have succumb , and have tell herself and have tell he that she love 
 he , she do not scruple to be as generous as a maiden should be who 
 have acknowledge herself to be conquer , and have render herself to 
 the conqueror . she would walk with he and ride with he , and take a 
 lively interest in the performance of all his horse , and listen to 
 hunt story as long as he choose to tell they . in all this , she 
 be so good and so loving that Lady Laura be more than once tempt 
 to throw in her tooth her old , often - repeat assertion , that she 
 be not prone to be in love , - that it be not her nature to feel any 
 ardent affection for a man , and that , therefore , she would probably 
 remain unmarried . " you begrudge I my little bit of pleasure , " 
 Violet say , in answer to one such attack . " no ; - but it be so odd to 
 see you , of all woman , become so love - lorn , " " I be not love - lorn , " 
 say Violet , " but I like the freedom of tell he everything and 
 of hear everything from he , and of have he for my own good 
 friend . he might go away for twelve month , and I should not be 
 unhappy , believe , as I do , that he would be true to I . " all of 
 which set Lady Laura think whether her friend have not be wise 
 than she have be . she have never know anything of that sort of 
 friendship with her husband which already seem to be quite 
 establish between these two . 
 in her misery one day Lady Laura tell the whole story of her own 
 unhappiness to her brother , say nothing of Phineas Finn , - think 
 nothing of he as she tell her story , but speak more strongly 
 perhaps than she should have do , of the terrible dreariness of her 
 life at Loughlinter , and of her inability to induce her husband to 
 alter it for her sake . 
 " do you mean that he , - ill - treat you ? " say the brother , with a 
 scowl on his face which seem to indicate that he would like no task 
 well than that of resent such ill - treatment . 
 " he do not beat I , if you mean that . " 
 " be he cruel to you ? do he use harsh language ? " 
 " he never say a word in his life either to I or , as I believe , to 
 any other human being , that he would think himself bind to regret . " 
 " what be it then ? " 
 " he simply choose to have his own way , and his way can not be my way . 
 he be hard , and dry , and just , and dispassionate , and he wish I to 
 be the same . that be all . " 
 " I tell you fairly , Laura , as far as I be concern , I never could 
 speak to he . he be antipathetic to I . but then I be not his wife . " 
 " I be ; - and I suppose I must bear it . " 
 " have you speak to my father ? " 
 " no . " 
 " or to Violet ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " and what do she say ? " 
 " what can she say ? she have nothing to say . nor have you . nor , if I be 
 drive to leave he , can I make the world understand why I do so . to 
 be simply miserable , as I be , be nothing to the world . " 
 " I could never understand why you marry he . " 
 " do not be cruel to I , Oswald . " 
 " Cruel ! I will stick by you in any way that you wish . if you think 
 well of it , I will go off to Loughlinter to - morrow , and tell he that 
 you will never return to he . and if you be not safe from he here 
 at Saulsby , you shall go abroad with we . I be sure Violet would not 
 object . I will not be cruel to you . " 
 but in truth neither of Lady Laura 's councillor be able to give 
 her advice that could serve she . she feel that she could not leave 
 her husband without other cause than now exist , although she feel , 
 also , that to go back to he be to go back to utter wretchedness . 
 and when she see Violet and her brother together there come to her 
 dream of what might have be her own happiness have she keep herself 
 free from those terrible bond in which she be now hold a prisoner . 
 she could not get out of her heart the remembrance of that young man 
 who would have be her lover , if she would have let he , - of whose 
 love for herself she have be aware before she have hand herself 
 over as a bale of good to she unloved , unlove husband . she have 
 marry Mr. Kennedy because she be afraid that otherwise she might 
 find herself force to own that she love that other man who be 
 then a nobody ; - almost nobody . it be not Mr. Kennedy 's money that 
 have buy she . this woman in regard to money have show herself 
 to be as generous as the sun . but in marry Mr. Kennedy she have 
 maintain herself in her high position , among the first of her own 
 people , - among the first socially and among the first politically . 
 but have she married Phineas , - have she become Lady Laura Finn , - there 
 would have be a great descent . she could not have entertain the 
 lead man of her party . she would not have be on a level with the 
 wife and daughter of Cabinet Ministers . she might , indeed , have 
 remain unmarried ! but she know that have she do so , - have she so 
 resolve , - that which she call her fancy would have be too strong 
 for she . she would not have remain unmarried . at that time it be 
 her fate to be either Lady Laura Kennedy or Lady Laura Finn . and she 
 have choose to be Lady Laura Kennedy . to neither Violet Effingham nor 
 to her brother could she tell one half of the sorrow which afflict 
 she . 
 " I shall go back to Loughlinter , " she say to her brother . 
 " do not , unless you wish it , " he answer . 
 " I do not wish it . but I shall do it . Mr. Kennedy be in London now , 
 and have be there since Parliament meet , but he will be in Scotland 
 again in March , and I will go and meet he there . I tell he that I 
 would do so when I leave . " 
 " but you will go up to London ? " 
 " I suppose so . I must do as he tell I , of course . what I mean be , I 
 will try it for another year . " 
 " if it do not succeed , come to we . " 
 " I can not say what I will do . I would die if I know how . never be a 
 tyrant , Oswald ; or at any rate , not a cold tyrant . and remember this , 
 there be no tyranny to a woman like tell she of her duty . talk of 
 beat a woman ! beating might often be a mercy . " 
 Lord Chiltern remain ten day at Saulsby , and at last do not get 
 away without a few unpleasant word with his father , - or without a 
 few word that be almost unpleasant with his mistress . on his first 
 arrival he have tell his sister that he should go on a certain day , 
 and some intimation to this effect have probably be convey to the 
 Earl . but when his son tell he one evening that the post - chaise have 
 be order for seven o'clock the next morning , he feel that his son 
 be ungracious and abrupt . there be many thing still to be say , 
 and indeed there have be no speech of any account make at all as 
 yet . 
 " that be very sudden , " say the Earl . 
 " I think Laura have tell you . " 
 " she have not tell I a word lately . she may have say something 
 before you come here . what be there to hurry you ? " 
 " I think ten day would be as long as you would care to have I 
 here , and as I say that I would be back by the first , I would rather 
 not change my plan . " 
 " you be go to hunt ? " 
 " yes ; - I shall hunt till the end of March . " 
 " you might have hunt here , Oswald . " but the son make no sign of 
 change his plan ; and the father , see that he would not change 
 they , become solemn and severe . there be a few word which he must 
 say to his son , - something of a speech that he must make ; - so he lead 
 the way into the room with the dark book and the dark furniture , and 
 point to a great deep arm - chair for his son 's accommodation . but as 
 he do not sit down himself , neither do Lord Chiltern . Lord Chiltern 
 understand very well how great be the advantage of a stand orator 
 over a sit recipient of his oratory , and that advantage he would 
 not give to his father . " I have hop to have an opportunity of say 
 a few word to you about the future , " say the Earl . 
 " I think we shall be marry in July , " say Lord Chiltern . 
 " so I have hear ; - but after that . now I do not want to interfere , 
 Oswald , and of course the less so , because Violet 's money will to 
 a great degree restore the inroad which have be make upon the 
 property . " 
 " it will more than restore they altogether . " 
 " not if her estate be settle on a second son , Oswald , and I hear 
 from Lady Baldock that that be the wish of her relation . " 
 " she shall have her own way , - as she ought . what that way be I do not 
 know . I have not even ask about it . she ask I , and I tell she to 
 speak to you . " 
 " of course I should wish it to go with the family property . of course 
 that would be good . " 
 " she shall have her own way , - as far as I be concern . " 
 " but it be not about that , Oswald , that I would speak . what be your 
 plan of life when you be marry ? " 
 " plan of life ? " 
 " yes ; - plan of life . I suppose you have some plan . I suppose you 
 mean to apply yourself to some useful occupation ? " 
 " I do not   know really , sir , that I be of much use for any purpose . " 
 Lord Chiltern laugh as he say this , but do not laugh pleasantly . 
 " you would not be a drone in the hive always ? " 
 " as far as I can see , sir , we who call ourselves lord generally be 
 drone . " 
 " I deny it , " say the Earl , become quite energetic as he defend 
 his order . " I deny it utterly . I know no class of man who do work 
 more useful or more honest . be I a drone ? have I be so from my 
 youth upwards ? I have always work , either in the one House or 
 in the other , and those of my fellow with whom I have be most 
 intimate have work also . the same career be open to you . " 
 " you mean politic ? " 
 " of course I mean politic . " 
 " I do not   care for politic . I see no difference in party . " 
 " but you should care for politic , and you should see a difference in 
 party . it be your duty to do so . my wish be that you should go into 
 Parliament . " 
 " I can not   do that , sir . " 
 " and why not ? " 
 " in the first place , sir , you have not get a seat to offer I . 
 you have manage matter among you in such a way that poor little 
 Loughton have be swallow up . if I be to canvass the elector of 
 Smotherem , I do not   think that many would look very sweet on I . " 
 " there be the county , Oswald . " 
 " and whom be I to turn out ? I should spend four or five thousand 
 pound , and have nothing but vexation in return for it . I have rather 
 not begin that game , and indeed I be too old for Parliament . I do 
 not take it up early enough to believe in it . " 
 all this make the Earl very angry , and from these thing they go 
 on to bad thing . when question again as to the future , Lord 
 Chiltern scowl , and at last declare that it be his idea to live 
 abroad in the summer for his wife 's recreation , and somewhere down 
 in the shire during the winter for his own . he would admit of no 
 purpose high than recreation , and when his father again talk to 
 he of a nobleman 's duty , he say that he know of no other special 
 duty than that of not exceed his income . then his father make a 
 long speech than before , and at the end of it Lord Chiltern simply 
 wish he good night . " it be get late , and I have   promise to see 
 Violet before I go to bed . good - bye . " then he be off , and Lord 
 Brentford be leave there , stand with his back to the fire . 
 after that Lord Chiltern have a discussion with Violet , which last 
 nearly half the night ; and during the discussion she tell he more 
 than once that he be wrong . " such as I be you must take I , or leave 
 I , " he say , in anger . " Nay ; there be no choice now , " she answer . 
 " I have take you , and I will stick by you , - whether you be right or 
 wrong . but when I think you wrong , I shall say so . " he swear to she 
 as he press she to his heart that she be the fine , grand , 
 sweetest woman that ever the world have produce . but still there be 
 present on his palate , when he leave she , the bitter taste of her 
 reprimand . 
 CHAPTER lvi 
 what the People in Marylebone Thought 
 Phineas Finn , when the session begin , be still hard at work upon his 
 Canada bill , and in his work find some relief for his break back . 
 he go into the matter with all his energy , and before the debate 
 come on , know much more about the seven thousand inhabitant of some 
 hundred of thousand of square mile at the back of Canada , than 
 he do of the people of London or of County Clare . and he find 
 some consolation also in the good - nature of Madame Goesler , whose 
 drawing - room be always open to he . he could talk freely now to 
 Madame Goesler about Violet , and have even venture to tell she that 
 once , in old day , he have think of love Lady Laura Standish . 
 he speak of those day as be very old ; and then he perhaps say 
 some word to she about dear little Mary Flood Jones . I think that 
 there be not much in his career of which he do not say something 
 to Madame Goesler , and that he receive from she a good deal of 
 excellent advice and encouragement in the direction of his political 
 ambition . " a man should work , " she say , - " and you do work . a woman 
 can only look on , and admire and long . what be there that I can do ? 
 I can learn to care for these Canadians , just because you care for 
 they . if it be the beaver that you tell I of , I should have to 
 care for the beaver . " then Phineas of course tell she that such 
 sympathy from she be all and all to he . but the reader must not 
 on this account suppose that he be untrue in his love to Violet 
 Effingham . his back be altogether break by his fall , and he be 
 quite aware that such be the fact . not as yet , at least , have come 
 to he any remotest idea that a cure be possible . 
 early in March he hear that Lady Laura be up in town , and of course 
 he be bind to go to she . the information be give to he by Mr. 
 Kennedy himself , who tell he that he have be to Scotland to fetch 
 she . in these day there be an acknowledge friendship between these 
 two , but there be no intimacy . indeed , Mr. Kennedy be a man who 
 be hardly intimate with any other man . with Phineas he now and 
 then exchange a few word in the lobby of the House , and when they 
 chance to meet each other , they meet as friend . Mr. Kennedy have no 
 strong wish to see again in his house the man respect whom he have 
 venture to caution his wife ; but he be thoughtful ; and think 
 over it all , he find it well to ask he there . no one must know 
 that there be any reason why Phineas should not come to his house ; 
 especially as all the world know that Phineas have protect he from 
 the garrotter . " Lady Laura be in town now , " he say ; " you must go 
 and see she before long . " phinea of course promise that he would 
 go . 
 in these day Phineas be begin to be aware that he have 
 enemy , - though he could not understand why anybody should be his 
 enemy now that Violet Effingham have decide against he . there be 
 poor Laurence Fitzgibbon , indeed , whom he have supersede at the 
 Colonial Office , but Laurence Fitzgibbon , to give merit where merit 
 be due , feel no animosity against he at all . " you be welcome , I 
 boy ; you be welcome , - as far as yourself go . but as for the party , 
 bedad , it be rotten to the core , and will not   stand another session . 
 mind , it be I who tell you so . " and the poor idle Irishman , in so 
 speaking , speak the truth as well as he know it . but the Ratlers and 
 the Bonteens be Finn 's bitter foe , and do not scruple to let he 
 know that such be the case . Barrington Erle have scruple on the 
 subject , and in a certain mildly apologetic way still speak well of 
 the young man , whom he have himself first introduce into political 
 life only four year since ; - but there be no earnestness or 
 cordiality in Barrington Erle 's manner , and Phineas know that his 
 first staunch friend could no long be regard as a pillar of 
 support . but there be a set of man , quite as influential , - so 
 Phineas think , - as the busy politician of the club , who be very 
 friendly to he . these be man , generally of high position , of 
 steady character , - hard worker , - who think quite as much of what 
 a man do in his office as what he say in the House . Lords Cantrip , 
 Thrift , and Fawn be of this class , - and they be all very 
 courteous to Phineas . envious man begin to say of he that he care 
 little now for any one of the party who have not a handle to his name , 
 and that he prefer to live with lord and lordling . this be hard 
 upon he , as the great political ambition of his life be to call Mr. 
 Monk his friend ; and he would soon have act with Mr. Monk than 
 with any other man in the Cabinet . but though Mr. Monk have not 
 desert he , there have come to be little of late in common between 
 the two . his life be become that of a parliamentary official 
 rather than that of a politician ; - whereas , though Mr. Monk be in 
 office , his public life be purely political . Mr. Monk have great 
 idea of his own which he intend to hold , whether by hold they 
 he might remain in office or be force out of office ; and he be 
 indifferent as to the direction which thing in this respect might 
 take with he . but Phineas , who have achieve his declare object in 
 get into place , feel that he be almost constrain to adopt 
 the view of other , let they be what they might . man speak to he , 
 as though his parliamentary career be wholly at the disposal of 
 the Government , - as though he be like a proxy in Mr. Gresham 's 
 pocket , - with this difference , that when direct to get up and 
 speak on a subject he be bind to do so . this annoy he , and he 
 complain to Mr. Monk ; but Mr. Monk only shrug his shoulder and 
 tell he that he must make his choice . he soon discover Mr. Monk 's 
 meaning . " if you choose to make Parliament a profession , - as you have 
 choose , - you can have no right even to think of independence . if the 
 country find you out when you be in Parliament , and then invite 
 you to office , of course the thing be different . but the latter be a 
 slow career , and probably would not have suit you . " that be the 
 meaning of what Mr. Monk say to he . after all , these official and 
 parliamentary honour be great when see at a distance than he 
 find they to be now that he possess they . Mr. Low work ten hour 
 a day , and could rarely call a day his own ; but , after all , with all 
 this work , Mr. Low be less of a slave , and more independent , than 
 be he , Phineas Finn , Under - Secretary of State , the friend of Cabinet 
 Ministers , and Member of Parliament since his twenty - fifth year ! he 
 begin to dislike the House , and to think it a bore to sit on the 
 Treasury bench ; - he , who a few year since have regard Parliament 
 as the british heaven on earth , and who , since he have be in 
 Parliament , have look at that bench with long envious eye . 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon , who seem to have as much to eat and drink as 
 ever , and a bed also to lie on , could come and go in the House as he 
 please , since his - resignation . 
 and there be a new trouble come . the Reform Bill for England have 
 pass ; but now there be to be another Reform Bill for Ireland . let 
 they pass what bill they might , this would not render necessary a 
 new irish election till the entire House should be dissolve . but he 
 fear that he would be call upon to vote for the abolition of his 
 own borough , - and for other point almost equally distasteful to he . 
 he know that he would not be consult , - but would be call upon to 
 vote , and perhaps to speak ; and be certain that if he do so , there 
 would be war between he and his constituent . Lord Tulla have already 
 communicate to he his idea that , for certain excellent reason , 
 Loughshane ought to be spar . but this evil be , he hop , a distant 
 one . it be generally think that , as the English Reform Bill have 
 be pass last year , and as the irish bill , if carry , could not 
 be immediately operative , the doing of the thing might probably be 
 postpone to the next session . 
 when he first see Lady Laura he be strike by the great change in she 
 look and manner . she seem to he to be old and worn , and he judge 
 she to be wretche , - as she be . she have write to he to say that 
 she would be at her father 's house on such and such a morning , and 
 he have go to she there . " it be of no use your come to Grosvenor 
 Place , " she say . " I see nobody there , and the house be like a 
 prison . " later in the interview she tell he not to come and dine 
 there , even though Mr. Kennedy should ask he . 
 " and why not ? " he demand . 
 " because everything would be stiff , and cold , and uncomfortable . I 
 suppose you do not wish to make your way into a lady 's house if she 
 ask you not . " there be a sort of smile on her face as she say 
 this , but he could perceive that it be a very bitter smile . " you can 
 easily excuse yourself . " 
 " yes , I can excuse myself . " 
 " then do so . if you be particularly anxious to dine with Mr. 
 Kennedy , you can easily do so at your club . " in the tone of her 
 voice , and the word she use , she hardly attempt to conceal she 
 dislike of her husband . 
 " and now tell I about Miss Effingham , " he say . 
 " there be nothing for I to tell . " 
 " yes there be ; - much to tell . you need not spare I . I do not pretend 
 to deny to you that I have be hit hard , - so hard , that I have be 
 nearly knock down ; but it will not hurt I now to hear of it all . 
 do she always love he ? " 
 " I can not say . I think she do after her own fashion . " 
 " I sometimes think woman would be less cruel , " he say , " if they know 
 how great be the anguish they can cause . " 
 " have she be cruel to you ? " 
 " I have nothing to complain of . but if she love Chiltern , why do 
 she not tell he so at once ? and why - " 
 " this be complain , Mr. Finn . " 
 " I will not complain . I would not even think of it , if I could help 
 it . be they to be marry soon ? " 
 " in July ; - so they now say . " 
 " and where will they live ? " 
 " ah ! no one can tell . I do not think that they agree as yet as to 
 that . but if she have a strong wish Oswald will yield to it . he be 
 always generous . " 
 " I would not even have have a wish , - except to have she with I . " 
 there be a pause for a moment , and then Lady Laura answer he with 
 a touch of scorn in her voice , - and with some scorn , too , in her 
 eye : - " that be all very well , Mr. Finn ; but the season will not be 
 over before there be some one else . " 
 " there you wrong I . " 
 " they tell I that you be already at Madame Goesler 's foot . " 
 " Madame Goesler ! " 
 " what matter who it be as long as she be young and pretty , and 
 have the interest attach to she of something more than ordinary 
 position ? when man tell I of the cruelty of woman , I think that no 
 woman can be really cruel because no man be capable of suffering . a 
 woman , if she be throw aside , do suffer . " 
 " do you mean to tell I , then , that I be indifferent to Miss 
 Effingham ? " when he thus speak , I wonder whether he have forget 
 that he have ever declare to this very woman to whom he be speak , 
 a passion for herself . 
 " Psha ! " 
 " it suit you , Lady Laura , to be harsh to I , but you be not 
 speak your thought . " 
 then she lose all control of herself , and pour out to he the real 
 truth that be in she . " and whose thought do you speak when you and 
 I be on the braes of Loughlinter ? be I wrong in say that change 
 be easy to you , or have I grow to be so old that you can talk to I 
 as though those far - away folly ought to be forget ? be it so 
 long ago ? talk of love ! I tell you , sir , that your heart be one in 
 which love can have no durable hold . Violet Effingham ! there may be 
 a dozen violet after she , and you will be none the bad . " then she 
 walk away from he to the window , and he stand still , dumb , on the 
 spot that he have occupy . " you have well go now , " she say , " and 
 forget what have pass between we . I know that you be a gentleman , 
 and that you will forget it . " the strong idea of his mind when he 
 hear all this be the injustice of her attack , - of the attack as 
 come from she , who have all but openly acknowledge that she have 
 marry a man whom she have not love because it suit she to escape 
 from a man whom she do love . she be reproach he now for his 
 fickleness in have venture to set his heart upon another woman , 
 when she herself have be so much bad than fickle , - so profoundly 
 false ! and yet he could not defend himself by accuse she . what 
 would she have have of he ? what would she have propose to he , have 
 he question she as to his future , when they be together on the 
 braes of Loughlinter ? would she not have bid he to find some one 
 else whom he could love ? would she then have suggest to he the 
 propriety of nurse his love for herself , - for she who be about 
 to become another man 's wife , - for she after she should have become 
 another man 's wife ? and yet because he have not do so , and because 
 she have make herself wretche by marry a man whom she do not 
 love , she reproach he ! 
 he could not tell she of all this , so he fall back for his defence on 
 word which have pass between they since the day when they have meet 
 on the braes . " Lady Laura , " he say , " it be only a month or two since 
 you speak to I as though you wish that Violet Effingham might be 
 my wife . " 
 " I never wish it . I never say that I wish it . there be moment 
 in which we try to give a child any brick on the chimney top for 
 which it may whimper . " then there be another silence which she be 
 the first to break . " you have well go , " she say . " I know that I 
 have commit myself , and of course I would rather be alone . " 
 " and what would you wish that I should do ? " 
 " do ? " she say . " what you do can be nothing to I . " 
 " must we be stranger , you and I , because there be a time in which 
 we be almost more than friend ? " 
 " I have speak nothing about myself , sir , - only as I have be draw 
 to do so by your pretence of be love - sick . you can do nothing for 
 I , - nothing , - nothing . what be it possible that you should do for 
 I ? you be not my father , or my brother . " it be not to be suppose 
 that she want he to fall at her foot . it be to be suppose that 
 have he do so her reproach would have be hot and heavy on 
 he ; but yet it almost seem to he as though he have no other 
 alternative . no ! - he be not her father or her brother ; - nor could he 
 be her husband . and at this very moment , as she know , his heart be 
 sore with love for another woman . and yet he hardly know how not to 
 throw himself at her foot , and swear , that he would return now and 
 for ever to his old passion , hopeless , sinful , degrade as it would 
 be . 
 " I wish it be possible for I to do something , " he say , draw 
 near to she . 
 " there be nothing to be do , " she say , clasp her hand together . 
 " for I nothing . I have before I no escape , no hope , no prospect of 
 relief , no place of consolation . you have everything before you . you 
 complain of a wound ! you have at least show that such wound with 
 you be capable of cure . you can not but feel that when I hear your 
 wailing , I must be impatient . you have well leave I now , if you 
 please . " 
 " and be we to be no long friend ? " he ask . 
 " as far as friendship can go without intercourse , I shall always be 
 your friend . " 
 then he go , and as he walk down to his office , so intent be he 
 on that which have just pass that he hardly see the people as he 
 meet they , or be aware of the street through which his way lead he . 
 there have be something in the later word which Lady Laura have 
 speak that have make he feel almost unconsciously that the injustice 
 of her reproach be not so great as he have at first feel it to be , 
 and that she have some cause for her scorn . if her case be such as 
 she have so plainly describe it , what be his plight as compare with 
 her ? he have lose his Violet , and be in pain . there must be much 
 of suffering before he . but though Violet be lose , the world be 
 not all blank before his eye . he have not tell himself , even in his 
 dreariest moment , that there be before he " no escape , no hope , no 
 prospect of relief , no place of consolation . " and then he begin to 
 think whether this must in truth be the case with Lady Laura . what if 
 Mr. Kennedy be to die ? what in such case as that would he do ? in 
 ten or perhaps in five year time might it not be possible for he 
 to go through the ceremony of fall upon his knee , with stiffen 
 joint indeed , but still with something leave of the ardour of his old 
 love , of his old love of all ? 
 as he be think of this he be bring up short in his walk as he 
 be enter the Green Park beneath the Duke 's figure , by Laurence 
 Fitzgibbon . " how dare you not be in your office at such an hour as 
 this , Finn , I boy , - or , at least , not in the House , - or serve your 
 master after some fashion ? " say the late Under - Secretary . 
 " so I be . I have   be on a message to Marylebone , to find what the 
 people there think about the Canadas . " 
 " and what do they think about the Canadas in Marylebone ? " 
 " not one man in a thousand care whether the Canadians prosper or 
 fail to prosper . they care that Canada should not go to the States , 
 because , - though they do not   love the Canadians , they do hate the 
 Americans . that be about the feeling in Marylebone , - and it be 
 astonishing how like the Maryleboners be to the rest of the world . " 
 " dear I , what a fellow you be for an Under - secretary ! you have   hear 
 the news about little Violet . " 
 " what news ? " 
 " she have quarrel with Chiltern , you know . " 
 " who say so ? " 
 " never mind who say so , but they tell I it be true . take an old 
 friend 's advice , and strike while the iron 's hot . " 
 Phineas do not believe what he have hear , but though he do not 
 believe it , still the tiding set his heart beat . he would have 
 believe it less perhaps have he know that Laurence have just receive 
 the news from Mrs. Bonteen . 
 CHAPTER LVII 
 the Top Brick of the Chimney 
 Madame Max Goesler be a lady who know that in fight the battle 
 which fall to her lot , in arrange the social difficulty which she 
 find in her way , in do the work of the world which come to she 
 share , very much more care be necessary , - and care too about thing 
 apparently trifle , - than be demand by the affair of people in 
 general . and this be not the case so much on account of any special 
 disadvantage under which she labour , as because she be ambitious 
 of do the very uttermost with those advantage which she 
 possess . her own birth have not be high , and that of her husband , 
 we may perhaps say , have be very low . he have be old when she have 
 marry he , and she have have little power of make any progress till 
 he have leave she a widow . then she find herself possess of money , 
 certainly ; of wit , - as she believe ; and of a something in her 
 personal appearance which , as she plainly tell herself , she might 
 perhaps palm off upon the world as beauty . she be a woman who do 
 not flatter herself , who do not strongly believe in herself , who 
 could even bring herself to wonder that man and woman in high 
 position should condescend to notice such a one as she . with all her 
 ambition , there be a something of genuine humility about she ; and 
 with all the hardness she have learn there be a touch of womanly 
 softness which would sometimes obtrude itself upon her heart . when 
 she find a woman really kind to she , she would be very kind in 
 return . and though she prize wealth , and know that her money be she 
 only rock of strength , she could be lavish with it , as though it be 
 dirt . 
 but she be highly ambitious , and she play her game with 
 great skill and great caution . her door be not open to all 
 caller ; - be shut even to some who find but few door close 
 against they ; - be shut occasionally to those whom she most 
 specially wish to see within they . she know how to allure by 
 deny , and to make the gift rich by delay it . we be tell by the 
 latin proverb that he who give quickly give twice ; but I say that 
 she who give quickly seldom give more than half . when in the early 
 spring the Duke of Omnium first knock at Madame Max Goesler 's door , 
 he be inform that she be not at home . the Duke feel very cross as 
 he hand his card out from his dark green brougham , - on the panel 
 of which there be no blazon to tell the owner 's rank . he be very 
 cross . she have tell he that she be always at home between four and 
 six on a Thursday . he have condescend to remember the information , 
 and have act upon it , - and now she be not at home ! she be not at 
 home , though he have come on a Thursday at the very hour she have name 
 to he . any duke would have be cross , but the Duke of Omnium be 
 particularly cross . no ; - he certainly would give himself no further 
 trouble by go to the cottage in Park Lane . and yet Madame Max 
 Goesler have be in her own drawing - room , while the Duke be hand 
 out his card from the brougham below . 
 on the next morning there come to he a note from the cottage , - such 
 a pretty note ! - so penitent , so full of remorse , - and , which be 
 well still , so laden with disappointment , that he forgive she . 
 MY DEAR DUKE , 
 I hardly know how to apologise to you , after have tell 
 you that I be always at home on Thursdays ; and I be at 
 home yesterday when you call . but I be unwell , and I 
 have tell the servant to deny I , not think how much I 
 might be lose . indeed , indeed , I would not have give 
 way to a silly headache , have I think that your grace 
 would have be here . I suppose that now I must not even 
 hope for the photograph . 
 your penitently , 
 MARIE M. G. 
 the note - paper be very pretty note - paper , hardly scented , and yet 
 convey a sense of something sweet , and the monogram be small and 
 new , and fantastic without be grotesque , and the writing be of 
 that sort which the Duke , have much experience , have learn to 
 like , - and there be something in the signature which please he . so 
 he write a reply , - 
 DEAR MADAME MAX goesler , 
 I will call again next Thursday , or , if prevent , will 
 let you know . 
 your faithfully , 
 O. 
 when the green brougham draw up at the door of the cottage on the 
 next Thursday , Madame Goesler be at home , and have no headache . 
 she be not at all penitent now . she have probably study the 
 subject , and have resolve that penitence be more alluring in a 
 letter than when act in person . she receive her guest with perfect 
 ease , and apologise for the injury do to he in the precede 
 week , with much self - complacency . " I be so sorry when I get your 
 card , " she say ; " and yet I be so glad now that you be refuse . " 
 " if you be ill , " say the Duke , " it be well . " 
 " I be horribly ill , to tell the truth ; - as pale as a death 's head , 
 and without a word to say for myself . I be fit to see no one . " 
 " then of course you be right . " 
 " but it flash upon I immediately that I have name a day , and that 
 you have be kind enough to remember it . but I do not think you come 
 to London till the March wind be over . " 
 " the March wind blow everywhere in this wretched island , Madame 
 Goesler , and there be no escape they . Youth may prevail against 
 they ; but on I they be so potent that I think they will succeed in 
 drive I out of my country . I doubt whether an old man should ever 
 live in England if he can help it . " 
 the Duke certainly be an old man , if a man turn of seventy be 
 old ; - and he be a man too who do not bear his year with hearty 
 strength . he move slowly , and turn his limb , when he do turn 
 they , as though the joint be stiff in their socket . but there be 
 nevertheless about he a dignity of demeanour , a majesty of person , 
 and an upright carriage which do not leave an idea of old age as 
 the first impress on the mind of those who encounter the Duke of 
 Omnium . he be tall and move without a stoop ; and though he move 
 slowly , he have learn to seem so to do because it be the proper 
 kind of movement for one so high up in the world as himself . and 
 perhaps his tailor do something for he . he have not be long under 
 Madame Max Goesler 's eye before she perceive that his tailor have 
 do a good deal for he . when he allude to his own age and to 
 her youth , she say some pleasant little word as to the difference 
 between oak - tree and currant - bush ; and by that time she be 
 seat comfortably on her sofa , and the Duke be on a chair before 
 she , - just as might have be any man who be not a Duke . 
 after a little time the photograph be bring forth from his grace 's 
 pocket . that bring out and give of photograph , with the demand 
 for counter photograph , be the most absurd practice of the day . 
 " I do not   think I look very nice , do I ? " " oh yes , - very nice , but a 
 little too old ; and certainly you have not   get those spot all over 
 your forehead . these be the remark which on such occasion be the 
 most common . it may be say that to give a photograph or to take a 
 photograph without the utterance of some word which would be feel by 
 a bystander to be absurd , be almost an impossibility . at this moment 
 there be no bystander , and therefore the Duke and the lady have no 
 need for caution . word be speak that be very absurd . Madame 
 Goesler protest that the Duke 's photograph be more to she than the 
 photograph of all the world beside ; and the Duke declare that he 
 would carry the lady 's picture next to his heart , - I be afraid he 
 say for ever and ever . then he take her hand and press it , and be 
 conscious that for a man over seventy year of age he do that kind 
 of thing very well . 
 " you will come and dine with I , Duke ? " she say , when he begin to 
 talk of go . 
 " I never dine out . " 
 " that be just the reason you should dine with I . you shall meet 
 nobody you do not wish to meet . " 
 " I would so much rather see you in this way , - I would indeed . I do 
 dine out occasionally , but it be at big formal party , which I 
 can not escape without give offence . " 
 " and you can not escape my little not formal party , - without give 
 offence . " she look into his face as she speak , and he know that she 
 mean it . and he look into her , and think that her eye be 
 bright than any he be in the habit of see in these latter day . 
 " name your own day , Duke . will a Sunday suit you ? " 
 " if I must come - " 
 " you must come . " as she speak her eye sparkle more and more , and 
 her colour go and come , and she shake her curl till they emit 
 through the air the same soft feeling of a perfume that her note have 
 produce . then her foot peep out from beneath the black and yellow 
 drapery of her dress , and the Duke see that it be perfect . and she 
 put out her finger and touch his arm as she speak . her hand be 
 very fair , and her finger be bright with rich gem . to man such as 
 the Duke , a hand , to be quite fair , should be bright with rich gem . 
 " you must come , " she say , - not implore he now but command he . 
 " then I will come , " he answer , and a certain Sunday be fix . 
 the arranging of the guest be a little difficulty , till Madame 
 Goesler beg the Duke to bring with he Lady Glencora Palliser , 
 his nephew 's wife . this at last he agree to do . as the wife of his 
 nephew and heir , Lady Glencora be to the Duke all that a woman could 
 be . she be everything that be proper as to her own conduct , and not 
 obtrusive as to his . she do not bore he , and yet she be attentive . 
 although in her husband 's house she be a fierce politician , in his 
 house she be simply an attractive woman . " ah ; she be very clever , " 
 the Duke once say , ' she adapt herself . if she be to go from any 
 one place to any other , she would be at home in both . " and the 
 movement of his Grace 's hand as he speak seem to indicate the 
 wide possible sphere for travel and the wide possible 
 scope for adaptation . the dinner be arrange , and go off very 
 pleasantly . Madame Goesler 's eye be not quite so bright as they 
 be during that morning visit , nor do she touch her guest 's arm in 
 a manner so alluring . she be very quiet , allow her guest to do 
 most of the talking . but the dinner and the flower and the wine be 
 excellent , and the whole thing be so quiet that the Duke like it . 
 " and now you must come and dine with I , " the Duke say as he take 
 his leave . " a command to that effect will be one which I certainly 
 shall not disobey , " whisper Madame Goesler . 
 " I be afraid he be go to get fond of that woman . " these word 
 be speak early on the follow morning by Lady Glencora to her 
 husband , Mr. Palliser . 
 " he be always get fond of some woman , and he will to the end , " 
 say Mr. Palliser . 
 " but this Madame Max Goesler be very clever . " 
 " so they tell I . I have generally think that my uncle like 
 talk to a fool the good . " 
 " every man like a clever woman the good , " say Lady Glencora , " if 
 the clever woman only know how to use her cleverness . " 
 " I be sure I hope he will be amuse , " say Mr. Palliser innocently . " a 
 little amusement be all that he care for now . " 
 " suppose you be tell some day that he be go - to be marry ? " 
 say Lady Glencora . 
 " my uncle marry ! " 
 " why not he as well as another ? " 
 " and to Madame Goesler ? " 
 " if he be ever marry it will be to some such woman . " 
 " there be not a man in all England who think more of his own 
 position than my uncle , " say Mr. Palliser somewhat proudly , - almost 
 with a touch of anger . 
 " that be all very well , Plantagenet , and true enough in a kind of 
 way . but a child will sacrifice all that it have for the top brick 
 of the chimney , and old man sometimes become child . you would 
 not like to be tell some morning that there be a little Lord 
 Silverbridge in the world . " now the eld son of the Duke of 
 Omnium , when the Duke of Omnium have a son , be call the Earl of 
 Silverbridge ; and Mr. Palliser , when this question be ask he , 
 become very pale . Mr. Palliser know well how thoroughly the cunning 
 of the serpent be join to the purity of the dove in the person 
 of his wife , and he be sure that there be cause for fear when she 
 hint at danger . 
 " perhaps you have well keep your eye upon he , " he say to his wife . 
 " and upon she , " say Lady Glencora . 
 when Madame Goesler din at the Duke 's house in St. James 's Square 
 there be a large party , and Lady Glencora know that there be no 
 need for apprehension then . indeed Madame Goesler be no more than 
 any other guest , and the Duke hardly speak to she . there be a 
 Duchess there , - the Duchess of St. Bungay , and old Lady Hartletop , 
 who be a dowager marchioness , - an old lady who pester the Duke 
 very sorely , - and Madame Max Goesler receive her reward , and know 
 that she be receive it , in be ask to meet these people . would 
 not all these name , include her own , be blazon to the world in 
 the column of the next day 's Morning Post ? there be no absolute 
 danger here , as Lady Glencora know ; and Lady Glencora , who be 
 tolerant and begrudge nothing to Madame Max except the one thing , 
 be quite willing to meet the lady at such a grand affair as this . 
 but the Duke , even should he become ever so childish a child in his 
 old age , still would have that plain green brougham at his command , 
 and could go anywhere in that at any hour in the day . and then 
 Madame Goesler be so manifestly a clever woman . a Duchess of Omnium 
 might be say to fill , - in the estimation , at any rate , of English 
 people , - the high position in the world short of royalty . and the 
 reader will remember that Lady Glencora intend to be a Duchess of 
 Omnium herself , - unless some very unexpected event should intrude 
 itself . she intend also that her little boy , her fair - haired , 
 curly - pat , bold - faced little boy , should be Earl of Silverbridge 
 when the sand of the old man should have run itself out . Heavens , 
 what a blow would it be , should some little wizen - cheek half - monkey 
 baby , with black brow , and yellow skin , be bring forward and show 
 to she some day as the heir ! what a blow to herself ; - and what a blow 
 to all England ! " we can not   prevent it if he choose to do it , " say 
 her husband , who have his budget to bring forward that very night , and 
 who in truth care more for his budget than he do for his heirship 
 at that moment . " but we must prevent it , " say Lady Glencora . " if I 
 stick to he by the tail of his coat , I will prevent it . " at the time 
 when she thus speak , the dark green brougham have be twice again 
 bring up at the door in Park Lane . 
 and the brougham be stand there a third time . it be May now , the 
 latter end of May , and the park opposite be beautiful with green 
 thing , and the air be soft and balmy , as it will be sometimes even 
 in May , and the flower in the balcony be full of perfume , and the 
 charm of London , - what London can be to the rich , - be at its height . 
 the Duke be sit in Madame Goesler 's drawing - room , at some 
 distance from she , for she have retreat . the Duke have a habit 
 of take her hand , which she never would permit for above a few 
 second . at such time she would show no anger , but would retreat . 
 " Marie , " say the Duke , " you will go abroad when the summer be over . " 
 as an old man he have take the privilege of call her Marie , and 
 she have not forbid it . 
 yes , probably ; to Vienna . I have property in Vienna you know , which 
 must be look after . 
 " do not mind Vienna this year . come to Italy . " 
 " what ; in summer , Duke ? " 
 " the lake be charming in August . I have a villa on Como which be 
 empty now , and I think I shall go there . if you do not know the 
 italian lake , I shall be so happy to show they to you . " 
 " I know they well , my lord . when I be young I be on the Maggiore 
 almost alone . some day I will tell you a history of what I be in 
 those day . " 
 " you shall tell it I there . " 
 " no , my lord , I fear not . I have no villa there . " 
 " will you not accept the loan of mine ? it shall be all your own while 
 you use it . " 
 " my own , - to deny the right of entrance to its owner ? " 
 " if it so please you . " 
 " it would not please I . it would so far from please I that I will 
 never put myself in a position that might make it possible for I to 
 require to do so . no , Duke ; it behove I to live in house of my 
 own . woman of whom more be know can afford to be your guest . " 
 " Marie , I would have no other guest than you . " 
 " it can not be so , Duke . " 
 " and why not ? " 
 " why not ? be I to be put to the blush by be make to answer such a 
 question as that ? because the world would say that the Duke of Omnium 
 have a new mistress , and that Madame Goesler be the woman . do you 
 think that I would be any man 's mistress ; - even your ? or do you 
 believe that for the sake of the softness of a summer evening on an 
 italian lake , I would give cause to the tongue of the woman here to 
 say that I be such a thing ? you would have I lose all that I have 
 gain by steady year of sober work for the sake of a week or two of 
 dalliance such as that ! no , Duke ; not for your dukedom ! " 
 how his grace might have get through his difficulty have they be 
 leave alone , can not be tell . for at this moment the door be open , 
 and Lady Glencora Palliser be announce . 
 CHAPTER LVIII 
 Rara Avis in Terris 
 " come and see the country and judge for yourself , " say Phineas . 
 " I should like nothing well , " say Mr. Monk . 
 " it have often seem to I that man in Parliament know less about 
 Ireland than they do of the interior of Africa , " say Phineas . 
 " it be seldom that we know anything accurately on any subject that 
 we have not make matter of careful study , " say Mr. Monk , " and very 
 often do not do so even then . we be very apt to think that we man 
 and woman understand one another ; but most probably you know nothing 
 even of the mode of thought of the man who live next door to you . " 
 " I suppose not . " 
 " there be general law current in the world as to morality . ' thou 
 shalt not steal , ' for instance . that have necessarily be current as 
 a law through all nation . but the first man you meet in the street 
 will have idea about theft so different from your , that , if you 
 know they as you know your own , you would say that this law and your 
 be not even found on the same principle . it be compatible with 
 this man 's honesty to cheat you in a matter of horseflesh , with that 
 man be in a traffic of railway share , with that other man 's as to a 
 woman 's fortune ; with a fourth 's anything may be do for a seat in 
 Parliament , while the fifth man , who stand high among we , and who 
 implore his God every Sunday to write that law on his heart , spend 
 every hour of his daily toil in a system of fraud , and be regard as 
 a pattern of the national commerce ! " 
 Mr. Monk and Phineas be din together at Mr. Monk 's house , and 
 the eld politician of the two in this little speech have recur to 
 certain matter which have already be discuss between they . Mr. 
 Monk be become somewhat sick of his place in the Cabinet , though 
 he have not as yet whisper a word of his sickness to any living 
 ear ; and he have begin to pine for the lose freedom of a seat below 
 the gangway . he have be discuss political honesty with Phineas , 
 and hence have come the sermon of which I have venture to reproduce 
 the conclude denunciation . 
 Phineas be fond of such discussion and fond of hold they with 
 Mr. Monk , - in this matter flutter like a moth round a candle . he 
 would not perceive that as he have make up his mind to be a servant 
 of the public in Parliament , he must abandon all idea of independent 
 action ; and unless he do so he could be neither successful as 
 regard himself , or useful to the public whom he serve . could a man 
 be honest in Parliament , and yet abandon all idea of independence ? 
 when he put such question to Mr. Monk he do not get a direct 
 answer . and indeed the question be never put directly . but the 
 teaching which he receive be ever of a nature to make he uneasy . 
 it be always to this effect : " you have take up the trade now , and 
 seem to be fit for success in it . you have well give up thinking 
 about its special honesty . " and yet Mr. Monk would on an occasion 
 preach to he such a sermon as that which he have just utter ! 
 perhaps there be no question more difficult to a man 's mind than that 
 of the expediency or inexpediency of scruple in political life . 
 whether would a candidate for office be more liable to rejection from 
 a leader because he be know to be scrupulous , or because he be 
 know to be the reverse ? 
 " but put aside the fourth commandment and all the theory , you 
 will come to Ireland ? " say Phineas . 
 " I shall be delighted . " 
 " I do not   live in a castle , you know . " 
 " I think everybody do live in a castle in Ireland , " say Mr. Monk . 
 " they seem to do when I be there twenty year ago . but for myself , 
 I prefer a cottage . " 
 this trip to Ireland have be propose in consequence of certain 
 idea respect tenant - right which Mr. Monk be begin to adopt , 
 and as to which the mind of politician be become move . it 
 have be all very well to put down Fenianism , and Ribandmen , and 
 Repeal , - and everything that have be put down in Ireland in the way 
 of rebellion for the last seventy - five year . England and Ireland 
 have be apparently join together by law of nature so fix , 
 that even politician liberal as be Mr. Monk , - liberal as be Mr. 
 Turnbull , - could not trust themselves to think that disunion could 
 be for the good of the Irish . they have teach themselves that it 
 certainly could not be good for the English . but if it be incumbent 
 on England to force upon Ireland the maintenance of the Union for her 
 own sake , and for England 's sake , because England could not afford 
 independence establish so close against her own rib , - it be at 
 any rate necessary to England 's character that the bride thus 
 bind in a compulsory wedlock should be endow with all the good 
 privilege that a wife can enjoy . let she at least not be a kept 
 mistress . let it be bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh , if we 
 be to live together in the married state . between husband and 
 wife a warm word now and then matter but little , if there be a 
 thoroughly good understanding at bottom . but let there be that good 
 understanding at bottom . what about this Protestant Church ; and what 
 about this tenant - right ? Mr. Monk have be ask himself these 
 question for some time past . in regard to the Church , he have long 
 make up his mind that the Establishment in Ireland be a cry sin . 
 a man have marry a woman whom he know to be of a religion different 
 from his own , and then insist that his wife should say that she 
 believe those thing which he know very well that she do not 
 believe . but , as Mr. Monk well know , the subject of the Protestant 
 Endowments in Ireland be so difficult that it would require almost 
 more than human wisdom to adjust it . it be one of those matter 
 which almost seem to require the interposition of some high 
 power , - the coming of some apparently chance event , - to clear away 
 the evil ; as a fire come , and pestilential alley be remove ; as a 
 famine come , and man be drive from want and ignorance and dirt to 
 seek new home and new thought across the broad water ; as a war 
 come , and slavery be banish from the face of the earth . but in 
 regard to tenant - right , to some arrangement by which a tenant in 
 Ireland might be at least encourage to lay out what little capital 
 he might have in labour or money without be at once call upon to 
 pay rent for that outlay which be his own , as well as for the land 
 which be not his own , - Mr. Monk think that it be possible that if 
 a man would look hard enough he might perhaps be able to see his way 
 as to that . he have speak to two of his colleague on the subject , 
 the two man in the Cabinet whom he believe to be the most thoroughly 
 honest in their idea as public servant , the Duke and Mr. Gresham . 
 there be so much to be do ; - and then so little be know upon the 
 subject ! " I will endeavour to study it , " say Mr. Monk . " if you can 
 see your way , do ; " say Mr. Gresham , - " but of course we can not bind 
 ourselves . " " I should be glad to see it name in the Queen 's speech 
 at the beginning of the next session , " say Mr. Monk . " that be a long 
 way off as yet , " say Mr. Gresham , laugh . " who will be in then , 
 and who will be out ? " so the matter be dispose of at the time , but 
 Mr. Monk do not abandon his idea . he rather feel himself the more 
 bind to cling to it because he receive so little encouragement . 
 what be a seat in the Cabinet to he that he should on that account 
 omit a duty ? he have not take up politic as a trade . he have sit 
 far behind the Treasury bench or below the gangway for many a year , 
 without owe any man a shilling , - and could afford to do so again . 
 but it be different with Phineas Finn , as Mr. Monk himself 
 understand ; - and , understand this , he feel himself bind to 
 caution his young friend . but it may be a question whether his 
 caution do not do more harm than good . " I shall be delighted , " he 
 say , " to go over with you in August , but I do not think that if I 
 be you , I would take up this matter . " 
 " and why not ? you do not   want to fight the battle singlehande ? " 
 " no ; I desire no such glory , and would wish to have no well 
 lieutenant than you . but you have a subject of which you be really 
 fond , which you be begin to understand , and in regard to which 
 you can make yourself useful . " 
 " you mean this Canada business ? " 
 " yes ; - and that will grow to other matter as regard the colony . 
 there be nothing so important to a public man as that he should have 
 his own subject ; - the thing which he understand , and in respect of 
 which he can make himself really useful . " 
 " then there come a change . " 
 " yes ; - and the man who have half learn how to have a ship build 
 without waste be send into opposition , and be then bring back 
 to look after regiment , or perhaps have to take up that beautiful 
 subject , a study of the career of India . but , nevertheless , if you 
 have a subject , stick to it at any rate as long as it will stick to 
 you . " 
 " but , " say Phineas , " if a man take up his own subject , independent 
 of the Government , no man can drive he from it . " 
 " and how often do he do anything ? look at the annual motion which 
 come forward in the hand of private man , - Maynooth and the ballot 
 for instance . it be become more and more apparent every day that 
 all legislation must be carry by the Government , and must be 
 carry in obedience to the express wish of the people . the true 
 democracy that ever have a chance of living be that which we be now 
 establish in Great Britain . " 
 " then leave tenant - right to the people and the Cabinet . why should 
 you take it up ? " 
 Mr. Monk pause a moment or two before he reply . " if I choose to 
 run a - muck , there be no reason why you should follow I . I be old and 
 you be young . I want nothing from politic as a profession , and you 
 do . moreover , you have a congenial subject where you be , and need 
 not disturb yourself . for myself , I tell you , in confidence , that I 
 can not speak so comfortably of my own position . " 
 " we will go and see , at any rate , " say Phineas . 
 " yes , " say Mr. Monk , " we will go and see . " and thus , in the month of 
 May , it be settle between they that , as soon as the session should 
 be over , and the incidental work of his office should allow Phineas 
 to pack up and be off , they two should start together for Ireland . 
 Phineas feel rather proud as he write to his father and ask 
 permission to bring home with he a Cabinet Minister as a visitor . at 
 this time the reputation of Phineas at Killaloe , as well in the mind 
 of the Killaloeians generally as in those of the inhabitant of the 
 paternal house , stand very high indeed . how could a father think that 
 a son have do badly when before he be thirty year of age he be 
 earn L2,000 a year ? and how could a father not think well of a 
 son who have absolutely pay back certain money into the paternal 
 coffer ? the money so repaid have not be much ; but the repayment 
 of any such money at Killaloe have be regard as little short of 
 miraculous . the news of Mr. Monk 's come fly about the town , about 
 the county , about the diocese , and all people begin to say all good 
 thing about the old doctor 's only son . Mrs. Finn have long since 
 be quite sure that a real black swan have be send forth out of 
 her nest . and the sister Finn , for some time past , have feel in 
 all social gathering they stand quite on a different footing than 
 formerly because of their brother . they be ask about in the 
 county , and two of they have be stay only last Easter with the 
 Molonys , - the Molonys of Poldoodie ! how should a father and a mother 
 and sister not be grateful to such a son , to such a brother , to such 
 a veritable black swan out of the nest ! and as for dear little Mary 
 Flood Jones , her eye become suffuse with tear as in her solitude 
 she think how much out of her reach this swan be fly . and yet 
 she take joy in his swanhood , and swear that she would love he 
 still ; - that she would love he always . might he bring home with he 
 to Killaloe , Mr. Monk , the Cabinet Minister ! of course he might . when 
 Mrs. Finn first hear of this august arrival , she feel as though she 
 would like to expend herself in entertain , though but an hour , the 
 whole cabinet . 
 Phineas , during the spring , have , of course , meet Mr. Kennedy 
 frequently in and about the House , and have become aware that Lady 
 Laura 's husband , from time to time , make little overture of civility 
 to he , - take he now and again by the button - hole , walk home 
 with he as far as their joint path allow , and ask he once 
 or twice to come and dine in Grosvenor Place . these little advance 
 towards a repetition of the old friendship Phineas would have avoid 
 altogether , have it be possible . the invitation to Mr. Kennedy 's 
 house he do refuse , feel himself positively bind to do so by 
 Lady Laura 's command , let the consequence be what they might . when 
 he do refuse , Mr. Kennedy would assume a look of displeasure and 
 leave he , and Phineas would hope that the work be do . then there 
 would come another encounter , and the invitation would be repeat . 
 at last , about the middle of May , there come another note . " dear 
 Finn , will you dine with we on Wednesday , the 28th ? I give you a long 
 notice , because you seem to have so many appointment . your always , 
 Robert Kennedy . " he have no alternative . he must refuse , even though 
 double the notice have be give . he could only think that Mr. 
 Kennedy be a very obtuse man and one who would not take a hint , 
 and hope that he might succeed at last . so he write an answer , not 
 intend to be conciliatory . " my dear Kennedy , I be sorry to say that 
 I be engage on the 28th . your always , Phineas Finn . " at this period 
 he do his good to keep out of Mr. Kennedy 's way , and would be very 
 cunning in his manoeuvre that they should not be alone together . 
 it be difficult , as they sit on the same bench in the House , 
 and consequently see each other almost every day of their life . 
 nevertheless , he think that with a little cunning he might prevail , 
 especially as he be not unwilling to give so much of offence as 
 might assist his own object . but when Mr. Kennedy call upon he at 
 his office the day after he have write the above note , he have no 
 mean of escape . 
 " I be sorry you can not come to we on the 28th , " Mr. Kennedy say , as 
 soon as he be seat . 
 Phineas be take so much by surprise that all his cunning fail 
 he . " well , yes , " say he ; " I be very sorry ; - very sorry indeed . " 
 " it seem to I , Finn , that you have have some reason for avoid I 
 of late . I do not know that I have do anything to offend you . " 
 " nothing on earth , " say Phineas . 
 " I be wrong , then , in suppose that anything beyond mere chance have 
 prevent you from come to my house ? " Phineas feel that he be in 
 a terrible difficulty , and he feel also that he be be rather 
 ill - use in be thus cross - examine as to his reason for not go 
 to a gentleman 's dinner . he think that a man ought to be allow 
 to choose where he would go and where he would not go , and that 
 question such as these be very uncommon . Mr. Kennedy be sit 
 opposite to he , look more grave and more sour than usual ; - and 
 now his own countenance also become a little solemn . it be 
 impossible that he should use Lady Laura 's name , and yet he must , in 
 some way , let his persecuting friend know that no further invitation 
 would be of any use ; - that there be something beyond mere chance 
 in his not go to Grosvenor Place . but how be he to do this ? the 
 difficulty be so great that he could not see his way out of it . so 
 he sit silent with a solemn face . Mr. Kennedy then ask he another 
 question , which make the difficulty ten time great . " have my wife 
 ask you not to come to our house ? " 
 it be necessary now that he should make a rush and get out of his 
 trouble in some way . " to tell you the truth , Kennedy , I do not   think 
 she want to see I there . " 
 " that do not answer my question . have she ask you not to come ? " 
 " she say that which leave on my mind an impression that she would 
 soon that I do not come . " 
 " what do she say ? " 
 " how can I answer such a question as that , Kennedy ? be it fair to ask 
 it ? " 
 " quite fair , - I think . " 
 " I think it quite unfair , and I must decline to answer it . I can not 
 imagine what you expect to gain by cross - question I in this way . 
 of course no man like to go to a house if he do not believe that 
 everybody there will make he welcome . " 
 " you and Lady Laura use to be great friend . " 
 " I hope we be not enemy now . but thing will occur that cause 
 friendship to grow cool . " 
 " have you quarrel with her father ? " 
 " with Lord Brentford ? - no . " 
 " or with her brother , - since the duel I mean ? " 
 " upon my word and honour I can not stand this , and I will not . I have 
 not as yet quarrel with anybody ; but I must quarrel with you , if 
 you go on in this way . it be quite unusual that a man should be put 
 through his facing after such a fashion , and I must beg that there 
 may be an end of it . " 
 " then I must ask Lady Laura . " 
 " you can say what you like to your own wife of course . I can not 
 hinder you . " 
 upon that Mr. Kennedy formally shake hand with he , in token that 
 there be no positive breach between they , - as two nation may still 
 maintain their alliance , though they have make up their mind to hate 
 each other , and thwart each other at every turn , - and take his leave . 
 Phineas , as he sit at his window , look out into the park , and 
 thinking of what have pass , could not but reflect that , disagreeable 
 as Mr. Kennedy have be to he , he would probably make himself much 
 more disagreeable to his wife . and , for himself , he think that he 
 have get out of the scrape very well by the exhibition of a little 
 mock anger . 
 CHAPTER LIX 
 the Earl 's Wrath 
 the reader may remember that a rumour have be convey to 
 Phineas , - a rumour indeed which reach he from a source which he 
 regard as very untrustworthy , - that Violet Effingham have quarrel 
 with her lover . he would probably have pay no attention to the 
 rumour , beyond that which necessarily attach itself to any tiding 
 as to a matter so full of interest to he , have it not be repeat 
 to he in another quarter . " a bird have tell I that your Violet 
 Effingham have break with her lover , " Madame Goesler say to he one 
 day . " what bird ? " he ask . " ah , that I can not tell you . but this I 
 will confess to you , that these bird which tell we news be seldom 
 very credible , - and be often not very creditable , you must take 
 a bird 's word for what it may be worth . it be say that they have 
 quarrel . I daresay , if the truth be know , they be bill and 
 cooing in each other 's arm at this moment . " 
 Phineas do not like to be tell of their billing and cooing , - do 
 not like to be tell even of their quarrelling . though they be to 
 quarrel , it would do he no good . he would rather that nobody should 
 mention their name to he ; - so that his back , which have be so 
 utterly break , might in process of time get itself cure . from what 
 he know of Violet he think it very improbable that , even be 
 she to quarrel with one lover , she would at once throw herself into 
 the arm of another . and he do feel , too , that there would be 
 some meanness in take she , be she willing to be so take . but , 
 nevertheless , these rumour , come to he in this way from different 
 source , almost make it incumbent on he to find out the truth . he 
 begin to think that his break back be not cure ; - that perhaps , 
 after all , it be not in the way of be cure , and be it not 
 possible that there might be explanation ? then he go to work 
 and build castle in the air , so construct as to admit of the 
 possibility of Violet Effingham become his wife . 
 this have be in April , and at that time all that he know of Violet 
 be , that she be not yet in London . and he think that he know the 
 same as to Lord Chiltern . the Earl have tell he that Chiltern be not 
 in town , nor expect in town as yet ; and in say so have seem to 
 express displeasure against his son . Phineas have meet Lady Baldock at 
 some house which he frequent , and have be quite surprised to find 
 himself graciously receive by the old woman . she have say not a word 
 of Violet , but have speak of Lord Chiltern , - mention his name in 
 bitter wrath . " but he be a friend of mine , " say Phineas , smile . 
 " a friend indeed ! Mr. Finn . I know what sort of a friend . I do not 
 believe that you be his friend . I be afraid he be not worthy of 
 have any friend . " Phineas do not quite understand from this 
 that Lady Baldock be signify to he that , badly as she have 
 thought of he as a suitor for her niece , she would have prefer 
 he , - especially now when people be begin to speak well of 
 he , - to that terrible young man , who , from his youth upwards , have 
 be to she a cause of fear and trembling . of course it be desirable 
 that Violet should marry an eld son , and a peer 's heir . all that 
 kind of thing , in Lady Baldock 's eye , be most desirable . but , 
 nevertheless , anything be well than Lord Chiltern . if Violet would 
 not take Mr. Appledom or Lord Fawn , in heaven 's name let she take 
 this young man , who be kind , worthy , and steady , who be civilised 
 in his manner , and would no doubt be amenable in regard to 
 settlement . Lady Baldock have so far fall in the world that she 
 would have consent to make a bargain with her niece , - almost any 
 bargain , so long as Lord Chiltern be exclude . Phineas do not quite 
 understand all this ; but when Lady Baldock ask he to come to 
 Berkeley Square , he perceive that help be be proffer to he 
 where he certainly have not look for help . 
 he be frequently with Lord Brentford , who talk to he constantly 
 on matter connect with his parliamentary life . after have be 
 the intimate friend of the daughter and of the son , it now seem 
 to be his lot to be the intimate friend of the father . the Earl 
 have constantly discuss with he his arrangement with his son , 
 and have lately express himself as only half satisfied with such 
 reconciliation as have take place . and Phineas could perceive that 
 from day to day the Earl be less and less satisfied . he would 
 complain bitterly of his son , - complain of his silence , complain of 
 his not come to London , complain of his conduct to Violet , complain 
 of his idle indifference to anything like proper occupation ; but he 
 have never as yet say a word to show that there have be any quarrel 
 between Violet and her lover , and Phineas have feel that he could not 
 ask the question . " Mr. Finn , " say the Earl to he one morning , as 
 soon as he enter the room , " I have just hear a story which have 
 almost seem to I to be incredible . " the nobleman 's manner be very 
 stern , and the fact that he call his young friend " Mr. Finn " , 
 show at once that something be wrong . 
 " what be it you have hear , my lord ? " say Phineas . 
 " that you and Chiltern go over , - last year to , - Belgium , and 
 fight , - a duel there ! " 
 now it must have be the case that , in the set among which they 
 all live , - Lord Brentford and his son and daughter and Phineas 
 Finn , - the old lord be the only man who have not hear of the duel 
 before this . it have even penetrate to the dull ear of Mr. Kennedy , 
 remind he , as it do so , that his wife have , - tell he a lie ! but 
 it be the fact that no rumour of the duel have reach the Earl till 
 this morning . 
 " it be true , " say Phineas . 
 " I have never be so much shocked in my life ; - never . I have no idea 
 that you have any thought of aspire to the hand of Miss Effingham . " 
 the lord 's voice as he say this be very stern . 
 " as I aspire in vain , and as Chiltern have be successful , that need 
 not now be make a reproach against I . " 
 " I do not know what to think of it , Mr. Finn . I be so much surprised 
 that I hardly know what to say . I must declare my opinion at once , 
 that you behave , - very badly . " 
 " I do not know how much you know , my lord , and how much you do not 
 know ; and the circumstance of the little affair do not permit I to 
 be explicit about they ; but , as you have express your opinion so 
 openly you must allow I to express mine , and to say that , as far as 
 I can judge of my own action , I do not behave badly at all . " 
 " do you intend to defend duelling , sir ? " 
 " no . if you mean to tell I that a duel be of itself sinful , I have 
 nothing to say . I suppose it be . my defence of myself merely go to 
 the manner in which this duel be fight , and the fact that I fight 
 it with your son . " 
 " I can not conceive how you can have come to my house as my guest , 
 and stand upon my interest for my borough , when you at the time be 
 do your very good to interpose yourself between Chiltern and the 
 lady whom you so well know I wish to become his wife . " Phineas be 
 aware that the Earl must have be very much move indeed when he 
 thus permit himself to speak of " his " borough . he say nothing 
 now , however , though the Earl pause ; - and then the angry lord 
 go on . " I must say that there be something , - something almost 
 approach to duplicity in such conduct . " 
 " if I be to defend myself by evidence , Lord Brentford , I should 
 have to go back to exact date , - and date not of fact which I could 
 verify , but date as to my feeling which could not be verify , - and 
 that would be useless . I can only say that I believe I know what 
 the honour and truth of a gentleman demand , - even to the verge of 
 self - sacrifice , and that I have do nothing that ought to place my 
 character as a gentleman in jeopardy . if you will ask your son , I 
 think he will tell you the same . " 
 " I have ask he . it be he who tell I of the duel . " 
 " when do he tell you , my lord ? " 
 " just now ; this morning . " thus Phineas learn that Lord Chiltern be 
 at this moment in the house , - or at least in London . 
 " and do he complain of my conduct ? " 
 " I complain of it , sir . I complain of it very bitterly . I place the 
 great confidence in you , especially in regard to my son 's affair , 
 and you deceive I . " the Earl be very angry , and be more angry 
 from the fact that this young man who have offend he , to whom he 
 have give such vital assistance when assistance be need , have use 
 that assistance to its utmost before his sin be find out . have 
 Phineas still be sit for Loughton , so that the Earl could have 
 say to he , " you be now bind to retreat from this borough because 
 you have offend I , your patron , " I think that he would have 
 forgive the offender and allow he to remain in his seat . there 
 would have be a scene , and the Earl would have be pacify . but 
 now the offender be beyond his reach altogether , have use the 
 borough as a most convenient stepping - stone over his difficulty , 
 and have so use it just at the time when he be commit this 
 sin . there be a good fortune about Phineas which add greatly to 
 the lord 's wrath . and then , to tell the truth , he have not that rich 
 consolation for which Phineas give he credit . Lord Chiltern have tell 
 he that morning that the engagement between he and Violet be at an 
 end . " you have so preach to she , my lord , about my duty , " the son 
 have say to his father , " that she find herself oblige to give I 
 your sermon at second hand , till I can bear they no long . " but of 
 this Phineas know nothing as yet . the Earl , however , be so imprudent 
 in his anger that before this interview be over he have tell the 
 whole story . " yes ; - you deceive I , " he continue ; " and I can never 
 trust you again . " 
 " be it for I , my lord , to tell you of that which would have 
 increase your anger against your own son ? when he want I to fight 
 be I to come , like a sneak at school , and tell you the story ? I know 
 what you would have think of I have I do so . and when it be over 
 be I to come and tell you then ? think what you yourself would have 
 do when you be young , and you may be quite sure that I do the 
 same . what have I gain ? he have get all that he want ; and you 
 have also get all that you want ; - and I have help you both . Lord 
 Brentford , I can put my hand on my heart and say that I have be 
 honest to you . " 
 " I have get nothing that I want , " say the Earl in his despair . 
 " Lord Chiltern and Miss Effingham will be man and wife . " 
 " no ; - they will not . he have quarrel with she . he be so obstinate 
 that she will not bear with he . " 
 then it be all true , even though the rumour have reach he through 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon and Madame Max Goesler . " at any rate , my lord , 
 that have not be my fault , " he say , after a moment 's hesitation . 
 the Earl be walk up and down the room , angry with himself at his 
 own mistake in have tell the story , and not know what far to 
 say to his visitor . he have be in the habit of talk so freely to 
 Phineas about his son that he could hardly resist the temptation of 
 do so still ; and yet it be impossible that he could swallow his 
 anger and continue in the same strain . " my lord , " say Phineas , after 
 a while , " I can assure you that I grieve that you should be grieve . 
 I have receive so much undeserved favour from your family , that I 
 owe you a debt which I can never pay . I be sorry that you should be 
 angry with I now ; but I hope that a time may come when you will 
 think less severely of my conduct . " 
 he be about to leave the room when the Earl stop he . " will you 
 give I your word , " say the Earl , " that you will think no more of 
 Miss Effingham ? " Phineas stand silent , consider how he might 
 answer this proposal , resolve that nothing should bring he to such 
 a pledge as that suggest while there be yet a ledge for hope to 
 stand on . " say that , Mr. Finn , and I will forgive everything . " 
 " I can not acknowledge that I have do anything to be forgive . " 
 " say that , " repeat the Earl , " and everything shall be forget . " 
 " there need be no cause for alarm , my lord , " say Phineas . " you may 
 be sure that Miss Effingham will not think of I . " 
 " will you give I your word ? " 
 " no , my lord ; - certainly not . you have no right to ask it , and the 
 pursuit be open to I as to any other man who may choose to follow 
 it . I have hardly a vestige of a hope of success . it be barely 
 possible that I should succeed . but if it be true that Miss Effingham 
 be disengage , I shall endeavour to find an opportunity of urge my 
 suit . I would give up everything that I have , my seat in Parliament , 
 all the ambition of my life , for the bare chance of success . when 
 she have accept your son , I desist , - of course . I have now hear , 
 from more source than one , that she or he or both of they have 
 change their mind . if this be so , I be free to try again . " the 
 Earl stand opposite to he , scowl at he , but say nothing . " good 
 morning , my lord . " 
 " good morning , sir . " 
 " I be afraid it must be good - bye , for some long day to come . " 
 " good morning , sir , " and the Earl as he speak rang the bell . then 
 Phineas take up his hat and depart . 
 as he walk away his mind fill itself gradually with various 
 idea , all spring from the word which Lord Brentford have speak . 
 what account have Lord Chiltern give to his father of the duel ? our 
 hero be a man very sensitive as to the good opinion of other , and 
 in spite of his bold assertion of his own knowledge of what become 
 a gentleman , be beyond measure solicitous that other should 
 acknowledge his claim at any rate to that title . he think that he 
 have be generous to Lord Chiltern ; and as he go back in his memory 
 over almost every word that have be speak in the interview that have 
 just pass , he fancy that he be able to collect evidence that his 
 antagonist at Blankenberg have not speak ill of he . as to the charge 
 of deceit which the Earl have make against he , he tell himself that 
 the Earl have make it in anger . he would not even think hardly of the 
 Earl who have be so good a friend to he , but he believe in his 
 heart that the Earl have make the accusation out of his wrath and not 
 out of his judgment . " he can not think that I have be false to he , " 
 Phineas say to himself . but it be very sad to he that he should 
 have to quarrel with all the family of the Standishes , as he could 
 not but feel that it be they who have put he on his foot . it seem 
 as though he be never to see Lady Laura again except when they 
 chance to meet in company , - on which occasion he simply bow to 
 she . now the Earl have almost turn he out of his house . and though 
 there have be to a certain extent a reconciliation between he and 
 Lord Chiltern , he in these day never see the friend who have once put 
 he upon Bonebreaker ; and now , - now that Violet Effingham be again 
 free , - how be it possible to avoid some renewal of enmity between 
 they ? he would , however , endeavour to see Lord Chiltern at once . 
 and then he think of Violet , - of Violet again free , of Violet as 
 again a possible wife for himself , of Violet to whom he might address 
 himself at any rate without any scruple as to his own unworthiness . 
 everybody concern , and many who be not concern at all , be 
 aware that he have be among her lover , and he think that he could 
 perceive that those who interest themselves on the subject , have 
 regard he as the only horse in the race likely to run with success 
 against Lord Chiltern . she herself have receive his offer without 
 scorn , and have always treat he as though he be a favoured 
 friend , though not favour as a lover . and now even Lady Baldock be 
 smile upon he , and ask he to her house as though the red - faced 
 porter in the hall in Berkeley Square have never be order to 
 refuse he a moment 's admission inside the door . he have be very 
 humble in speak of his own hope to the Earl , but surely there 
 might be a chance . what if after all the little strain which he have 
 have in his back be to be cure after such a fashion as this ! when he 
 get to his lodging , he find a card from Lady Baldock , inform he 
 that Lady Baldock would be at home on a certain night , and that there 
 would be music . he could not go to Lady Baldock be on the night name , 
 as it would be necessary that he should be in the House ; - nor do he 
 much care to go there , as Violet Effingham be not in town . but he 
 would call and explain , and endeavour to curry favour in that way . 
 he at once write a note to Lord Chiltern , which he address to 
 Portman Square . " as you be in town , can we not meet ? come and dine 
 with I at the - - Club on Saturday . " that be the note . after a 
 few day he receive the follow answer , date from the Bull at 
 Willingford . why on earth should Chiltern be stay at the Bull at 
 Willingford in May ? 
 the old Shop at W - - , Friday . 
 DEAR phinea , 
 I can not   dine with you , because I be down here , look 
 after the cripple , and write a sporting novel . they 
 tell I I ought to do something , so I be go to do that . 
 I hope you do not   think I turn informer against you in 
 tell the Earl of our pleasant little meeting on the 
 sand . it have become necessary , and you be too much of a 
 man to care much for any truth be tell . he be terribly 
 angry both with I and with you ; but the fact be , he be so 
 blindly unreasonable that one can not regard his anger . I 
 endeavour to tell the story truly , and , so tell , it 
 certainly should not have injure you in his estimation . 
 but it do . very sorry , old fellow , and I hope you will get 
 over it . it be a good deal more important to I than to 
 you . 
 your , 
 C. 
 there be not a word about Violet . but then it be hardly to be 
 expect that there should be word about Violet . it be not likely 
 that a man should write to his rival of his own failure . but yet 
 there be a flavour of Violet in the letter which would not have be 
 there , so Phineas think , if the writer have be despondent . the 
 pleasant little meeting on the sand have be convene altogether in 
 respect of Violet . and the telling of the story to the Earl must have 
 arise from discussion about Violet . Lord Chiltern must have tell 
 his father that Phineas be his rival . could the reject suitor have 
 write on such a subject in such a strain to such a correspondent 
 if he have believe his own rejection to be certain ? but then 
 Lord Chiltern be not like anybody else in the world , and it be 
 impossible to judge of he by one 's experience of the motif of 
 other . 
 shortly afterwards Phineas do call in Berkeley Square , and be show 
 up at once into Lady Baldock 's drawing - room . the whole aspect of the 
 porter 's countenance be change towards he , and from this , too , he 
 gather good augury this have surprise he ; but his surprise be 
 far great , when , on enter the room , he find Violet Effingham 
 there alone . a little fresh colour come to her face as she greet 
 he , though it can not be say that she blush . she behave herself 
 admirably , not endeavour to conceal some little emotion at thus 
 meet he , but betray none that be injurious to her composure . 
 " I be so glad to see you , Mr. Finn , " she say . " my aunt have just leave 
 I , and will be back directly . " 
 he be by no mean she equal in his management of himself on the 
 occasion ; but perhaps it may be acknowledge that his position 
 be the more difficult of the two . he have not see she since she 
 engagement have be proclaim to the world , and now he have hear 
 from a source which be not to be doubt , that it have be break 
 off . of course there be nothing to be say on that matter . he could 
 not have congratulate she in the one case , nor could he either 
 congratulate she or condole with she on the other . and yet he do not 
 know how to speak to she as though no such event have occur . " I 
 do not know that you be in town , " he say . 
 " I only come yesterday . I have be , you know , at Rome with the 
 Effinghams ; and since that I have be - ; but , indeed , I have be 
 such a vagrant that I can not tell you of all my coming and going . 
 and you , - you be hard at work ! " 
 " oh yes ; - always . " 
 " that be right . I wish I could be something , if it be only a stick 
 in waiting , or a door - keeper . it be so good to be something . " be it 
 some such teaching as this that have jar against Lord Chiltern 's 
 susceptibility , and have seem to he to be a repetition of his 
 father 's sermon ? 
 " a man should try to be something , " say Phineas . 
 " and a woman must be content to be nothing , - unless Mr. Mill can pull 
 we through ! and now , tell I , - have you see Lady Laura ? " 
 " not lately . " 
 " nor Mr. Kennedy ? " 
 " I sometimes see he in the House . " the visit to the Colonial Office 
 of which the reader have be make aware have not at that time as yet 
 be make . 
 " I be sorry for all that , " she say . upon which Phineas smile and 
 shake his head . " I be very sorry that there should be a quarrel 
 between you two . " 
 " there be no quarrel . " 
 " I use to think that you and he might do so much for each 
 other , - that be , of course , if you could make a friend of he . " 
 " he be a man of whom it be very hard to make a friend , " say Phineas , 
 feel that he be dishonest to Mr. Kennedy in say so , but 
 think that such dishonesty be justify by what he owe to Lady 
 Laura . 
 " yes ; - he be hard , and what I call ungenial . we will not   say anything 
 about he , - will we ? have you see much of the Earl ? " this she ask 
 as though such a question have no reference whatever to Lord Chiltern . 
 " oh dear , - alas , alas ! " 
 " you have not quarrel with he too ? " 
 " he have quarrel with I . he have hear , Miss Effingham , of what 
 happen last year , and he think that I be wrong . " 
 " of course you be wrong , Mr. Finn . " 
 " very likely . to he I choose to defend myself , but I certainly shall 
 not do so to you . at any rate , you do not think it necessary to 
 quarrel with I . " 
 " I ought to have do so . I wonder why my aunt do not come . " then 
 she ring the bell . 
 " now I have tell you all about myself , " say he ; " you should tell I 
 something of yourself . " 
 " about I ? I be like the knife - grinder , who have no story to 
 tell , - none at least to be tell . we have all , no doubt , get our 
 little story , interesting enough to ourselves . " 
 " but your story , Miss Effingham , " he say , " be of such intense 
 interest to I . " at that moment , luckily , Lady Baldock come into 
 the room , and Phineas be save from the necessity of make a 
 declaration at a moment which would have be most inopportune . 
 Lady Baldock be exceedingly gracious to he , bid Violet use she 
 influence to persuade he to come to the gathering . " persuade he to 
 desert his work to come and hear some fiddler ! " say Miss Effingham . 
 " indeed I shall not , aunt . who can tell but what the colony might 
 suffer from it through century , and that such a lapse of duty might 
 drive a province or two into the arm of our mortal enemy ? " 
 " Herr Moll be come , " say Lady Baldock , " and so be Signor Scrubi , 
 and Pjinskt , who , they say , be the great man live on the 
 flageolet . have you ever hear Pjinskt , Mr. Finn ? " Phineas never have 
 hear Pjinskt . " and as for Herr Moll , there be nothing equal to he , 
 this year , at least . " Lady Baldock have take up music this season , 
 but all her enthusiasm be unable to shake the conscientious zeal of 
 the young Under - Secretary of State . at such a gathering he would have 
 be unable to say a word in private to Violet Effingham . 
 CHAPTER LX 
 Madame Goesler 's Politics 
 it may be remember that when Lady Glencora Palliser be show into 
 Madame Goesler 's room , Madame Goesler have just explain somewhat 
 forcibly to the Duke of Omnium her reason for refuse the loan of 
 his grace 's villa at Como . she have tell the Duke in so many word 
 that she do not mean to give the world an opportunity of malign 
 she , and it would then have be leave to the Duke to decide whether 
 any other arrangement might have be make for take Madame Goesler 
 to Como , have he not be interrupt . that he be very anxious to 
 take she be certain . the green brougham have already be often 
 enough at the door in Park Lane to make his grace feel that Madame 
 Goesler 's company be very desirable , - be , perhaps , of all thing 
 leave for his enjoyment , the one thing the most desirable . Lady 
 Glencora have speak to her husband of child cry for the top 
 brick of the chimney . now it have come to this , that in the eye 
 of the Duke of Omnium Marie Max Goesler be the top brick of the 
 chimney . she have more wit for he than other woman , - more of that 
 sort of wit which he be capable of enjoy . she have a beauty which 
 he have learn to think more alluring than other beauty . he be sick 
 of fair face , and fat arm , and free neck . Madame Goesler 's eye 
 sparkle as other eye do not sparkle , and there be something 
 of the vagueness of mystery in the very blackness and gloss and 
 abundance of her hair , - as though her beauty be the beauty of some 
 world which he have not yet know . and there be a quickness and yet 
 a grace of motion about she which be quite new to he . the lady 
 upon whom the Duke have of late most often smile have be somewhat 
 slow , - perhaps almost heavy , - though , no doubt , graceful withal . in 
 his early youth he remember to have see , somewhere in Greece , such 
 a houri as be this Madame Goesler . the houri in that case have run 
 off with the captain of a russian vessel engage in the tallow trade ; 
 but not the less be there leave on his grace 's mind some dreamy 
 memory of charm which have impress he very strongly when he be 
 simply a young Mr. Palliser , and have have at his command not so 
 convenient a mode of sudden abduction as the russian captain 's tallow 
 ship . press hard by such circumstance as these , there be no 
 know how the Duke might have get out of his difficulty have not 
 Lady Glencora appear upon the scene . 
 since the future little Lord Silverbridge have be bear , the Duke have 
 be very constant in his worship of Lady Glencora , and as , from year 
 to year , a little brother be add , thus make the family very 
 strong and stable , his act of worship have increase ; but with his 
 worship there have come of late something almost of dread , - something 
 almost of obedience , which have make those who be immediately 
 about the Duke declare that his grace be a good deal change . for , 
 hitherto , whatever may have be the Duke 's weakness , he certainly 
 have know no master . his heir , Plantagenet Palliser , have be always 
 subject to he . his other relation have be keep at such a distance 
 as hardly to be more than recognise ; and though his grace no 
 doubt have have his intimacy , they who have be intimate with he 
 have either never try to obtain ascendancy , or have fail . Lady 
 Glencora , whether with or without a struggle , have succeed , and 
 people about the Duke say that the Duke be much change . Mr. 
 Fothergill , - who be his grace 's man of business , and who be not 
 a favourite with Lady Glencora , - say that he be very much change 
 indeed . find his grace so much change , Mr. Fothergill have make 
 a little attempt at dictation himself , but have recede with finger 
 very much scorch in the attempt . it be indeed possible that the 
 Duke be become in the slight degree weary of Lady Glencora 's 
 thraldom , and that he think that Madame Max Goesler might be more 
 tender with he . Madame Max Goesler , however , intend to be tender 
 only on one condition . 
 when Lady Glencora enter the room , Madame Goesler receive she 
 beautifully . " how lucky that you should have come just when his grace 
 be here ! " she say . 
 " I see my uncle 's carriage , and of course I know it , " say Lady 
 Glencora . 
 " then the favour be to he , " say Madame Goesler , smile . 
 " no , indeed ; I be come . if my word be to be doubt in that point , 
 I must insist on have the servant up ; I must , certainly . I tell 
 he to drive to this door , as far back as Grosvenor Street . do I 
 not , Planty ? " Planty be the little Lord Silverbridge as be to 
 be , if nothing unfortunate intervene , who be now sit on his 
 granduncle 's knee . 
 " Dou say to the little house in Park Lane , " say the boy . 
 " yes , - because I forget the number . " 
 " and it be the small house in Park Lane , so the evidence be 
 complete , " say Madame Goesler . Lady Glencora have not care much for 
 evidence to convince Madame Goesler , but she have not wish her uncle 
 to think that he be watch and hunt down . it might be necessary 
 that he should know that he be watch , but thing have not come to 
 that as yet . 
 " how be Plantagenet ? " ask the Duke . 
 " answer for papa , " say Lady Glencora to her child . 
 " Papa be very well , but he almost never come home . " 
 " he be work for his country , " say the Duke . " your papa be a busy , 
 useful man , and can not   afford time to play with a little boy as I 
 can . " 
 " but papa be not a duke . " 
 " he will be some day , and that probably before long , my boy . he will 
 be a duke quite as soon as he want to be a duke . he like the House 
 of Commons well than the strawberry leave , I fancy . there be not a 
 man in England less in a hurry than he be . " 
 " no , indeed , " say Lady Glencora . 
 " how nice that be , " say Madame Goesler . 
 " and I be not   in a hurry either , - be I , mamma ? " say the little future 
 Lord Silverbridge . 
 " you be a wicked little monkey , " say his grand - uncle , kiss he . 
 at this moment Lady Glencora be , no doubt , think how necessary 
 it be that she should be careful to see that thing do turn out 
 in the manner propose , - so that people who have wait should not 
 be disappoint ; and the Duke be perhaps think that he be not 
 absolutely bound to his nephew by any law of God or man ; and Madame 
 Max Goesler , - I wonder whether her thought be injurious to the 
 prospect of that handsome bold - faced little boy . 
 Lady Glencora rise to take she leave first . it be not for she to 
 show any anxiety to force the Duke out of the lady 's presence . if the 
 Duke be resolve to make a fool of himself , nothing that she could 
 do would prevent it . but she think that this little inspection 
 might possibly be of service , and that her uncle 's ardour would 
 be cool by the interruption to which he have be subject . so 
 she go , and immediately afterwards the Duke follow she . the 
 interruption have , at any rate , save he on that occasion from make 
 the high bid for the pleasure of Madame Goesler 's company at Como . 
 the Duke go down with the little boy in his hand , so that there 
 be not an opportunity for a single word of interest between the 
 gentleman and the lady . 
 Madame Goesler , when she be alone , seat herself on her sofa , 
 tuck her foot up under she as though she be seat somewhere in 
 the East , push her ringlet back roughly from her face , and then 
 place she two hand to her side so that her thumb rest lightly 
 on her girdle . when alone with something weighty on her mind she 
 would sit in this form for the hour together , resolve , or try 
 to resolve , what should be her conduct . she do few thing without 
 much thinking , and though she walk very boldly , she walk warily . 
 she often tell herself that such success as she have achieve could 
 not have be achieve without much caution . and yet she be ever 
 discontent with herself , tell herself that all that she have do 
 be nothing , or bad than nothing . what be it all , to have a duke 
 and to have lord din with she , to dine with lord or with a duke 
 itself , if life be dull with she , and the hour hang heavy ! life 
 with she be dull , and the hour do hang heavy . and what if she 
 catch this old man , and become herself a duchess , - catch he by 
 mean of his weakness , to the inexpressible dismay of all those 
 who be bind to he by tie of blood , - would that make her life 
 happy , or her hour less tedious ? that prospect of a life on the 
 italian lake with an old man tie to her side be not so charming in 
 her eye as it be in those of the Duke . be she to succeed , and to 
 be blazon forth to the world as Duchess of Omnium , what would she 
 have gain ? 
 she perfectly understand the motive of Lady Glencora 's visit , and 
 think that she would at any rate gain something in the very triumph 
 of baffle the manoeuvre of so clever a woman . let Lady Glencora 
 throw her aegis before the Duke , and it would be something to carry 
 off his grace from beneath the protection of so thick a shield . the 
 very flavour of the contest be pleasing to Madame Goesler . but , the 
 victory gain , what then would remain to she ? money she have already ; 
 position , too , she have of her own . she be free as air , and should it 
 suit she at any time to go off to some lake of Como in society that 
 would personally be more agreeable to she than that of the Duke of 
 Omnium , there be nothing to hinder she for a moment . and then come a 
 smile over her face , - but the sad smile , - as she think of one 
 with whom it might be pleasant to look at the colour of italian sky 
 and feel the softness of italian breeze . in feign to like to do 
 this with an old man , in act the rapture of love on behalf of a 
 wear - out duke who at the good would scarce believe in her acting , 
 there would not be much delight for she . she have never yet know what 
 it be to have anything of the pleasure of love . she have grow , as 
 she often tell herself , to be a hard , cautious , selfish , successful 
 woman , without any interference or assistance from such pleasure . 
 might there not be yet time leave for she to try it without 
 selfishness , - with an absolute devotion of self , - if only she 
 could find the right companion ? there be one who might be such a 
 companion , but the Duke of Omnium certainly could not be such a one . 
 but to be Duchess of Omnium ! after all , success in this world be 
 everything ; - be at any rate the only thing the pleasure of which will 
 endure . there be the name of many a woman write in a black list 
 within Madame Goesler 's breast , - write there because of scorn , 
 because of reject overture , because of deep social injury ; and 
 Madame Goesler tell herself often that it would be a pleasure to she 
 to use the list , and to be revenge on those who have ill - use and 
 scornfully treat she . she do not readily forgive those who have 
 injure she . as Duchess of Omnium she think that probably she might 
 use that list with efficacy . Lady Glencora have treat she well , and 
 she have no such feeling against Lady Glencora . as Duchess of Omnium 
 she would accept Lady Glencora as her dear friend , if Lady 
 Glencora would admit it . but if it should be necessary that there 
 should be a little duel between they , as to which of they should take 
 the Duke in hand , the duel must of course be fight . in a matter so 
 important , one woman would of course expect no false sentiment from 
 another . she and Lady Glencora would understand each other ; - and no 
 doubt , respect each other . 
 I have say that she would sit there resolve , or try to resolve . 
 there be nothing in the world so difficult as that task of make 
 up one 's mind . who be there that have not long that the power and 
 privilege of selection among alternative should be take away from 
 he in some important crisis of his life , and that his conduct should 
 be arrange for he , either this way or that , by some divine power 
 if it be possible , - by some patriarchal power in the absence of 
 divinity , - or by chance even , if nothing well than chance could be 
 find to do it ? but no one dare to cast the die , and to go honestly 
 by the hazard . there must be the actual necessity of obey the die , 
 before even the die can be of any use . as it be , when Madame Goesler 
 have sit there for an hour , till her leg be tired beneath she , she 
 have not resolve . it must be as her impulse should direct she when 
 the important moment come . there be not a soul on earth to whom she 
 could go for counsel , and when she ask herself for counsel , the 
 counsel would not come . 
 two day afterwards the Duke call again . he would come generally on 
 a Thursday , - early , so that he might be there before other visitor ; 
 and he have already quite learn that when he be there other 
 visitor would probably be refuse admittance . how Lady Glencora have 
 make her way in , tell the servant that her uncle be there , he have 
 not understand . that visit have be make on the Thursday , but now he 
 come on the Saturday , - have , I regret to say , send down some early 
 fruit from his own hot - house , - or from Covent Garden , - with a little 
 note on the previous day . the grape might have be pretty well , but 
 the note be injudicious . there be three line about the grape , as 
 to which there be some special history , the vine have be bring 
 from the garden of some villa in which some ill - use queen have live 
 and die ; and then there be a postscript in one line to say that the 
 Duke would call on the following morning . I do not think that he have 
 mean to add this when he begin his note ; but then child , who want 
 the top brick , want it so badly , and cry for it so perversely ! 
 of course Madame Goesler be at home . but even then she have not make 
 up her mind . she have make up her mind only to this , - that he should 
 be make to speak plainly , and that she would take time for her reply . 
 not even with such a gem as the Duke 's coronet before her eye , would 
 she jump at it . where there be so much doubt , there need at least be 
 no impatience . 
 " you run away the other day , Duke , because you could not resist the 
 charm of that little boy , " she say , laugh . 
 " he be a dear little boy , - but it be not that , " he answer . 
 " then what be it ? your niece carry you off in a whirl - wind . she 
 be come and go , take you with she , in half a minute . " 
 " she have disturb I when I be think of something , " say the 
 Duke . 
 " thing should not   be think of , - not so deeply as that . " Madame 
 Goesler be play with a bunch of his grape now , eat one or 
 two from a small china plate which have stand upon the table , and 
 he think that he have never see a woman so graceful and yet 
 so natural . " will you not eat your own grape with I ? they be 
 delicious ; - flavour with the poor queen 's sorrow . " he shake his 
 head , know that it do not suit his gastric juice to have to deal 
 with fruit eat at odd time . " never think , Duke . I be convince 
 that it do no good . it simply mean doubt , and doubt always 
 lead to error . the safe way in the world be to do nothing . " 
 " I believe so , " say the Duke . 
 " much the safe . but if you have not sufficient command over 
 yourself to enable you to sit in repose , always quiet , never 
 commit yourself to the chance of any danger , - then take a leap in 
 the dark ; or rather many leap . a stumble horse regain his footing 
 by persevere in his onward course . as for move cautiously , that I 
 detest . " 
 " and yet one must think ; - for instance , whether one will succeed or 
 not . " 
 " take that for grant always . remember , I do not recommend motion at 
 all . Repose be my idea of life ; - repose and grape . " 
 the Duke sit for a while silent , take his repose as far as the 
 outer man be concern , look at his top brick of the chimney , as 
 from time to time she eat one of his grape . probably she do not eat 
 above half - a - dozen of they altogether , but he think that the grape 
 must have be make for the woman , she be so pretty in the eating of 
 they . but it be necessary that he should speak at last . " have you 
 be think of come to Como ? " he say . 
 " I tell you that I never think . " 
 " but I want an answer to my proposition . " 
 " I think I have answer your grace on that question . " then she put 
 down the grape , and move herself on her chair , so that she sit with 
 her face turn away from he . 
 " but a request to a lady may be make twice . " 
 " oh , yes . and I be grateful , know how far it be from your 
 intention to do I any harm . and I be somewhat ashamed of my warmth 
 on the other day . but still there can be but one answer . there 
 be delight which a woman must deny herself , let they be ever so 
 delightful . " 
 " I have think , - " the Duke begin , and then he stop himself . 
 " your grace be say that you think , - " 
 " Marie , a man at my age do not like to be deny . " 
 " what man like to be deny anything by a woman at any age ? a woman 
 who deny anything be call cruel at once , - even though it be 
 her very soul . " she have turn round upon he now , and be lean 
 forward towards he from her chair , so that he could touch she if he 
 put out his hand . 
 he put out his hand and touch she . " Marie , " he say , " will you deny 
 I if I ask ? " 
 " Nay , my lord ; how shall I say ? there be many a trifle I would deny 
 you . there be many a great gift I would give you willingly . " 
 " but the great gift of all ? " 
 " my lord , if you have anything to say , you must say it plainly . there 
 never be a woman bad than I be at the reading of riddle . " 
 " could you endure to live in the quietude of an italian lake with an 
 old man ? " now he touch she again , and have take her hand . 
 " no , my lord ; - nor with a young one , - for all my day . but I do not 
 know that age would guide I . " 
 then the Duke rise and make his proposition in form . " Marie , you know 
 that I love you . why it be that I at my age should feel so sore a 
 love , I can not say . " 
 " so sore a love ! " 
 " so sore , if it be not gratify . Marie , I ask you to be my wife . " 
 " Duke of Omnium , this from you ! " 
 " yes , from I . my coronet be at your foot . if you will allow I to 
 raise it , I will place it on your brow . " 
 then she go away from he , and seat herself at a distance . after 
 a moment or two he follow she , and stand with his arm upon her 
 shoulder . " you will give I an answer , Marie ? " 
 " you can not have think of this , my lord . " 
 " Nay ; I have think of it much . " 
 " and your friend ? " 
 " my dear , I may venture to please myself in this , - as in everything . 
 will you not answer I ? " 
 " certainly not on the spur of the moment , my lord . think how high be 
 the position you offer I , and how immense be the change you propose 
 to I . allow I two day , and I will answer you by letter . I be so 
 flutter now that I must leave you . " then he come to she , take she 
 hand , kiss her brow , and open the door for she . 
 CHAPTER LXI 
 Another Duel 
 it happen that there be at this time certain matter of business 
 to be settle between the Duke of Omnium and his nephew Mr. Palliser , 
 respect which the latter call upon his uncle on the morning 
 after the Duke have commit himself by his offer . Mr. Palliser have 
 come by appointment make with Mr. Fothergill , the Duke 's man of 
 business , and have expect to meet Mr. Fothergill . Mr. Fothergill , 
 however , be not with the Duke , and the uncle tell the nephew that 
 the business have be postpone . then Mr. Palliser ask some 
 question as to the reason of such postponement , not mean much by 
 his question , - and the Duke , after a moment 's hesitation , answer 
 he , mean very much by his answer . " the truth be , Plantagenet , 
 that it be possible that I may marry , and if so this arrangement 
 would not suit I . " 
 " be you go to be marry ? " ask the astonished nephew . 
 " it be not exactly that , - but it be possible that I may do so . since 
 I propose this matter to Fothergill , I have be think over it , 
 and I have change my mind . it will make but little difference to 
 you ; and after all you be a far rich man than I be . " 
 " I be not think of money , Duke , " say Plantagenet Palliser . 
 " of what then be you think ? " 
 " simply of what you tell I . I do not in the least mean to 
 interfere . " 
 " I hope not , Plantagenet . " 
 " but I could not hear such a statement from you without some 
 surprise . whatever you do I hope will tend to make you happy . " 
 so much pass between the uncle and the nephew , and what the uncle 
 tell to the nephew , the nephew of course tell to his wife . " he be 
 with she again , yesterday , " say Lady Glencora , " for more than an 
 hour . and he have be half the morning dress himself before he 
 go to she . " 
 " he be not engage to she , or he would have tell I , " say 
 Plantagenet Palliser . 
 " I think he would , but there be no knowing . at the present moment I 
 have only one doubt , - whether to act upon he or upon she . " 
 " I do not see that you can do good by go to either . " 
 " well , we will see . if she be the woman I take she to be , I think I 
 could do something with she . I have never suppose she to be a bad 
 woman , - never . I will think of it . " then Lady Glencora leave she 
 husband , and do not consult he afterwards as to the course she 
 would pursue . he have his budget to manage , and his speech to make . 
 the little affair of the Duke and Madame Goesler , she think it well 
 to take into her own hand without any assistance from he . " what a 
 fool I be , " she say to herself , " to have she down there when the 
 Duke be at Matching ! " 
 Madame Goesler , when she be leave alone , feel that now indeed she 
 must make up her mind . she have ask for two day . the intervening 
 day be a Sunday , and on the Monday she must send her answer . she 
 might doubt at any rate for this one night , - the Saturday night , - and 
 sit playing , as it be , with the coronet of a duchess in her lap . 
 she have be bear the daughter of a small country attorney , and now a 
 duke have ask she to be his wife , - and a duke who be acknowledge 
 to stand above other duke ! nothing at any rate could rob she of that 
 satisfaction . whatever resolution she might form at last , she have by 
 her own resource reach a point of success in remembering which 
 there would always be a keen gratification . it would be much to be 
 Duchess of Omnium ; but it would be something also to have refuse to 
 be a Duchess of Omnium . during that evening , that night , and the next 
 morning , she remain play with the coronet in her lap . she would 
 not go to church . what good could any sermon do she while that bauble 
 be dangle before her eye ? after church - time , about two o'clock , 
 Phineas Finn come to she . just at this period Phineas would come 
 to she often ; - sometimes full of a new decision to forget Violet 
 Effingham altogether , at other minded to continue his siege let the 
 hope of success be ever so small . he have now hear that Violet and 
 Lord Chiltern have in truth quarrel , and be of course anxious to 
 be advise to continue the siege . when he first come in and speak a 
 word or two , in which there be no reference to Violet Effingham , 
 there come upon Madame Goesler a strong wish to decide at once that 
 she would play no long with the coronet , that the gem be not worth 
 the cost she would be call upon to pay for it . there be something 
 in the world well for she than the coronet , - if only it might be 
 have . but within ten minute he have tell she the whole tale about Lord 
 Chiltern , and how he have see Violet at Lady Baldock 's , - and how 
 there might yet be hope for he . what would she advise he to do ? " go 
 home , Mr. Finn , " she say , " and write a sonnet to her eyebrow . see if 
 that will have any effect . " 
 " ah , well ! it be natural that you should laugh at I ; but somehow , I 
 do not expect it from you . " 
 " do not be angry with I . what I mean be that such little thing seem 
 to influence this Violet of your . " 
 " do they ? I have not find that they do so . " 
 " if she have love Lord Chiltern she would not have quarrel with 
 he for a few word . if she have love you , she would not have 
 accept Lord Chiltern . if she love neither of you , she should say 
 so . I be lose my respect for she . " 
 " do not say that , Madame Goesler . I respect she as strongly as I love 
 she . " then Madame Goesler almost make up her mind that she would have 
 the coronet . there be a substance about the coronet that would not 
 elude her grasp . 
 late that afternoon , while she be still hesitate , there come 
 another caller to the cottage in Park Lane . she be still hesitate , 
 feeling that she have as yet another night before she . should she be 
 Duchess of Omnium or not ? all that she wish to be , she could not 
 be ; - but to be Duchess of Omnium be within her reach . then she begin 
 to ask herself various question . would the Queen refuse to accept 
 she in her new rank ? Refuse ! how could any Queen refuse to accept 
 she ? she have not do aught amiss in life . there be no slur on her 
 name ; no stain on her character . what though her father have be a 
 small attorney , and her first husband a Jew banker ! she have break 
 no law of God or man , have be accuse of break no law , which 
 breaking or which accusation need stand in the way of she be as 
 good a duchess as any other woman ! she be sit think of this , 
 almost angry with herself at the awe with which the propose rank 
 inspire she , when Lady Glencora be announce to she . 
 " Madame Goesler , " say Lady Glencora , " I be very glad to find you . " 
 " and I more than equally so , to be find , " say Madame Goesler , 
 smile with all her grace . 
 " my uncle have be with you since I see you last ? " 
 " oh yes ; - more than once if I remember right . he be here yesterday 
 at any rate . " 
 " he come often to you then ? " 
 " not so often as I would wish , Lady Glencora . the Duke be one of my 
 dear friend . " 
 " it have be a quick friendship . " 
 " yes ; - a quick friendship , " say Madame Goesler . then there be a 
 pause for some moment which Madame Goesler be determined that she 
 would not break . it be clear to she now on what ground Lady Glencora 
 have come to she , and she be fully minded that if she could bear the 
 full light of the god himself in all his glory , she would not allow 
 herself to be scorch by any reflect heat come from the god 's 
 niece . she think she could endure anything that Lady Glencora might 
 say ; but she would wait and hear what might be say . 
 " I think , Madame Goesler , that I have well hurry on to my subject 
 at once , " say Lady Glencora , almost hesitate as she speak , and 
 feel that the colour be rush up to her cheek and cover she 
 brow . " of course what I have to say will be disagreeable . of course I 
 shall offend you . and yet I do not mean it . " 
 " I shall be offend at nothing , Lady Glencora , unless I think that 
 you mean to offend I . " 
 " I protest that I do not . you have see my little boy . " 
 " yes , indeed . the sweetest child ! God never give I anything half so 
 precious as that . " 
 " he be the Duke 's heir . " 
 " so I understand . " 
 " for myself , by my honour as a woman , I care nothing . I be rich and 
 have all that the world can give I . for my husband , in this matter , 
 I care nothing . his career he will make for himself , and it will 
 depend on no title . " 
 " why all this to I , Lady Glencora ? what have I to do with your 
 husband 's title ? " 
 " much ; - if it be true that there be an idea of marriage between you 
 and the Duke of Omnium . " 
 " Psha ! " say Madame Goesler , with all the scorn of which she be 
 mistress . 
 " it be untrue , then ? " ask Lady Glencora . 
 " no ; - it be not untrue . there be an idea of such a marriage . " 
 " and you be engage to he ? " 
 " no ; - I be not engaged to he . " 
 " have he ask you ? " 
 " Lady Glencora , I really must say that such a cross - questioning 
 from one lady to another be very unusual . I have promise not to be 
 offend , unless I think that you wish to offend I . but do not 
 drive I too far . " 
 " Madame Goesler , if you will tell I that I be mistaken , I will beg 
 your pardon , and offer to you the most sincere friendship which one 
 woman can give another . " 
 " Lady Glencora , I can tell you nothing of the kind . " 
 " then it be to be so ! and have you think what you would gain ? " 
 " I have think much of what I should gain : - and something also of 
 what I should lose . " 
 " you have money . " 
 " yes , indeed ; plenty , - for want so moderate as mine . " 
 " and position . " 
 " well , yes ; a sort of position . not such as your , Lady Glencora . 
 that , if it be not bear to a woman , can only come to she from a 
 husband . she can not win it for herself . " 
 " you be free as air , go where you like , and do what you like . " 
 " too free , sometimes , " say Madame Goesler . 
 " and what will you gain by change all this simply for a title ? " 
 " but for such a title , Lady Glencora ! it may be little to you to be 
 Duchess of Omnium , but think what it must be to I ! " 
 " and for this you will not hesitate to rob he of all his friend , to 
 embitter his future life , to degrade he among his peer , - " 
 " degrade he ! who dare say that I shall degrade he ? he will exalt 
 I , but I shall no whit degrade he . you forget yourself , Lady 
 Glencora . " 
 " ask any one . it be not that I despise you . if I do , would I offer 
 you my hand in friendship ? but an old man , over seventy , carry the 
 weight and burden of such rank as his , will degrade himself in the 
 eye of his fellow , if he marry a young woman without rank , let 
 she be ever so clever , ever so beautiful . a Duke of Omnium may not do 
 as he please , as may another man . " 
 " it may be well , Lady Glencora , for other duke , and for the 
 daughter and heir and cousin of other duke , that his grace should 
 try that question . I will , if you wish it , argue this matter with you 
 on many point , but I will not allow you to say that I should degrade 
 any man whom I might marry . my name be as unstaine as your own . " 
 " I mean nothing of that , " say Lady Glencora . 
 " for he ; - I certainly would not willingly injure he . who wish 
 to injure a friend ? and , in truth , I have so little to gain , that 
 the temptation to do he an injury , if I think it one , be not 
 strong . for your little boy , Lady Glencora , I think your fear be 
 premature . " as she say this , there come a smile over her face , which 
 threaten to break from control and almost become laughter . " but , if 
 you will allow I to say so , my mind will not be turn against this 
 marriage half so strongly by any argument you can use as by those 
 which I can adduce myself . you have nearly drive I into it by 
 tell I I should degrade his house . it be almost incumbent on I 
 to prove that you be wrong . but you have well leave I to settle 
 the matter in my own bosom . you have indeed . " 
 after a while Lady Glencora do leave she , - to settle the matter 
 within her own bosom , - have no other alternative . 
 CHAPTER LXII 
 the Letter that be send to Brighton 
 Monday morning come and Madame Goesler have as yet write no answer 
 to the Duke of Omnium . have not Lady Glencora go to Park Lane on 
 the Sunday afternoon , I think the letter would have be write on 
 that day ; but , whatever may have be the effect of Lady Glencora 's 
 visit , it so far disturb Madame Goesler as to keep she from her 
 writing - table . there be yet another night for thought , and then the 
 letter should be write on the Monday morning . 
 when Lady Glencora leave Madame Goesler she go at once to the Duke 's 
 house . it be her custom to see her husband 's uncle on a Sunday , and 
 she would most frequently find he just at this hour , - before he go 
 up - stair to dress for dinner . she usually take her boy with she , but 
 on this occasion she go alone . she have try what she could do with 
 Madame Goesler , and she find that she have fail . she must now make 
 her attempt upon the Duke . but the Duke , perhaps anticipate some 
 attack of the kind , have flee . " where be his Grace , Barker ? " say Lady 
 Glencora to the porter . " we do not know , your ladyship . his grace 
 go away yesterday evening with nobody but Lapoule . " Lapoule be 
 the Duke 's french valet . Lady Glencora could only return home and 
 consider in her own mind what battery might yet be bring to 
 bear upon the Duke , towards stop the marriage , even after the 
 engagement should have be make , - if it be to be make . Lady 
 Glencora feel that such battery might still be bring up as would 
 not improbably have an effect on a proud , weak old man . if all other 
 resource fail , royalty in some of its branch might be induce 
 to make a request , and every august relation in the peerage should 
 interfere . the Duke no doubt might persevere and marry whom he 
 please , - if he be strong enough . but it require much personal 
 strength , - that stand alone against the well - arm battery of 
 all one 's friend . Lady Glencora have once try such a battle on 
 her own behalf , and have fail . she have wish to be imprudent when 
 she be young ; but her friend have be too strong for she . she have 
 be reduce , and keep in order , and make to run in a groove , - and 
 be now , when she sit look at her little boy with his bold face , 
 almost inclined to think that the world be right , and that groove 
 be good . but if she have be control when she be young , so 
 ought the Duke to be control now that he be old . it be all very 
 well for a man or woman to boast that he , - or she , - may do what he 
 like with his own , - or with her own . but there be circumstance in 
 which such self - action be ruinous to so many that coercion from the 
 outside become absolutely need . nobody have feel the injustice of 
 such coercion when apply to herself more sharply than have Lady 
 Glencora . but she have live to acknowledge that such coercion might 
 be proper , and be now prepared to use it in any shape in which it 
 might be make available . it be all very well for Madame Goesler 
 to laugh and exclaim , " Psha ! " when Lady Glencora declare her real 
 trouble . but should it ever come to pass that a black - browed baby 
 with a yellow skin should be show to the world as Lord Silverbridge , 
 Lady Glencora know that her peace of mind would be go for ever . she 
 have begin the world desire one thing , and have miss it . she have 
 suffer much , and have then reconcile herself to other hope . if 
 those other hope be also to be cut away from she , the world would 
 not be worth a pinch of snuff to she . the Duke have flee , and she 
 could do nothing to - day ; but to - morrow she would begin with her 
 battery . and she herself have do the mischief ! she have invite 
 this woman down to Matching ! Heaven and earth ! - that such a man as 
 the Duke should be such a fool ! - the widow of a Jew banker ! he , the 
 Duke of Omnium , - and thus to cut away from himself , for the rest of 
 his life , all honour , all peace of mind , all the grace of a noble 
 end to a career which , if not very noble in itself , have receive 
 the praise of nobility ! and to do this for a thin , black - browe , 
 yellow - visage woman with ringlet and devil 's eye , and a beard on 
 her upper lip , - a Jewess , - a creature of whose habit of life and 
 manner of thought they all be absolutely ignorant ; who drink , 
 possibly ; who might have be a forger , for what any one know ; 
 an adventuress who have find her way into society by her art and 
 perseverance , - and who do not even pretend to have a relation in 
 the world ! that such a one should have influence enough to intrude 
 herself into the house of Omnium , and blot the scutcheon , and , - 
 what be bad of all , - perhaps be the mother of future duke ! Lady 
 Glencora , in her anger , be very unjust to Madame Goesler , think 
 all evil of she , accuse she in her mind of every crime , deny 
 her all charm , all beauty . have the Duke forget himself and his 
 position for the sake of some fair girl with a pink complexion and 
 grey eye , and smooth hair , and a father , Lady Glencora think that 
 she would have forgive it well . it might be that Madame Goesler 
 would win her way to the coronet ; but when she come to put it on , she 
 should find that there be sharp thorn inside the lining of it . not 
 a woman worth the knowing in all London should speak to she ; - nor a 
 man either of those man with whom a Duchess of Omnium would wish to 
 hold converse . she should find her husband rat as a doting fool , 
 and herself rat as a scheming female adventuress . and it should go 
 hard with Lady Glencora , if the Duke be not separate from his new 
 Duchess before the end of the first year ! in her anger Lady Glencora 
 be very unjust . 
 the Duke , when he leave his house without tell his household 
 whither he be go , do send his address to , - the top brick of the 
 chimney . his note , which be deliver at Madame Goesler 's house late 
 on the Sunday evening , be as follow : - " I be to have your answer on 
 Monday . I shall be at Brighton . send it by a private messenger to the 
 Bedford Hotel there . I need not tell you with what expectation , with 
 what hope , with what fear I shall await it . - O. " poor old man ! he have 
 run through all the pleasure of life too quickly , and have not much 
 leave with which to amuse himself . at length he have set his eye on a 
 top brick , and be tired of everything else , want it very sorely . 
 poor old man ! how should it do he any good , even if he get it ? 
 Madame Goesler , when she receive the note , sit with it in her 
 hand , think of his great want . " and he would be tired of his new 
 playthe after a month , " she say to herself . but she have give 
 herself to the next morning , and she would not make up her mind that 
 night . she would sleep once more with the coronet of a duchess within 
 her reach . she do do so ; and wake in the morning with her mind 
 absolutely in doubt . when she walk down to breakfast , all doubt be 
 at an end . the time have come when it be necessary that she should 
 resolve , and while her maid be brush her hair for she she do 
 make her resolution . 
 " what a thing it be to be a great lady , " say the maid , who may 
 probably have reflect that the Duke of Omnium do not come here so 
 often for nothing . 
 " what do you mean by that , Lotta ? " 
 " the woman I know , madame , talk so much of their countess , and 
 ladyship , and duchess . I would never rest till I have a title in 
 this country , if I be a lady , - and rich and beautiful . " 
 " and can the countess , and the ladyship , and the duchess do as 
 they please ? " 
 " ah , madame ; - I know not that . " 
 " but I know . that will do , Lotta . now leave I . " then Madame Goesler 
 have make up her mind ; but I do not know whether that doubt as to 
 have her own way have much to do with it . as the wife of an old man 
 she would probably have have much of her own way . immediately after 
 breakfast she write her answer to the Duke , which be as follow : - 
 Park Lane , Monday . 
 MY DEAR DUKE of OMNIUM , 
 I find so great a difficulty in express myself to your 
 Grace in a write letter , that since you leave I I have 
 never cease to wish that I have be less nervous , less 
 doubting , and less foolish when you be present with I 
 here in my room . I might then have say in one word what 
 will take so many awkward word to explain . 
 great as be the honour you propose to confer on I , rich 
 as be the gift you offer I , I can not accept it . I can not 
 be your grace 's wife . I may almost say that I know it 
 be so when you part from I ; but the surprise of the 
 situation take away from I a part of my judgment , and 
 make I unable to answer you as I should have do . my 
 lord , the truth be , that I be not fit to be the wife of 
 the Duke of Omnium . I should injure you ; and though I 
 should raise myself in name , I should injure myself in 
 character . but you must not think , because I say this , 
 that there be any reason why I should not be an honest 
 man 's wife . there be none . I have nothing on my conscience 
 which I could not tell you , - or to another man ; nothing 
 that I need fear to tell to all the world . indeed , my 
 lord , there be nothing to tell but this , - that I be not 
 fit by birth and position to be the wife of the Duke of 
 Omnium . you would have to blush for I , and that no man 
 shall ever have to do on my account . 
 I will own that I have be ambitious , too ambitious , and 
 have be pleased to think that one so exalted as you be , 
 one whose high position be so rife in the eye of all man , 
 should have take pleasure in my company . I will confess 
 to a foolish woman 's silly vanity in have wish to be 
 know to be the friend of the Duke of Omnium . I be like 
 the other moth that flutter near the light and have their 
 wing burn . but I be wise than they in this , that 
 have be scorch , I know that I must keep my distance . 
 you will easily believe that a woman , such as I be , do 
 not refuse to ride in a carriage with your grace 's arm on 
 the panel without a regret . I be no philosopher . I do not 
 pretend to despise the rich thing of the world , or the 
 high thing . accord to my way of think a woman ought 
 to wish to be Duchess of Omnium ; - but she ought to wish 
 also to be able to carry her coronet with a proper grace . 
 as Madame Goesler I can live , even among my superior , at 
 my ease . as your grace 's wife , I should be easy no long ; 
  - nor would your Grace . 
 you will think perhaps that what I write be heartless , 
 that I speak altogether of your rank , and not at all of 
 the affection you have show I , or of that which I might 
 possibly bear towards you . I think that when the first 
 flush of passion be over in early youth man and woman 
 should strive to regulate their love , as they do their 
 other desire , by their reason . I could love your grace , 
 fondly , as your wife , if I think it well for your grace 
 or for myself that we should be man and wife . as I think 
 it would be ill for both of we , I will restrain that 
 feeling , and remember your grace ever with the pure 
 feeling of true friendship . 
 before I close this letter , I must utter a word of 
 gratitude . in the kind of life which I have lead as a 
 widow , a life which have be very isolated as regard 
 true fellowship , it have be my great effort to obtain 
 the good opinion of those among whom I have attempt to 
 make my way . I may , perhaps , own to you now that I have 
 have many difficulty . a woman who be alone in the world 
 be ever regard with suspicion . in this country a woman 
 with a foreign name , with mean derive from foreign 
 source , with a foreign history , be specially suspect . 
 I have strive to live that down , and I have succeed . 
 but in my wild dream I never dream of such success 
 as this , - that the Duke of Omnium should think I the 
 worthiest of the worthy . you may be sure that I be not 
 ungrateful , - that I never will be ungrateful . and I trust 
 it will not derogate from your opinion of my worth , that 
 I have know what be due to your grace 's highness . 
 I have the honour to be , 
 my Lord Duke , 
 your most obliged and faithful servant , 
 MARIE MAX GOESLER . 
 " how many unmarried woman in England be there would do the same ? " 
 she say to herself , as she fold the paper , and put it into an 
 envelope , and seal the cover . the moment that the letter be 
 complete she send it off , as she be direct to send it , so 
 that there might be no possibility of repentance and subsequent 
 hesitation . she have at last make up her mind , and she would stand 
 by the making . she know that there would come moment in which she 
 would deeply regret the opportunity that she have lose , - the chance 
 of greatness that she have fling away from she . but so would she 
 have often regret it , also , have she accept the greatness . her 
 position be one in which there must be regret , let her decision have 
 be what it might . but she have decide , and the thing be do . she 
 would still be free , - Marie Max Goesler , - unless in abandon she 
 freedom she would obtain something that she might in truth prefer to 
 it . when the letter be go she sit disconsolate , at the window of 
 an up - stair room in which she have write , think much of the 
 coronet , much of the name , much of the rank , much of that position 
 in society which she have flatter herself she might have win for 
 herself as Duchess of Omnium by her beauty , her grace , and her wit . 
 it have not be simply her ambition to be a duchess , without far 
 aim or object . she have fancy that she might have be such a 
 duchess as there be never another , so that her fame might have be 
 great throughout Europe , as a woman charming at all point . and she 
 would have have friend , then , - real friend , and would not have live 
 alone as it be now her fate to do . and she would have love she 
 ducal husband , old though he be , and stiff with pomp and ceremony . 
 she would have love he , and do she good to add something of 
 brightness to his life . it be indeed true that there be one whom 
 she love well ; but of what avail be it to love a man who , when he 
 come to she , would speak to she of nothing but of the charm which he 
 find in another woman ! 
 she have be sit thus at her window , with a book in her hand , at 
 which she never look , gaze over the park which be now beautiful 
 with its May verdure , when on a sudden a thought strike she . Lady 
 Glencora Palliser have come to she , try to enlist her sympathy for 
 the little heir , behaving , indeed , not very well , as Madame Goesler 
 have think , but still with an earnest purpose which be in itself 
 good . she would write to Lady Glencora and put she out of her misery . 
 perhaps there be some feeling of triumph in her mind as she return 
 to the desk from which her epistle have be send to the Duke ; - not of 
 that triumph which would have find its gratification in boasting of 
 the offer that have be make to she , but arise from a feeling that 
 she could now show the proud mother of the bold - faced boy that though 
 she would not pledge herself to any woman as to what she might do or 
 not do , she be nevertheless capable of resist such a temptation 
 as would have be irresistible to many . of the Duke 's offer to she 
 she would have speak to no human being , have not this woman show 
 that the Duke 's purpose be know at least to she , and now , in her 
 letter , she would write no plain word of that offer . she would not 
 state , in word intelligible to any one who might read , that the Duke 
 have offer she his hand and his coronet . but she would write so that 
 Lady Glencora should understand she . and she would be careful that 
 there should be no word in the letter to make Lady Glencora think 
 that she suppose herself to be unfit for the rank offer to she . 
 she have be very humble in what she have write to the Duke , but 
 she would not be at all humble in what she be about to write to the 
 mother of the bold - face boy . and this be the letter when it be 
 write : - 
 MY DEAR LADY GLENCORA , 
 I venture to send you a line to put you out of your 
 misery ; - for you be very miserable when you be so good 
 as to come here yesterday . your dear little boy be safe 
 from I ; - and , what be more to the purpose , so be you and 
 your husband , - and your uncle , whom , in truth , I love . you 
 ask I a downright question which I do not then choose 
 to answer by a downright answer . the downright answer be 
 not at that time due to you . it have since be give , and 
 as I like you too well to wish you to be in torment , I 
 send you a line to say that I shall never be in the way of 
 you or your boy . 
 and now , dear Lady Glencora , one word more . should it 
 ever again appear to you to be necessary to use your zeal 
 for the protection of your husband or your child , do not 
 endeavour to dissuade a woman by try to make she think 
 that she , by her alliance , would bring degradation into 
 any house , or to any man . if there could have be an 
 argument powerful with I , to make I do that which you 
 wish to prevent , it be the argument which you use . but 
 my own comfort , and the happiness of another person whom 
 I value almost as much as myself , be too important to 
 be sacrifice even to a woman 's revenge . I take mine by 
 write to you and tell you that I be well and more 
 rational and wise than you take I to be . 
 if , after this , you choose to be on good term with I , I 
 shall be happy to be your friend . I shall want no further 
 revenge . you owe I some little apology ; but whether you 
 make it or not , I will be content , and will never do 
 more than ask whether your darling 's prospect be still 
 safe . there be more woman than one in the world , you 
 know , and you must not consider yourself to be out of the 
 wood because you have escape from a single danger . if 
 there arise another , come to I , and we will consult 
 together . 
 Dear Lady Glencora , your always sincerely , 
 MARIE M. G. 
 there be a thing or two besides which she long to say , laugh 
 as she think of they . but she refrain , and her letter , when 
 finish , be as it be give above . 
 on the day follow , Lady Glencora be again in Park Lane . when she 
 first read Madame Goesler 's letter , she feel herself to be annoy 
 and angry , but her anger be with herself rather than with her 
 correspondent . ever since her last interview with the woman whom she 
 have fear , she have be conscious of have be indiscreet . all her 
 feeling have be too violent , and it might well have be that she 
 should have drive this woman to do the very thing that she be so 
 anxious to avoid . " you owe I some little apology , " Madame Goesler 
 have say . it be true , - and she would apologise . undue pride be not 
 a part of Lady Glencora 's character . indeed , there be not enough 
 of pride in her composition . she have be quite ready to hate this 
 woman , and to fight she on every point as long as the danger exist ; 
 but she be equally willing to take the woman to her heart now that 
 the danger be over . apologise ! of course she would apologise . and 
 she would make a friend of the woman if the woman wish it . but she 
 would not have the woman and the Duke at Matching together again , 
 lest , after all , there might be a mistake . she do not show Madame 
 Goesler 's letter to her husband , or tell he anything of the relief 
 she have receive . he have care but little for the danger , think 
 more of his budget than of the danger ; and would be sufficiently at 
 his ease if he hear no more rumour of his uncle 's marriage . Lady 
 Glencora go to Park Lane early on the Tuesday morning , but she do 
 not take her boy with she . she understand that Madame Goesler might 
 perhaps indulge in a little gentle raillery at the child 's expense , 
 and the mother feel that this might be bear the more easily if the 
 child be not present . 
 " I have come to thank you for your letter , Madame Goesler , " say Lady 
 Glencora , before she sit down . 
 " oh , come ye in peace here , or come ye in war , or to dance at our 
 bridal ? " say Madame Goesler , stand up from her chair and 
 laughing , as she sing the line . 
 " certainly not to dance at your bridal , " say Lady Glencora . 
 " alas ! no . you have forbid the bann too effectually for that , and 
 I sit here wear the willow all alone . why should not   I be allow 
 to get marry as well as another woman , I wonder ? I think you have 
 be very hard upon I among you . but sit down , Lady Glencora . at any 
 rate you come in peace . " 
 " certainly in peace , and with much admiration , - and a great deal of 
 love and affection , and all that kind of thing , if you will only 
 accept it . " 
 " I shall be too proud , Lady Glencora ; - for the Duke 's sake , if for no 
 other reason . " 
 " and I have to make my apology . " 
 " it be make as soon as your carriage stop at my door with 
 friendly wheel . of course I understand . I can know how terrible it 
 all be to you , - even though the dear little Plantagenet might not 
 have be in much danger . Fancy what it would be to disturb the 
 career of a Plantagenet ! I be far too well read in history , I can 
 assure you . " 
 " I say a word for which I be sorry , and which I should not have 
 say . " 
 " never mind the word . after all , it be a true word . I do not 
 hesitate to say so now myself , though I will allow no other woman 
 to say it , - and no man either . I should have degrade he , - and 
 disgrace he . " Madame Goesler now have drop the banter tone 
 which she have assume , and be speak in sober earnest . " I , for 
 myself , have nothing about I of which I be ashamed . I have no 
 history to hide , no story to be bring to light to my discredit . 
 but I have not be so bear , or so place by circumstance , as make 
 I fit to be the wife of the Duke of Omnium . I should not have be 
 happy , you know . " 
 " you want nothing , dear Madame Goesler . you have all that society can 
 give you . " 
 " I do not know about that . I have much give to I by society , but 
 there be many thing that I want ; - a bright - faced little boy , for 
 instance , to go about with I in my carriage . why do you not bring 
 he , Lady Glencora ? " 
 " I come out in my penitential sheet , and when one go in that guise , 
 one go alone . I have half a mind to walk . " 
 " you will bring he soon ? " 
 " oh , yes . he be very anxious to know the other day who be the 
 beautiful lady with the black hair . " 
 " you do not tell he that the beautiful lady with the black hair be 
 a possible aunt , be a possible - ? but we will not think any more of 
 thing so horrible . " 
 " I tell he nothing of my fear , you may be sure . " 
 " some day , when I be a very old woman , and when his father be quite 
 an old duke , and when he have a dozen little boy and girl of his 
 own , you will tell he the story . then he will reflect what a madman 
 his great - uncle must have be , to have think of make a duchess 
 out of such a wizened old woman as that . " 
 they part the good of friend , but Lady Glencora be still of 
 opinion that if the lady and the Duke be to be bring together at 
 Matching , or elsewhere , there might still be danger . 
 CHAPTER LXIII 
 show how the Duke stand his Ground 
 Mr. Low the barrister , who have give so many lecture to our friend 
 Phineas Finn , lecture that ought to have be useful , be now 
 himself in the House of Commons , have reach it in the legitimate 
 course of his profession . at a certain point of his career , suppose 
 his career to have be sufficiently prosperous , it become natural 
 to a barrister to stand for some constituency , and natural for he 
 also to form his politic at that period of his life with a view to 
 his further advancement , look , as he do so , carefully at the age 
 and standing of the various candidate for high legal office . when a 
 man have work as Mr. Low have work , he begin to regard the bench 
 wistfully , and to calculate the profit of a two year ' run in the 
 Attorney - Generalship . it be the way of the profession , and thus a 
 proper and sufficient number of real barrister find its way into 
 the House . Mr. Low have be angry with Phineas because he , be a 
 barrister , have climb into it after another fashion , have take 
 up politic , not in the proper way as an assistance to his great 
 profession , but as a profession in itself . Mr. Low have be quite 
 sure that his pupil have be wrong in this , and that the error would 
 at last show itself , to his pupil 's cost . and Mrs. Low have be more 
 sure than Mr. Low , have not unnaturally be jealous that a young 
 whipper - snapper of a pupil , - as she have once call Phineas , - should 
 become a Parliament man before her husband , who have work his way 
 up gallantly , in the usual course . she would not give way a jot even 
 now , - not even when she hear that Phineas be go to marry this 
 and that heiress . for at this period of his life such rumour be 
 afloat about he , originate probably in his hope as to Violet 
 Effingham and his intimacy with Madame Goesler . " oh , heiress ! " 
 say Mrs. Low . " I do not   believe in heiress ' money till I see it . 
 three or four hundred a year be a great fortune for a woman , but it 
 do not   go far in keep a house in London . and when a woman have get 
 a little money she generally know how to spend it . he have begin at 
 the wrong end , and they who do that never get themselves right at 
 the last . " 
 at this time Phineas have become somewhat of a fine gentleman , which 
 make Mrs. Low the more angry with he . he show himself willing 
 enough to go to Mrs. Low 's house , but when there he seem to she 
 to give himself air . I think that she be unjust to he , and that 
 it be natural that he should not bear himself beneath her remark 
 exactly as he have do when he be nobody . he have certainly be very 
 successful . he be always listen to in the House , and rarely speak 
 except on subject which belong to he , or have be allot to he 
 as part of his business . he live quite at his ease with people of 
 the high rank , - and those of his own mode of life who dislike he 
 do so simply because they regard with envy his too rapid rise . he 
 ride upon a pretty horse in the park , and be careful in his dress , 
 and have about he an air of comfortable wealth which Mrs. Low think 
 he have not earn . when her husband tell she of his sufficient 
 salary , she would shake her head and express her opinion that a good 
 time be come . by which she perhaps mean to imply a belief that 
 a time be come in which her husband would have a salary much 
 well than that now enjoy by Phineas , and much more likely to be 
 permanent . the Radicals be not to have office for ever , and when 
 they be go , what then ? " I do not   suppose he save a shilling , " 
 say Mrs. Low . " how can he , keep a horse in the park , and hunt 
 down in the country , and live with lord ? I should not   wonder if he 
 be not   find to be over head and ear in debt when thing come to be 
 look into . " Mrs. Low be fond of an assured prosperity , of money in 
 the fund , and be proud to think that her husband live in a house 
 of his own . " L19 10s . ground - rent to the Portman estate be what we 
 pay , Mr. Bunce , " she once say to that gallant Radical , " and that 
 come of begin at the right end . Mr. Low have nothing when he 
 begin the world , and I have just what make we decent the day we 
 marry . but he begin at the right end , and let thing go as they may 
 he can not   get a fall . " Mr. Bunce and Mrs. Low , though they differ 
 much in politic , sympathise in reference to Phineas . 
 " I never believe , ma'am , in nobody do any good by get a 
 place , " say Mr. Bunce . " of course I do not   mean judge and they like , 
 which must be . but when a young man have ever so much a year for 
 sit in a big room down at Whitehall , and read a newspaper 
 with his foot up on a chair , I do not   think it honest , whether he be 
 a Parliament man or whether he be not . " whence Mr. Bunce have get his 
 notion as to the way in which official at Whitehall pass their 
 time , I can not say ; but his notion be very common notion . the 
 british world at large be slow to believe that the great british 
 housekeeper keep no more cat than what kill mouse . 
 Mr. Low , who be now frequently in the habit of see Phineas at 
 the House , have somewhat change his opinion , and be not so eager 
 in condemn Phineas as be his wife . he have begin to think that 
 perhaps Phineas have show some knowledge of his own aptitude in the 
 career which he have seek , and be aware , at any rate , that his late 
 pupil be somebody in the House of Commons . a man will almost always 
 respect he whom those around he respect , and will generally look up 
 to one who be evidently above himself in his own daily avocation . now 
 Phineas be certainly above Mr. Low in parliamentary reputation . he 
 sit on a front bench . he know the leader of party . he be at home 
 amidst the form of the House . he enjoy something of the prestige 
 of Government power . and he walk about familiarly with the son of 
 duke and the brother of earl in a manner which have its effect even 
 on Mr. Low . see these thing Mr. Low could not maintain his old 
 opinion as stoutly as do his wife . it be almost a privilege to Mr. 
 Low to be intimate with Phineas Finn . how then could he look down 
 upon he ? 
 he be surprised , therefore , one day when Phineas discuss the 
 matter with he fully . Phineas have ask he what would be his chance 
 of success if even now he be to give up politic and take to the 
 Bar as the mean of earn his livelihood . " you would have uphill 
 work at first , as a matter of course , " say Mr. Low . 
 " but it might be do , I suppose . to have be in office would not be 
 fatal to I ? " 
 " no , not fatal , nothing of the kind need be fatal . man have 
 succeed , and have sit on the bench afterwards , who do not begin 
 till they be past forty . you would have to live down a prejudice 
 create against yourself ; that be all . the attorney do not like 
 barrister who be anything else but barrister . " 
 " the attorney be very arbitrary , I know , " say Phineas . 
 " yes ; - and there would be this against you - that it be so difficult 
 for a man to go back to the verdure and malleability of pupildom , 
 who have once escape from the necessary humility of its condition . 
 you will find it difficult to sit and wait for business in a 
 Vice - Chancellor 's Court , after have have Vice - Chancellors , or man 
 as big as Vice - Chancellors , to wait upon you . " 
 " I do not think much of that . " 
 " but other would think of it , and you would find that there be 
 difficulty . but you be not think of it in earnest ? " 
 " yes , in earnest . " 
 " why so ? I should have think that every day have remove you 
 far and far from any such idea . " 
 " the ground I be on at present be so slippery . " 
 " well , yes . I can understand that . but yet it be less slippery than 
 it use to be . " 
 " ah ; - you do not exactly see . what if I be to lose my seat ? " 
 " you be safe at least for the next four year , I should say . " 
 " ah ; - no one can tell . and suppose I take it into my head to differ 
 from the government ? " 
 " you must not do that . you have put yourself into a boat with these 
 man , and you must remain in the boat . I should have think all that 
 be easy to you . " 
 " it be not so easy as it seem . the very necessity of sit still 
 in the boat be in itself irksome , - very irksome . and then there come 
 some crisis in which a man can not sit still . " 
 " be there any such crisis at hand now ? " 
 " I can not say that ; - but I be begin to find that sit still be 
 very disagreeable to I . when I hear those fellow below have their 
 own way , and say just what they like , it make I furious . there 
 be Robson . he try office for a couple of year , and have break 
 away ; and now , by George , there be no man they think so much of as 
 they do of Robson . he be twice the man he be when he sit on the 
 Treasury Bench . " 
 " he be a man of fortune ; - be he not ? " 
 " I suppose so . of course he be , because he live . he never earn 
 anything . his wife have money . " 
 " my dear Finn , that make all the difference . when a man have mean 
 of his own he can please himself . do you marry a wife with money , 
 and then you may kick up your heel , and do as you like about the 
 Colonial Office . when a man have not   money , of course he must fit 
 himself to the circumstance of a profession . " 
 " though his profession may require he to be dishonest . " 
 " I do not say that . " 
 " but I say it , my dear Low . a man who be ready to vote black white 
 because somebody tell he , be dishonest . never mind , old fellow . I 
 shall pull through , I daresay . do not   go and tell your wife all this , 
 or she will be hard upon I than ever when she see I . " after that 
 Mr. Low begin to think that his wife 's judgment in this matter have 
 be well than his own . 
 Robson could do as he like because he have marry a woman with 
 money . Phineas tell himself that that game be also open to he . he , 
 too , might marry money . Violet Effingham have money ; - quite enough to 
 make he independent be he married to she . and Madame Goesler have 
 money ; - plenty of money . and an idea have begin to creep upon he that 
 Madame Goesler would take he be he to offer himself . but he would 
 soon go back to the Bar as the low pupil , soon clean boot for 
 barrister , - so he tell himself , - than marry a woman simply because 
 she have money , than marry any other woman as long as there be a 
 chance that Violet might be win . but it be very desirable that he 
 should know whether Violet might be win or not . it be now July , and 
 everybody would be go in another month . before August would be over 
 he be to start for Ireland with Mr. Monk , and he know that word 
 would be speak in Ireland which might make it indispensable for 
 he to be , at any rate , able to throw up his office . in these day 
 he become more anxious than he use to be about Miss Effingham 's 
 fortune . 
 he have never speak as yet to Lord Brentford since the day on which 
 the Earl have quarrel with he , nor have he ever be at the house 
 in Portman Square . Lady Laura he meet occasionally , and have always 
 speak to she . she be gracious to he , but there have be no renewal 
 of their intimacy . rumour have reach he that thing be go 
 badly with she and her husband ; but when man repeat such rumour 
 in his presence , he say little or nothing on the subject . it be 
 not for he , at any rate , to speak of Lady Laura 's unhappiness . Lord 
 Chiltern he have see once or twice during the last month , and they 
 have meet cordially as friend . of course he could ask no question 
 from Lord Chiltern as to Violet ; but he do learn that his friend 
 have again patch up some reconciliation with his father . " he have 
 quarrel with I , you know , " say Phineas . 
 " I be very sorry , but what could I do ? as thing go , I be oblige 
 to tell he . " 
 " do not suppose for a moment that I be blame you . it be , no doubt , 
 much well that he should know it all . " 
 " and it can not make much difference to you , I should say . " 
 " one do not   like to quarrel with those who have be kind to one , " 
 say Phineas . 
 " but it be not   your doing . he will come right again after a time . when 
 I can get my own affair settle , you may be sure I will do my good to 
 bring he round . but what be the reason you never see Laura now ? " 
 " what be the reason that everything go awry ? " say Phineas , 
 bitterly . 
 " when I mention your name to Kennedy the other day , he look as 
 black as thunder . but it be not odd that any one should quarrel with 
 he . I can not   stand he . do you know , I sometimes think that Laura 
 will have to give it up . then there will be another mess in the 
 family ! " 
 this be all very well as come from Lord Chiltern ; but there be no 
 word about Violet , and Phineas do not know how to get a word from 
 any one . Lady Laura could have tell he everything , but he could not 
 go to Lady Laura . he do go to Lady Baldock 's house as often as he 
 think he could with propriety , and occasionally he see Violet . but 
 he could do no more than see she , and the day and week be pass 
 by , and the time be come in which he would have to go away , and be 
 with she no more . the end of the season , which be always to other 
 man , - to other work man such as our hero , - a period of pleasurable 
 anticipation , to he be a time of sadness , in which he feel that 
 he be not exactly like to , or even equal to , the man with whom he 
 live in London . in the old day , in which he be allow to go to 
 Loughlinter or to Saulsby , when all man and woman be go to their 
 Loughlinters and their Saulsbys , it be very well with he ; but there 
 be something melancholy to he in his yearly journey to Ireland . he 
 love his father and mother and sister as well as do other man ; but 
 there be a fall off in the manner of his life which make he feel 
 that he have be in some sort out of his own element in London . he 
 would have like to have shoot grouse at Loughlinter , or pheasant at 
 Saulsby , or to have hunt down at Willingford , - or well still , to 
 have make love to Violet Effingham wherever Violet Effingham might 
 have place herself . but all this be close to he now ; and there 
 would be nothing for he but to remain at Killaloe , or to return 
 to his work in Downing Street , from August to February . Mr. Monk , 
 indeed , be go with he for a few week ; but even this association 
 do not make up for that sort of society which he would have 
 prefer . 
 the session go on very quietly . the question of the Irish Reform 
 Bill be postpone till the next year , which be a great thing 
 gain . he carry his bill about the Canada Railway , with sundry 
 other small bill appertain to it , through the House in a manner 
 which redound infinitely to his credit . there be just enough 
 of opposition to give a zest to the work , and to make the affair 
 conspicuous among the affair of the year . as his chief be in the 
 other house , the work fall altogether into his hand , so that he come 
 to be conspicuous among under - secretary . it be only when he say 
 a word to any leader of his party about other matter , - about Irish 
 Tenant - right , for instance , which be begin to loom very large , 
 that he find himself to be snub . but there be no room for action 
 this year in reference to Irish Tenant - right , and therefore any deep 
 consideration of that discomfort might be legitimately postpone . if 
 he do by chance open his mouth on the subject to Mr. Monk , even Mr. 
 Monk discourage he . 
 in the early day of July , when the weather be very hot , and people 
 be begin to complain of the Thames , and member be become 
 thirsty after grouse , and the remain day of parliamentary work 
 be be count up , there come to he news , - news that be soon 
 know throughout the fashionable world , - that the Duke of Omnium be 
 go to give a garden party at a certain villa residence on the 
 bank of the Thames above Richmond . it be to be such a garden party 
 as have never be see before . and it would be the more remarkable 
 because the Duke have never be know to do such a thing . the villa 
 be call the Horns , and have , indeed , be give by the Duke to 
 Lady Glencora on her marriage ; but the party be to be the Duke 's 
 party , and the Horns , with all its garden , conservatory , lawn , 
 shrubbery , paddock , boat - house , and boat , be to be make bright 
 and beautiful for the occasion . score of workman be about the 
 place through the three first week of July . the world at large do 
 not at all know why the Duke be do so unwonted a thing , - why 
 he should undertake so new a trouble . but Lady Glencora know , and 
 Madame Goesler shrewdly guess , the riddle . when Madame Goesler 's 
 unexpected refusal have reach his grace , he feel that he must either 
 accept the lady 's refusal , or persevere . after a day 's consideration , 
 he resolve that he would accept it . the top brick of the chimney be 
 very desirable ; but perhaps it might be well that he should endeavour 
 to live without it . then , accept this refusal , he must either 
 stand his ground and bear the blow , - or he must run away to that 
 villa at Como , or elsewhere . the run away seem to he at first 
 to be the well , or at least the more pleasant , course ; but at last 
 he determine that he would stand his ground and bear the blow . 
 therefore he give his garden party at the Horns . 
 who be to be invite ? before the first week in July be over , many 
 a bosom in London be flutter with anxiety on that subject . the 
 Duke , in give his short word of instruction to Lady Glencora , 
 make she understand that he would wish she to be particular in her 
 invitation . her Royal Highness the Princess , and his Royal Highness 
 the Prince , have both be so gracious as to say that they would 
 honour his fete . the Duke himself have make out a short list , with not 
 more than a dozen name . Lady Glencora be employ to select the 
 real crowd , - the five hundred out of the ten thousand who be to 
 be bless . on the Duke 's own private list be the name of Madame 
 Goesler . Lady Glencora understand it all . when Madame Goesler get she 
 card , she think that she understand it too . and she think also 
 that the Duke be behave in a gallant way . 
 there be , no doubt , much difficulty about the invitation , and a 
 considerable amount of ill - will be create . and they who consider 
 themselves entitle to be ask , and be not ask , be full of 
 wrath against their more fortunate friend , instead of be angry 
 with the Duke or with Lady Glencora , who have neglect they . it be 
 soon know that Lady Glencora be the real dispenser of the favour , 
 and I fancy that her ladyship be tired of her task before it be 
 complete . the party be to take place on Wednesday , the 27th of 
 July , and before the day have come , man and woman have become so hardy 
 in the combat that personal application be make with unflinche 
 importunity ; and letter be write to Lady Glencora put 
 forward this claim and that claim with a piteous clamour . " no , that 
 be too bad , " Lady Glencora say to her particular friend , Mrs. Grey , 
 when a letter come from Mrs. Bonteen , state all that her husband 
 have ever do towards support Mr. Palliser in Parliament , - and all 
 that he ever would do . " she shall not   have it , even though she could put 
 Plantagenet into a minority to - morrow . " 
 Mrs. Bonteen do not get a card ; and when she hear that Phineas Finn 
 have receive one , her wrath against Phineas be very great . he be 
 " an irish adventurer , " and she regret deeply that Mr. Bonteen have 
 ever interested himself in bring such an upstart forward in the 
 world of politic . but as Mr. Bonteen never have do anything towards 
 bring Phineas forward , there be not much cause for regret on this 
 head . Phineas , however , get his card , and , of course , accept the 
 invitation . 
 the ground be open at four . there be to be an early dinner out 
 in tent at five ; and after dinner man and woman be to walk about , 
 or dance , or make love - or hay , as suit they . the haycock , 
 however , be ready prepare , while it be expect that they should 
 bring the love with they . Phineas , know that he should meet Violet 
 Effingham , take a great deal with he ready make . 
 for an hour and a half Lady Glencora keep her position in a saloon 
 through which the guest pass to the ground , and to every comer 
 she impart the information that the Duke be on the lawn ; - to every 
 comer but one . to Madame Goesler she say no such word . " so glad to 
 see you , my dear , " she say , as she press her friend 's hand : " if I 
 be not kill by this work , I will make you out again by - and - by . " then 
 Madame Goesler pass on , and soon find herself amidst a throng 
 of acquaintance . after a few minute she see the Duke seat in an 
 arm - chair , close to the river - bank , and she bravely go up to he , 
 and thank he for the invitation . " the thank be due to you for 
 grace our entertainment , " say the Duke , rise to greet she . there 
 be a dozen people stand round , and so the thing be do without 
 difficulty . at that moment there come a notice that their royal 
 highness be on the ground , and the Duke , of course , go off to 
 meet they . there be not a word more speak between the Duke and 
 Madame Goesler on that afternoon . 
 Phineas do not come till late , - till seven , when the banquet be 
 over . I think he be right in this , as the banqueting in tent lose 
 in comfort almost more than it gain in romance . a small picnic may 
 be very well , and the distance previously travel may give to a 
 dinner on the ground the seem excuse of necessity . Frail human 
 nature must be support , - and human nature , have go so far 
 in pursuit of the beautiful , be entitle to what good support the 
 unaccustomed circumstance will allow . therefore , out with the cold 
 pie , out with the salad , and the chicken , and the champagne . since 
 no well may be , let we recruit human nature sit upon this moss , 
 and forget our discomfort in the glory of the verdure around we . and 
 dear Mary , see that the cushion from the waggonet be small , and 
 not wish to accept the too generous offer that she should take it 
 all for her own use , will admit a contact somewhat close than the 
 ordinary chair of a dining - room render necessary . that in its way be 
 very well ; - but I hold that a banquet on narrow table in a tent be 
 displease . 
 Phineas stroll into the ground when the tent be nearly empty , and 
 when Lady Glencora , almost sink beneath her exertion , be take 
 rest in an inner room . the Duke at this time be din with their 
 royal highness , and three or four other , specially select , 
 very comfortably within door . out of door the world have begin to 
 dance , - and the world be begin to say that it would be much 
 nice to go and dance upon the board inside as soon as possible . 
 for , though of all party a garden party be the nice , everybody 
 be always anxious to get out of the garden as quick as may be . a few 
 ardent lover of suburban picturesque effect be sit beneath the 
 haycock , and four forlorn damsel be vainly endeavour to excite 
 the sympathy of manly youth by play croquet in a corner . I be not 
 sure , however , that the lover beneath the haycock and the player 
 at croquet be not actor hire by Lady Glencora for the occasion . 
 Phineas have not be long on the lawn before he see Lady Laura 
 Kennedy . she be stand with another lady , and Barrington Erle be 
 with they . " so you have be successful ? " say Barrington , greet 
 he . 
 " successful in what ? " 
 " in what ? in get a ticket . I have have to promise three 
 tide - waitership , and to give deep hint about a bishopric expect 
 to be vacant , before I get in . but what matter ? success pay for 
 everything . my only trouble now be how I be to get back to London . " 
 Lady Laura shake hand with Phineas , and then as he be pass on , 
 follow he for a step and whisper a word to he . " Mr. Finn , " she 
 say , " if you be not go yet , come back to I presently . I have 
 something to say to you . I shall not be far from the river , and shall 
 stay here for about an hour . " 
 Phineas say that he would , and then go on , not know exactly 
 where he be go . he have one desire , - to find Violet Effingham , but 
 when he should find she he could not carry she off , and sit with she 
 beneath a haycock . 
 CHAPTER LXIV 
 the Horns 
 while look for Violet Effingham , Phineas encounter Madame 
 Goesler , among a crowd of people who be watch the adventurous 
 embarkation of certain daring spirit in a pleasure - boat . there be 
 waterman there in the Duke 's livery , ready to take such spirit down 
 to Richmond or up to Teddington lock , and many daring spirit do 
 take such trip , - to the great peril of muslin , ribbon , and starch , 
 to the peril also of ornamental summer white garment , so that when 
 the thing be over , the boat be vote to have be a bore . 
 " be you go to venture ? " say Phineas to the lady . 
 " I should like it of all thing if I be not afraid for my clothe . 
 will you come ? " 
 " I be never good upon the water . I should be sea - sick to a 
 certainty . they be go down beneath the bridge too , and we should 
 be splash by the steamer . I do not   think my courage be high 
 enough . " thus Phineas excuse himself , be still intent on 
 prosecute his search for Violet . 
 " then neither will I , " say Madame Goesler . " one dash from a peccant 
 oar would destroy the whole symmetry of my dress . look . that green 
 young lady have already be sprinkle . " 
 " but the blue young gentleman have be sprinkle also , " say Phineas , 
 " and they will be happy in a joint baptism . " then they stroll along 
 the river path together , and be soon alone . " you will be leave 
 town soon , Madame Goesler ? " 
 " almost immediately . " 
 " and where do you go ? " 
 " oh , - to Vienna . I be there for a couple of month every year , 
 mind my business . I wonder whether you would know I , if you see 
 I ; - sometimes sit on a stool in a counting - house , sometimes 
 go about among old house , settle what must be do to save they 
 from tumble down . I dress so differently at such time , and talk so 
 differently , and look so much old , that I almost fancy myself to be 
 another person . " 
 " be it a great trouble to you ? " 
 " no , - I rather like it . it make I feel that I do something in the 
 world . " 
 " do you go alone ? " 
 " quite alone . I take a german maid with I , and never speak a word to 
 any one else on the journey . " 
 " that must be very bad , " say Phineas . 
 " yes ; it be the bad of it . but then I be so much accustomed to be 
 alone . you see I in society , and in society only , and therefore 
 naturally look upon I as one of a gregarious herd ; but I be in truth 
 an animal that feed alone and live alone . take the hour of the 
 year all through , and I be a solitary during four - fifth of they . and 
 what do you intend to do ? " 
 " I go to Ireland . " 
 " home to your own people . how nice ! I have no people to go to . I 
 have one sister , who live with her husband at Riga . she be my only 
 relation , and I never see she . " 
 " but you have thousand of friend in England . " 
 " yes , - as you see they , " - and she turn and spread out her hand 
 towards the crowded lawn , which be behind they . " what be such 
 friend worth ? what would they do for I ? " 
 " I do not know that the Duke would do much , " say Phineas laugh . 
 Madame Goesler laugh also . " the Duke be not so bad , " she say . " the 
 Duke would do as much as any one else . I will not   have the Duke abuse . " 
 " he may be your particular friend , for what I know , " say Phineas . 
 " ah ; - no . I have no particular friend . and be I to wish to choose 
 one , I should think the Duke a little above I . " 
 " oh , yes ; - and too stiff , and too old , and too pompous , and too cold , 
 and too make - believe , and too gingerbread . " 
 " Mr. Finn ! " 
 " the Duke be all buckram , you know . " 
 " then why do you come to his house ? " 
 " to see you , Madame Goesler . " 
 " be that true , Mr. Finn ? " 
 " yes ; - it be true in its way . one go about to meet those whom one 
 like , not always for the pleasure of the host 's society . I hope I be 
 not wrong because I go to house at which I like neither the host nor 
 the hostess . " phinea as he say this be think of Lady Baldock , 
 to whom of late he have be exceedingly civil , - but he certainly do 
 not like Lady Baldock . 
 " I think you have be too hard upon the Duke of Omnium . do you know 
 he well ? " 
 " personally ? certainly not . do you ? do anybody ? " 
 " I think he be a gracious gentleman , " say Madame Goesler , " and 
 though I can not boast of know he well , I do not like to hear he 
 call buckram . I do not think he be buckram . it be not very easy for 
 a man in his position to live so as to please all people . he have to 
 maintain the prestige of the high aristocracy in Europe . " 
 " look at his nephew , who will be the next Duke , and who work as hard 
 as any man in the country . will he not maintain it well ? what good 
 do the present man ever do ? " 
 " you believe only in motion , Mr. Finn ; - and not at all in quiescence . 
 an express train at full speed be grander to you than a mountain with 
 heap of snow . I own that to I there be something glorious in the 
 dignity of a man too high to do anything , - if only he know how to 
 carry that dignity with a proper grace . I think that there should be 
 breast make to carry star . " 
 " star which they have never earn , " say Phineas . 
 " ah ; - well ; we will not fight about it . go and earn your star , and I 
 will say that it become you well than any glitter on the coat of 
 the Duke of Omnium . " this she say with an earnestness which he could 
 not pretend not to notice or not to understand . " I too may be able to 
 see that the express train be really great than the mountain . " 
 " though , for your own life , you would prefer to sit and gaze upon the 
 snowy peak ? " 
 " no ; - that be not so . for myself , I would prefer to be of use 
 somewhere , - to some one , if it be possible . I strive sometimes . " 
 " and I be sure successfully . " 
 " never mind . I hate to talk about myself . you and the Duke be 
 fair subject for conversation ; you as the express train , who will 
 probably do your sixty mile an hour in safety , but may possibly go 
 down a bank with a crash . " 
 " certainly I may , " say Phineas . 
 " and the Duke , as the mountain , which be fix in its stateliness , 
 short of the power of some earthquake , which shall be grander and 
 more terrible than any earthquake yet know . here we be at the house 
 again . I will go in and sit down for a while . " 
 " if I leave you , Madame Goesler , I will say good - bye till next 
 winter . " 
 " I shall be in town again before Christmas , you know . you will come 
 and see I ? " 
 " of course I will . " 
 " and then this love trouble of course will be over , - one way or the 
 other ; - will it not ? " 
 " ah ! - who can say ? " 
 " faint heart never win fair lady . but your heart be never faint . 
 Farewell . " 
 then he leave she . up to this moment he have not see Violet , and yet 
 he know that she be to be there . she have herself tell he that she 
 be to accompany Lady Laura , whom he have already meet . Lady Baldock 
 have not be invite , and have express great animosity against the 
 Duke in consequence . she have go so far as to say that the Duke be 
 a man at whose house a young lady such as her niece ought not to be 
 see . but Violet have laugh at this , and declare her intention of 
 accept the invitation . " go , " she have say ; " of course I shall go . 
 I should have break my heart if I could not have get there . " Phineas 
 therefore be sure that she must be in the place . he have keep his 
 eye ever on the alert , and yet he have not find she . and now he must 
 keep his appointment with Lady Laura Kennedy . so he go down to the 
 path by the river , and there he find she seat close by the water 's 
 edge . her cousin Barrington Erle be still with she , but as soon as 
 Phineas join they , Erle go away . " I have tell he , " say Lady 
 Laura , " that I wish to speak to you , and he stay with I till you 
 come . there be bad man than Barrington a great deal . " 
 " I be sure of that . " 
 " be you and he still friend , Mr. Finn ? " 
 " I hope so . I do not see so much of he as I do when I have less to 
 do . " 
 " he say that you have get into altogether a different set . " 
 " I do not   know that . I have go as circumstance have direct I , 
 but I have certainly not intend to throw over so old and good a 
 friend as Barrington Erle . " 
 " oh , - he do not blame you . he tell I that you have find your 
 way among what he call the work man of the party , and he think 
 you will do very well , - if you can only be patient enough . we all 
 expect a different line from you , you know , - more of word and 
 less of deed , if I may say so ; - more of liberal oratory and less of 
 government action ; but I do not doubt that you be right . " 
 " I think that I have be wrong , " say Phineas . " I be become 
 heartily sick of officialitie . " 
 " that come from the fickleness about which papa be so fond of 
 quote his Latin . the ox desire the saddle . the charger want to 
 plough . " 
 " and which be I ? " 
 " your career may combine the dignity of the one with the utility of 
 the other . at any rate you must not think of change now . have you 
 see Mr. Kennedy lately ? " she ask the question abruptly , show 
 that she be anxious to get to the matter respect which she have 
 summon he to her side , and that all that she have say hitherto have 
 be utter as it be in preparation of that subject . 
 " seen he ? yes ; I see he daily . but we hardly do more than speak , " 
 " why not ? " Phineas stand for a moment in silence , hesitate . " why be 
 it that he and you do not speak ? " 
 " how can I answer that question , Lady Laura ? " 
 " do you know any reason ? sit down , or , if you please , I will get up 
 and walk with you . he tell I that you have choose to quarrel with 
 he , and that I have make you do so . he say that you have confess 
 to he that I have ask you to quarrel with he . " 
 " he can hardly have say that . " 
 " but he have say it , - in so many word . do you think that I would 
 tell you such a story falsely ? " 
 " be he here now ? " 
 " no ; - he be not here . he would not come . I come alone . " 
 " be not Miss Effingham with you ? " 
 " no ; - she be to come with my father later . she be here no doubt , now . 
 but answer my question , Mr. Finn ; - unless you find that you can not 
 answer it . what be it that you do say to my husband ? " 
 " nothing to justify what he have tell you . " 
 " do you mean to say that he have speak falsely ? " 
 " I mean to use no harsh word , - but I think that Mr. Kennedy when 
 trouble in his spirit look at thing gloomily , and put meaning 
 upon word which they should not bear . " 
 " and what have trouble his spirit ? " 
 " you must know that well than I can do , Lady Laura . I will tell you 
 all that I can tell you . he invite I to his house and I would not 
 go , because you have forbid I . then he ask I some question 
 about you . do I refuse because of you , - or of anything that you have 
 say ? if I remember right , I tell he that I do fancy that you would 
 not be glad to see I , - and that therefore I would rather stay away . 
 what be I to say ? " 
 " you should have say nothing . " 
 " nothing with he would have be bad than what I do say . remember 
 that he ask I the question point - blank , and that no reply would 
 have be equal to an affirmation . I should have confess that his 
 suggestion be true . " 
 " he could not then have twit I with your word . " 
 " if I have err , Lady Laura , and bring any sorrow on you , I be 
 indeed grieve . " 
 " it be all sorrow . there be nothing but sorrow . I have make up my 
 mind to leave he . " 
 " oh , Lady Laura ! " 
 " it be very bad , - but not so bad , I think , as the life I be now 
 lead . he have accuse I - , of what do you think ? he say that you 
 be my lover ! " 
 " he do not say that , - in those word ? " 
 " he say it in word which make I feel that I must part from he . " 
 " and how do you answer he ? " 
 " I would not answer he at all . if he have come to I like a man , - not 
 accuse I , but ask I , - I would have tell he everything . and 
 what be there to tell ? I should have break my faith to you , in 
 speak of that scene at Loughlinter , but woman always tell such 
 story to their husband when their husband be good to they , and 
 true , and just . and it be well that they should be tell . but to Mr. 
 Kennedy I can tell nothing . he do not believe my word . " 
 " not believe you , Lady Laura ? " 
 " no ! because I do not blurt out to he all that story about your 
 foolish duel , - because I think it well to keep my brother 's secret , 
 as long as there be a secret to be keep , he tell I that I 
 have , - lie to he ! " 
 " what ! - with that word ? " 
 " yes , - with that very word . he be not particular about his word , 
 when he think it necessary to express himself strongly . and he have 
 tell I since that because of that he could never believe I again . 
 how be it possible that a woman should live with such a man ? " but 
 why do she come to he with this story , - to he whom she have be 
 accuse of entertaining as a lover ; - to he who of all her friend 
 be the last whom she should have choose as the recipient for such a 
 tale ? phinea as he think how he might well answer she , with what 
 word he might try to comfort she , could not but ask himself this 
 question . " the moment that the word be out of his mouth , " she go 
 on to say , " I resolve that I would tell you . the accusation be 
 against you as it be against I , and be equally false to both . I 
 have write to he , and there be my letter . " 
 " but you will see he again ? " 
 " no ; - I will go to my father 's house . I have already arrange it . Mr. 
 Kennedy have my letter by this time , and I go from hence home with my 
 father . " 
 " do you wish that I should read the letter ? " 
 " yes , - certainly . I wish that you should read it . should I ever meet 
 he again , I shall tell he that you see it . " 
 they be now stand close upon the river 's bank , at a corner of 
 the ground , and , though the voice of people sound near to they , 
 they be alone . Phineas have no alternative but to read the letter , 
 which be as follow : - 
 after what you have say to I it be impossible that I 
 should return to your house . I shall meet my father at the 
 Duke of Omnium 's , and have already ask he to give I an 
 asylum . it be my wish to remain wherever he may be , either 
 in town or in the country . should I change my purpose in 
 this , and change my residence , I will not fail to let you 
 know where I go and what I propose to do . you I think must 
 have forget that I be your wife ; but I will never 
 forget it . 
 you have accuse I of have a lover . you can not have 
 expect that I should continue to live with you after 
 such an accusation . for myself I can not understand how 
 any man can have bring himself to bring such a charge 
 against his wife . even have it be true the accusation 
 should not have be make by your mouth to my ear . 
 that it be untrue I believe you must be as well aware as 
 I be myself . how intimate I be with . Mr. Finn , and what 
 be the limit of my intimacy with he you know before 
 I marry you . after our marriage I encourage his 
 friendship till I find that there be something in 
 it that displease you , - and , after learn that , I 
 discourage it . you have say that he be my lover , but 
 you have probably not define for yourself that word very 
 clearly . you have feel yourself slight because his name 
 have be mention with praise ; - and your jealousy have 
 be wound because you have think that I have regard 
 he as in some way superior to yourself . you have never 
 really think that he be my lover , - that he speak word 
 to I which other might not hear , that he claim from 
 I aught that a wife may not give , that he receive aught 
 which a friend should not receive . the accusation have be 
 a coward 's accusation . 
 I shall be at my father 's to - night , and to - morrow I will 
 get you to let my servant bring to I such thing as be 
 my own , - my clothe , namely , and desk , and a few book . 
 she will know what I want . I trust you may be happy 
 without a wife , than ever you have be with I . I have 
 feel almost daily since we be married that you be a 
 man who would have be happy without a wife than with 
 one . 
 your affectionately , 
 LAURA kennedy . 
 " it be at any rate true , " she say , when Phineas have read the letter . 
 " true ! Doubtless it be true , " say Phineas , " except that I do not 
 suppose he be ever really angry with I , or jealous , or anything of 
 the sort , - because I get on well . it seem absurd even to think it . " 
 " there be nothing too absurd for some man . I remember your telling 
 I that he be weak , and poor , and unworthy . I remember your saying 
 so when I first think that he might become my husband . I wish I 
 have believe you when you tell I so . I should not have make such a 
 shipwreck of myself as I have do . that be all I have to say to you . 
 after what have pass between we I do not choose that you should 
 hear how I be separate from my husband from any lip but my own . 
 I will go now and find papa . do not come with I . I prefer be 
 alone . " then he be leave stand by himself , look down upon the 
 river as it glide by . how would it have be with both of they if 
 Lady Laura have accept he three year ago , when she consent to 
 join her lot with that of Mr. Kennedy , and have reject he ? as he 
 stand he hear the sound of music from the house , and remember 
 that he have come there with the one sole object of see Violet 
 Effingham . he have know that he would meet Lady Laura , and it have 
 be in his mind to break through that law of silence which she have 
 impose upon he , and once more to ask she to assist he , - to implore 
 she for the sake of their old friendship to tell he whether there 
 might yet be for he any chance of success . but in the interview 
 which have just take place it have be impossible for he to speak 
 a word of himself or of Violet . to she , in her great desolation , 
 he could address himself on no other subject than that of her own 
 misery . but not the less when she be talk to he of her own 
 sorrow , of her regret that she have not listen to he when in year 
 past he have speak slightingly of Mr. Kennedy , be he think of 
 Violet Effingham . Mr. Kennedy have certainly mistake the sign of 
 thing when he have accuse his wife by say that Phineas be her 
 lover . Phineas have soon get over that early feeling ; and as far as he 
 himself be concern have never regret Lady Laura 's marriage . 
 he remain down by the water for a few minute , give Lady Laura 
 time to escape , and then he wander across the ground towards the 
 house . it be now about nine o'clock , and though there be still 
 many walk about the ground , the crowd of people be in the 
 room . the musician be range out on a verandah , so that their 
 music might have be available for dance within or without ; but 
 the dancer have find the board pleasanter than the lawn , and the 
 Duke 's garden party be become a mere ball , with privilege for the 
 dancer to stroll about the lawn between the dance . and in this 
 respect the fun be well than at a ball , - that let the engagement 
 make for partner be what they might , they could always be break 
 with ease . no lady feel herself bind to dance with a cavalier who 
 be displease to she ; and some gentleman be leave sadly in the 
 lurch . Phineas feel himself to be very much in the lurch , even after 
 he have discover Violet Effingham stand up to dance with Lord 
 Fawn . 
 he bid his time patiently , and at last he find his opportunity . 
 " would she dance with he ? " she declare that she intend to dance 
 no more , and that she have promise to be ready to return home with 
 Lord Brentford before ten o'clock . " I have pledge myself not to be 
 after ten , " she say , laugh . then she put her hand upon his arm , 
 and they step out upon the terrace together . " have you hear 
 anything ? " she ask he , almost in a whisper . 
 " yes , " he say . " I have hear what you mean . I have hear it all . " 
 " be it not dreadful ? " 
 " I fear it be the good thing she can do . she have never be happy 
 with he . " 
 " but to be accuse after that fashion , - by her husband ! " say Violet . 
 " one can hardly believe it in these day . and of all woman she be the 
 last to deserve such accusation . " 
 " the very last , " say Phineas , feel that the subject be one upon 
 which it be not easy for he to speak . 
 " I can not conceive to whom he can have allude , " say Violet . then 
 Phineas begin to understand that Violet have not hear the whole 
 story ; but the difficulty of speak be still very great . 
 " it have be the result of ungovernable temper , " he say . 
 " but a man do not usually strive to dishonour himself because he 
 be in a rage . and this man be incapable of rage . he must be curse 
 with one of those dark gloomy mind in which love always lead to 
 jealousy . she will never return to he . " 
 " one can not say . in many respect it would be well that she 
 should , " say Phineas . 
 " she will never return to he , " repeat Violet , - " never . would you 
 advise she to do so ? " 
 " how can I say ? if one be call upon for advice , one would think 
 so much before one speak . " 
 " I would not , - not for a minute . what ! to be accuse of that ! how be 
 a man and woman to live together after there have be such word 
 between they ? poor Laura ! what a terrible end to all her high hope ! 
 do you not grieve for she ? " 
 they be now at some distance from the house , and Phineas could not 
 but feel that chance have be very good to he in give he his 
 opportunity . she be lean on his arm , and they be alone , and she 
 be speak to he with all the familiarity of old friendship . " I 
 wonder whether I may change the subject , " say he , " and ask you a 
 word about yourself ? " 
 " what word ? " she say sharply . 
 " I have hear - " 
 " what have you hear ? " 
 " simply this , - that you be not now as you be six month ago . your 
 marriage be then fix for June . " 
 " it have be unfixed since then , " she say . 
 " yes ; - it have be unfixe . I know it . Miss Effingham , you will not 
 be angry with I if I say that when I hear it be so , something of a 
 hope , - no , I must not call it a hope , - something that long to form 
 itself into hope return to my breast , and from that hour to this 
 have be the only subject on which I have care to think . " 
 " Lord Chiltern be your friend , Mr. Finn ? " 
 " he be so , and I do not think that I have ever be untrue to my 
 friendship for he . " 
 " he say that no man have ever have a true friend . he will swear to 
 that in all company . and I , when it be allow to I to swear with 
 he , swear it too . as his friend , let I tell you one thing , - one 
 thing which I would never tell to any other man , - one thing which I 
 know I may tell you in confidence . you be a gentleman , and will not 
 break my confidence ? " 
 " I think I will not . " 
 " I know you will not , because you be a gentleman . I tell Lord 
 Chiltern in the autumn of last year that I love he . and I do love 
 he . I shall never have the same confession to make to another man . 
 that he and I be not now , - on those love term , - which once 
 exist , can make no difference in that . a woman can not transfer her 
 heart . there have be thing which have make I feel , - that I be 
 perhaps mistaken , - in say that I would be , - his wife . but I say 
 so , and can not now give myself to another . here be Lord Brentford , 
 and we will join he . " there be Lord Brentford with Lady Laura on 
 his arm , very gloomy , - resolve on what way he might be avenge on 
 the man who have insult his daughter . he take but little notice 
 of Phineas as he resume his charge of Miss Effingham ; but the two 
 lady wish he good night . 
 " good night , Lady Laura , " say Phineas , stand with his hat in his 
 hand , - " good night , Miss Effingham . " then he be alone , - quite alone . 
 would it not be well for he to go down to the bottom of the garden , 
 and fle himself into the quiet river , so that there might be an 
 end of he ? or would it not be well still that he should create 
 for himself some quiet river of life , away from London , away from 
 politic , away from lord , and title lady , and fashionable 
 square , and the party give by duke , and the disappointment 
 incident to a small man in attempt to make for himself a career 
 among big man ? there have frequently be in the mind of this young 
 man an idea that there be something almost false in his own 
 position , - that his life be a pretence , and that he would ultimately 
 be subject to that ruin which always come , soon or later , on 
 thing which be false ; and now as he wander alone about Lady 
 Glencora 's garden , this feeling be very strong within his bosom , 
 and rob he altogether of the honour and glory of have be one 
 of the Duke of Omnium 's guest . 
 CHAPTER LXV 
 the Cabinet Minister at Killaloe 
 Phineas do not throw himself into the river from the Duke 's garden ; 
 and be ready , in spite of Violet Effingham , to start for Ireland 
 with Mr. Monk at the end of the first week in August . the close of 
 that season in London certainly be not a happy period of his life . 
 Violet have speak to he after such a fashion that he could not bring 
 himself not to believe she . she have give he no hint whether it be 
 likely or unlikely that she and Lord Chiltern would be reconcile ; 
 but she have convince he that he could not be allow to take Lord 
 Chiltern 's place . " a woman can not transfer her heart , " she have say . 
 Phineas be well aware that many woman do transfer their heart ; 
 but he have go to this woman too soon after the wrench which she 
 love have receive ; he have be too sudden with his proposal for a 
 transfer ; and the punishment for such ill judgment must be that 
 success would now be impossible to he . and yet how could he have 
 wait , feel that Miss Effingham , if she be at all like other 
 girl whom he have know , might have promise herself to some other 
 lover before she would return within his reach in the succeed 
 spring ? but she be not like some other girl . ah ; - he know that now , 
 and repent he of his haste . 
 but he be ready for Mr. Monk on the 7th of August , and they start 
 together . something less than twenty hour take they from London to 
 Killaloe , and during four or five of those twenty hour Mr. Monk 
 be unfit for any conversation by the uncomfortable feeling 
 incidental to the passage from Holyhead to Kingstown . nevertheless , 
 there be a great deal of conversation between they during the 
 journey . Mr. Monk have almost make up his mind to leave the Cabinet . 
 " it be sad to I to have to confess it , " he say , " but the truth be 
 that my old rival , Turnbull , be right . a man who begin his political 
 life as I begin mine , be not the man of whom a Minister should 
 be form . I be inclined to think that Ministers of Government 
 require almost as much education in their trade as shoemaker or 
 tallow - chandler . I doubt whether you can make a good public servant 
 of a man simply because he have get the ear of the House of Commons . " 
 " then you mean to say , " say Phineas , " that we be altogether wrong 
 from begin to end , in our way of arrange these thing ? " 
 " I do not say that at all . look at the man who have be lead 
 statesman since our present mode of government be form , - from the 
 day in which it be form itself , say from Walpole down , and you 
 will find that all who have be of real use have early training as 
 public servant . " 
 " be we never to get out of the old groove ? " 
 " not if the groove be good , " say Mr. Monk , " those who have be 
 efficient as minister suck in their efficacy with their mother 's 
 milk . Lord Brock do so , and Lord de Terrier , and Mr. Mildmay . they 
 seat themselves in office chair the moment they leave college . 
 Mr. Gresham be in office before he be eight - and - twenty . the 
 Duke of St. Bungay be at work as a private Secretary when he be 
 three - and - twenty . you , luckily for yourself , have do the same . " 
 " and regret it every hour of my life . " 
 " you have no cause for regret , but it be not so with I . if there be 
 any man unfit by his previous career for office , it be he who have 
 become , or who have endeavour to become , a popular politician , - an 
 exponent , if I may say so , of public opinion . as far as I can see , 
 office be offer to such man with one view only , - that of clip 
 their wing . " 
 " and of obtain their help . " 
 " it be the same thing . help from Turnbull would mean the withdrawal 
 of all power of opposition from he . he could not give other help for 
 any long term , as the very fact of his accept power and patronage 
 would take from he his popular leadership . the mass outside 
 require to have their minister as the Queen have her ; but the same 
 man can not be minister to both . if the people 's minister choose to 
 change his master , and to take the Queen 's shilling , something of 
 temporary relief may be gain by government in the fact that the 
 other place will for a time be vacant . but there be candidate 
 enough for such place , and the vacancy be not a vacancy long . of 
 course the Crown have this pull , that it pay wage , and the people do 
 not . " 
 " I do not think that that influence you , " say Phineas . 
 " it do not influence I . to you I will make bold to state so much 
 positively , though it would be foolish , perhaps , to do so to other . 
 I do not go for the shilling , though I be so poor a man that the 
 shilling be more to I than it would be to almost any man in the 
 House . I take the shilling , much doubting , but guide in part by 
 this , that I be ashamed of be afraid to take it . they tell 
 I , - Mr. Mildmay and the Duke , - that I could earn it to the benefit 
 of the country . I have not earn it , and the country have not be 
 benefit , - unless it be for the good of the country that my voice in 
 the House should be silence . if I believe that , I ought to hold my 
 tongue without take a salary for hold it . I have make a mistake , 
 my friend . such mistake make at my time of life can not be wholly 
 rectify ; but , be convince of my error , I must do the good in my 
 power to put myself right again . " 
 there be a bitterness in all this to Phineas himself of which he 
 could not but make plaint to his companion . " the truth be , " he say , 
 " that a man in office must be a slave , and that slavery be 
 distasteful . " 
 " there I think you be wrong . if you mean that you can not do joint 
 work with other man altogether after your own fashion the same may be 
 say of all work . if you have stick to the Bar you must have plead 
 your cause in conformity with instruction from the attorney . " 
 " I should have be guide by my own light in advise those 
 attorney . " 
 " I can not see that you suffer anything that ought to go against the 
 grain with you . you be begin young , and it be your first adopt 
 career . with I it be otherwise . if by my tell you this I shall 
 have lead you astray , I shall regret my openness with you . could I 
 begin again , I would willingly begin as you begin . " 
 it be a great day in Killaloe , that on which Mr. Monk arrive with 
 Phineas at the doctor 's house . in London , perhaps , a bishop inspire 
 more awe than a Cabinet Minister . in Killaloe , where a bishop might 
 be see walk about every day , the mitre dignitary of the Church , 
 though much love , be think of , I fear , but lightly ; whereas a 
 Cabinet Minister come to stay in the house of a townsman be a 
 thing to be wonder at , to be talk about , to be afraid of , to be 
 a fruitful source of conversation for a year to come . there be 
 many in Killaloe , especially among the eld lady , who have shake 
 their head and express the sad doubt when young Phineas Finn 
 have first become a Parliament man . and though by degree they have 
 be half bring round , have be drive to acknowledge that he 
 have be wonderfully successful as a Parliament man , still they 
 have continue to shake their head among themselves , and to fear 
 something in the future , - until he appear at his old home lead a 
 Cabinet Minister by the hand . there be such assurance in this that 
 even old Mrs. Callaghan , at the brewery , give way , and begin to say 
 all manner of good thing , and to praise the doctor 's luck in that he 
 have a son gift with part so excellent . there be a great desire to 
 see the Cabinet Minister in the flesh , to be with he when he eat and 
 drank , to watch the gait and countenance of the man , and to drink 
 water from this fountain of state lore which have be so wonderfully 
 bring among they by their young townsman . Mrs. Finn be aware that 
 it behove she to be chary of her invitation , but the lady from the 
 brewery have say such good thing of Mrs. Finn 's black swan , that she 
 carry her point , and be invite to meet the Cabinet Minister at 
 dinner on the day after his arrival . 
 Mrs. Flood Jones and her daughter be invite also to be of the 
 party . when Phineas have be last at Killaloe , Mrs. Flood Jones , 
 as the reader may remember , have remain with her daughter at 
 Floodborough , - feel it to be her duty to keep her daughter away 
 from the danger of an unrequited attachment . but it seem that 
 her purpose be change now , or that she no long fear the 
 danger , - for both Mary and her mother be now again live in 
 Killaloe , and Mary be at the doctor 's house as much as ever . 
 a day or two before the coming of the god and the demigod to the 
 little town , Barbara Finn and her friend have thus come to understand 
 each other as they walk along the Shannon side . " I be sure , my 
 dear , that he be engage to nobody , " say Barbara Finn . 
 " and I be sure , my dear , " say Mary , " that I do not care whether he 
 be or be not . " 
 " what do you mean , Mary ? " 
 " I mean what I say . why should I care ? five year ago I have a foolish 
 dream , and now I be awake again . think how old I have get to be ! " 
 " yes ; - you be twenty - three . what have that to do with it ? " 
 " it have this to do with it ; - that I be old enough to know well . 
 Mamma and I quite understand each other . she use to be angry with 
 he , but she have get over all that foolishness now . it always make I 
 so vexed ; - the idea of be angry with a man because , - because - ! 
 you know one can not   talk about it , it be so foolish . but that be all 
 over now . " 
 " do you mean to say you do not   care for he , Mary ? do you remember 
 what you use to swear to I less than two year ago ? " 
 " I remember it all very well , and I remember what a goose I be . as 
 for care for he , of course I do , - because he be your brother , and 
 because I have know he all my life . but if he be go to be 
 married to - morrow , you would see that it would make no difference to 
 I . " 
 Barbara Finn walk on for a couple of minute in silence before she 
 reply . " Mary , " she say at last , " I do not   believe a word of it . " 
 " very well ; - then all that I shall ask of you be , that we may not 
 talk about he any more . Mamma believe it , and that be enough for 
 I . " nevertheless , they do talk about Phineas during the whole of 
 that day , and very often talk about he afterwards , as long as Mary 
 remain at Killaloe . 
 there be a large dinner party at the doctor 's on the day after Mr. 
 Monk 's arrival . the bishop be not there , though he be on term 
 sufficiently friendly with the doctor 's family to have be invite 
 on so grand an occasion ; but he be not there , because Mrs. Finn 
 be determined that she would be take out to dinner by a Cabinet 
 Minister in the face of all her friend . she be aware that have the 
 bishop be there , she must have take the bishop 's arm . and though 
 there would have be glory in that , the other glory be more to her 
 taste . it be the first time in her life that she have ever see a 
 Cabinet Minister , and I think that she be a little disappointed at 
 find he so like other middle - aged gentleman . she have hop that 
 Mr. Monk would have assume something of the dignity of his position ; 
 but he assume nothing . now the bishop , though he be a very mild 
 man , do assume something by the very fact of his apron and 
 knee - breech . 
 " I be sure , sir , it be very good of you to come and put up with our 
 humble way of living , " say Mrs. Finn to her guest , as they sit down 
 at table . and yet she have resolve that she would not make any speech 
 of the kind , - that she would condescend to no apology , - that she 
 would bear herself as though a Cabinet Minister din with she at 
 least once a year . but when the moment come , she break down , and make 
 this apology with almost abject meekness , and then hat herself 
 because she have do so . 
 " my dear madam , " say Mr. Monk , " I live myself so much like a hermit 
 that your house be a palace of luxury to I . " then he feel that he 
 have make a foolish speech , and he also hat himself . he find it 
 very difficult to talk to his hostess upon any subject , until by 
 chance he mention his young friend Phineas . then her tongue be 
 unloosed . " your son , madam , " he say , " be go with I to Limerick 
 and back to Dublin . it be a shame , I know , take he so soon away 
 from home , but I should not know how to get on without he . " 
 " oh , Mr. Monk , it be such a blessing for he , and such an honour for 
 we , that you should be so good to he . " then the mother speak out 
 all her past fear and all her present hope , and acknowledge the 
 great glory which it be to she to have a son sit in Parliament , 
 hold an office with a stately name and a great salary , and bless 
 with the friendship of such a man as Mr. Monk . after that Mr. Monk 
 get on well with she . 
 " I do not   know any young man , " say he , " in whose career I have take 
 so strong an interest . " 
 " he be always good , " say Mrs. Finn , with a tear force itself into 
 the corner of each eye . " I be his mother , and of course I ought not 
 to say so , - not in this way ; but it be true , Mr. Monk . " and then the 
 poor lady be oblige to raise her handkerchief and wipe away the 
 drop . 
 phinea on this occasion have take out to dinner the mother of his 
 devote Mary , Mrs. Flood Jones . " what a pleasure it must be to the 
 doctor and Mrs. Finn to see you come back in this way , " say Mrs. 
 Flood Jones . 
 " with all my bone unbroken ? " say he , laugh . 
 " yes ; with all your bone unbroken . you know , Phineas , when we 
 first hear that you be to sit in Parliament , we be afraid that 
 you might break a rib or two , - since you choose to talk about the 
 breaking of bone . " 
 " yes , I know . everybody think I should come to grief ; but nobody 
 feel so sure of it as I do myself . " 
 " but you have not come to grief . " 
 " I be not out of the wood yet , you know , Mrs. Flood Jones . there be 
 plenty of possibility for grief in my way still . " 
 " as far as I can understand it , you be out of the wood . all that 
 your friend here want to see now be , that you should marry some nice 
 english girl , with a little money , if possible . rumour have reach 
 we , you know . " 
 " rumour always lie , " say Phineas . 
 " sometimes they do , of course ; and I be not go to ask any 
 indiscreet question . but that be what we all hope . Mary be say , 
 only the other day , that if you be once marry , we should all 
 feel quite safe about you . and you know we all take the most lively 
 interest in your welfare . it be not every day that a man from County 
 Clare get on as you have do , and therefore we be bind to think 
 of you . " thus Mrs. Flood Jones signify to Phineas Finn that she have 
 forgive he the thoughtlessness of his early youth , - even though 
 there have be something of treachery in that thoughtlessness to her 
 own daughter ; and show he , also , that whatever Mary 's feeling 
 might have be once , they be not now of a nature to trouble she . 
 " of course you will marry ? " say Mrs. Flood Jones . 
 " I should think very likely not , " say Phineas , who perhaps look 
 far into the mind of the lady than the lady intend . 
 " oh , do , " say the lady . " every man should marry as soon as he can , 
 and especially a man in your position . " 
 when the lady meet together in the drawing - room after dinner , 
 it be impossible but that they should discuss Mr. Monk . there 
 be Mrs. Callaghan from the brewery there , and old Lady Blood , of 
 Bloodstone , - who on ordinary occasion would hardly admit that she 
 be on dining - out term with any one in Killaloe except the bishop , 
 but who have find it impossible to decline to meet a Cabinet 
 Minister , - and there be Mrs. Stackpoole from Sixmiletown , a far - away 
 cousin of the Finns , who hat Lady Blood with a true provincial 
 hatred . 
 " I do not   see anything particularly uncommon in he , after all , " say 
 Lady Blood . 
 " I think he be very nice indeed , " say Mrs. Flood Jones . 
 " so very quiet , my dear , and just like other people , " say Mrs. 
 Callaghan , mean to pronounce a strong eulogium on the Cabinet 
 Minister . 
 " very like other people indeed , " say Lady Blood . 
 " and what would you expect , Lady Blood ? " say Mrs. Stackpoole . " man 
 and woman in London walk upon two leg , just as they do in Ennis . " 
 now Lady Blood herself have be bear and breed in Ennis , whereas Mrs. 
 Stackpoole have come from Limerick , which be a much more considerable 
 town , and therefore there be a satire in this allusion to the habit 
 of the man of Ennis which Lady Blood understand thoroughly . 
 " my dear Mrs. Stackpoole , I know how the people walk in London quite 
 as well as you do . " Lady Blood have once pass three month in London 
 while Sir Patrick have be alive , whereas Mrs. Stackpoole have never 
 do more than visit the metropolis for a day or two . 
 " oh , no doubt , " say Mrs. Stackpoole ; " but I never can understand 
 what it be that people expect . I suppose Mr. Monk ought to have 
 come with his star on the breast of his coat , to have please Lady 
 Blood . " 
 " my dear Mrs. Stackpoole , Cabinet Ministers do not   have star , " say 
 Lady Blood . 
 " I never say they do , " say Mrs. Stackpoole . 
 " he be so nice and gentle to talk to , " say Mrs. Finn . " you may say 
 what you will , but man who be high up do very often give themselves 
 air . now I must say that this friend of my son 's do not do 
 anything of that kind . " 
 " not the least , " say Mrs. Callaghan . 
 " quite the contrary , " say Mrs. Stackpoole . 
 " I dare say he be a wonderful man , " say Lady Blood . " all I say be , 
 that I do not   hear anything wonderful come out of his mouth ; and 
 as for people in Ennis walk on two leg , I have see donkey in 
 Limerick do just the same thing . " now it be well know that Mrs. 
 Stackpoole have two son live in Limerick , as to neither of whom 
 be it expect that he would set the Shannon on fire . after this 
 little speech there be no further mention of Mr. Monk , as it become 
 necessary that all the good - nature of Mrs. Finn and all the tact 
 of Mrs. Flood Jones and all the energy of Mrs. Callaghan should be 
 use , to prevent the raging of an internecine battle between Mrs. 
 Stackpoole and Lady Blood . 
 CHAPTER LXVI 
 Victrix 
 Mr. Monk 's holiday programme allow he a week at Killaloe , and 
 from thence he be to go to Limerick , and from Limerick to Dublin , 
 in order that , at both place , he might be entertain at a public 
 dinner and make a speech about tenant - right . foresee that Phineas 
 might commit himself if he attend these meeting , Mr. Monk have 
 counsel he to remain at Killaloe . but Phineas have refuse to 
 subject himself to such cautious abstinence . Mr. Monk have come to 
 Ireland as his friend , and he would see he through his travel . " I 
 shall not , probably , be ask to speak , " say Phineas , " and if I be 
 ask , I need not say more than a few word . and what if I do speak 
 out ? " 
 " you might find it disadvantageous to you in London . " 
 " I must take my chance of that . I be not go to tie myself down for 
 ever and ever for the sake of be under - secretary to the Colonies . " 
 Mr. Monk say very much to he on the subject , - be constantly say 
 very much to he about it ; but in spite of all that Mr. Monk say , 
 Phineas do make the journey to Limerick and Dublin . 
 he have not , since his arrival at Killaloe , be a moment alone with 
 Mary Flood Jones till the evening before he start with Mr. Monk . 
 she have keep out of his way successfully , though she have constantly 
 be with he in company , and be begin to plume herself on the 
 strength and valour of her conduct . but her self - praise have in it 
 nothing of joy , and her glory be very sad . of course she would care 
 for he no more , - more especially as it be so very evident that he 
 care not at all for she . but the very fact of she keep out of 
 his way , make she acknowledge to herself that her position be very 
 miserable . she have declare to her mother that she might certainly 
 go to Killaloe with safety , - that it would be well for she to put 
 herself in the way of meet he as an old friend , - that the idea of 
 the necessity of shut herself up because of his approach , be the 
 one thing that give her real pain . therefore her mother have bring 
 she to Killaloe and she have meet he ; but her fancied security have 
 desert she , and she find herself to be miserable , hop for 
 something she do not know what , still dream of possibility , 
 feel during every moment of his presence with she that some 
 special conduct be necessary on her part . she could not make further 
 confession to her mother and ask to be carry back to Floodborough ; 
 but she know that she be very wretched at Killaloe . 
 as for Phineas , he have feel that his old friend be very cold to he . 
 he be in that humour with reference to Violet Effingham which seem 
 especially to require consolation . he know now that all hope be 
 over there . Violet Effingham could never be his wife . even be she 
 not to marry Lord Chiltern for the next five year , she would not , 
 during those five year , marry any other man . such be our hero 's 
 conviction ; and , suffer under this conviction , he be in want of 
 the comfort of feminine sympathy . have Mary know all this , and have it 
 suit she to play such a part , I think she might have have Phineas 
 at her foot before he have be a week at home . but she have keep 
 aloof from he and have hear nothing of his sorrow . as a natural 
 consequence of this , Phineas be more in love with she than ever . 
 on the evening before he start with Mr. Monk for Limerick , he 
 manage to be alone with she for a few minute . Barbara may probably 
 have assist in bring about this arrangement , and have , perhaps , 
 be guilty of some treachery , - sister in such circumstance will 
 sometimes be very treacherous to their friend . I feel sure , however , 
 that Mary herself be quite innocent of any guile in the matter . 
 " Mary , " Phineas say to she suddenly , " it seem to I that you have 
 avoid I purposely ever since I have be at home . " she smile and 
 blush , and stammer and say nothing . " have there be any reason 
 for it , Mary ? " 
 " no reason at all that I know of , " she say . 
 " we use to be such great friend . " 
 " that be before you be a great man , Phineas . it must necessarily 
 be different now . you know so many people now , and people of such a 
 different sort , that of course I fall a little into the background . " 
 " when you talk in that way , Mary , I know that you be laugh at 
 I . " 
 " indeed , indeed I be not . " 
 " I believe there be no one in the whole world , " he say , after a 
 pause , " whose friendship be more to I than yours be . I think of it 
 so often , Mary . say that when we come back it shall be between we as 
 it use to be . " then he put out his hand for her , and she could not 
 help give it to he . " of course there will be people , " he say , 
 " who talk nonsense , and one can not help it ; but I will not put up 
 with it from you . " 
 " I do not mean to talk nonsense , Phineas ! " then there come some one 
 across they , and the conversation be end ; but the sound of his 
 voice remain on her ear , and she could not help but remember 
 that he have declare that her friendship be dearer to he than the 
 friendship of any one else . 
 Phineas go with Mr. Monk first to Limerick and then to Dublin , and 
 find himself at both place to be regard as a hero only second 
 to the great hero . at both place the one subject of debate be 
 tenant - right ; - could anything be do to make it profitable for man 
 with capital to put their capital into irish land ? the fertility of 
 the soil be question by no one , - nor the sufficiency of external 
 circumstance , such as railroad and the like ; - nor the abundance of 
 labour ; - nor even security for the wealth to be produce . the only 
 difficulty be in this , that the man who be to produce the wealth 
 have no guarantee that it would be theirs when it be create . in 
 England and elsewhere such guarantee be in existence . might it not 
 be possible to introduce they into Ireland ? that be the question 
 which Mr. Monk have in hand ; and in various speech which he make 
 both before and after the dinner give to he , he pledge himself to 
 keep it well in hand when Parliament should meet . of course Phineas 
 speak also . it be impossible that he should be silent when his 
 friend and leader be pour out his eloquence . of course he speak , 
 and of course he pledge himself . something like the old pleasure 
 of the debating society return to he , as stand upon a platform 
 before a listening multitude , he give full vent to his word . in 
 the House of Commons , of late he have be so cabin , cribbed , and 
 confine by office as to have enjoy nothing of this . indeed , from 
 the commencement of his career , he have fall so thoroughly into the 
 decorum of Government way , as to have miss altogether the delight 
 of that wild irresponsible oratory of which Mr. Monk have speak 
 to he so often . he have envy man below the gangway , who , though 
 support the Government on main question , could get up on their 
 leg whenever the House be full enough to make it worth their while , 
 and say almost whatever they please . there be that Mr. Robson , who 
 literally do say just what come uppermost ; and the thing that come 
 uppermost be often ill - nature , often unbecome the gravity of the 
 House , be always startling ; but man listen to he and like he to 
 speak . but Mr. Robson have - marry a woman with money . oh , why , - why , 
 have not Violet Effingham be kind to he ? he might even yet , 
 perhaps , marry a woman with money . but he could not bring himself to 
 do so unless he love she . 
 the upshot of the Dublin meeting be that he also positively pledge 
 himself to support during the next session of Parliament a bill 
 advocate tenant - right . " I be sorry you go so far as that , " Mr. 
 Monk say to he almost as soon as the meeting be over . they be 
 stand on the pier at Kingstown , and Mr. Monk be prepare to 
 return to England . 
 " and why not I as far as you ? " 
 " because I have think about it , and I do not think that you have . I 
 be prepared to resign my office to - morrow ; and directly that I can 
 see Mr. Gresham and explain to he what I have do , I shall offer to 
 do so . " 
 " he will not   accept your resignation . " 
 " he must accept it , unless he be prepared to instruct the irish 
 Secretary to bring in such a bill as I can support . " 
 " I shall be exactly in the same boat . " 
 " but you ought not to be in the same boat ; - nor need you . my advice 
 to you be to say nothing about it till you get back to London , and 
 then speak to Lord Cantrip . tell he that you will not say anything 
 on the subject in the House , but that in the event of there be a 
 division you hope to be allow to vote as on an open question . it 
 may be that I shall get Gresham 's assent , and if so we shall be all 
 right . if I do not , and if they choose to make it a point with you , 
 you must resign also . " 
 " of course I shall , " say Phineas . 
 " but I do not think they will . you have be too useful , and they 
 will wish to avoid the weakness which come to a ministry from 
 change its team . good - bye , my dear fellow ; and remember this , - my 
 last word of advice to you be to stick by the ship . I be quite sure 
 it be a career which will suit you . I do not begin it soon enough . " 
 Phineas be rather melancholy as he return alone to Killaloe . it 
 be all very well to bid he stick to the ship , and he know as well 
 as any one could tell he how material the ship be to he ; but there 
 be circumstance in which a man can not stick to his ship , - can not 
 stick , at least , to this special Government ship . he know that 
 whither Mr. Monk go , in this session , he must follow . he have 
 considerable hope that when Mr. Monk explain his purpose to the 
 Prime Minister , the Prime Minister would feel himself oblige to give 
 way . in that case Phineas would not only be able to keep his office , 
 but would have such an opportunity of make a speech in Parliament 
 as circumstance have never yet give to he . when he be again at 
 home he say nothing to his father or to the Killaloeians as to the 
 danger of his position . of what use would it be to make his mother 
 and sister miserable , or to incur the useless counsel of the 
 doctor ? they seem to think his speech at Dublin very fine , and be 
 never tired of talk of what Mr. Monk and Phineas be go to do ; 
 but the idea have not come home to they that if Mr. Monk or Phineas 
 choose to do anything on their own account , they must give up the 
 place which they hold under the Crown . 
 it be September when Phineas find himself back at Killaloe , and he 
 be due to be at his office in London in November . the excitement 
 of Mr. Monk 's company be now over , and he have nothing to do but to 
 receive pouch full of official paper from the Colonial Office , and 
 study all the statistic which come within his reach in reference to 
 the propose new law for tenant - right . in the meantime Mary be still 
 live with her mother at Killaloe , and still keep herself somewhat 
 aloof from the man she love . how could it be possible for he not to 
 give way in such circumstance as those ? 
 one day he find himself talk to she about himself , and speak 
 to she of his own position with more frankness than he ever use with 
 his own family . he have begin by remind she of that conversation 
 which they have have before he go away with Mr. Monk , and by 
 remind she also that she have promise to return to her old 
 friendly way with he . 
 " Nay , Phineas ; there be no promise , " she say . 
 " and be we not to be friend ? " 
 " I only say that I make no particular promise . of course we be 
 friend . we have always be friend . " 
 " what would you say if you hear that I have resign my office and 
 give up my seat ? " he ask . of course she express her surprise , 
 almost her horror , at such an idea , and then he tell she everything . 
 it take long in the telling , because it be necessary that he should 
 explain to she the working of the system which make it impossible for 
 he , as a member of the Government , to entertain an opinion of his 
 own . 
 " and do you mean that you would lose your salary ? " she ask . 
 " certainly I should . " 
 " would not that be very dreadful ? " 
 he laugh as he acknowledge that it would be dreadful . " it be very 
 dreadful , Mary , to have nothing to eat and drink . but what be a man 
 to do ? would you recommend I to say that black be white ? " 
 " I be sure you will never do that . " 
 " you see , Mary , it be very nice to be call by a big name and to 
 have a salary , and it be very comfortable to be envy by one 's 
 friend and enemy ; - but there be drawback . there be this especial 
 drawback . " then he pause for a moment before he go on . 
 " what especial drawback , Phineas ? " 
 " a man can not do what he please with himself . how can a man marry , 
 so circumstanced as I be ? " 
 she hesitate for a moment , and then she answer he , - " a man may be 
 very happy without marry , I suppose . " 
 he also pause for many moment before he speak again , and she then 
 make a faint attempt to escape from he . but before she succeed he 
 have ask she a question which arrest she . " I wonder whether you 
 would listen to I if I be to tell you a history ? " of course she 
 listen , and the history he tell she be the tale of his love for 
 Violet Effingham . 
 " and she have money of her own ? " Mary ask . 
 " yes ; - she be rich . she have a large fortune . " 
 " then , Mr. Finn , you must seek some one else who be equally blessed . " 
 " Mary , that be untrue , - that be ill - natured . you do not mean that . 
 say that you do not mean it . you have not believe that I love Miss 
 Effingham because she be rich . " 
 " but you have tell I that you could love no one who be not rich . " 
 " I have say nothing of the kind . love be involuntary . it do not 
 often run in a yoke with prudence . I have tell you my history as 
 far as it be concern with Violet Effingham . I do love she very 
 dearly . " 
 " do love she , Mr. Finn ? " 
 " yes ; - do love she . be there any inconstancy in cease to love when 
 one be not love ? be there inconstancy in change one 's love , and in 
 love again ? " 
 " I do not know , " say Mary , to whom the occasion be become so 
 embarrassing that she no long be able to reply with word that have 
 a meaning in they . 
 " if there be , dear , I be inconstant . " he pause , but of course she 
 have not a syllable to say . " I have change my love . but I could not 
 speak of a new passion till I have tell the story of that which have 
 pass away . you have hear it all now , Mary . can you try to love I , 
 after that ? " it have come at last , - the thing for which she have be 
 ever wish . it have come in spite of her imprudence , and in spite of 
 her prudence . when she have hear he to the end she be not a whit 
 angry with he , - she be not in the least aggrieve , - because he have 
 be lose to she in his love for this Miss Effingham , while she have 
 be so nearly lose by her love for he . for woman such episode 
 in the life of their lover have an excitement which be almost 
 pleasurable , whereas each man be anxious to hear his lady swear that 
 until he appear upon the scene her heart have be fancy free . Mary , 
 upon the whole , have like the story , - have think that it have be 
 finely tell , and be well pleased with the final catastrophe . but , 
 nevertheless , she be not prepare with her reply . " have you no 
 answer to give I , Mary ? " he say , look up into her eye . I be 
 afraid that he do not doubt what would be her answer , - as it would 
 be good that all lover should do . " you must vouchsafe I some word , 
 Mary . " 
 when she essay to speak she find that she be dumb . she could not 
 get her voice to give she the assistance of a single word . she do 
 not cry , but there be a motion as of sob in her throat which 
 impede all utterance . she be as happy as earth , - as heaven could 
 make she ; but she do not know how to tell he that she be happy . 
 and yet she long to tell it , that he might know how thankful she 
 be to he for his goodness . he still sit look at she , and now by 
 degree he have get her hand in his . " Mary , " he say , " will you be my 
 wife , - my own wife ? " 
 when half an hour have pass , they be still together , and now she 
 have find the use of her tongue . " do whatever you like well , " she 
 say . " I do not care which you do . if you come to I to - morrow and 
 tell I you have no income , it would make no difference . though to 
 love you and to have your love be all the world to I , - though it 
 make all the difference between misery and happiness , - I would 
 soon give up that than be a clog on you . " then he take she in his 
 arm and kiss she . " oh , Phineas ! " she say , " I do love you so 
 entirely ! " 
 " my own one ! " 
 " yes ; your own one . but if you have know it always ! never mind . now 
 you be my own , - be you not ? " 
 " indeed yes , dearest . " 
 " oh , what a thing it be to be victorious at last . " 
 " what on earth be you two do here these two hour together ? " say 
 Barbara , burst into the room . 
 " what be we do ? " say Phineas . 
 " yes ; - what be you do ? " 
 " nothing in particular , " say Mary . 
 " nothing at all in particular , " say Phineas . " only this , - that we 
 have engage ourselves to marry each other . it be quite a trifle , - be 
 it not , Mary ? " 
 " oh , Barbara ! " say the joyful girl , spring forward into her 
 friend 's arm ; " I do believe I be the happy creature on the face 
 of this earth ! " 
 CHAPTER LXVII 
 Job 's Comforters 
 before Phineas have return to London his engagement with Mary Flood 
 Jones be know to all his family , be know to Mrs. Flood Jones , and 
 be indeed know generally to all Killaloe . that other secret of his , 
 which have reference to the probability of his be oblige to throw 
 up his office , be know only to Mary herself . he think that he have 
 do all that honour require of he in tell she of his position 
 before he have propose ; - so that she might on that ground refuse 
 he if she be so minded . and yet he have know very well that such 
 prudence on her part be not to be expect . if she love he , of 
 course she would say so when she be ask . and he have know that 
 she love he . " there may be delay , Mary , " he say to she as he be 
 go ; " nay , there must be delay , if I be oblige to resign . " 
 " I do not care a straw for delay if you will be true to I , " she 
 say . 
 " do you doubt my truth , dearest ? " 
 " not in the least . I will swear by it as the one thing that be true 
 in the world . " 
 " you may , dearest . and if this should come to pass I must go to work 
 and put my shoulder to the wheel , and earn an income for you by my 
 old profession before I can make you my wife . with such a motive 
 before I I know that I shall earn an income . " and thus they part . 
 Mary , though of course she would have prefer that her future 
 husband should remain in his high office , that he should be a member 
 of Parliament and an Under - Secretary of State , admit no doubt 
 into her mind to disturb her happiness ; and Phineas , though he have 
 many misgiving as to the prudence of what he have do , be not the 
 less strong in his resolution of constancy and endurance . he would 
 throw up his position , resign his seat , and go to work at the Bar 
 instantly , if he find that his independence as a man require he to 
 do so . and , above all , let come what might , he would be true to Mary 
 Flood Jones . 
 December be half over before he see Lord Cantrip . " yes , - yes ; " say 
 Lord Cantrip , when the Under - Secretary begin to tell his story ; " I 
 see what you be about . I wish I have be at your elbow . " 
 " if you know the country as I know it , you would be as eager about it 
 as I be . " 
 " then I can only say that I be very glad that I do not know the 
 country as you know it . you see , Finn , it be my idea that if a man 
 want to make himself useful he should stick to some special kind of 
 work . with you it be a thousand pity that you should not do so . " 
 " you think , then , I ought to resign ? " 
 " I do not   say anything about that . as you wish it , of course I will 
 speak to Gresham . Monk , I believe , have resign already . " 
 " he have write to I , and tell I so , " say Phineas . 
 " I always feel afraid of he for your sake , Finn . Mr. Monk be a 
 clever man , and as honest a man as any in the House , but I always 
 think that he be a dangerous friend for you . however , we will see . 
 I will speak to Gresham after Christmas . there be no hurry about it . " 
 when Parliament meet the first great subject of interest be the 
 desertion of Mr. Monk from the Ministry . he at once take his place 
 below the gangway , sit as it happen exactly in front of Mr. 
 Turnbull , and there he make his explanation . some one opposite ask 
 a question whether a certain right honourable gentleman have not leave 
 the Cabinet . then Mr. Gresham reply that to his infinite regret his 
 right honourable friend , who lately preside at the Board of Trade , 
 have resign ; and he go on to explain that this resignation have , 
 accord to his idea , be quite unnecessary . his right honourable 
 friend entertain certain idea about irish tenant - right , as to 
 which he himself and his right honourable friend the Secretary for 
 Ireland could not exactly pledge themselves to be in unison with he ; 
 but he have think that the motion might have rest at any rate over 
 this session . then Mr. Monk explain , make his first great speech 
 on irish tenant - right . he find himself oblige to advocate some 
 immediate measure for give security to the irish farmer ; and as he 
 could not do so as a member of the Cabinet , he be force to resign 
 the honour of that position . he say something also as to the great 
 doubt which have ever weigh on his own mind as to the inexpediency 
 of a man at his time of life submit himself for the first time 
 to the trammel of office . this call up Mr. Turnbull , who take 
 the opportunity of say that he now agree cordially with his old 
 friend for the first time since that old friend have listen to the 
 blandishment of the ministerial seducer , and that he welcome his 
 old friend back to those independent bench with great satisfaction . 
 in this way the debate be very exciting . nothing be say which make 
 it then necessary for Phineas to get upon his leg or to declare 
 himself ; but he perceive that the time would rapidly come in which 
 he must do so . Mr. Gresham , though he strove to speak with gentle 
 word , be evidently very angry with the late President of the Board 
 of Trade ; and , moreover , it be quite clear that a bill would be 
 introduce by Mr. Monk himself , which Mr. Gresham be determine 
 to oppose . if all this come to pass and there should be a close 
 division , Phineas feel that his fate would be seal . when he again 
 speak to Lord Cantrip on the subject , the Secretary of State shrug 
 his shoulder and shake his head . " I can only advise you , " say Lord 
 Cantrip , " to forget all that take place in Ireland . if you will do 
 so , nobody else will remember it . " " as if it be possible to forget 
 such thing , " he say in the letter which he write to Mary that 
 night . " of course I shall go now . if it be not for your sake , I 
 should not in the least regret it . " 
 he have be with Madame Goesler frequently in the winter , and have 
 discuss with she so often the question of his official position 
 that she have declare that she be come at last to understand the 
 mystery of an English Cabinet . " I think you be quite right , my 
 friend , " she say , - " quite right . what - you be to be in Parliament 
 and say that this black thing be white , or that this white thing be 
 black , because you like to take your salary ! that can not be honest ! " 
 then , when he come to talk to she of money , - that he must give up 
 Parliament itself , if he give up his place , - she offer to lend he 
 money . " why should you not treat I as a friend ? " she say . when he 
 point out to she that there would never come a time in which he 
 could pay such money back , she stamp her foot and tell he that 
 he have well leave she . " you have high principle , " she say , " but 
 not principle sufficiently high to understand that this thing could 
 be do between you and I without disgrace to either of we . " then 
 Phineas assure she with tear in his eye that such an arrangement 
 be impossible without disgrace to he . 
 but he whisper to this new friend no word of the engagement with 
 his dear Irish Mary . his irish life , he would tell himself , be a 
 thing quite apart and separate from his life in England . he say not 
 a word about Mary Flood Jones to any of those with whom he live 
 in London . why should he , feel as he do that it would so soon 
 be necessary that he should disappear from among they ? about Miss 
 Effingham he have say much to Madame Goesler . she have ask he 
 whether he have abandon all hope . " that affair , then , be over ? " she 
 have say . 
 " yes ; - it be all over now . " 
 " and she will marry the red - headed , violent lord ? " 
 " Heaven know . I think she will . but she be exactly the girl to 
 remain unmarried if she take it into her head that the man she like 
 be in any way unfit for she . " 
 " do she love this lord ? " 
 " oh yes ; - there be no doubt of that . " and Phineas , as he make this 
 acknowledgment , seem to do so without much inward agony of soul . 
 when he have be last in London he could not speak of Violet and Lord 
 Chiltern together without show that his misery be almost too much 
 for he . 
 at this time he receive some counsel from two friend . one be 
 Laurence Fitzgibbon , and the other be Barrington Erle . Laurence have 
 always be true to he after a fashion , and have never resent his 
 intrusion at the Colonial Office . " Phineas , I boy , " he say , " if all 
 this be thrue , you be about up a tree . " 
 " it be true that I shall support Monk 's motion . " 
 " then , I boy , you be up a tree as far as office go . a place like 
 that niver suit I , because , you see , that poker of a young lord 
 expect so much of a man ; but you do not   mind that kind of thing , and 
 I think you be as snug as snug . " 
 " trouble will come , you see , Laurence . " 
 " Bedad , yes . it be all throuble , I think , sometimes . but you have   a way 
 out of all your throuble . " 
 " what way ? " 
 " pop the question to Madame Max . the money be all thrue , you know . " 
 " I do not   doubt the money in the least , " say Phineas . 
 " and it be my belief she will take you without a second word . anyway , 
 thry it , Phinny , my boy . that be my advice . " Phineas so far agree 
 with his friend Laurence that he think it possible that Madame 
 Goesler might accept he be he to propose marriage to she . he know , 
 of course , that that mode of escape from his difficulty be out 
 of the question for he , but he could not explain this to Laurence 
 Fitzgibbon . 
 " I be sorry to hear that you have take up a bad cause , " say 
 Barrington Erle to he . 
 " it be a pity ; - be it not ? " 
 " and the bad of it be that you will sacrifice yourself and do no good 
 to the cause . I never know a man break away in this fashion , and not 
 feel afterwards that he have do it all for nothing . " 
 " but what be a man to do , Barrington ? he can not   smother his 
 conviction . " 
 " conviction ! there be nothing on earth that I be so much afraid of in 
 a young member of Parliament as conviction . there be ever so many 
 rock against which man get break . one man can not   keep his temper . 
 another can not   hold his tongue . a third can not   say a word unless he have 
 be prim himself half a session . a fourth be always think of 
 himself , and want more than he can get . a fifth be idle , and will not 
 be there when he be want . a sixth be always in the way . a seventh 
 lie so that you never can trust he . I have   have to do with they all , 
 but a fellow with conviction be the bad of all . " 
 " I do not   see how a fellow be to help himself , " say Phineas . " when a 
 fellow begin to meddle with politic they will come . " 
 " why can not   you grow into they gradually as your better and elder 
 have do before you ? it ought to be enough for any man , when he 
 begin , to know that he be a Liberal . he understand which side of the 
 House he be to vote , and who be to lead he . what be the meaning of 
 have a leader to a party , if it be not that ? do you think that you 
 and Mr. Monk can go and make a government between you ? " 
 " whatever I think , I be sure he do not . " 
 " I be not so sure of that . but look here , Phineas , I do not   care two 
 straw about Monk 's go . I always think that Mildmay and the 
 Duke be wrong when they ask he to join . I know he would go over the 
 trace , - unless , indeed , he take his money and do nothing for it , 
 which be the way with some of those Radicals . I look upon he as 
 go . " 
 " he have go . " 
 " the devil go along with he , as you say in Ireland . but do not   you be 
 such a fool as to ruin yourself for a crotchet of Monk 's . it be not 
 too late yet for you to hold back . to tell you the truth , Gresham 
 have say a word to I about it already . he be most anxious that you 
 should stay , but of course you can not   stay and vote against we . " 
 " of course I can not . " 
 " I look upon you , you know , as in some sort my own child . I have   try 
 to bring other fellow forward who seem to have something in they , 
 but I have never succeed as I have with you . you have   hit the thing 
 off , and have get the ball at your foot . upon my honour , in the whole 
 course of my experience I have never know such good fortune as 
 your . " 
 " and I shall always remember how it begin , Barrington , " say Phineas , 
 who be greatly move by the energy and solicitude of his friend . 
 " but , for God 's sake , do not   go and destroy it all by such mad 
 perversity as this . they mean to do something next session . Morrison 
 be go to take it up . " Sir Walter Morrison be at this time 
 Secretary for Ireland . " but of course we can not   let a fellow like Monk 
 take the matter into his own hand just when he please . I call it 
 d - - d treachery . " 
 " Monk be no traitor , Barrington . " 
 " man will have their own opinion about that . it be generally 
 understand that when a man be ask to take a seat in the Cabinet he 
 be expect to conform with his colleague , unless something very 
 special turn up . but I be speak of you now , and not of Monk . you 
 be not a man of fortune . you can not afford to make duck and drake . 
 you be excellently place , and you have plenty of time to hark back , 
 if you will only listen to reason . all that irish stump balderdash will 
 never be throw in your tooth by we , if you will just go on as though 
 it have never be utter . " 
 Phineas could only thank his friend for his advice , which be at 
 least disintereste , and be good of its kind , and tell he that he 
 would think of it . he do think of it very much . he almost think 
 that , be it to do again , he would allow Mr. Monk to go upon his 
 tour alone , and keep himself from the utterance of anything that so 
 good a judge as Erle could call stump balderdash . as he sit in his 
 arm - chair in his room at the Colonial Office , with despatch - box 
 around he , and official paper spread before he , - feel himself 
 to be one of those who in truth manage and govern the affair of 
 this great nation , feel also that if he relinquish his post now 
 he could never regain it , - he do wish that he have be a little less 
 in love with independence , a little quieter in his boasting that no 
 official consideration should ever silence his tongue . but all this 
 be too late now . he know that his skin be not thick enough to bear 
 the arrow of those archer who would bend their bow against he if 
 he should now dare to vote against Mr. Monk 's motion . his own party 
 might be willing to forgive and forget ; but there would be other who 
 would read those report , and would appear in the House with the 
 odious tell - tale newspaper in their hand . 
 then he receive a letter from his father . some good - natured person 
 have enlighten the doctor as to the danger in which his son 
 be place himself . Dr. Finn , who in his own profession be a 
 very excellent and well - instruct man , have be so ignorant of 
 parliamentary tactic , as to have be proud at his son 's success at 
 the irish meeting . he have think that Phineas be carry on his 
 trade as a public speaker with proper energy and continued success . 
 he have care nothing himself for tenant - right , and have acknowledge 
 to Mr. Monk that he could not understand in what it be that the 
 farmer be wrong . but he know that Mr. Monk be a Cabinet 
 Minister , and he think that Phineas be earn his salary . then 
 there come some one who undeceive he , and the paternal bosom of 
 the doctor be dismay . " I do not   mean to interfere , " he say in his 
 letter , " but I can hardly believe that you really intend to resign 
 your place . yet I be tell that you must do so if you go on with this 
 matter . my dear boy , pray think about it . I can not imagine you be 
 disposed to lose all that you have win for nothing . " Mary also write 
 to he . Mrs. Finn have be talk to she , and Mary have teach 
 herself to believe that after the many sweet conversation she 
 have have with a man so high in office as Phineas , she really do 
 understand something about the British Government . Mrs. Finn have 
 interrogate Mary , and Mary have be oblige to own that it be quite 
 possible that Phineas would be call upon to resign . 
 " but why , my dear ? Heaven and earth ! resign two thousand a year ! " 
 " that he may maintain his independence , " say Mary proudly . 
 " Fiddlestick ! " say Mrs. Finn . " how be he to maintain you , or himself 
 either , if he go on in that way ? I should not   wonder if he do not 
 get himself all wrong , even now . " then Mrs. Finn begin to cry ; and 
 Mary could only write to her lover , point out to he how very 
 anxious all his friend be that he should do nothing in a hurry . 
 but what if the thing be do already ! phinea in his great 
 discomfort go to seek further counsel from Madame Goesler . of all 
 his counsellor , Madame Goesler be the only one who applaud he 
 for what he be about to do . 
 " but , after all , what be it you give up ? Mr. Gresham may be out 
 to - morrow , and then where will be your place ? " 
 " there do not seem to be much chance of that at present . " 
 " who can tell ? of course I do not understand , - but it be only the 
 other day when Mr. Mildmay be there , and only the day before that 
 when Lord de Terrier be there , and again only the day before 
 that when Lord Brock be there . " Phineas endeavour to make she 
 understand that of the four Prime Ministers whom she have name , three 
 be man of the same party as himself , under whom it would have 
 suit he to serve . " I would not serve under any man if I be an 
 english gentleman in Parliament , " say Madame Goesler . 
 " what be a poor fellow to do ? " say Phineas , laugh . 
 " a poor fellow need not be a poor fellow unless he like , " say 
 Madame Goesler . immediately after this Phineas leave she , and as he 
 go along the street he begin to question himself whether the 
 prospect of his own darling Mary be at all endanger by his 
 visit to Park Lane ; and to reflect what sort of a blackguard he 
 would be , - a blackguard of how deep a dye , - be he to desert Mary 
 and marry Madame Max Goesler . then he also ask himself as to the 
 nature and quality of his own political honesty if he be to abandon 
 Mary in order that he might maintain his parliamentary independence . 
 after all , if it should ever come to pass that his biography should 
 be write , his biographer would say very much more about the manner 
 in which he keep his seat in Parliament than of the manner in which 
 he keep his engagement with Miss Mary Flood Jones . half a dozen 
 people who know he and she might think ill of he for his conduct 
 to Mary , but the world would not condemn he ! and when he thunder 
 forth his liberal eloquence from below the gangway as an independent 
 member , have the fortune of his charming wife to back he , give 
 excellent dinner at the same time in Park Lane , would not the world 
 praise he very loudly ? 
 when he get to his office he find a note from Lord Brentford 
 invite he to dine in Portman Square . 
 CHAPTER LXVIII 
 the Joint Attack 
 the note from Lord Brentford surprise our hero not a little . he have 
 have no communication with the Earl since the day on which he have be 
 so savagely scold about the duel , when the Earl have plainly tell 
 he that his conduct have be as bad as it could be . Phineas have not 
 on that account become at all ashamed of his conduct in reference to 
 the duel , but he have conceive that any reconciliation between he 
 and the Earl have be out of the question . now there have come a 
 civilly - word invitation , ask he to dine with the offended 
 nobleman . the note have be write by Lady Laura , but it have 
 purport to come from Lord Brentford himself . he send back word to 
 say that he should be happy to have the honour of dining with Lord 
 Brentford . 
 Parliament at this time have be sit nearly a month , and it be 
 already March . Phineas have hear nothing of Lady Laura , and do not 
 even know that she be in London till he see her handwriting . he do 
 not know that she have not go back to her husband , and that she have 
 remain with her father all the winter at Saulsby . he have also 
 hear that Lord Chiltern have be at Saulsby . all the world have be 
 talk of the separation of Mr. Kennedy from his wife , one half of 
 the world declare that his wife , if not absolutely false to he , 
 have neglect all her duty ; and the other half assert that Mr. 
 Kennedy 's treatment of his wife have be so bad that no woman could 
 possibly have live with he . there have even be a rumour that Lady 
 Laura have go off with a lover from the Duke of Omnium 's garden 
 party , and some indiscreet tongue have hint that a certain unmarried 
 under - Secretary of State be miss at the same time . but Lord 
 Chiltern upon this have show his tooth with so strong a propensity to 
 do some real biting , that no one have venture to repeat that rumour . 
 its untruth be soon establish by the fact that Lady Laura Kennedy 
 be live with her father at Saulsby . of Mr. Kennedy , Phineas have as 
 yet see nothing since he have be up in town . that gentleman , though 
 a member of the Cabinet , have not be in London at the opening of the 
 session , nor have he attend the Cabinet meeting during the recess . 
 it have be state in the newspaper that he be ill , and state in 
 private that he could not bear to show himself since his wife have 
 leave he . at last , however , he come to London , and Phineas see he in 
 the House . then , when the first meeting of the Cabinet be summon 
 after his return , it become know that he also have resign his 
 office . there be nothing say about his resignation in the House . he 
 have resign on the score of ill - health , and that very worthy peer , 
 Lord Mount Thistle , formerly Sir Marmaduke Morecombe , come back to 
 the Duchy of Lancaster in his place . a Prime Minister sometimes find 
 great relief in the possession of a serviceable stick who can be make 
 to go in and out as occasion may require ; only it generally happen 
 that the stick will expect some reward when he be make to go out . 
 Lord Mount Thistle immediately see his way to a viscount 's coronet , 
 when he be once more summon to the august council of the 
 Ministers . 
 a few day after this have be arrange , in the interval between 
 Lord Brentford 's invitation and Lord Brentford 's dinner , Phineas 
 encounter Mr. Kennedy so closely in one of the passage of the 
 House that it be impossible that they should not speak to each 
 other , unless they be to avoid each other as people do who have 
 palpably quarrel . Phineas see that Mr. Kennedy be hesitate , and 
 therefore take the bull by the horn . he greet his former friend 
 in a friendly fashion , shake he by the hand , and then prepare 
 to pass on . but Mr. Kennedy , though he have hesitate at first , now 
 detain his brother member . " Finn , " he say , " if you be not engage 
 I should like to speak to you for a moment . " Phineas be not engage , 
 and allow himself to be lead out arm - in - arm by the late Chancellor 
 of the Duchy into Westminster Hall . " of course you know what a 
 terrible thing have happen to I , " say Mr. Kennedy . 
 " yes ; - I have hear of it , " say Phineas . 
 " everybody have hear of it . that be one of the terrible cruelty of 
 such a blow . " 
 " all those thing be very bad of course . I be very much 
 grieve , - because you have both be intimate friend of mine . " 
 " yes , - yes ; we be . do you ever see she now ? " 
 " not since last July , - at the Duke 's party , you know . " 
 " ah , yes ; the morning of that day be the last on which I speak to 
 she . it be then she leave I . " 
 " I be go to dine with Lord Brentford to - morrow , and I dare say she 
 will be there . " 
 " yes ; - she be in town . I see she yesterday in her father 's carriage . 
 I think that she have no cause to leave I . " 
 " of course I can not say anything about that . " 
 " I think she have no cause to leave I . " Phineas as he hear this 
 could not but remember all that Lady Laura have tell himself , and 
 think that no woman have ever have a well reason for leave she 
 husband . " there be thing I do not like , and I say so . " 
 " I suppose that be generally the way , " reply Phineas . 
 " but surely a wife should listen to a word of caution from her 
 husband . " 
 " I fancy they never like it , " say Phineas . 
 " but be we all of we to have all that we like ? I have not find it 
 so . or would it be good for we if we have ? " then he pause ; but as 
 Phineas have no further remark to make , he continue speak after 
 they have walk about a third of the length of the hall . " it be not 
 of my own comfort I be think now so much as of her name and her 
 future conduct . of course it will in every sense be good for she that 
 she should come back to her husband 's roof . " 
 " well ; yes ; - perhaps it would , " say Phineas . 
 " have she not accept that lot for well or for bad ? " say Mr. 
 Kennedy , solemnly . 
 " but incompatibility of temper , you know , be always , - always 
 suppose - . you understand I ? " 
 " it be my intention that she should come back to I . I do not wish to 
 make any legal demand ; - at any rate , not as yet . will you consent to 
 be the bearer of a message from I both to herself and to the Earl ? " 
 now it seem to Phineas that of all the messenger whom Mr. Kennedy 
 could have choose he be the most unsuited to be a Mercury in this 
 cause , - not perceive that he have be so select with some craft , 
 in order that Lady Laura might understand that the accusation against 
 she be , at any rate , withdraw , which have name Phineas as she 
 lover . he pause again before he answer . " of course , " he say , " I 
 should be most willing to be of service , if it be possible . but I 
 do not see how I can speak to the Earl about it . though I be go to 
 dine with he I do not   know why he have ask I ; - for he and I be on 
 very bad term . he hear that stupid story about the duel , and have 
 not speak to I since . " 
 " I hear that , too , " say Mr. Kennedy , frown blackly as he 
 remember his wife 's duplicity . 
 " everybody hear of it . but it have make such a difference between he 
 and I , that I do not   think I can meddle . send for Lord Chiltern , and 
 speak to he . " 
 " speak to Chiltern ! never ! he would probably strike I on the head 
 with his club . " 
 " call on the Earl yourself . " 
 " I do , and he would not see I . " 
 " write to he . " 
 " I do , and he send back my letter unopened . " 
 " write to she . " 
 " I do ; - and she answer I , say only thus ; ' indeed , indeed , it 
 can not be so . ' but it must be so . the law of God require it , and the 
 law of man permit it . I want some one to point out that to they more 
 softly than I could do if I be simply to write to that effect . to 
 the Earl , of course , I can not write again . " the conference end by a 
 promise from Phineas that he would , if possible , say a word to Lady 
 Laura . 
 when he be show into Lord Brentford 's drawing - room he find not 
 only Lady Laura there , but her brother . Lord Brentford be not in 
 the room . Barrington Erle be there , and so also be Lord and Lady 
 Cantrip . 
 " be not your father go to be here ? " he say to Lady Laura , after 
 their first greeting . 
 " we live in that hope , " say she , " and do not at all know why he 
 should be late . what have become of he , Oswald ? " 
 " he come in with I half an hour ago , and I suppose he do not 
 dress as quickly as I do , " say Lord Chiltern ; upon which Phineas 
 immediately understand that the father and the son be reconcile , 
 and he rush to the conclusion that Violet and her lover would also 
 soon be reconcile , if such be not already the case . he feel some 
 remnant of a soreness that it should be so , as a man feel where 
 his headache have be when the real ache itself have leave he . then 
 the host come in and make his apology . " Chiltern keep I stand 
 about , " he say , " till the east wind have chill I through and 
 through . the only charm I recognise in youth be that it be impervious 
 to the east wind . " Phineas feel quite sure now that Violet and her 
 lover be reconcile , and he have a distinct feeling of the place 
 where the ache have be . dear Violet ! but , after all , Violet lack 
 that sweet , clinging , feminine softness which make Mary Flood Jones 
 so pre - eminently the most charming of her sex . the Earl , when he have 
 repeat his general apology , especially to Lady Cantrip , who be the 
 only lady present except his daughter , come up to our hero and shake 
 he kindly by the hand . he take he up to one of the window and then 
 address he in a voice of mock solemnity . 
 " Stick to the colony , young man , " he say , " and never meddle with 
 foreign affair ; - especially not at Blankenberg . " 
 " never again , my Lord ; - never again . " 
 " and leave all question of fire - arm to be arrange between the 
 Horse Guards and the War Office . I have hear a good deal about it 
 since I see you , and I retract a part of what I say . but a duel be a 
 foolish thing , - a very foolish thing . come ; - here be dinner . " and the 
 Earl walk off with Lady Cantrip , and Lord Cantrip walk off with 
 Lady Laura . Barrington Erle follow , and Phineas have an opportunity 
 of say a word to his friend , Lord Chiltern , as they go down 
 together . 
 " it be all right between you and your father ? " 
 " yes ; - after a fashion . there be no knowing how long it will last . he 
 want I to do three thing , and I will not   do any one of they . " 
 " what be the three ? " 
 " to go into Parliament , to be an owner of sheep and oxen , and to hunt 
 in his own county . I should never attend the first , I should ruin 
 myself with the second , and I should never get a run in the third . " 
 but there be not a word say about his marriage . 
 there be only seven who sit down to dinner , and the six be all 
 people with whom Phineas be or have be on most intimate term . 
 Lord Cantrip be his official chief , and , since that connection have 
 exist between they , Lady Cantrip have be very gracious to he . 
 she quite understand the comfort which it be to her husband to have 
 under he , as his representative in the House of Commons , a man whom 
 he could thoroughly trust and like , and therefore she have use she 
 woman 's art to bind Phineas to her lord in more than mere official 
 bondage . she have try her skill also upon Laurence Fitzgibbon , - but 
 altogether in vain . he have eat her dinner and accept she 
 courtesy , and have give for they no return whatever . but Phineas 
 have possess a more grateful mind , and have do all that have be 
 require of he ; - have do all that have be require of he till 
 there have come that terrible absurdity in Ireland . " I know very well 
 what sort of thing would happen when they bring such a man as Mr. 
 Monk into the Cabinet , " Lady Cantrip have say to her husband . 
 but though the party be very small , and though the guest be all 
 his intimate friend , Phineas suspect nothing special till an 
 attack be make upon he as soon as the servant have leave the room . 
 this be do in the presence of the two lady , and , no doubt , have 
 be preconcerte . there be Lord Cantrip there , who have already say 
 much to he , and Barrington Erle who have say more even than Lord 
 Cantrip . Lord Brentford , himself a member of the Cabinet , open the 
 attack by ask whether it be actually true that Mr. Monk mean 
 to go on with his motion . Barrington Erle assert that Mr. Monk 
 positively would do so . " and Gresham will oppose it ? " ask the Earl . 
 " of course he will , " say Barrington . " of course he will , " say Lord 
 Cantrip . " I know what I should think of he if he do not , " say Lady 
 Cantrip . " he be the last man in the world to be force into a thing , " 
 say Lady Laura . then Phineas know pretty well what be come on 
 he . 
 Lord Brentford begin again by ask how many supporter Mr. Monk 
 would have in the House . " that depend upon the amount of courage 
 which the Conservatives may have , " say Barrington Erle . " if they 
 dare to vote for a thoroughly democratic measure , simply for the sake 
 of turn we out , it be quite on the card that they may succeed . " 
 " but of our own people ? " ask Lord Cantrip . " you have well inquire 
 that of Phineas Finn , " say Barrington . and then the attack be make . 
 our hero have a bad half hour of it , though many word be say which 
 must have gratify he much . they all want to keep he , - so Lord 
 Cantrip declare , " except one or two whom I could name , and who be 
 particularly anxious to wear his shoe , " say Barrington , think 
 that certain reminiscence of Phineas with regard to Mr. Bonteen 
 and other might operate as strongly as any other consideration to 
 make he love his place . Lord Brentford declare that he could not 
 understand it , - that he should find himself lose in amazement if such 
 a man as his young friend allow himself to be lead into the outer 
 wilderness by such an ignis - fatuus of light as this . Lord Cantrip 
 lay down the unwritten traditional law of Government official very 
 plainly . a man in office , - in an office which really impose upon 
 he as much work as he could possibly do with credit to himself or 
 his cause , - be dispense from the necessity of a conscience with 
 reference to other matter . it be for Sir Walter Morrison to have 
 a conscience about irish tenant - right , as no doubt he have , - just as 
 Phineas Finn have a conscience about Canada , and Jamaica , and the 
 Cape . Barrington Erle be very strong about party in general , and 
 paint the comfort of official position in glow colour . but I 
 think that the two lady be more efficacious than even their male 
 relative in the argument which they use . " we have be so happy 
 to have you among we , " say Lady Cantrip , look at he with 
 beseech , almost love eye . " Mr. Finn know , " say Lady Laura , 
 " that since he first come into Parliament I have always believe 
 in his success , and I have be very proud to see it . " " we shall 
 weep over he , as over a fall angel , if he leave we , " say Lady 
 Cantrip . " I will not   say that I will weep , " say Lady Laura , " but I do 
 not know anything of the kind that would so truly make I unhappy . " 
 what be he to say in answer to application so flattering and so 
 press ? he would have say nothing , have that be possible , but he 
 feel himself oblige to reply . he reply very weakly , - of course , 
 not justify himself , but declare that as he have go so far he 
 must go far . he must vote for the measure now . both his chief and 
 Barrington Erle prove , or attempt to prove , that he be wrong in 
 this . of course he would not speak on the measure , and his vote for 
 his party would probably be allow to pass without notice . one or 
 two newspaper might perhaps attack he ; but what public man care 
 for such attack as those ? his whole party would hang by he , and in 
 that he would find ample consolation . phinea could only say that he 
 would think of it ; - and this he say in so irresolute a tone of voice 
 that all the man then present believe that he be gain . the two 
 lady , however , be of a different opinion . " in spite of anything 
 that anybody may say , he will do what he think right when the time 
 come , " say Laura to her father afterwards . but then Lady Laura have 
 be in love with he , - be perhaps almost in love with he still . 
 " I be afraid he be a mule , " say Lady Cantrip to her husband . " he be 
 a good mule up a hill with a load on his back , " say his lordship . 
 " but with a mule there always come a time when you can not   manage 
 he , " say Lady Cantrip . but Lady Cantrip have never be in love with 
 Phineas . 
 Phineas find a moment , before he leave Lord Brentford 's house , to say 
 a word to Lady Laura as to the commission that have be give to he . 
 " it can never be , " say Lady Laura , shudder ; - " never , never , 
 never ! " 
 " you be not angry with I for speak ? " 
 " oh , no - not if he tell you . " 
 " he make I promise that I would . " 
 " tell he it can not be . tell he that if he have any instruction to 
 send I as to what he consider to be my duty , I will endeavour to 
 comply , if that duty can be do apart . I will recognize he so 
 far , because of my vow . but not even for the sake of my vow , will I 
 endeavour to live with he . his presence would kill I ! " 
 when Phineas repeat this , or as much of this as he judge to be 
 necessary , to Mr. Kennedy a day or two afterwards , that gentleman 
 reply that in such case he would have no alternative but to seek 
 redress at law . " I have do nothing to my wife , " say he , " of 
 which I need be ashamed . it will be sad , no doubt , to have all our 
 affair bandy about in court , and make the subject of comment in 
 newspaper , but a man must go through that , or bad than that , in 
 the vindication of his right , and for the performance of his duty to 
 his maker . " that very day Mr. Kennedy go to his lawyer , and desire 
 that step might be take for the restitution to he of his conjugal 
 right . 
 CHAPTER LXIX 
 the Temptress 
 Mr. Monk 's bill be read the first time before Easter , and Phineas 
 Finn still hold his office . he have speak to the Prime Minister 
 once on the subject , and have be surprise at that gentleman 's 
 courtesy ; - for Mr. Gresham have the reputation of be unconciliatory 
 in his manner , and very prone to resent anything like desertion from 
 that allegiance which be due to himself as the leader of his party . 
 " you have well stay where you be and take no step that may be 
 irretrievable , till you have quite make up your mind , " say Mr. 
 Gresham . 
 " I fear I have make up my mind , " say Phineas . 
 " nothing can be do till after Easter , " reply the great man , " and 
 there be no knowing how thing may go then . I strongly recommend you 
 to stay with we . if you can do this it will be only necessary that 
 you shall put your resignation in Lord Cantrip 's hand before you 
 speak or vote against we . see Monk and talk it over with he . " Mr. 
 Gresham possibly imagine that Mr. Monk might be move to abandon his 
 bill , when he see what injury he be about to do . 
 at this time Phineas receive the following letter from his darling 
 Mary : - 
 Floodborough , Thursday . 
 DEAREST PHINEAS , 
 we have just get home from Killaloe , and mean to remain 
 here all through the summer . after leave your sister 
 this house seem so desolate ; but I shall have the more 
 time to think of you . I have be read Tennyson , as you 
 tell I , and I fancy that I could in truth be a Mariana 
 here , if it be not that I be so quite certain that you 
 will come ; - and that make all the difference in the world 
 in a moated grange . last night I sit at the window and 
 try to realise what I should feel if you be to tell I 
 that you do not want I ; and I get myself into such an 
 ecstatic state of mock melancholy that I cry for half an 
 hour . but when one have such a real live joy at the back 
 of one 's romantic melancholy , tear be very pleasant ; - 
 they water and do not burn . 
 I must tell you about they all at Killaloe . they certainly 
 be very unhappy at the idea of your resigning . your 
 father say very little , but I make he own that to act 
 as you be act for the sake of principle be very grand . 
 I would not leave he till he have say so , and he do say 
 it . Dear Mrs. Finn do not understand it as well , but 
 she will do so . she complain mostly for my sake , and 
 when I tell she that I will wait twenty year if it be 
 necessary , she tell I I do not know what waiting mean . 
 but I will , - and will be happy , and will never really 
 think myself a Mariana . dear , dear , dear Phineas , indeed 
 I will not . the girl be half sad and half proud . but I be 
 wholly proud , and know that you be do just what you 
 ought to do . I shall think more of you as a man who might 
 have be a Prime Minister than if you be really sit 
 in the Cabinet like Lord Cantrip . as for mamma , I can not 
 make she quite understand it . she merely say that no 
 young man who be go to be marry ought to resign 
 anything . dear mamma ; - sometimes she do say such odd 
 thing . 
 you tell I to tell you everything , and so I have . I 
 talk to some of the people here , and tell they what they 
 might do if they have tenant - right . one old fellow , Mike 
 Dufferty , - I do not   know whether you remember he , - ask 
 if he would have to pay the rent all the same . when I say 
 certainly he would , then he shake his head . but as you 
 say once , when we want to do good to people one have no 
 right to expect that they should understand it . it be like 
 baptize little infant . 
 I get both your note ; - seven word in one , Mr. 
 Under - Secretary , and nine in the other ! but the one little 
 word at the end be worth a whole sheet full of common 
 word . how nice it be to write letter without pay 
 postage , and to send they about the world with a grand 
 name in the corner . when Barney bring I one he always 
 look as if he do not   know whether it be a love letter 
 or an order to go to Botany Bay . if he see the inside of 
 they , how short they be , I do not   think he would think much of 
 you as a lover nor yet as an Under - Secretary . 
 but I think ever so much of you as both ; - I do , indeed ; 
 and I be not scold you a bit . as long as I can have two 
 or three dear , sweet , love word , I shall be as happy as 
 a queen . ah , if you know it all ! but you never can know 
 it all . a man have so many other thing to learn that he 
 can not understand it . 
 good - bye , dear , dear , dear man . whatever you do I shall 
 be quite sure you have do the good . 
 ever your own , with all the love of her heart , 
 MARY F. JONES . 
 this be very nice . such a man as be Phineas Finn always take a 
 delight which he can not express even to himself in the receipt of 
 such a letter as this . there be nothing so flattering as the warm 
 expression of the confidence of a woman 's love , and Phineas think 
 that no woman ever express this more completely than do his Mary . 
 dear , dear Mary . as for give she up , as for treachery to one so 
 trusting , so sweet , so well beloved , that be out of the question . 
 but nevertheless the truth come home to he more clearly day by day , 
 that he of all man be the last who ought to have give himself up to 
 such a passion . for her sake he ought to have abstain . so he tell 
 himself now . for her sake he ought to have keep aloof from she ; - and 
 for his own sake he ought to have keep aloof from Mr. Monk . that very 
 day , with Mary 's letter in his pocket , he go to the livery stable 
 and explain that he would not keep his horse any long . there be 
 no difficulty about the horse . Mr. Howard Macleod of the Treasury 
 would take he from that very hour . Phineas , as he walk away , 
 utter a curse upon Mr. Howard Macleod . Mr. Howard Macleod be just 
 begin the glory of his life in London , and he , Phineas Finn , be 
 bring his to an end . 
 with Mary 's letter in his pocket he go up to Portman Square . he have 
 again get into the habit of see Lady Laura frequently , and be 
 often with her brother , who now again live at his father 's house . 
 a letter have reach Lord Brentford , through his lawyer , in which a 
 demand be make by Mr. Kennedy for the return of his wife . she be 
 quite determined that she would never go back to he ; and there have 
 come to she a doubt whether it would not be expedient that she should 
 live abroad so as to be out of the way of persecution from her 
 husband . Lord Brentford be in great wrath , and Lord Chiltern have 
 once or twice hint that perhaps he have well ' see " Mr. Kennedy . 
 the amenity of such an interview , as this would be , have up to the 
 present day be postpone ; and , in a certain way , Phineas have be 
 use as a messenger between Mr. Kennedy and his wife 's family . 
 " I think it will end , " she say , " in my go to Dresden , and 
 settle myself there . papa will come to I when Parliament be not 
 sit . " 
 " it will be very dull . " 
 " dull ! what do dulness amount to when one have come to such a pass 
 as this ? when one be in the ruck of fortune , to be dull be very bad ; 
 but when misfortune come , simple dulness be nothing . it sound 
 almost like relief . " 
 " it be so hard that you should be drive away . " she do not answer 
 he for a while , and he be begin to think of his own case also . 
 be it not hard that he too should be drive away ? " it be odd enough 
 that we should both be go at the same time . " 
 " but you will not go ? " 
 " I think I shall . I have resolve upon this , - that if I give up my 
 place , I will give up my seat too . I go into Parliament with the 
 hope of office , and how can I remain there when I shall have gain 
 it and then have lose it ? " 
 " but you will stay in London , Mr. Finn ? " 
 " I think not . after all that have come and go I should not be happy 
 here , and I should make my way easy and on cheap term in Dublin . 
 my present idea be that I shall endeavour to make a practice over in 
 my own country . it will be hard work begin at the bottom ; - will 
 it not ? " 
 " and so unnecessary . " 
 " ah , Lady Laura , - if it only could be avoid ! but it be of no use 
 go through all that again . " 
 " how much we would both of we avoid if we could only have another 
 chance ! " say Lady Laura . " if I could only be as I be before I 
 persuade myself to marry a man whom I never love , what a paradise 
 the earth would be to I ! with I all regret be too late . " 
 " and with I as much so . " 
 " no , Mr. Finn . even should you resign your office , there be no reason 
 why you should give up your seat . " 
 " simply that I have no income to maintain I in London . " 
 she be silent for a few moment , during which she change her seat 
 so as to come near to he , place herself on a corner of a sofa 
 close to the chair on which he be seat . " I wonder whether I may 
 speak to you plainly , " she say . 
 " indeed you may . " 
 " on any subject ? " 
 " yes ; - on any subject . " 
 " I trust you have be able to rid your bosom of all remembrance of 
 Violet Effingham . " 
 " certainly not of all remembrance , Lady Laura . " 
 " of all hope , then ? " 
 " I have no such hope . " 
 " and of all linger desire ? " 
 " well , yes ; - and of all linger desire . I know now that it can not 
 be . your brother be welcome to she . " 
 " ah ; - of that I know nothing . he , with his perversity , have estrange 
 she . but I be sure of this , - that if she do not marry he , she will 
 marry no one . but it be not on account of he that I speak . he must 
 fight his own battle now . " 
 " I shall not interfere with he , Lady Laura . " 
 " then why should you not establish yourself by a marriage that will 
 make place a matter of indifference to you ? I know that it be within 
 your power to do so . " Phineas put his hand up to his breastcoat 
 pocket , and feel that Mary 's letter , - her precious letter , - be there 
 safe . it certainly be not in his power to do this thing which Lady 
 Laura recommend to he , but he hardly think that the present be 
 a moment suitable for explain to she the nature of the impediment 
 which stand in the way of such an arrangement . he have so lately 
 speak to Lady Laura with an assurance of undye constancy of his 
 love for Miss Effingham , that he could not as yet acknowledge the 
 force of another passion . he shake his head by way of reply . " I tell 
 you that it be so , " she say with energy . 
 " I be afraid not . " 
 " go to Madame Goesler , and ask she . hear what she will say . " 
 " Madame Goesler would laugh at I , no doubt . " 
 " Psha ! you do not think so . you know that she would not laugh . and 
 be you the man to be afraid of a woman 's laughter ? I think not . " 
 again he do not answer she at once , and when he do speak the tone 
 of his voice be alter . " what be it you say of yourself , just 
 now ? " 
 " what do I say of myself ? " 
 " you regret that you have consent to marry a man , - whom you do 
 not love . " 
 " why should you not love she ? and it be so different with a man ! a 
 woman be wretched if she do not love her husband , but I fancy that 
 a man get on very well without any such feeling . she can not domineer 
 over you . she can not expect you to pluck yourself out of your own 
 soil , and begin a new growth altogether in accordance with the law 
 of her own . it be that which Mr. Kennedy do . " 
 " I do not for a moment think that she would take I , if I be to 
 offer myself . " 
 " try she , " say Lady Laura energetically . " such trial cost you but 
 little ; - we both of we know that ! " still he say nothing of the 
 letter in his pocket . " it be everything that you should go on now 
 that you have once begin . I do not believe in you work at the 
 Bar . you can not do it . a man who have commence life as you have do 
 with the excitement of politic , who have know what it be to take a 
 prominent part in the control of public affair , can not give it up 
 and be happy at other work . make she your wife , and you may resign 
 or remain in office just as you choose . Office will be much easy 
 to you than it be now , because it will not be a necessity . let I 
 at any rate have the pleasure of think that one of we can remain 
 here , - that we need not both fall together . " 
 still he do not tell she of the letter in his pocket . he feel that 
 she move he , - that she make he acknowledge to himself how great 
 would be the pity of such a failure as would be his . he be quite as 
 much alive as she could be to the fact that work at the Bar , either 
 in London or in Dublin , would have no charm for he now . the 
 prospect of such a life be very dreary to he . even with the comfort 
 of Mary 's love such a life would be very dreary to he . and then he 
 know , - he think that he know , - that be he to offer himself to 
 Madame Goesler he would not in truth be reject . she have tell he 
 that if poverty be a trouble to he he need be no long poor . of 
 course he have understand this . her money be at his service if he 
 should choose to stoop and pick it up . and it be not only money that 
 such a marriage would give he . he have acknowledge to himself more 
 than once that Madame Goesler be very lovely , that she be clever , 
 attractive in every way , and as far as he could see , bless with a 
 sweet temper . she have a position , too , in the world that would help 
 he rather than mar he . what might he not do with an independent 
 seat in the House of Commons , and as joint owner of the little house 
 in Park Lane ? of all career which the world could offer to a man the 
 pleasantest would then be within his reach . " you appear to I as a 
 tempter , " he say at last to Lady Laura . 
 " it be unkind of you to say that , and ungrateful . I would do anything 
 on earth in my power to help you . " 
 " nevertheless you be a tempter . " 
 " I know how it ought to have be , " she say , in a low voice . " I know 
 very well how it ought to have be . I should have keep myself free 
 till that time when we meet on the braes of Loughlinter , and then all 
 would have be well with we . " 
 " I do not know how that might have be , " say Phineas , hoarsely . 
 " you do not know ! but I know . of course you have stab I with a 
 thousand dagger when you have tell I from time to time of your love 
 for Violet . you have be very cruel , - needlessly cruel . man be so 
 cruel ! but for all that I have know that I could have keep you , - have 
 it not be too late when you speak to I . will you not own as much 
 as that ? " 
 " of course you would have be everything to I . I should never have 
 thought of Violet then . " 
 " that be the only kind word you have say to I from that day to 
 this . I try to comfort myself in think that it would have be so . 
 but all that be past and go , and do . I have have my romance and 
 you have have your . as you be a man , it be natural that you should 
 have be disturb by a double image ; - it be not so with I . " 
 " and yet you can advise I to offer marriage to a woman , - a woman 
 whom I be to seek merely because she be rich ? " 
 " yes ; - I do so advise you . you have have your romance and must now 
 put up with reality . why should I so advise you but for the interest 
 that I have in you ? your prosperity will do I no good . I shall not 
 even be here to see it . I shall hear of it only as so many a woman 
 banish out of England hear a distant misunderstood report of what 
 be go on in the country she have leave . but I still have regard 
 enough , - I will be bold , and , know that you will not take it 
 amiss , will say love enough for you , - to feel a desire that you 
 should not be shipwreck . since we first take you in hand between 
 we , Barrington and I , I have never swerve in my anxiety on your 
 behalf . when I resolve that it would be well for we both that we 
 should be only friend , I do not swerve . when you would talk to I 
 so cruelly of your love for Violet , I do not swerve . when I warn 
 you from Loughlinter because I think there be danger , I do not 
 swerve . when I bade you not to come to I in London because of my 
 husband , I do not swerve . when my father be hard upon you , I 
 do not swerve then . I would not leave he till he be soften . 
 when you try to rob Oswald of his love , and I think you would 
 succeed , - for I do think so , - I do not swerve . I have ever be 
 true to you . and now that I must hide myself and go away , and be see 
 no more , I be true still . " 
 " Laura , - dear Laura ! " he exclaim . 
 " ah , no ! " she say , speak with no touch of anger , but all in 
 sorrow ; - " it must not be like that . there be no room for that . nor do 
 you mean it . I do not think so ill of you . but there may not be even 
 word of affection between we - only such as I may speak to make you 
 know that I be your friend . " 
 " you be my friend , " he say , stretch out his hand to she as he 
 turn away his face . " you be my friend , indeed . " 
 " then do as I would have you do . " 
 he put his hand into his pocket , and have the letter between his 
 finger with the purport of show it to she . but at the moment 
 the thought occur to he that be he to do so , then , indeed , he 
 would be bind for ever . he know that he be bind for ever , - bind 
 for ever to his own Mary ; but he desire to have the privilege of 
 think over such bondage once more before he proclaim it even to 
 his dear friend . he have tell she that she tempt he , and she 
 stand before he now as a temptress . but lest it might be possible 
 that she should not tempt in vain , - that letter in his pocket must 
 never be show to she . in that case Lady Laura must never hear from 
 his lip the name of Mary Flood Jones . 
 he leave she without any assured purpose ; - without , that is , the 
 assurance to she of any fix purpose . there yet want a week to the 
 day on which Mr. Monk 's bill be to be read , - or not to be read , - the 
 second time ; and he have still that interval before he need decide . 
 he go to his club , and before he din he strive to write a line 
 to Mary ; - but when he have the paper before he he find that it be 
 impossible to do so . though he do not even suspect himself of an 
 intention to be false , the idea that be in his mind make the effort 
 too much for he . he put the paper away from he and go down and 
 eat his dinner . 
 it be a Saturday , and there be no House in the evening . he have 
 remain in Portman Square with Lady Laura till near seven o'clock , 
 and be engage to go out in the evening to a gathering at Mrs. 
 Gresham 's house . everybody in London would be there , and Phineas 
 be resolve that as long as he remain in London he would be see 
 at place where everybody be see . he would certainly be at Mrs. 
 Gresham 's gathering ; but there be an hour or two before he need 
 go home to dress , and as he have nothing to do , he go down to the 
 smoking - room of his club . the seat be crowd , but there be 
 one vacant ; and before he have look about he to scrutinise his 
 neighbourhood , he find that he have place himself with Bonteen on 
 his right hand and Ratler on his left . there be no two man in all 
 London whom he more thoroughly dislike ; but it be too late for he 
 to avoid they now . 
 they instantly attack he , first on one side and then on the other . 
 " so I be tell you be go to leave we , " say Bonteen . 
 " who can have be ill - natured enough to whisper such a thing ? " 
 reply Phineas . 
 " the whisper be very loud , I can tell you , " say Ratler . " I think I 
 know already pretty nearly how every man in the House will vote , and 
 I have not get your name down on the right side . " 
 " change it for heaven 's sake , " say Phineas . 
 " I will , if you will tell I seriously that I may , " say Ratler . 
 " my opinion be , " say Bonteen , " that a man should be know either as 
 a friend or foe . I respect a declare foe . " 
 " know I as a declare foe then , " say Phineas , " and respect I . " 
 " that be all very well , " say Ratler , " but it mean nothing . I have 
 always have a sort of fear about you , Finn , that you would go over the 
 trace some day . of course it be a very grand thing to be 
 independent . " 
 " the fine thing in the world , " say Bonteen ; " only so d - - d 
 useless . " 
 " but a man should not   be independent and stick to the ship at the 
 same time . you forget the trouble you cause , and how you upset all 
 calculation . " 
 " I have not   think of the calculation , " say Phineas . 
 " the fact be , Finn , " say Bonteen , " you be make of clay too fine for 
 office . I have   always find it have be so with man from your country . 
 you be the grand horse in the world to look at out on a prairie , 
 but you do not   like the slavery of harness . " 
 " and the sound of a whip over our shoulder set we kicking ; - do it 
 not , Ratler ? " 
 " I shall show the list to Gresham to - morrow , " say Ratler , " and of 
 course he can do as he please ; but I do not   understand this kind of 
 thing . " 
 " do not   you be in a hurry , " say Bonteen . " I will bet you a sovereign 
 Finn vote with we yet . there be nothing like be a little coy to 
 set off a girl 's charm . I will bet you a sovereign , Ratler , that Finn 
 go out into the lobby with you and I against Monk 's bill . " 
 Phineas , not be able to stand any more of this most unpleasant 
 raillery , get up and go away . the club be distasteful to he , and 
 he walk off and saunter for a while about the park . he go down 
 by the Duke of York 's column as though he be go to his office , 
 which of course be close at this hour , but turn round when he 
 get beyond the new public building , - building which he be never 
 destine to use in their complete state , - and enter the gate of 
 the enclosure , and wander on over the bridge across the water . as 
 he go his mind be full of thought . could it be good for he to 
 give up everything for a fair face ? he swear to himself that of all 
 woman whom he have ever see Mary be the sweetest and the dear and 
 the good . if it could be well to lose the world for a woman , it would 
 be well to lose it for she . Violet , with all her skill , and all her 
 strength , and all her grace , could never have write such a letter 
 as that which he still hold in his pocket . the good charm of a woman 
 be that she should be soft , and trusting , and generous ; and who ever 
 have be more soft , more trusting , and more generous than his Mary ? 
 of course he would be true to she , though he do lose the world . 
 but to yield such a triumph to the Ratlers and Bonteens whom he leave 
 behind he , - to let they have their will over he , - to know that they 
 would rejoice scurrilously behind his back over his downfall ! the 
 feeling be terrible to he . the last word which Bonteen have speak 
 make it impossible to he now not to support his old friend Mr. Monk . 
 it be not only what Bonteen have say , but that the word of Mr. 
 Bonteen so plainly indicate what would be the word of all the other 
 Bonteens . he know that he be weak in this . he know that have he be 
 strong , he would have allow himself to be guide , - if not by the 
 firm decision of his own spirit , - by the counsel of such man as Mr. 
 Gresham and Lord Cantrip , and not by the sarcasm of the Bonteens and 
 Ratlers of official life . but man who sojourn amidst savagery fear 
 the mosquito more than they do the lion . he could not bear to think 
 that he should yield his blood to such a one as Bonteen . 
 and he must yield his blood , unless he could vote for Mr. Monk 's 
 motion , and hold his ground afterwards among they all in the House 
 of Commons . he would at any rate see the session out , and try a 
 fall with Mr. Bonteen when they should be sit on different 
 bench , - if ever fortune should give he an opportunity . and in the 
 meantime , what should he do about Madame Goesler ? what a fate be his 
 to have the handsome woman in London with thousand and thousand 
 a year at his disposal ! for , - so he now swear to himself , - Madame 
 Goesler be the handsome woman in London , as Mary Flood Jones be 
 the sweetest girl in the world . 
 he have not arrive at any decision so fix as to make he 
 comfortable when he go home and dress for Mrs. Gresham 's party . 
 and yet he know , - he think that he know that he would be true to 
 Mary Flood Jones . 
 CHAPTER LXX 
 the Prime Minister 's House 
 the room and passage and staircase at Mrs. Gresham 's house be 
 very crowded when Phineas arrive there . man of all shade of 
 politic be there , and the wife and daughter of such man ; and 
 there be a streak of royalty in one of the saloon , and a whole 
 rainbow of foreign minister with their star , and two blue ribbon 
 be to be see together on the first landing - place , with a stout 
 lady between they carry diamond enough to load a pannier . 
 everybody be there . Phineas find that even Lord Chiltern be come , 
 as he stumble across his friend on the first foot - ground that he 
 gain in his ascent towards the room . " Halloa , - you here ? " say 
 Phineas . " yes , by George ! " say the other , " but I be go to escape 
 as soon as possible . I have   be try to make my way up for the last 
 hour , but could never get round that huge promontory there . Laura be 
 more persevering . " " be Kennedy here ? " Phineas whisper . " I do not 
 know , " say Chiltern , " but she be determined to run the chance . " 
 a little high up , - for Phineas be bless with more patience than 
 Lord Chiltern possess , - he come upon Mr. Monk . " so you be still 
 admit privately , " say Phineas . 
 " oh dear yes , - and we have just be have a most friendly 
 conversation about you . what a man he be ! he know everything . he 
 be so accurate ; so just in the abstract , - and in the abstract so 
 generous ! " 
 " he have be very generous to I in detail as well as in abstract , " 
 say Phineas . 
 " ah , yes ; I be not think of individual exactly . his want of 
 generosity be to large mass , - to a party , to class , to a people ; 
 whereas his generosity be for mankind at large . he assume the god , 
 affect to nod , and seem to shake the sphere . but I have nothing 
 against he . he have ask I here to - night , and have talk to I most 
 familiarly about Ireland . " 
 " what do you think of your chance of a second reading ? " ask 
 Phineas . 
 " what do you think of it ? - you hear more of those thing than I do . " 
 " everybody say it will be a close division . " 
 " I never expect it , " say Mr. Monk . 
 " nor I , till I hear what Daubeny say at the first reading . they 
 will all vote for the bill en masse , - hat it in their heart all 
 the time . " 
 " let we hope they be not so bad as that . " 
 " it be the way with they always . they do all our work for 
 we , - sail either on one tack or the other . that be their use in 
 creation , that when we split among ourselves , as we always do , they 
 come in and finish our job for we . it must be unpleasant for they to 
 be always do that which they always say should never be do at 
 all . " 
 " wherever the gift horse may come from , I shall not look it in the 
 mouth , " say Mr. Monk . " there be only one man in the House whom I 
 hope I may not see in the lobby with I , and that be yourself . " 
 " the question be decide now , " say Phineas . 
 " and how be it decide ? " 
 Phineas could not tell his friend that a question of so great 
 magnitude to he have be decide by the last sting which he have 
 receive from an insect so contemptible as Mr. Bonteen , but he 
 express the feeling as well as he know how to express it . " oh , I 
 shall be with you . I know what you be go to say , and I know how 
 good you be . but I could not stand it . man be begin already to 
 say thing which almost make I get up and kick they . if I can help 
 it , I will give occasion to no man to hint anything to I which 
 can make I be so wretched as I have be to - day . pray do not say 
 anything more . my idea be that I shall resign to - morrow . " 
 " then I hope that we may fight the battle side by side , " say Mr. 
 Monk , give he his hand . 
 " we will fight the battle side by side , " reply Phineas . 
 after that he push his way still high up the stair , have no 
 special purpose in view , not dream of any such success as that 
 of reach his host or hostess , - merely feel that it should be 
 a point of honour with he to make a tour through the room before 
 he descend the stair . the thing , he think , be to be do with 
 courage and patience , and this might , probably , be the last time in 
 his life that he would find himself in the house of a Prime Minister . 
 just at the turn of the balustrade at the top of the stair , he find 
 Mr. Gresham in the very spot on which Mr. Monk have be talk with 
 he . " very glad to see you , " say Mr. Gresham . " you , I find , be a 
 persevere man , with a genius for get upwards . " 
 " like the spark , " say Phineas . 
 " not quite so quickly , " say Mr. Gresham . 
 " but with the same assurance of speedy loss of my little light . " 
 it do not suit Mr. Gresham to understand this , so he change the 
 subject . " have you see the news from America ? " 
 " yes , I have see it , but do not believe it , " say Phineas . 
 " ah , you have such faith in a combination of british colony , 
 properly back in Downing Street , as to think they strong 
 against a world in arm . in your place I should hold to the same 
 doctrine , - hold to it stoutly . " 
 " and you do now , I hope , Mr. Gresham ? " 
 " well , - yes , - I be not down - hearted . but I confess to a feeling that 
 the world would go on even though we have nothing to say to a single 
 province in North America . but that be for your private ear . you be 
 not to whisper that in Downing Street . " then there come up somebody 
 else , and Phineas go on upon his slow course . he have long for an 
 opportunity to tell Mr. Gresham that he could go to Downing Street no 
 more , but such opportunity have not reach he . 
 for a long time he find himself stick close by the side of Miss 
 Fitzgibbon , - Miss Aspasia Fitzgibbon , - who have once relieve he from 
 terrible pecuniary anxiety by pay for he a sum of money which be 
 due by he on her brother 's account . " it be a very nice thing to be 
 here , but one do get tired of it , " say Miss Fitzgibbon . 
 " very tired , " say Phineas . 
 " of course it be a part of your duty , Mr. Finn . you be on your 
 promotion and be bind to be here . when I ask Laurence to come , he 
 say there be nothing to be get till the card be shuffle again . " 
 " they will be shuffle very soon , " say Phineas . 
 " whatever colour come up , you will hold trump , I know , " say the 
 lady . " some hand always hold trump . " he could not explain to Miss 
 Fitzgibbon that it would never again be his fate to hold a single 
 trump in his hand ; so he make another fight , and get on a few step 
 far . 
 he say a word as he go to half a dozen friend , - as friend go 
 with he . he be detain for five minute by Lady Baldock , who be 
 very gracious and very disagreeable . she tell he that Violet be in 
 the room , but where she do not know . " she be somewhere with Lady 
 Laura , I believe ; and really , Mr. Finn , I do not like it . " Lady 
 Baldock have hear that Phineas have quarrel with Lord Brentford , 
 but have not hear of the reconciliation . " really , I do not like it . I 
 be tell that Mr. Kennedy be in the house , and nobody know what may 
 happen . " 
 " Mr. Kennedy be not likely to say anything . " 
 " one can not tell . and when I hear that a woman be separate from her 
 husband , I always think that she must have be imprudent . it may be 
 uncharitable , but I think it be most safe so to consider . " 
 " as far as I have hear the circumstance , Lady Laura be quite 
 right , " say Phineas . 
 " it may be so . gentleman will always take the lady 's part , - of 
 course . but I should be very sorry to have a daughter separate from 
 her husband , - very sorry . " 
 Phineas , who have nothing now to gain from Lady Baldock 's favour , leave 
 she abruptly , and go on again . he have a great desire to see Lady 
 Laura and Violet together , though he could hardly tell himself why . 
 he have not see Miss Effingham since his return from Ireland , and he 
 think that if he meet she alone he could hardly have talk to she 
 with comfort ; but he know that if he meet she with Lady Laura , she 
 would greet he as a friend , and speak to he as though there be no 
 cause for embarrassment between they . but he be so far disappointed , 
 that he suddenly encounter Violet alone . she have be lean on 
 the arm of Lord Baldock , and Phineas see her cousin leave she . but 
 he would not be such a coward as to avoid she , especially as he know 
 that she have see he . " oh , Mr. Finn ! " she say , " do you see that ? " 
 " see what ? " 
 " look ; there be Mr. Kennedy . we have hear that it be possible , and 
 Laura make I promise that I would not leave she . " Phineas turn his 
 head , and see Mr. Kennedy stand with his back bolt upright against 
 a door - post , with his brow as black as thunder . " she be just opposite 
 to he , where he can see she , " say Violet . " pray take I to she . he 
 will think nothing of you , because I know that you be still friend 
 with both of they . I come away because Lord Baldock want to 
 introduce I to Lady Mouser . you know he be go to marry Miss 
 Mouser . " 
 Phineas , not care much about Lord Baldock and Miss Mouser , take 
 Violet 's hand upon his arm , and very slowly make his way across 
 the room to the spot indicate . there they find Lady Laura alone , 
 sit under the upas - tree influence of her husband 's gaze . there 
 be a concourse of people between they , and Mr. Kennedy do not seem 
 inclined to make any attempt to lessen the distance . but Lady Laura 
 have find it impossible to move while she be under her husband 's 
 eye . 
 " Mr. Finn , " she say , " could you find Oswald ? I know he be here . " 
 " he have go , " say Phineas . " I be speak to he downstairs . " 
 " you have not see my father ? he say he would come . " 
 " I have not see he , but I will search . " 
 " no ; - it will do no good . I can not stay . his carriage be there , I 
 know , - wait for I . " Phineas immediately start off to have the 
 carriage call , and promise to return with as much celerity as he 
 could use . as he go , make his way much quick through the crowd 
 than he have do when he have no such object for haste , he purposely 
 avoid the door by which Mr. Kennedy have stand . it would have be 
 his near way , but his present service , he think , require that 
 he should keep aloof from the man . but Mr. Kennedy pass through the 
 door and intercept he in his path . 
 " be she go ? " he ask . 
 " well . yes . I dare say she may before long . I shall look for Lord 
 Brentford 's carriage by - and - by . " 
 " tell she she need not go because of I . I shall not return . I shall 
 not annoy she here . it would have be much well that a woman in 
 such a plight should not have come to such an assembly . " 
 " you would not wish she to shut herself up . " 
 " I would wish she to come back to the home that she have leave , and , if 
 there be any law in the land , she shall be make to do so . you tell 
 she that I say so . " then Mr. Kennedy fight his way down the stair , 
 and Phineas Finn follow in his wake . 
 about half an hour afterwards Phineas return to the two lady with 
 tiding that the carriage would be at hand as soon as they could be 
 below . " do he see you ? " say Lady Laura . 
 " yes , he follow I . " 
 " and do he speak to you ? " 
 " yes ; - he speak to I . " 
 " and what do he say ? " and then , in the presence of Violet , Phineas 
 give the message . he think it well that it should be give ; 
 and be he to decline to deliver it now , it would never be give . 
 " whether there be law in the land to protect I or whether there be 
 none , I will never live with he , " say Lady Laura . " be a woman like 
 a head of cattle , that she can be fasten in her crib by force ? I 
 will never live with he though all the judge of the land should 
 decide that I must do so . " 
 Phineas think much of all this as he go to his solitary lodging . 
 after all , be not the world much well with he than it be with 
 either of those two wretched marry being ? and why ? he have not , 
 at any rate as yet , sacrifice for money or social gain any of 
 the instinct of his nature . he have be fickle , foolish , vain , 
 uncertain , and perhaps covetous ; - but as yet he have not be false . 
 then he take out Mary 's last letter and read it again . 
 CHAPTER LXXI 
 compare note 
 it would , perhaps , be difficult to decide , - between Lord Chiltern and 
 Miss Effingham , - which have be most wrong , or which have be near 
 to the right , in the circumstance which have lead to their separation . 
 the old lord , wish to induce his son to undertake work of some 
 sort , and feel that his own effort in this direction be bad 
 than useless , have closet himself with his intended daughter - in - law , 
 and have obtain from she a promise that she would use her influence 
 with her lover . " of course I think it right that he should do 
 something , " Violet have say . " and he will if you bid he , " reply 
 the Earl . Violet express a great doubt as to this willingness of 
 obedience ; but , nevertheless , she promise to do she good , and she 
 do she good . Lord Chiltern , when she speak to he , knit his brow 
 with an apparent ferocity of anger which his countenance frequently 
 express without any intention of ferocity on his part . he be 
 annoyed , but be not savagely disposed to Violet . as he look at 
 she , however , he seem to be very savagely disposed . " what be it you 
 would have I do ? " he say . 
 " I would have you choose some occupation , Oswald . " 
 " what occupation ? what be it that you mean ? ought I to be a 
 shoemaker ? " 
 " not that by preference , I should say ; but that if you please . " when 
 her lover have frown at she , Violet have resolve , - have strongly 
 determine , with inward assertion of her own right , - that she would 
 not be frighten by he . 
 " you be talk nonsense , Violet . you know that I can not be a 
 shoemaker . " 
 " you may go into Parliament . " 
 " I neither can , nor would I if I could . I dislike the life . " 
 " you might farm . " 
 " I can not afford it . " 
 " you might , - might do anything . you ought to do something . you know 
 that you ought . you know that your father be right in what he say . " 
 " that be easily assert , Violet ; but it would , I think , be well 
 that you should take my part than my father 's , if it be that you 
 intend to be my wife . " 
 " you know that I intend to be your wife ; but would you wish that I 
 should respect my husband ? " 
 " and will you not do so if you marry I ? " he ask . 
 then Violet look into his face and see that the frown be blacker 
 than ever . the great mark down his forehead be deep and more 
 like an ugly wound than she have ever see it ; and his eye sparkle 
 with anger ; and his face be red as with fiery wrath . if it be so 
 with he when she be no more than engage to he , how would it be 
 when they should be man and wife ? at any rate , she would not fear 
 he , - not now at least . " no , Oswald , " she say . " if you resolve upon 
 be an idle man , I shall not respect you . it be well that I 
 should tell you the truth . " 
 " a great deal well , " he say . 
 " how can I respect one whose whole life will be , - will be - ? " 
 " will be what ? " he demand with a loud shout . 
 " Oswald , you be very rough with I . " 
 " what do you say that my life will be ? " 
 then she again resolve that she would not fear he . " it will be 
 discreditable , " she say . 
 " it shall not discredit you , " he reply . " I will not bring disgrace 
 on one I have love so well . Violet , after what you have say , we have 
 well part . " she be still proud , still determine , and they do 
 part . though it nearly break her heart to see he leave she , she bid 
 he go . she hat herself afterwards for her severity to he ; but , 
 nevertheless , she would not submit to recall the word which she 
 have speak . she have think he to be wrong , and , so thinking , have 
 conceive it to be her duty and her privilege to tell he what she 
 think . but she have no wish to lose he ; - no wish not to be his wife 
 even , though he should be as idle as the wind . she be so constituted 
 that she have never allow he or any other man to be master of her 
 heart , - till she have with a full purpose give her heart away . the 
 day before she have resolve to give it to one man , she might , I 
 think , have resolve to give it to another . Love have not conquer 
 she , but have be take into her service . nevertheless , she could 
 not now rid herself of her servant , when she find that his service 
 would stand she no long in good stead . she part from Lord 
 Chiltern with an assent , with an assured brow , and with much dignity 
 in her gait ; but as soon as she be alone she be a prey to remorse . 
 she have declare to the man who be to have be her husband that 
 his life be discreditable , - and , of course , no man would bear such 
 language . have Lord Chiltern bear it , he would not have be worthy 
 of her love . 
 she herself tell Lady Laura and Lord Brentford what have 
 occur , - and have tell Lady Baldock also . Lady Baldock have , of 
 course , triumph , - and Violet seek her revenge by swear that 
 she would regret for ever the loss of so inestimable a gentleman . 
 " then why have you give he up , my dear ? " demand Lady Baldock . 
 " because I find that he be too good for I , " say Violet . it may be 
 doubtful whether Lady Baldock be not justify , when she declare 
 that her niece be to she a care so harass that no aunt know in 
 history have ever be so troubled before . 
 Lord Brentford have fuss and fume , and have certainly make thing 
 bad . he have quarrel with his son , and then make it up , and then 
 quarrel again , - swear that the fault must all be attribute to 
 Chiltern 's stubbornness and Chiltern 's temper . latterly , however , by 
 Lady Laura 's intervention , Lord Brentford and his son have again be 
 reconcile , and the Earl endeavour manfully to keep his tongue from 
 disagreeable word , and his face from evil look , when his son be 
 present . " they will make it up , " Lady Laura have say , " if you and I 
 do not attempt to make it up for they . if we do , they will never come 
 together . " the Earl be convince , and do his good . but the task 
 be very difficult to he . how be he to keep his tongue off his son 
 while his son be daily say thing of which any father , - any such 
 father as Lord Brentford , - could not but disapprove ? Lord Chiltern 
 profess to disbelieve even in the wisdom of the House of Lords , and 
 on one occasion assert that it must be a great comfort to any Prime 
 Minister to have three or four old woman in the Cabinet . the father , 
 when he hear this , try to rebuke his son tenderly , strove even to 
 be jocose . it be the one wish of his heart that Violet Effingham 
 should be his daughter - in - law . but even with this wish he find it 
 very hard to keep his tongue off Lord Chiltern . 
 when Lady Laura discuss the matter with Violet , Violet would always 
 declare that there be no hope . " the truth be , " she say on the 
 morning of that day on which they both go to Mrs. Gresham 's , " that 
 though we like each other , - love each other , if you choose to say 
 so , - we be not fit to be man and wife . " 
 " and why not fit ? " 
 " we be too much alike . each be too violent , too headstrong , and too 
 masterful . " 
 " you , as the woman , ought to give way , " say Lady Laura . 
 " but we do not always do just what we ought . " 
 " I know how difficult it be for I to advise , see to what a pass I 
 have bring myself . " 
 " do not say that , dear ; - or rather do say it , for we have , both of 
 we , bring ourselves to what you call a pass , - to such a pass that 
 we be like to be able to live together and discuss it for the rest 
 of our life . the difference be , I take it , that you have not to 
 accuse yourself , and that I have . " 
 " I can not say that I have not to accuse myself , " say Lady Laura . 
 " I do not know that I have do much wrong to Mr. Kennedy since I 
 marry he ; but in marry he I do he a grievous wrong . " 
 " and he have avenge himself . " 
 " we will not talk of vengeance . I believe he be wretche , and I know 
 that I be ; - and that have come of the wrong that I have do . " 
 " I will make no man wretche , " say Violet . 
 " do you mean that your mind be make up against Oswald ? " 
 " I mean that , and I mean much more . I say that I will make no man 
 wretche . your brother be not the only man who be so weak as to be 
 willing to run the hazard . " 
 " there be Lord Fawn . " 
 " yes , there be Lord Fawn , certainly . perhaps I should not do he much 
 harm ; but then I should do he no good . " 
 " and poor Phineas Finn . " 
 " yes ; - there be Mr. Finn . I will tell you something , Laura . the only 
 man I ever see in the world whom I have think for a moment that 
 it be possible that I should like , - like enough to love as my 
 husband , - except your brother , be Mr. Finn . " 
 " and now ? " 
 " oh ; - now ; of course that be over , " say Violet . 
 " it be over ? " 
 " quite over . be he not go to marry Madame Goesler ? I suppose 
 all that be fix by this time . I hope she will be good to he , 
 and gracious , and let he have his own way , and give he his tea 
 comfortably when he come up tired from the House ; for I confess that 
 my heart be a little tender towards Phineas still . I should not like 
 to think that he have fall into the hand of a female philistine . " 
 " I do not think he will marry Madame Goesler . " 
 " why not ? " 
 " I can hardly tell you ; - but I do not think he will . and you love 
 he once , - eh , Violet ? " 
 " not quite that , my dear . it have be difficult with I to love . the 
 difficulty with most girl , I fancy , be not to love . Mr. Finn , when I 
 come to measure he in my mind , be not small , but he be never quite 
 tall enough . one feel oneself to be a sort of recruiting sergeant , 
 go about with a standard of inch . Mr. Finn be just half an inch 
 too short . he lack something in individuality . he be a little too 
 much a friend to everybody . " 
 " shall I tell you a secret , Violet ? " 
 " if you please , dear ; though I fancy it be one I know already . " 
 " he be the only man whom I ever love , " say Lady Laura . 
 " but it be too late when you learn to love he , " say Violet . 
 " it be too late , when I be so sure of it as to wish that I have 
 never see Mr. Kennedy . I feel it come on I , and I argue with 
 myself that such a marriage would be bad for we both . at that moment 
 there be trouble in the family , and I have not a shilling of my own . " 
 " you have pay it for Oswald . " 
 " at any rate , I have nothing ; - and he have nothing . how could I have 
 dare to think even of such a marriage ? " 
 " do he think of it , Laura ? " 
 " I suppose he do . " 
 " you know he do . do you not tell I before ? " 
 " well ; - yes . he think of it . I have come to some foolish , 
 half - sentimental resolution as to friendship , believe that he and I 
 could be knit together by some adhesion of fraternal affection that 
 should be void of offence to my husband ; and in furtherance of this 
 he be ask to Loughlinter when I go there , just after I have 
 accept Robert . he come down , and I measure he too , as you have 
 do . I measure he , and I find that he want nothing to come up 
 to the height require by my standard . I think I know he well than 
 you do . " 
 " very possibly ; - but why measure he at all , when such measurement 
 be useless ? " 
 " can one help such thing ? he come to I one day as I be sit up 
 by the Linter . you remember the place , where it make its first 
 leap . " 
 " I remember it very well . " 
 " so do I. Robert have show it I as the fair spot in all 
 Scotland . " 
 " and there this lover of our sing his song to you ? " 
 " I do not know what he tell I then ; but I know that I tell he that 
 I be engage ; and I feel when I tell he so that my engagement be a 
 sorrow to I . and it have be a sorrow from that day to this . " 
 " and the hero , Phineas , - he be still dear to you ? " 
 " dear to I ? " 
 " yes . you would have hat I , have he become my husband ? and you will 
 hate Madame Goesler when she become his wife ? " 
 " not in the least . I be no dog in the manger . I have even go so far 
 as almost to wish , at certain moment , that you should accept he . " 
 " and why ? " 
 " because he have wish it so heartily . " 
 " one can hardly forgive a man for such speedy change , " say Violet . 
 " be I not to forgive he ; - I , who have turn myself away from he 
 with a fix purpose the moment that I find that he have make a mark 
 upon my heart ? I could not wipe off the mark , and yet I marry . be 
 he not to try to wipe off his mark ? " 
 " it seem that he wipe it off very quickly ; - and since that he have 
 wipe off another mark . one do not   know how many mark he have wipe 
 off . they be like the inn - keeper 's score which he make in chalk . a 
 damp cloth bring they all away , and leave nothing behind . " 
 " what would you have ? " 
 " there should be a little notch on the stick , - to remember by , " say 
 Violet . " not that I complain , you know . I can not complain , as I be 
 not notch myself . " 
 " you be silly , Violet . " 
 " in not have allow myself to be notch by this great champion ? " 
 " a man like Mr. Finn have his life to deal with , - to make the most 
 of it , and to divide it between work , pleasure , duty , ambition , and 
 the rest of it as well he may . if he have any softness of heart , it 
 will be necessary to he that love should bear a part in all these 
 interest . but a man will be a fool who will allow love to be the 
 master of they all . he will be one whose mind be so ill - balanced 
 as to allow he to be the victim of a single wish . even in a woman 
 passion such as that be evidence of weakness , and not of strength . " 
 " it seem , then , Laura , that you be weak . " 
 " and if I be , do that condemn he ? he be a man , if I judge he 
 rightly , who will be constant as the sun , when constancy can be of 
 service . " 
 " you mean that the future Mrs. Finn will be secure ? " 
 " that be what I mean ; - and that you or I , have either of we choose to 
 take his name , might have be quite secure . we have think it right 
 to refuse to do so . " 
 " and how many more , I wonder ? " 
 " you be unjust , and unkind , Violet . so unjust and unkind that it be 
 clear to I he have just gratify your vanity , and have never touch 
 your heart . what would you have have he do , when I tell he that I 
 be engage ? " 
 " I suppose that Mr. Kennedy would not have go to Blankenberg with 
 he . " 
 " Violet ! " 
 " that seem to be the proper thing to do . but even that do not 
 adjust thing finally ; - do it ? " then some one come upon they , and 
 the conversation be bring to an end . 
 CHAPTER LXXII 
 Madame Goesler 's Generosity 
 when Phineas Finn leave Mr. Gresham 's house he have quite resolve what 
 he would do . on the next morning he would tell Lord Cantrip that his 
 resignation be a necessity , and that he would take that nobleman 's 
 advice as to resign at once , or wait till the day on which Mr. 
 Monk 's Irish Bill would be read for the second time . 
 " my dear Finn , I can only say that I deeply regret it , " say Lord 
 Cantrip . 
 " so do I. I regret to leave office , which I like , - and which indeed 
 I want . I regret specially to leave this office , as it have be a 
 thorough pleasure to I ; and I regret , above all , to leave you . but 
 I be convinced that Monk be right , and I find it impossible not to 
 support he . " 
 " I wish that Mr. Monk be at Bath , " say Lord Cantrip . 
 Phineas could only smile , and shrug his shoulder , and say that 
 even though Mr. Monk be at Bath it would not probably make much 
 difference . when he tender his letter of resignation , Lord Cantrip 
 beg he to withdraw it for a day or two . he would , he say , speak 
 to Mr. Gresham . the debate on the second reading of Mr. Monk 's bill 
 would not take place till that day week , and the resignation would 
 be in time if it be tender before Phineas either speak or vote 
 against the Government . so Phineas go back to his room , and 
 endeavour to make himself useful in some work appertain to his 
 favourite colony . 
 that conversation have take place on a Friday , and on the 
 follow Sunday , early in the day , he leave his room after a late 
 breakfast , - a prolonged breakfast , during which he have be study 
 tenant - right statistic , prepare his own speech , and endeavour 
 to look forward into the future which that speech be to do so much 
 to influence , - and turn his face towards Park Lane . there have be 
 a certain understanding between he and Madame Goesler that he be 
 to call in Park Lane on this Sunday morning , and then declare to she 
 what be his final resolve as to the office which he hold . " it be 
 simply to bid she adieu , " he say to himself , " for I shall hardly 
 see she again . " and yet , as he take off his morning easy coat , and 
 dress himself for the street , and stand for a moment before his 
 look - glass , and see that his glove be fresh and that his boot 
 be properly polish , I think there be a care about his person 
 which he would have hardly take have he be quite assure that he 
 simply intend to say good - bye to the lady whom he be about to 
 visit . but if there be any such conscious feeling , he administer 
 to himself an antidote before he leave the house . on return to the 
 sitting - room he go to a little desk from which he take out the 
 letter from Mary which the reader have see , and carefully peruse 
 every word of it . " she be the good of they all , " he say to himself , 
 as he refolde the letter and put it back into his desk . I be not 
 sure that it be well that a man should have any large number from 
 whom to select a good ; as , in such circumstance , he be so very apt 
 to change his judgment from hour to hour . the quality which be the 
 most attractive before dinner sometimes become the least so in the 
 evening . 
 the morning be warm , and he take a cab . it would not do that he 
 should speak even his last farewell to such a one as Madame Goesler 
 with all the heat and dust of a long walk upon he . have be so 
 careful about his boot and glove he might as well use his care to 
 the end . Madame Goesler be a very pretty woman , who spar herself 
 no trouble in make herself as pretty as Nature would allow , on 
 behalf of those whom she favour with her smile ; and to such a lady 
 some special attention be due by one who have receive so many of she 
 smile as have Phineas . and he feel , too , that there be something 
 special in this very visit . it be to be make by appointment , and 
 there have come to be an understanding between they that Phineas 
 should tell she on this occasion what be his resolution with 
 reference to his future life . I think that he have be very wise in 
 fortify himself with a further glance at our dear Mary 's letter , 
 before he trust himself within Madame Goesler 's door . 
 yes ; - Madame Goesler be at home . the door be open by Madame 
 Goesler 's own maid , who , smile , explain that the other servant 
 be all at church . Phineas have become sufficiently intimate at the 
 cottage in Park Lane to be on friendly term with Madame Goesler 's 
 own maid , and now make some little half - familiar remark as to the 
 propriety of his visit during church time . " Madame will not refuse to 
 see you , I be think , " say the girl , who be a German . " and she 
 be alone ? " ask Phineas . " alone ? yes ; - of course she be alone . who 
 should be with she now ? " then she take he up into the drawing - room ; 
 but , when there , he find that Madame Goesler be absent . " she shall 
 be down directly , " say the girl . " I shall tell she who be here , and 
 she will come . " 
 it be a very pretty room . it may almost be say that there could be 
 no pretty room in all London . it look out across certain small 
 private garden , - which be as bright and gay as money could make 
 they when bring into competition with London smoke , - right on to 
 the park . outside and inside the window , flower and green thing 
 be so arrange that the room itself almost look as though it 
 be a bower in a garden . and everything in that bower be rich and 
 rare ; and there be nothing there which annoy by its rarity or be 
 distasteful by its richness . the seat , though they be costly as 
 money could buy , be mean for sit , and be comfortable as 
 seat . there be book for reading , and the mean of read they . 
 two or three gem of english art be hang upon the wall , and 
 could be see backwards and forwards in the mirror . and there 
 be precious toy lie here and there about the room , - toy very 
 precious , but place there not because of their price , but because of 
 their beauty . phinea already know enough of the art of live to be 
 aware that the woman who have make that room what it be , have charm 
 to add a beauty to everything she touch . what would such a life as 
 his want , if grace by such a companion , - such a life as his might 
 be , if the mean which be her be at his command ? it would want 
 one thing , he think , - the self - respect which he would lose if he 
 be false to the girl who be trust he with such sweet trust at 
 home in Ireland . 
 in a very few minute Madame Goesler be with he , and , though he do 
 not think about it , he perceive that she be bright in her apparel , 
 that her hair be as soft as care could make it , and that every charm 
 belong to she have be bring into use for his gratification . he 
 almost tell himself that he be there in order that he might ask to 
 have all those charm bestow upon himself . he do not know who have 
 lately come to Park Lane and be a suppliant for the possession of 
 those rich endowment ; but I wonder whether they would have be more 
 precious in his eye have he know that they have so move the heart 
 of the great Duke as to have induce he to lay his coronet at the 
 lady 's foot . I think that have he know that the lady have refuse the 
 coronet , that knowledge would have enhance the value of the prize . 
 " I be so sorry to have keep you wait , " she say , as she give he 
 her hand . " I be an owl not to be ready for you when you tell I that 
 you would come . " 
 " no ; - but a bird of paradise to come to I so sweetly , and at an 
 hour when all the other bird refuse to show the feather of a single 
 wing . " 
 " and you , - you feel like a naughty boy , do you not , in thus come 
 out on a Sunday morning ? " 
 " do you feel like a naughty girl ? " 
 " yes ; - just a little so . I do not know that I should care for 
 everybody to hear that I receive visitor , - or bad still , a 
 visitor , - at this hour on this day . but then it be so pleasant to 
 feel oneself to be naughty ! there be a bohemian flavour of picnic 
 about it which , though it do not come up to the rich gusto of 
 real wickedness , make one fancy that one be on the border of that 
 delightful region in which there be none of the constraint of 
 custom , - where man and woman say what they like , and do what they 
 like . " 
 " it be pleasant enough to be on the border , " say Phineas . 
 " that be just it . of course decency , morality , and propriety , all 
 make to suit the eye of the public , be the thing which be really 
 delightful . we all know that , and live accordingly , - as well as we 
 can . I do at least . " 
 " and do not I , Madame Goesler ? " 
 " I know nothing about that , Mr. Finn , and want to ask no question . 
 but if you do , I be sure you agree with I that you often envy the 
 improper people , - the Bohemians , - the people who do not   trouble 
 themselves about keep any law except those for break which 
 they would be put into nasty , unpleasant prison . I envy they . oh , 
 how I envy they ! " 
 " but you be free as air . " 
 " the most cabin , cribbed , and confine creature in the world ! I 
 have be fight my way up for the last four year , and have not 
 allow myself the liberty of one flirtation ; - not often even the 
 recreation of a natural laugh . and now I should not   wonder if I do not 
 find myself fall back a year or two , just because I have allow 
 you to come and see I on a Sunday morning . when I tell Lotta that 
 you be come , she shake her head at I in dismay . but now that you 
 be here , tell I what you have do . " 
 " nothing as yet , Madame Goesler . " 
 " I think it be to have be settle on Friday ? " 
 " it be settle , - before Friday . indeed , as I look back at it all 
 now , I can hardly tell when it be not settle . it be impossible , 
 and have be impossible , that I should do otherwise . I still hold my 
 place , Madame Goesler , but I have declare that I shall give it up 
 before the debate come on . " 
 " it be quite fix ? " 
 " quite fix , my friend . " 
 " and what next ? " Madame Goesler , as she thus interrogate he , be 
 lean across towards he from the sofa on which she be place , 
 with both her elbow rest on a small table before she . we all know 
 that look of true interest which the countenance of a real friend 
 will bear when the welfare of his friend be in question . there be 
 doubtless some who can assume it without feel , - as there be 
 actor who can personate all the passion . but in ordinary life we 
 think that we can trust such a face , and that we know the true look 
 when we see it . Phineas , as he gaze into Madame Goesler 's eye , be 
 sure that the lady opposite he be not act . she at least be 
 anxious for his welfare , and be make his care her own . " what 
 next ? " say she , repeat her word in a tone that be somewhat 
 hurry . 
 " I do not know that there will be any next . as far as public life be 
 concern , there will be no next for I , Madame Goesler . " 
 " that be out of the question , " she say . " you be make for public 
 life . " 
 " then I shall be untrue to my making , I fear . but to speak plainly - " 
 " yes ; speak plainly . I want to understand the reality . " 
 " the reality be this . I shall keep my seat to the end of the session , 
 as I think I may be of use . after that I shall give it up . " 
 " resign that too ? " she say in a tone of chagrin . 
 " the chance be , I think , that there will be another dissolution . if 
 they hold their own against Mr. Monk 's motion , then they will pass an 
 Irish Reform Bill . after that I think they must dissolve . " 
 " and you will not come forward again ? " 
 " I can not afford it . " 
 " Psha ! some five hundred pound or so ! " 
 " and , besides that , I be well aware that my only chance at my old 
 profession be to give up all idea of Parliament . the two thing be 
 not compatible for a beginner at the law . I know it now , and have 
 buy my knowledge by a bitter experience . " 
 " and where will you live ? " 
 " in Dublin , probably . " 
 " and you will do , - will do what ? " 
 " anything honest in a barrister 's way that may be bring to I . I 
 hope that I may never descend below that . " 
 " you will stand up for all the blackguard , and try to make out that 
 the thief do not steal ? " 
 " it may be that that sort of work may come in my way . " 
 " and you will wear a wig and try to look wise ? " 
 " the wig be not universal in Ireland , Madame Goesler . " 
 " and you will wrangle , as though your very soul be in it , for 
 somebody 's twenty pound ? " 
 " exactly . " 
 " you have already make a name in the great senate in the world , 
 and have govern other country large than your own - " 
 " no ; - I have not do that . I have govern no country . 
 " I tell you , my friend , that you can not do it . it be out of the 
 question . man may move forward from little work to big work ; but they 
 can not move back and do little work , when they have have task which 
 be really great . I tell you , Mr. Finn , that the House of Parliament 
 be the place for you to work in . it be the only place ; - that and the 
 abode of Ministers . be not I your friend who tell you this ? " 
 " I know that you be my friend . " 
 " and will you not credit I when I tell you this ? what do you fear , 
 that you should run away ? you have no wife ; - no child . what be the 
 come misfortune that you dread ? " she pause a moment as though for 
 an answer , and he feel that now have come the time in which it would 
 be well that he should tell she of his engagement with his own Mary . 
 she have receive he very playfully ; but now within the last few 
 minute there have come upon she a seriousness of gesture , and almost 
 a solemnity of tone , which make he conscious that he should in no 
 way trifle with she . she be so earnest in her friendship that he 
 owe it to she to tell she everything . but before he could think of 
 the word in which his tale should be tell , she have go on with she 
 quick question . " be it solely about money that you fear ? " she say . 
 " it be simply that I have no income on which to live . " 
 " have I not offer you money ? " 
 " but , Madame Goesler , you who offer it would yourself despise I if I 
 take it . " 
 " no ; - I do deny it . " as she say this , - not loudly but with much 
 emphasis , - she come and stand before he where he be sit . and as 
 he look at she he could perceive that there be a strength about 
 she of which he have not be aware . she be strong , large , more 
 robust physically than he have hitherto conceive . " I do deny it , " she 
 say . " money be neither god nor devil , that it should make one noble 
 and another vile . it be an accident , and , if honestly possess , may 
 pass from you to I , or from I to you , without a stain . you may 
 take my dinner from I if I give it you , my flower , my friendship , 
 my , - my , - my everything , but my money ! explain to I the cause of the 
 phenomenon . if I give to you a thousand pound , now this moment , and 
 you take it , you be base ; - but if I leave it you in my will , - and 
 die , - you take it , and be not base . explain to I the cause of 
 that . " 
 " you have not say it quite all , " say Phineas hoarsely . 
 " what have I leave unsaid ? if I have leave anything unsaid , do you say 
 the rest . " 
 " it be because you be a woman , and young , and beautiful , that no man 
 may take wealth from your hand . " 
 " oh , it be that ! " 
 " it be that partly , " 
 " if I be a man you might take it , though I be young and beautiful 
 as the morning ? " 
 " no ; - present of money be always bad . they stain and load the 
 spirit , and break the heart . " 
 " and specially when give by a woman 's hand ? " 
 " it seem so to I . but I can not argue of it . do not let we talk of 
 it any more . " 
 " nor can I argue . I can not argue , but I can be generous , - very 
 generous . I can deny myself for my friend , - can even lower myself in 
 my own esteem for my friend . I can do more than a man can do for a 
 friend . you will not take money from my hand ? " 
 " no , Madame Goesler ; - I can not do that . " 
 " take the hand then first . when it and all that it hold be your 
 own , you can help yourself as you list . " so say , she stand before 
 he with her right hand stretch out towards he . 
 what man will say that he would not have be tempt ? or what woman 
 will declare that such temptation should have have no force ? the very 
 air of the room in which she dwelt be sweet in his nostril , and 
 there hover around she an halo of grace and beauty which greet 
 all his sens . she invite he to join his lot to her , in order 
 that she might give to he all that be need to make his life rich 
 and glorious . how would the Ratlers and the Bonteens envy he when 
 they hear of the prize which have become his ! the Cantrips and the 
 Greshams would feel that he be a friend doubly valuable , if he could 
 be win back ; and Mr. Monk would greet he as a fitting ally , - an ally 
 strong with the strength which he have before want . with whom would 
 he not be equal ? whom need he fear ? who would not praise he ? the 
 story of his poor Mary would be know only in a small village , out 
 beyond the Channel . the temptation certainly be very strong . 
 but he have not a moment in which to doubt . she be stand there 
 with her face turn from he , but with her hand still stretch 
 towards he . of course he take it . what man so place could do other 
 than take a woman 's hand ? 
 " my friend , " he say . 
 " I will be call friend by you no more , " she say . " you must call I 
 Marie , your own Marie , or you must never call I by any name again . 
 which shall it be , sir ? " he pause a moment , hold her hand , and 
 she let it lie there for an instant while she listen . but still she 
 do not look at he . " speak to I ! tell I ! which shall it be ? " still 
 he pause . " speak to I . tell I ! " she say again . 
 " it can not be as you have hint to I , " he say at last . his word 
 do not come louder than a low whisper ; but they be plainly hear , 
 and instantly the hand be withdraw . 
 " can not be ! " she exclaim . " then I have betray myself . " 
 " no ; - Madame Goesler . " 
 " Sir ; I say yes ! if you will allow I I will leave you . you will , I 
 know , excuse I if I be abrupt to you . " then she stride out of the 
 room , and be no more see of the eye of Phineas Finn . 
 he never afterwards know how he escape out of that room and find 
 his way into Park Lane . in after day he have some memory that he 
 remain there , he know not how long , stand on the very spot on 
 which she have leave he ; and that at last there grow upon he almost a 
 fear of move , a dread lest he should be hear , an inordinate desire 
 to escape without the sound of a footfall , without the clicking of 
 a lock . everything in that house have be offer to he . he have 
 refuse it all , and then feel that of all human being under the 
 sun none have so little right to be stand there as he . his very 
 presence in that drawing - room be an insult to the woman whom he have 
 drive from it . 
 but at length he be in the street , and have find his way across 
 Piccadilly into the Green Park . then , as soon as he could find a spot 
 apart from the Sunday world , he throw himself upon the turf ; and 
 try to fix his thought upon the thing that he have do . his first 
 feeling , I think , be one of pure and unmixed disappointment ; - of 
 disappointment so bitter , that even the vision of his own Mary do 
 not tend to comfort he . how great might have be his success , and 
 how terrible be his failure ! have he take the woman 's hand and her 
 money , have he clench his grasp on the great prize offer to he , 
 his misery would have be ten time bad the first moment that he 
 would have be away from she . then , indeed , - it be so that he 
 be a man with a heart within his breast , - there would have be no 
 comfort for he , in his outlook on any side . but even now , when he 
 have do right , - know well that he have do right , - he find that 
 comfort do not come readily within his reach . 
 CHAPTER LXXIII 
 Amantium Irae 
 Miss Effingham 's life at this time be not the happy in the world . 
 her line , as she once say to her friend Lady Laura , be not 
 lay for she in pleasant place . her residence be still with her 
 aunt , and she have come to find that it be almost impossible any 
 long to endure Lady Baldock , and quite impossible to escape from 
 Lady Baldock . in former day she have have a dream that she might 
 escape , and live alone if she choose to be alone ; that she might be 
 independent in her life , as a man be independent , if she choose to 
 live after that fashion ; that she might take her own fortune in her 
 own hand , as the law certainly allow she to do , and act with it as 
 she might please . but latterly she have learn to understand that all 
 this be not possible for she . though one law allow it , another law 
 disallow it , and the latter law be at least as powerful as the 
 former . and then her present misery be enhance by the fact that 
 she be now banish from the second home which she have formerly 
 possess . Hitherto she have always be able to escape from Lady 
 Baldock to the house of her friend , but now such escape be out of 
 the question . Lady Laura and Lord Chiltern live in the same house , 
 and Violet could not live with they . 
 Lady Baldock understand all this , and torture her niece accordingly . 
 it be not premeditate torture . the aunt do not mean to make she 
 niece 's life a burden to she , and , so intending , systematically work 
 upon a principle to that effect . Lady Baldock , no doubt , desire 
 to do her duty conscientiously . but the result be torture to poor 
 Violet , and a strong conviction on the mind of each of the two lady 
 that the other be the most unreasonable be in the world . 
 the aunt , in these day , have take it into her head to talk of poor 
 Lord Chiltern . this arise partly from a belief that the quarrel be 
 final , and that , therefore , there would be no danger in aggravate 
 Violet by this expression of pity , - partly from a feeling that it 
 would be well that her niece should marry Lord Chiltern than that 
 she should not marry at all , - and partly , perhaps , from the general 
 principle that , as she think it right to scold her niece on all 
 occasion , this might be well do by take an opposite view of 
 all question to that take by the niece to be scold . Violet be 
 suppose to regard Lord Chiltern as have sin against she , and 
 therefore Lady Baldock talk of " poor Lord Chiltern . " as to the 
 other lover , she have begin to perceive that their condition be 
 hopeless . her daughter Augusta have explain to she that there be 
 no chance remain either for Phineas , or for Lord Fawn , or for Mr. 
 Appledom . " I believe she will be an old maid , on purpose to bring I 
 to my grave , " say Lady Baldock . when , therefore , Lady Baldock be 
 tell one day that Lord Chiltern be in the house , and be ask to 
 see Miss Effingham , she do not at once faint away , and declare that 
 they would all be murder , - as she would have do some month 
 since . she be perplex by a double duty . if it be possible that 
 Violet should relent and be reconcile , then it would be her duty to 
 save Violet from the claw of the wild beast . but if there be no 
 such chance , then it would be her duty to poor Lord Chiltern to see 
 that he be not treat with contumely and ill - humour . 
 " do she know that he be here ? " Lady Baldock ask her daughter . 
 " not yet , mamma . " 
 " oh dear , oh dear ! I suppose she ought to see he . she have give he 
 so much encouragement ! " 
 " I suppose she will do as she please , mamma . " 
 " Augusta , how can you talk in that way ? be I to have no control in my 
 own house ? " it be , however , soon apparent to she that in this matter 
 she be to have no control . 
 " Lord Chiltern be down - stair , " say Violet , come into the room 
 abruptly . 
 " so Augusta tell I . sit down , my dear . " 
 " I can not sit down , aunt , - not just now . I have send down to say that 
 I would be with he in a minute . he be the most impatient soul alive , 
 and I must not keep he wait . " 
 " and you mean to see he ? " 
 " certainly I shall see he , " say Violet , as she leave the room . 
 " I wonder that any woman should ever take upon herself the charge of 
 a niece ! " say Lady Baldock to her daughter in a despondent tone , as 
 she hold up her hand in dismay . in the meantime , Violet have go 
 down - stair with a quick step , and have then boldly enter the room 
 in which her lover be wait to receive she . 
 " I have to thank you for come to I , Violet , " say Lord Chiltern . 
 there be still in his face something of savagery , - an expression 
 partly of anger and partly of resolution to tame the thing with which 
 he be angry . Violet do not regard the anger half so keenly as she 
 do that resolution of taming . an angry lord , she think , she could 
 endure , but she could not bear the idea of be tame by any one . 
 " why should I not come ? " she say . " of course I come when I be tell 
 that you be here . I do not think that there need be a quarrel 
 between we , because we have change our mind . " 
 " such change make quarrel , " say he . 
 " it shall not do so with I , unless you choose that it shall , " say 
 Violet . " why should we be enemy , - we who have know each other 
 since we be child ? my dear friend be your father and your 
 sister . why should we be enemy ? " 
 " I have come to ask you whether you think that I have ill - use you ? " 
 " Ill - use I ! certainly not . have any one tell you that I have accuse 
 you ? " 
 " no one have tell I so . " 
 " then why do you ask I ? " 
 " because I would not have you think so , - if I could help it . I do 
 not intend to be rough with you . when you tell I that my life be 
 disreputable - " 
 " oh , Oswald , do not let we go back to that . what good will it do ? " 
 " but you say so . " 
 " I think not . " 
 " I believe that that be your word , - the harsh word that you could 
 use in all the language . " 
 " I do not mean to be harsh . if I use it , I will beg your pardon . 
 only let there be an end of it . as we think so differently about life 
 in general , it be well that we should not be marry . but that 
 be settle , and why should we go back to word that be speak in 
 haste , and which be simply disagreeable ? " 
 " I have come to know whether it be settle . " 
 " certainly . you settle it yourself , Oswald . I tell you what I 
 think myself bind to tell you . perhaps I use language which I 
 should not have use . then you tell I that I could not be your 
 wife ; - and I think you be right , quite right . " 
 " I be wrong , quite wrong , " he say impetuously . " so wrong , that I 
 can never forgive myself , if you do not relent . I be such a fool , 
 that I can not forgive myself my folly . I have know before that I 
 could not live without you ; and when you be mine , I throw you away 
 for an angry word . " 
 " it be not an angry word , " she say . 
 " say it again , and let I have another chance to answer it . " 
 " I think I say that idleness be not , - respectable , or something 
 like that , take out of a copy - book probably . but you be a man who 
 do not like rebuke , even out of copy - book . a man so thin - skin 
 as you be must choose for himself a wife with a soft tongue than 
 mine . " 
 " I will choose none other ! " he say . but still he be savage in his 
 tone and in his gesture . " I make my choice long since , as you know 
 well enough . I do not change easily . I can not change in this . Violet , 
 say that you will be my wife once more , and I will swear to work for 
 you like a coal - heaver . " 
 " my wish be that my husband , - should I ever have one , - should work , 
 not exactly as a coal - heaver . " 
 " come , Violet , " he say , - and now the look of savagery depart from 
 he , and there come a smile over his face , which , however , have in it 
 more of sadness than of hope or joy , - " treat I fairly , - or rather , 
 treat I generously if you can . I do not know whether you ever love 
 I much . " 
 " very much , - year ago , when you be a boy . " 
 " but not since ? if it be so , I have well go . love on one side only 
 be a poor affair at well . " 
 " a very poor affair . " 
 " it be well to bear anything than to try and make out life with 
 that . some of you woman never want to love any one . " 
 " that be what I be say of myself to Laura but the other day . 
 with some woman it be so easy . with other it be so difficult , that 
 perhaps it never come to they . " 
 " and with you ? " 
 " oh , with I - . but it be well in these matter to confine 
 oneself to generality . if you please , I will not describe myself 
 personally . be I to do so , doubtless I should do it falsely . " 
 " you love no one else , Violet ? " 
 " that be my affair , my lord . " 
 " by heaven , and it be mine too . tell I that you do , and I will 
 go away and leave you at once . I will not ask his name , and I will 
 trouble you no more . if it be not so , and if it be possible that you 
 should forgive I - " 
 " forgive you ! when have I be angry with you ? " 
 " answer I my question , Violet . " 
 " I will not answer you your question , - not that one . " 
 " what question will you answer ? " 
 " any that may concern yourself and myself . none that may concern 
 other people . " 
 " you tell I once that you love I . " 
 " this moment I tell you that I do so , - year ago . " 
 " but now ? " 
 " that be another matter . " 
 " Violet , do you love I now ? " 
 " that be a point - blank question at any rate , " she say . 
 " and you will answer it ? " 
 " I must answer it , - I suppose . " 
 " well , then ? " 
 " oh , Oswald , what a fool you be ! love you ! of course I love you . 
 if you can understand anything , you ought to know that I have never 
 love any one else ; - that after what have pass between we , I never 
 shall love any one else . I do love you . there . whether you throw I 
 away from you , as you do the other day , - with great scorn , mind 
 you , - or come to I with sweet , beautiful promise , as you do now , I 
 shall love you all the same . I can not be your wife , if you will not 
 have I ; can I ? when you run away in your tantrum because I quote 
 something out of the copy - book , I can not   run after you . it would not 
 be pretty . but as for love you , if you doubt that , I tell you , you 
 be a - fool . " as she speak the last word she pout out her lip at 
 he , and when he look into her face he see that her eye be full 
 of tear . he be stand now with his arm round her waist , so that 
 it be not easy for he to look into her face . 
 " I be a fool , " he say . 
 " yes ; - you be ; but I do not   love you the less on that account . " 
 " I will never doubt it again . " 
 " no ; - do not ; and , for I , I will not say another word , whether you 
 choose to heave coal or not . you shall do as you please . I mean to 
 be very wise ; - I do indeed . " 
 " you be the grand girl that ever be make . " 
 " I do not want to be grand at all , and I never will be wise any more . 
 only do not frown at I and look savage . " then she put up her hand 
 to smooth his brow . " I be half afraid of you still , you know . there . 
 that will do . now let I go , that I may tell my aunt . during the last 
 two month she have be full of pity for poor Lord Chiltern . " 
 " it have be poor Lord Chiltern with a vengeance ! " say he . 
 " but now that we have make it up , she will be horrify again at all 
 your wickedness . you have be a turtle dove lately ; - now you will 
 be an ogre again . but , Oswald , you must not be an ogre to I . " 
 as soon as she could get quit of her lover , she do tell her tale to 
 Lady Baldock . " you have accept he again ! " say her aunt , hold 
 up her hand . " yes , - I have accept he again , " reply Violet . 
 " then the responsibility must be on your own shoulder , " say she 
 aunt ; " I wash my hand of it . " that evening , when she discuss the 
 matter with her daughter , Lady Baldock speak of Violet and Lord 
 Chiltern , as though their intended marriage be the one thing in the 
 world which she most deplore . 
 CHAPTER LXXIV 
 the beginning of the End 
 the day of the debate have come , and Phineas Finn be still sit in 
 his room at the Colonial Office . but his resignation have be send in 
 and accept , and he be simply await the coming of his successor . 
 about noon his successor come , and he have the gratification of 
 resign his arm - chair to Mr. Bonteen . it be generally understand 
 that gentleman leave office give up either seal or a portfolio . 
 Phineas have be put in possession of no seal and no portfolio ; but 
 there be in the room which he have occupy a special arm - chair , and 
 this with much regret he surrender to the use and comfort of Mr. 
 Bonteen . there be a glance of triumph in his enemy 's eye , and an 
 exultation in the tone of his enemy 's voice , which be very bitter 
 to he . " so you be really go ? " say Mr. Bonteen . " well ; I dare 
 say it be all very proper . I do not   quite understand the thing myself , 
 but I have no doubt you be right . " " it be not   easy to understand ; be 
 it ? " say Phineas , try to laugh . but Mr. Bonteen do not feel the 
 intend satire , and poor Phineas find it useless to attempt to 
 punish the man he hat . he leave he as quickly as he could , and go 
 to say a few word of farewell to his late chief . 
 " good - bye , Finn , " say Lord Cantrip . " it be a great trouble to I 
 that we should have to part in this way . " 
 " and to I also , my lord . I wish it could have be avoid . " 
 " you should not have go to Ireland with so dangerous a man as Mr. 
 Monk . but it be too late to think of that now . " 
 " the milk be spill ; be it not ? " 
 " but these terrible rending asunder never last very long , " say 
 Lord Cantrip , " unless a man change his opinion altogether . how 
 many quarrel and how many reconciliation we have live to see ! I 
 remember when Gresham go out of office , because he could not sit 
 in the same room with Mr. Mildmay , and yet they become the fast 
 of political friend . there be a time when Plinlimmon and the Duke 
 could not stable their horse together at all ; and do not   you remember 
 when Palliser be oblige to give up his hope of office because he 
 have some bee in his bonnet ? " I think , however , that the bee in Mr. 
 Palliser 's bonnet to which Lord Cantrip be allude make its buzzing 
 audible on some subject that be not exactly political . " we shall 
 have you back again before long , I do not   doubt . man who can really do 
 their work be too rare to be leave long in the comfort of the bench 
 below the gangway . " this be very kindly say , and Phineas be 
 flattered and comfort . he could not , however , make Lord Cantrip 
 understand the whole truth . for he the dream of a life of politic 
 be over for ever . he have try it , and have succeed beyond his 
 utmost hope ; but , in spite of his success , the ground have crumble 
 to piece beneath his foot , and he know that he could never recover 
 the niche in the world 's gallery which he be now leave . 
 that same afternoon he meet Mr. Gresham in one of the passage lead 
 to the House , and the Prime Minister put his arm through that of our 
 hero as they walk together into the lobby . " I be sorry that we be 
 lose you , " say Mr. Gresham . 
 " you may be sure that I be sorry to be so lost , " say Phineas . 
 " these thing will occur in political life , " say the leader ; " but 
 I think that they seldom leave rancour behind they when the purpose 
 be declare , and when the subject of disagreement be mark and 
 understand . the defalcation which create angry feeling be that which 
 have to be endure without previous warning , - when a man vote against 
 his party , - or a set of man , from private pique or from some cause 
 which be never clear . " Phineas , when he hear this , know well how 
 terribly this very man have be harass , and drive nearly wild , 
 by defalcation , exactly of that nature which he be attempt to 
 describe . " no doubt you and Mr. Monk think you be right , " continue 
 Mr. Gresham . 
 " we have give strong evidence that we think so , " say Phineas . " we 
 give up our place , and we be , both of we , very poor man . " 
 " I think you be wrong , you know , not so much in your view on the 
 question itself - which , to tell the truth , I hardly understand as 
 yet . " 
 " we will endeavour to explain they . " 
 " and will do so very clearly , no doubt . but I think that Mr. Monk be 
 wrong in desiring , as a member of a Government , to force a measure 
 which , whether good or bad , the Government as a body do not desire 
 to initiate , - at any rate , just now . " 
 " and therefore he resign , " say Phineas . 
 " of course . but it seem to I that he fail to comprehend the only 
 way in which a great party can act together , if it be to do any 
 service in this country . do not   for a moment think that I be blame 
 he or you . " 
 " I be nobody in this matter , " say Phineas . 
 " I can assure you , Mr. Finn , that we have not regard you in that 
 light , and I hope that the time may come when we may be sit 
 together again on the same bench . " 
 neither on the Treasury bench nor on any other in that House be 
 he to sit again after this fashion ! that be the trouble which be 
 crush his spirit at this moment , and not the loss of his office ! 
 he know that he could not venture to think of remain in London 
 as a member of Parliament with no other income than that which his 
 father could allow he , even if he could again secure a seat in 
 Parliament . when he have first be return for Loughshane he have 
 assure his friend that his duty as a member of the House of Commons 
 would not be a bar to his practice in the Courts . he have now be 
 five year a member , and have never once make an attempt at do any 
 part of a barrister 's work . he have go altogether into a different 
 line of life , and have be most successful ; - so successful that man 
 tell he , and woman more frequently than man , that his career have 
 be a miracle of success . but there have be , as he have well know 
 from the first , this drawback in the new profession which he have 
 choose , that nothing in it could be permanent . they who succeed in 
 it , may probably succeed again ; but then the success be intermittent , 
 and there may be year of hard work in opposition , to which , 
 unfortunately , no pay be assign . it be almost imperative , as he now 
 find , that they who devote themselves to such a profession should 
 be man of fortune . when he have commence his work , - at the period of 
 his first return for Loughshane , - he have have no thought of mend 
 his deficiency in this respect by a rich marriage . nor have it ever 
 occur to he that he would seek a marriage for that purpose . such 
 an idea would have be thoroughly distasteful to he . there have be 
 no stain of premeditate mercenary arrangement upon he at any time . 
 but circumstance have so fall out with he , that as he win his 
 spur in Parliament , as he become know , and be place first in one 
 office and then in another , prospect of love and money together be 
 open to he , and he venture on , leave Mr. Low and the law behind 
 he , - because these prospect be so alluring . then have come Mr. 
 Monk and Mary Flood Jones , - and everything around he have collapse . 
 everything around he have collapse , - with , however , a terrible 
 temptation to he to inflate his sail again , at the cost of his 
 truth and his honour . the temptation would have affect he 
 not at all , have Madame Goesler be ugly , stupid , or personally 
 disagreeable . but she be , he think , the most beautiful woman 
 he have ever see , the most witty , and in many respect the most 
 charming . she have offer to give he everything that she have , so to 
 place he in the world that opposition would be more pleasant to he 
 than office , to supply every want , and have do so in a manner that 
 have gratify all his vanity . but he have refuse it all , because he 
 be bind to the girl at Floodborough . my reader will probably say 
 that he be not a true man unless he could do this without a regret . 
 when Phineas think of it all , there be many regret . 
 but there be at the same time a resolve on his part , that if any man 
 have ever love the girl he promise to love , he would love Mary Flood 
 Jones . a thousand time he have tell himself that she have not the 
 spirit of Lady Laura , or the bright wit of Violet Effingham , or the 
 beauty of Madame Goesler . but Mary have charm of her own that be 
 more valuable than they all . be there one among the three who have 
 trust he as she trust he , - or love he with the same satisfied 
 devotion ? there be regret , regret that be heavy on his 
 heart ; - for London , and Parliament , and the club , and Downing 
 Street , have become dear to he . he like to think of himself as he 
 ride in the park , and be greet by all those whose greeting be 
 the most worth have . there be regret , - sad regret . but the 
 girl whom he love well than the park and the club , - well even 
 than Westminster and Downing Street , should never know that they have 
 exist . 
 these thought be run through his mind even while he be 
 listen to Mr. Monk , as he propound his theory of do justice 
 to Ireland . this might probably be the last great debate in which 
 Phineas would be able to take a part , and he be determined that he 
 would do his good in it . he do not intend to speak on this day , if , 
 as be generally suppose , the House would be adjourn before a 
 division could be obtain . but he would remain on the alert and see 
 how the thing go . he have come to understand the form of the place , 
 and be as well - train a young member of Parliament as any there . he 
 have be quick at learn a lesson that be not easily learn , and 
 know how thing be go , and what be the proper moment for this 
 question or that form of motion . he could anticipate a count - out , 
 understand the tone of man 's mind , and could read the gesture of 
 the House . it be very little likely that the debate should be over 
 to - night . he know that ; and as the present time be the evening of 
 Tuesday , he resolve at once that he would speak as early as he could 
 on the following Thursday . what a pity it be , that with one who have 
 learn so much , all his learning should be in vain ! 
 at about two o'clock , he himself succeed in move the adjournment 
 of the debate . this he do from a seat below the gangway , to which he 
 have remove himself from the Treasury bench . then the House be up , 
 and he walk home with Mr. Monk . Mr. Monk , since he have be tell 
 positively by Phineas that he have resolve upon resign his office , 
 have say nothing more of his sorrow at his friend 's resolve , but have 
 use he as one political friend use another , tell he all his 
 thought and all his hope as to this new measure of his , and take 
 counsel with he as to the way in which the fight should be fight . 
 together they have count over the list of member , mark these 
 man as supporter , those as opponent , and another set , now more 
 important than either , as be doubtful . from day to day those who 
 have be write down as doubtful be strike off that third list , 
 and put in either the one or the other of those who be either 
 supporter or opponent . and their different mode of argument be 
 settle between these two allied orator , how one should take this 
 line and the other that . to Mr. Monk this be very pleasant . he be 
 quite assure now that opposition be more congenial to his spirit , 
 and more fitting for he than office . there be no doubt to he as 
 to his future sit in Parliament , let the result of this contest 
 be what it might . the work which he be now do , be the work for 
 which he have be train himself all his life . while he have be 
 force to attend Cabinet Councils from week to week , he have be 
 depressed . now he be exultant . phinea see and understand all 
 this , say but little to his friend of his own prospect . as long as 
 this pleasant battle be rag , he could fight in it shoulder to 
 shoulder with the man he love . after that there would be a blank . 
 " I do not see how we be to fail to have a majority after Daubeny 's 
 speech to - night , " say Mr. Monk , as they walk together down 
 Parliament Street through the bright moonlight . 
 " he expressly say that he only speak for himself , " say Phineas . 
 " but we know what that mean . he be bid for office , and of course 
 those who want office with he will vote as he vote . we have already 
 count those who would go into office , but they will not carry the 
 whole party . " 
 " it will carry enough of they . " 
 " there be forty or fifty man on his side of the House , and as many 
 perhaps on ours , " say Mr. Monk , " who have no idea of any kind on 
 any bill , and who simply follow the bell , whether into this lobby 
 or that . Argument never touch they . they do not even look to the 
 result of a division on their own interest , as the making of any 
 calculation would be laborious to they . their party leader be to they 
 a Pope whom they do not dream of doubt . I never can quite make up 
 my mind whether it be good or bad that there should be such man in 
 Parliament . " 
 " man who think much want to speak often , " say Phineas . 
 " exactly so , - and of speak member , God know that we have enough . 
 and I suppose that these purblind sheep do have some occult weight 
 that be salutary . they enable a leader to be a leader , and even in 
 that way they be useful . we shall get a division on Thursday . " 
 " I understand that Gresham have consent to that . " 
 " so Ratler tell I . Palliser be to speak , and Barrington Erle . and 
 they say that Robson be go to make an onslaught specially on I . 
 we shall get it over by one o'clock . " 
 " and if we beat they ? " ask Phineas . 
 " it will depend on the number . everybody who have speak to I about 
 it , seem to think that they will dissolve if there be a respectable 
 majority against they . " 
 " of course he will dissolve , " say Phineas , speak of Mr. Gresham ; 
 " what else can he do ? " 
 " he be very anxious to carry his Irish Reform Bill first , if he can 
 do so . good - night , Phineas . I shall not be down to - morrow as there 
 be nothing to be do . come to I on Thursday , and we will go to the 
 House together . " 
 on the Wednesday Phineas be engage to dine with Mr. Low . there 
 be a dinner party in Bedford Square , and Phineas meet half - a - dozen 
 barrister and their wife , - man to whom he have look up as 
 successful pundit in the law some five or six year ago , but who 
 since that time have almost learn to look up to he . and now they 
 treat he with that courteousness of manner which success in life 
 always beget . there be a judge there who be very civil to he ; and 
 the judge 's wife whom he have take down to dinner be very gracious 
 to he . the judge have get his prize in life , and be therefore 
 personally indifferent to the fate of minister ; but the judge 's wife 
 have a brother who want a County Court from Lord De Terrier , and it 
 be know that Phineas be give valuable assistance towards the 
 attainment of this object . " I do think that you and Mr. Monk be so 
 right , " say the judge 's wife . Phineas , who understand how it come to 
 pass that the judge 's wife should so cordially approve his conduct , 
 could not help think how grand a thing it would be for he to have 
 a County Court for himself . 
 when the guest be go he be leave alone with Mr. and Mrs. Low , 
 and remain awhile with they , there have be an understanding 
 that they should have a last chat together over the affair of our 
 hero . " do you really mean that you will not stand again ? " ask Mrs. 
 Low . 
 " I do mean it . I may say that I can not do so . my father be hardly 
 so well able to help I as he be when I begin this game , and I 
 certainly shall not ask he for money to support a canvass . " 
 " it be a thousand pity , " say Mrs. Low . 
 " I really have begin to think that you would make it answer , " say Mr. 
 Low . 
 " in one way I have make it answer . for the last three year I have 
 live upon what I have earn , and I be not in debt . but now I must 
 begin the world again . I be afraid I shall find the drudgery very 
 hard . " 
 " it be hard no doubt , " say the barrister , who have go through it 
 all , and be now reap the fruit of it . " but I suppose you have 
 not forget what you learn ? " 
 " who can say ? I dare say I have . but I do not mean the drudgery 
 of learn , so much as the drudgery of look after work ; - of 
 expect brief which perhaps will never come . I be thirty year old 
 now , you know . " 
 " be you indeed ? " say Mrs. Low , - who know his age to a day . " how the 
 time pass . I be sure I hope you will get on , Mr. Finn . I do indeed . " 
 " I be sure he will , if he put his shoulder to it , " say Mr. Low . 
 neither the lawyer nor his wife repeat any of those sententious 
 admonition , which have almost become rebuke , and which have be 
 so common in their mouth . the fall with which they have threaten 
 Phineas Finn have come upon he , and they be too generous to remind 
 he of their wisdom and sagacity . indeed , when he get up to take his 
 leave , Mrs. Low , who probably might not see he again for year , be 
 quite affectionate in her manner to he , and look as if she be 
 almost minded to kiss he as she press his hand . " we will come and 
 see you , " she say , " when you be Master of the Rolls in Dublin . " 
 " we shall see he before then thunder at we poor Tories in the 
 House , " say Mr. Low . " he will be back again soon or later . " and 
 so they part . 
 CHAPTER LXXV 
 P. P. C. 
 on the Thursday morning before Phineas go to Mr. Monk , a gentleman 
 call upon he at his lodging . Phineas request the servant to 
 bring up the gentleman 's name , but tempt perhaps by a shill the 
 girl bring up the gentleman instead . it be Mr. Quintus Slide from 
 the office of the " Banner of the People . " 
 " Mr. Finn , " say Quintus , with his hand extend , " I have come to 
 offer you the calumet of peace . " Phineas certainly desire no such 
 calumet . but to refuse a man 's hand be to declare active war after a 
 fashion which man do not like to adopt except on deliberation . he have 
 never care a straw for the abuse which Mr. Slide have pour upon 
 he , and now he give his hand to the man of letter . but he do not 
 sit down , nor do he offer a seat to Mr. Slide . " I know that as a man 
 of sense who know the world , you will accept the calumet of peace , " 
 continue Mr. Slide . 
 " I do not   know why I should be ask particularly to accept war or 
 peace , " say Phineas . 
 " well , Mr. Finn , - I do not   often quote the Bible ; but those who be 
 not for we must be against we . you will agree to that . now that 
 you have   free yourself from the iniquity of that sink of abomination 
 in Downing Street , I look upon you as a man again . " 
 " upon my word you be very kind . " 
 " as a man and also a brother . I suppose you know that I have   get the 
  Banner into my own ' and now . " Phineas be oblige to explain that 
 he have not hitherto be make acquainted with this great literary 
 and political secret . " oh dear , yes , altogether so . we have   get rid of 
 old Rusty as I use to call he . he would not   go the pace , and so we 
 strip he . he be do the West of England Art Journal now , and 
 he ' ang out down at Bristol . " 
 " I hope he will succeed , Mr. Slide . " 
 " he will earn his wage . he be a man who will always earn his wage , but 
 nothing more . well , now , Mr. Finn , I will just offer you one word of 
 apology for our little severity . " 
 " pray do nothing of the kind . " 
 " indeed I shall . Dooty be dooty . there be some thing print which 
 be a little rough , but if one be not   a little rough there be not   no 
 flavour . of course I write them . you know my ' and , I dare say . " 
 " I only remember that there be some throwing of mud . " 
 " just so . but mud do not   break any bone ; do it ? when you turn 
 against we I have to be down on you , and I be down upon you ; - that be 
 just about all of it . now you be come among we again , and so I come 
 to you with a calumet of peace . " 
 " but I be not come among you . " 
 " yes you be , Finn , and bring Monk with you . " it be now become 
 very disagreeable , and Phineas be begin to perceive that it 
 would soon be his turn to say something rough . " now I will tell you 
 what my proposition be . if you will do we two leader a week through 
 the session , you shall have a cheque for L16 on the last day of every 
 month . if that be not honester money than what you get in Downing 
 Street , my name be not Quintus Slide . " 
 " Mr. Slide , " say Phineas , - and then he pause . 
 " if we be to come to business , drop the Mister . it make thing go 
 so much easy . " 
 " we be not to come to business , and I do not want thing to go easy . 
 I believe you say some thing of I in your newspaper that be very 
 scurrilous . " 
 " what of that ? if you mind that sort of thing - " 
 " I do not regard it in the least . you be quite welcome to continue 
 it . I do not   doubt but you will continue it . but you be not welcome 
 to come here afterwards . " 
 " do you mean to turn I out ? " 
 " just that . you print a heap of lie - " 
 " Lies , Mr. Finn ! do you say lie , sir ? " 
 " I say lie ; - lie ; - lie ! " and Phineas walk over at he as though 
 he be go to pitch he instantly out of the window . " you may go 
 and write as many more as you like . it be your trade , and you must do 
 it or starve . but do not come to I again . " then he open the door 
 and stand with it in his hand . 
 " very well , sir . I shall know how to punish this . " 
 " exactly . but if you please you will go and do your punishment at the 
 office of the Banner , - unless you like to try it here . you want to 
 kick I and spit at I , but you will prefer to do it in print . " 
 " yes , sir , " say Quintus Slide . " I shall prefer to do it in 
 print , - though I must own that the temptation to adopt the manual 
 violence of a ruffian be great , very great , very great indeed . " but 
 he resist the temptation and walk down the stair , concoct his 
 article as he go . 
 Mr. Quintus Slide do not so much impede the business of his day but 
 what Phineas be with Mr. Monk by two , and in his place in the House 
 when prayer be read at four . as he sit in his place , conscious 
 of the work that be before he , listen to the presentation of 
 petition , and to the formal reading of certain notice of motion , 
 which with the asking of sundry question occupy over half an 
 hour , he look back and remember accurately his own feeling on 
 a certain night on which he have intend to get up and address the 
 House . the ordeal before he have then be so terrible , that it have 
 almost obliterate for the moment his sens of hear and of sight . 
 he have hardly be able to perceive what have be go on around 
 he , and have vainly endeavour to occupy himself in recall to 
 his memory the word which he wish to pronounce . when the time for 
 pronounce they have come , he have find himself unable to stand upon 
 his leg . he smile as he recall all this in his memory , wait 
 impatiently for the moment in which he might rise . his audience be 
 assure to he now , and he do not fear it . his opportunity for 
 utterance be his own , and even the Speaker could not deprive he of 
 it . during these minute he think not at all of the word that he 
 be to say . he have prepare his matter but have prepare no word . he 
 know that word would come readily enough to he , and that he have 
 learn the task of turn his thought quickly into language while 
 stand with a crowd of listener around he , - as a practised writer 
 do when seat in his chair . there be no violent beating at his 
 heart now , no dimness of the eye , no feeling that the ground be 
 turn round under his foot . if only those weary vain question 
 would get themselves all ask , so that he might rise and begin the 
 work of the night . then there come the last thought as the House be 
 hush for his rising . what be the good of it all , when he would 
 never have an opportunity of speak there again ? 
 but not on that account would he be slack in his endeavour now . 
 he would be listen to once at least , not as a subaltern of the 
 Government but as the owner of a voice prominent in opposition to 
 the Government . he have be teach by Mr. Monk that that be the one 
 place in the House in which a man with a power of speak could 
 really enjoy pleasure without alloy . he would make the trial , - once , 
 if never again . thing have so go with he that the rostrum be his 
 own , and a House cram to overflow be there to listen to he . 
 he have give up his place in order that he might be able to speak his 
 mind , and have become aware that many intend to listen to he while 
 he speak . he have observe that the row of stranger be thick in 
 the gallery , that peer be stand in the passage , and that 
 over the reporter 's head , the ribbon of many lady be to be see 
 through the bar of their cage . yes ; - for this once he would have an 
 audience . 
 he speak for about an hour , and while he be speak he know nothing 
 about himself , whether he be do it well or ill . something of 
 himself he do say soon after he have commence , - not quite begin 
 with it , as though his mind have be laden with the matter . he have , 
 he say , find himself compel to renounce his happy allegiance to 
 the First Lord of the Treasury , and to quit the pleasant company in 
 which , humble as have be his place , he have be allow to sit and 
 act , by his unfortunate conviction in this great subject . he have be 
 tell , he say , that it be a misfortune in itself for one so young as 
 he to have conviction . but his irish birth and irish connection have 
 bring this misfortune of his country so closely home to he that he 
 have find the task of extricate himself from it to be impossible . 
 of what far he say , speak on that terribly unintelligible 
 subject , a tenant - right propose for irish farmer , no english reader 
 will desire to know much . irish subject in the House of Commons 
 be interesting or be dull , be debate before a crowded audience 
 compose of all who be leader in the great world of London , or 
 before empty bench , in accordance with the importance of the moment 
 and the character of the debate . for we now it be enough to know that 
 to our hero be accord that attention which orator love , - which 
 will almost make an orator if it can be assure . a full House with a 
 promise of big type on the next morning would wake to eloquence the 
 propounder of a canadian grievance , or the mover of an indian budget . 
 Phineas do not stir out of the House till the division be over , 
 have agree with Mr. Monk that they two would remain through it 
 all and hear everything that be to be say . Mr. Gresham have already 
 speak , and to Mr. Palliser be confide the task of wind up 
 the argument for the Government . Mr. Robson speak also , greatly 
 enliven the tedium of the evening , and to Mr. Monk be permit 
 the privilege of a final reply . at two o'clock the division come , and 
 the Ministry be beat by a majority of twenty - three . " and now , " 
 say Mr. Monk , as he again walk home with Phineas , " the pity be 
 that we be not a bit near tenant - right than we be before . " 
 " but we be near to it . " 
 " in one sense , yes . such a debate and such a majority will make man 
 think . but no ; - think be too high a word ; as a rule man do not   think . 
 but it will make they believe that there be something in it . many who 
 before regard legislation on the subject as chimerical , will now 
 fancy that it be only dangerous , or perhaps not more than difficult . 
 and so in time it will come to be look on as among the thing 
 possible , then among the thing probable ; - and so at last it will be 
 range in the list of those few measure which the country require 
 as be absolutely need . that be the way in which public opinion 
 be make . " 
 " it be no loss of time , " say Phineas , " to have take the first great 
 step in make it . " 
 " the first great step be take long ago , " say Mr. Monk , - " take 
 by man who be look upon as revolutionary demagogue , almost as 
 traitor , because they take it . but it be a great thing to take any 
 step that lead we onwards . " 
 two day after this Mr. Gresham declare his intention of dissolve 
 the House because of the adverse division which have be produce by 
 Mr. Monk 's motion , but express a wish to be allow to carry an 
 Irish Reform Bill through Parliament before he do so . he explain 
 how expedient this would be , but declare at the same time that if 
 any strong opposition be make , he would abandon the project . his 
 intention simply be to pass with regard to Ireland a measure which 
 must be pass soon , and which ought to be pass before a new 
 election take place . the bill be ready , and should be read for the 
 first time on the next night , if the House be willing . the House 
 be willing , though there be very many recalcitrant irish member . 
 the irish member make loud opposition , and then twit Mr. Gresham 
 with his promise that he would not go on with his bill , if opposition 
 be make . but , nevertheless , he do go on , and the measure be 
 hurry through the two Houses in a week . our hero who still sit for 
 Loughshane , but who be never to sit for Loughshane again , give what 
 assistance he could to the Government , and vote for the measure 
 which deprive Loughshane for ever of its parliamentary honour . 
 " and very dirty conduct I think it be , " say Lord Tulla , when he 
 discuss the subject with his agent . " after be put in for the 
 borough twice , almost free of expense , it be very dirty . " it never 
 occur to Lord Tulla that a member of Parliament might feel himself 
 oblige to vote on such a subject in accordance with his judgment . 
 this Irish Reform Bill be scramble through the two Houses , and 
 then the session be over . the session be over , and they who know 
 anything of the private concern of Mr. Phineas Finn be aware that 
 he be about to return to Ireland , and do not intend to reappear on 
 the scene which have know he so well for the last five year . " I 
 can not tell you how sad it make I , " say Mr. Monk . 
 " and it make I sad too , " say Phineas . " I try to shake off the 
 melancholy , and tell myself from day to day that it be unmanly . but 
 it get the well of I just at present . " 
 " I feel quite certain that you will come back among we again , " say 
 Mr. Monk . 
 " everybody tell I so ; and yet I feel quite certain that I shall 
 never come back , - never come back with a seat in Parliament . as my 
 old tutor , Low , have tell I score of time , I begin at the wrong 
 end . here I be , thirty year of age , and I have not a shilling in the 
 world , and I do not know how to earn one . " 
 " only for I you would still be receive ever so much a year , and 
 all would be pleasant , " say Mr. Monk . 
 " but how long would it have last ? the first moment that Daubeny get 
 the upper hand I should have fall low than I have fall now . if 
 not this year , it would have be the next . my only comfort be in 
 this , - that I have do the thing myself , and have not be turn 
 out . " to the very last , however , Mr. Monk continue to express his 
 opinion that Phineas would come back , declare that he have know no 
 instance of a young man who have make himself useful in Parliament , 
 and then have be allow to leave it in early life . 
 among those of whom he be bind to take a special leave , the member 
 of the family of Lord Brentford be , of course , the foremost . he 
 have already hear of the reconciliation of Miss Effingham and Lord 
 Chiltern , and be anxious to offer his congratulation to both of 
 they . and it be essential to he that he should see Lady Laura . to 
 she he write a line , say how much he hop that he should be able 
 to bid she adieu , and a time be fix for his come at which she 
 know that she would meet he alone . but , as chance rule it , he come 
 upon the two lover together , and then remember that he have hardly 
 ever before be in the same room with both of they at the same time . 
 " oh , Mr. Finn , what a beautiful speech you make . I read every word of 
 it , " say Violet . 
 " and I do not   even look at it , old fellow , " say Chiltern , get up 
 and put his arm on the other 's shoulder in a way that be common 
 with he when he be quite intimate with the friend near he . 
 " Laura go down and hear it , " say Violet . " I could not do that , 
 because I be tie to my aunt . you can not   conceive how dutiful I be 
 during this last month . " 
 " and be it to be in a month , Chiltern ? " say Phineas . 
 " she say so . she arrange everything , - in concert with my father . 
 when I throw up the sponge , I simply ask for a long day . ' a long 
 day , my lord , ' I say . but my father and Violet between they refuse 
 I any mercy . " 
 " you do not believe he , " say Violet . 
 " not a word . if I do he would want to see I on the coast of 
 Flanders again , I do not   doubt . I have come to congratulate you both . " 
 " thank you , Mr. Finn , " say Violet , take his hand with hearty 
 kindness . " I should not have be quite happy without one nice word 
 from you . " 
 " I shall try and make the good of it , " say Chiltern . " but , I say , 
 you will come over and ride Bonebreaker again . he be down there at 
 the Bull , and I have   take a little box close by . I can not   stand the 
 governor 's county for hunting . " 
 " and will your wife go down to Willingford ? " 
 " of course she will , and ride to hound a great deal close than I 
 can ever do . mind you come , and if there be anything in the stable fit 
 to carry you , you shall have it . " 
 then Phineas have to explain that he have come to bid they farewell , 
 and that it be not at all probable that he should ever be able to 
 see Willingford again in the hunting season . " I do not   suppose that I 
 shall make either of you quite understand it , but I have get to begin 
 again . the chance be that I shall never see another foxhound all my 
 life . " 
 " not in Ireland ! " exclaim Lord Chiltern . 
 " not unless I should have to examine one as a witness . I have nothing 
 before I but downright hard work ; and a great deal of that must be 
 do before I can hope to earn a shilling . " 
 " but you be so clever , " say Violet . " of course it will come 
 quickly . " 
 " I do not mean to be impatient about it , nor yet unhappy , " say 
 Phineas . " only hunting will not   be much in my line . " 
 " and will you leave London altogether ? " Violet ask . 
 " altogether . I shall stick to one club , - Brooks 's ; but I shall take 
 my name off all the other . " 
 " what a deuce of a nuisance ! " say Lord Chiltern . 
 " I have no doubt you will be very happy , " say Violet ; " and you will be 
 a Lord Chancellor in no time . but you will not   go quite yet . " 
 " Next Sunday . " 
 " you will return . you must be here for our wedding ; - indeed you must . 
 I will not be marry unless you do . " 
 even this , however , be impossible . he must go on Sunday , and must 
 return no more . then he make his little farewell speech , which he 
 could not deliver without some awkward stuttering . he would think of 
 she on the day of her marriage , and pray that she might be happy . and 
 he would send she a little trifle before he go , which he hop she 
 would wear in remembrance of their old friendship . 
 " she shall wear it , whatever it be , or I will know the reason why , " 
 say Chiltern . 
 " hold your tongue , you rough bear ! " say Violet . " of course I will 
 wear it . and of course I will think of the giver . I shall have many 
 present , but few that I will think of so much . " then Phineas leave 
 the room , with his throat so full that he could not speak another 
 word . 
 " he be still break - hearted about you , " say the favour lover as 
 soon as his rival have leave the room . 
 " it be not that , " say Violet . " he be break - hearted about 
 everything . the whole world be vanish away from he . I wish he 
 could have make up his mind to marry that german woman with all the 
 money . " it must be understand , however , that Phineas have never speak 
 a word to any one as to the offer which the german woman have make to 
 he . 
 it be on the morning of the Sunday on which he be to leave London 
 that he see Lady Laura . he have ask that it might be so , in order 
 that he might then have nothing more upon his mind . he find she 
 quite alone , and he could see by her eye that she have be weep . 
 as he look at she , remember that it be not yet six year since 
 he have first be allow to enter that room , he could not but 
 perceive how very much she be alter in appearance . then she have 
 be three - and - twenty , and have not look to be a day old . now she 
 might have be take to be nearly forty , so much have her trouble 
 preyed upon her spirit , and eat into the vitality of her youth . " so 
 you have come to say good - bye , " she say , smile as she rise to meet 
 he . 
 " yes , Lady Laura ; - to say good - bye . not for ever , I hope , but 
 probably for long . " 
 " no , not for ever . at any rate , we will not think so . " then she 
 pause ; but he be silent , sit with his hat dangle in his two 
 hand , and his eye fix upon the floor . " do you know , Mr. Finn , " 
 she continue , " that sometimes I be very angry with myself about 
 you . " 
 " then it must be because you have be too kind to I . " 
 " it be because I fear that I have do much to injure you . from 
 the first day that I know you , - do you remember , when we be 
 talk here , in this very room , about the beginning of the Reform 
 Bill ; - from that day I wish that you should come among we and be 
 one of we . " 
 " I have be with you , to my infinite satisfaction , - while it 
 last . " 
 " but it have not last , and now I fear that it have do you harm . " 
 " who can say whether it have be for good or evil ? but of this I be 
 sure you will be certain , - that I be very grateful to you for all the 
 goodness you have show I . " then again he be silent . 
 she do not know what it be that she want , but she do desire some 
 expression from his lip that should be warm than an expression of 
 gratitude . an expression of love , - of exist love , - she would have 
 feel to be an insult , and would have treat it as such . indeed , she 
 know that from he no such insult could come . but she be in that 
 morbid , melancholy state of mind which require the excitement 
 of more than ordinary sympathy , even though that sympathy be all 
 painful ; and I think that she would have be pleased have he refer 
 to the passion for herself which he have once express . if he would 
 have speak of his love , and of her mistake , and have make some 
 half - suggestion as to what might have be their life have thing 
 go differently , - though she would have rebuke he even for 
 that , - still it would have comfort she . but at this moment , though 
 he remember much that have pass between they , he be not even 
 thinking of the Braes of Linter . all that have take place four year 
 ago ; - and there have be so many other thing since which have move 
 he even more than that ! " you have hear what I have arrange for 
 myself ? " she say at last . 
 " your father have tell I that you be go to Dresden . " 
 " yes ; - he will accompany I , - come home of course for Parliament . 
 it be a sad break - up , be it not ? but the lawyer say that if I remain 
 here I may be subject to very disagreeable attempt from Mr. Kennedy 
 to force I to go back again . it be odd , be it not , that he should 
 not understand how impossible it be ? " 
 " he mean to do his duty . " 
 " I believe so . but he become more stern every day to those who be 
 with he . and then , why should I remain here ? what be there to tempt 
 I ? as a woman separate from her husband I can not take an interest 
 in those thing which use to charm I . I feel that I be crush and 
 quell by my position , even though there be no disgrace in it . " 
 " no disgrace , certainly , " say Phineas . 
 " but I be nobody , - or bad than nobody . " 
 " and I also be go to be a nobody , " say Phineas , laugh . 
 " ah ; you be a man and will get over it , and you have many year 
 before you will begin to be grow old . I be grow old already . 
 yes , I be . I feel it , and know it , and see it . a woman have a fine 
 game to play ; but then she be so easily bowl out , and the term 
 allow to she be so short . " 
 " a man 's allowance of time may be short too , " say Phineas . 
 " but he can try his hand again . " then there be another pause . " I have 
 think , Mr. Finn , that you would have marry , " she say in her very 
 low voice . 
 " you know all my hope and fear about that . " 
 " I mean that you would have marry Madame Goesler . " 
 " what make you think that , Lady Laura ? " 
 " because I see that she like you , and because such a marriage would 
 have be so suitable . she have all that you want . you know what they 
 say of she now ? " 
 " what do they say ? " 
 " that the Duke of Omnium offer to make she his wife , and that she 
 refuse he for your sake . " 
 " there be nothing that people will not   say ; - nothing on earth , " say 
 Phineas . then he get up and take his leave of she . he also want to 
 part from she with some special expression of affection , but he do 
 not know how to choose his word . he have wish that some allusion 
 should be make , not to the Braes of Linter , but to the close 
 confidence which have so long exist between they ; but he find 
 that the language to do this properly be want to he . have the 
 opportunity arisen he would have tell she now the whole story of 
 Mary Flood Jones ; but the opportunity do not come , and he leave she , 
 never have mention the name of his Mary or have hint at his 
 engagement to any one of his friend in London . " it be well so , " 
 he say to himself . " my life in Ireland be to be a new life , and why 
 should I mix two thing together that will be so different ? " 
 he be to dine at his lodging , and then leave they for good at 
 eight o'clock . he have pack up everything before he go to Portman 
 Square , and he return home only just in time to sit down to his 
 solitary mutton chop . but as he sit down he see a small note 
 address to himself lie on the table among the crowd of book , 
 letter , and paper , of which he have still to make disposal . it be 
 a very small note in an envelope of a peculiar tint of pink , and he 
 know the handwriting well . the blood mount all over his face as he 
 take it up , and he hesitate for a moment before he open it . it 
 could not be that the offer should be repeat to he . slowly , hardly 
 venture at first to look at the enclosure , he open it , and the 
 word which it contain be as follow : - 
 I learn that you be go to - day , and I write a word 
 which you will receive just as you be depart . it be to 
 say merely this , - that when I leave you the other day I be 
 angry , not with you , but with myself . let I wish you all 
 good wish and that prosperity which I know you will 
 deserve , and which I think you will win . 
 your very truly , 
 M. M. G. 
 Sunday morning . 
 should he put off his journey and go to she this very evening and 
 claim she as his friend ? the question be ask and answer in a 
 moment . of course he would not go to she . be he to do so there 
 would be only one possible word for he to say , and that word should 
 certainly never be speak . but he write to she a reply , short even 
 than her own short note . 
 thank , dear friend . I do not doubt but that you and I 
 understand each other thoroughly , and that each trust the 
 other for good wish and honest intention . 
 always your , 
 P. F. 
 I write these as I be start . 
 when he have write this , he keep it till the last moment in his 
 hand , think that he would not send it . but as he slip into the 
 cab , he give the note to his late landlady to post . 
 at the station Bunce come to he to say a word of farewell , and Mrs. 
 Bunce be on his arm . 
 " well do , Mr. Finn , well do , " say Bunce . " I always know there 
 be a good drop in you . " 
 " you always tell I I should ruin myself in Parliament , and so I 
 have , " say Phineas . 
 " not at all . it take a deal to ruin a man if he be get the right 
 sperrit . I have   well hope of you now than ever I have in the old 
 day when you use to be look out for Government place ; - and Mr. 
 Monk have try that too . I think he would find the iron too heavy 
 for he . " " God bless you , Mr. Finn , " say Mrs. Bunce with her 
 handkerchief up to her eye . " there be not one of them I ever have as 
 lodger I have   care about half as much as I do for you . " then they 
 shake hand with he through the window , and the train be off . 
 CHAPTER LXXVI 
 Conclusion 
 we be tell that it be a bitter moment with the Lord Mayor when he 
 leave the Mansion House and become once more Alderman Jones , of no . 
 75 , Bucklersbury . Lord Chancellors go out of office have a great 
 fall though they take pension with they for their consolation . and 
 the President of the United States when he leave the glory of the 
 White House and once more become a simple citizen must feel the 
 change severely . but our hero , Phineas Finn , as he turn his back 
 upon the scene of his many success , and prepare himself for 
 permanent residence in his own country , be , I think , in a bad 
 plight than any of the reduce divinity to whom I have allude . 
 they at any rate have know that their fall would come . he , like 
 Icarus , have fly up towards the sun , hop that his wing of wax 
 would bear he steadily aloft among the god . see that his wing 
 be wing of wax , we must acknowledge that they be very good . but 
 the celestial light have be too strong for they , and now , have 
 live for five year with lord and countess , with Ministers and 
 orator , with beautiful woman and man of fashion , he must start again 
 in a little lodging in Dublin , and hope that the attorney of that 
 litigious city might be good to he . on his journey home he make but 
 one resolution . he would make the change , or attempt to make it , 
 with manly strength . during his last month in London he have allow 
 himself to be sad , depressed , and melancholy . there should be an end 
 of all that now . nobody at home should see that he be depressed . 
 and Mary , his own Mary , should at any rate have no cause to think 
 that her love and his own engagement have ever be the cause to he 
 of depression . do he not value her love more than anything in the 
 world ? a thousand time he tell himself that he do . 
 she be there in the old house at Killaloe to greet he . her 
 engagement be an affair know to all the county , and she have no 
 idea that it would become she to be coy in her love . she be in his 
 arm before he have speak to his father and mother , and have make she 
 little speech to he , - very inaudibly indeed , - while he be cover 
 her sweet face with kiss . " oh , Phineas , I be so proud of you ; and 
 I think you be so right , and I be so glad you have do it . " again 
 he cover her face with kiss . could he ever have have such 
 satisfaction as this have he allow Madame Goesler 's hand to remain 
 in his ? 
 on the first night of his arrival he sit for an hour downstairs 
 with his father talk over his plan . he feel , - he could not but 
 feel , - that he be not the hero now that he have be when he be last 
 at Killaloe , - when he have come thither with a Cabinet Minister under 
 his wing . and yet his father do his good to prevent the growth of 
 any such feeling . the old doctor be not quite as well off as he have 
 be when Phineas first start with his high hope for London . since 
 that day he have abandon his profession and be now live on the 
 fruit of his life 's labour . for the last two year he have be 
 absolve from the necessity of provide an income for his son , and 
 have probably allow himself to feel that no such demand upon he 
 would again be make . now , however , it be necessary that he should do 
 so . could his son manage to live on two hundred a - year ? there would 
 then be four hundred a - year leave for the want of the family at home . 
 Phineas swear that he could fight his battle on a hundred and fifty , 
 and they end the argument by split the difference . he have be 
 pay exactly the same sum of money for the room he have just leave 
 in London ; but then , while he hold those room , his income have be 
 two thousand a - year . Tenant - right be a very fine thing , but could it 
 be worth such a fall as this ? 
 " and about dear Mary ? " say the father . 
 " I hope it may not be very long , " say Phineas . 
 " I have not speak to she about it , but your mother say that Mrs. 
 Flood Jones be very averse to a long engagement . " 
 " what can I do ? she would not wish I to marry her daughter with no 
 other income than an allowance make by you . " 
 " your mother say that she have some idea that you and she might live 
 together ; - that if they let Floodborough you might take a small house 
 in Dublin . remember , Phineas , I be not propose it myself . " 
 then Phineas bethink himself that he be not even yet so low in the 
 world that he need submit himself to term dictate to he by Mrs. 
 Flood Jones . " I be glad that you do not propose it , sir . " 
 " why so , Phineas ? " 
 " because I should have be oblige to oppose the plan even if it have 
 come from you . mother - in - law be never a comfort in a house . " 
 " I never try it myself , " say the doctor . 
 " and I never will try it . I be quite sure that Mary do not expect 
 any such thing , and that she be willing to wait . if I can shorten the 
 term of wait by hard work , I will do so . " the decision to which 
 Phineas have come on this matter be probably make known to Mrs. Flood 
 Jones after some mild fashion by old Mrs. Finn . nothing more be 
 say to Phineas about a joint household ; but he be quite able to 
 perceive from the manner of the lady towards he that his propose 
 mother - in - law wish he to understand that he be treat she 
 daughter very badly . what do it signify ? none of they know the story 
 of Madame Goesler , and of course none of they would know it . none of 
 they would ever hear how well he have behave to his little Mary . 
 but Mary do know it all before he leave she to go up to Dublin . the 
 two lover allow themselves , - or be allow by their elder , one 
 week of exquisite bliss together ; and during this week , Phineas tell 
 she , I think , everything . he tell she everything as far as he could 
 do so without seem to boast of his own success . how be a man 
 not to tell such tale when he have on his arm , close to he , a girl 
 who tell he her little everything of life , and only ask for his 
 confidence in return ? and then his secret be so precious to she and 
 so sacred , that he feel as sure of her fidelity as though she be 
 a very goddess of faith and trust . and the temptation to tell be so 
 great . for all that he have to tell she love he the well and still 
 the well . a man desire to win a virgin heart , and be happy to 
 know , - or at least to believe , - that he have win it . with a woman 
 every former rival be an add victim to the wheel of the triumphant 
 chariot in which she be sit . " all these have he know and love , 
 cull sweet from each of they . but now he have come to I , and I be 
 the sweetest of they all . " and so Mary be teach to believe of Laura 
 and of Violet and of Madame Goesler , - that though they have have charm 
 to please , her lover have never be so charmed as he be now while 
 she be hang to his breast . and I think that she be right in her 
 belief . during those lovely summer evening walk along the shore of 
 Lough Derg , Phineas be as happy as he have ever be at any moment of 
 his life . 
 " I shall never be impatient , - never , " she say to he on the last 
 evening . " all I want be that you should write to I . " 
 " I shall want more than that , Mary . " 
 " then you must come down and see I . when you do come they will be 
 happy , happy day for I . but of course we can not be marry for the 
 next twenty year . " 
 " say forty , Mary . " 
 " I will say anything that you like ; - you will know what I mean just 
 as well . and , Phineas , I must tell you one thing , - though it make I 
 sad to think of it , and will make I sad to speak of it . " 
 " I will not have you sad on our last night , Mary . " 
 " I must say it . I be begin to understand how much you have give 
 up for I . " 
 " I have give up nothing for you . " 
 " if I have not be at Killaloe when Mr. Monk be here , and if we have 
 not , - have not , - oh dear , if I have not love you so very much , you 
 might have remain in London , and that lady would have be your 
 wife . " 
 " never ! " say Phineas stoutly . 
 " would she not ? she must not be your wife now , Phineas . I be not 
 go to pretend that I will give you up . " 
 " that be unkind , Mary . " 
 " oh , well ; you may say what you please . if that be unkind , I be 
 unkind . it would kill I to lose you . " 
 have he do right ? how could there be a doubt about it ? how could 
 there be a question about it ? which of they have love he , or be 
 capable of love he as Mary love he ? what girl be ever so sweet , 
 so gracious , so angelic , as his own Mary ? he swear to she that he be 
 prouder of win she than of anything he have ever do in all his 
 life , and that of all the treasure that have ever come in his way she 
 be the most precious . she go to bed that night the happy girl 
 in all Connaught , although when she part from he she understand 
 that she be not to see he again till Christmas - Eve . 
 but she do see he again before the summer be over , and the manner 
 of their meeting be in this wise . immediately after the passing of 
 that scramble Irish Reform Bill , Parliament , as the reader know , 
 be dissolve . this be in the early day of June , and before the end 
 of July the new member be again assemble at Westminster . this 
 session , late in summer , be very terrible ; but it be not very long , 
 and then it be essentially necessary . there be something of the 
 year 's business which must yet be do , and the country would require 
 to know who be to be the Ministers of the Government . it be not 
 need that the reader should be trouble any far with the 
 strategy of one political leader or of another , or that more should 
 be say of Mr. Monk and his tenant - right . the House of Commons have 
 offend Mr. Gresham by vote in a majority against he , and Mr. 
 Gresham have punish the House of Commons by subject it to the 
 expense and nuisance of a new election . all this be constitutional , 
 and rational enough to Englishmen , though it may be unintelligible to 
 stranger . the upshot on the present occasion be that the minister 
 remain in their place and that Mr. Monk 's bill , though it have 
 receive the substantial honour of a second reading , pass away for 
 the present into the limbo of abortive legislation . 
 all this would not concern we at all , nor our poor hero much , be 
 it not that the great man with whom he have be for two year so 
 pleasant a colleague , remember he with something of affectionate 
 regret . whether it begin with Mr. Gresham or with Lord Cantrip , I 
 will not say ; - or whether Mr. Monk , though now a political enemy , 
 may have say a word that bring about the good deed . be that as it 
 may , just before the summer session be bring to a close Phineas 
 receive the following letter from Lord Cantrip : - 
 Downing Street , August 4 , 186 - . 
 MY DEAR MR . FINN , - 
 Mr. Gresham have be talk to I , and we both think 
 that possibly a permanent Government appointment may be 
 acceptable to you . we have no doubt , that should this be 
 the case , your service would be very valuable to the 
 country . there be a vacancy for a poor - law inspector at 
 present in Ireland , whose residence I believe should be 
 in Cork . the salary be a thousand a - year . should the 
 appointment suit you , Mr. Gresham will be most happy to 
 nominate you to the office . let I have a line at your 
 early convenience . 
 believe I , 
 most sincerely your , 
 cantrip . 
 he receive the letter one morning in Dublin , and within three hour 
 he be on his route to Killaloe . of course he would accept the 
 appointment , but he would not even do that without tell Mary of 
 his new prospect . of course he would accept the appointment . though 
 he have be as yet barely two month in Dublin , though he have hardly 
 be long enough settle to his work to have hop to be able to see 
 in which way there might be a vista open lead to success , still he 
 have fancy that he have see that success be impossible . he do not 
 know how to begin , - and man be afraid of he , think that he be 
 unsteady , arrogant , and prone to failure . he have not see his way to 
 the possibility of a guinea . 
 " a thousand a - year ! " say Mary Flood Jones , open her eye wide 
 with wonder at the golden future before they . 
 " it be nothing very great for a perpetuity , " say Phineas . 
 " oh , Phineas ; surely a thousand a - year will be very nice . " 
 " it will be certain , " say Phineas , " and then we can be marry 
 to - morrow . " 
 " but I have be make up my mind to wait ever so long , " say Mary . 
 " then your mind must be unmade , " say Phineas . 
 what be the nature of the reply to Lord Cantrip the reader may 
 imagine , and thus we will leave our hero an Inspector of Poor Houses 
 in the County of Cork . 
