milly and OLLY 
 BY 

 MRS . HUMPHRY WARD 
 DEDICATION 


 to F.A. , in the name of the child of FOX HOW , this REVIVAL of a 
 child 's STORY WRITTEN TWENTY - seven YEARS AGO , under the spell of ROTHA 
 and FAIRFIELD , be inscribed by the writer . 




 PREFACE 


 after many year this little book be once more to see the light . the 
 child for whom it be write be long since grow up . but perhaps 
 the pleasure they once take in it may still be feel by some of the 
 Millys and Ollys of to - day . up in the dear mountain country which it 
 describe , the beck be still sparkle ; " Brownholme " still spread its 
 green steep and ferny hollow under rain and sun ; the tiny trout still 
 leap in its tiny stream ; and Fairfield , in its noble curve , still 
 girdle the deep valley where these child play : the valley of 
 Wordsworth and Arnold -- the valley where Arnold 's poet - son ramble as a 
 boy -- where , for I , the shy and passionate ghost of Charlotte Brontë 
 still haunt the open door - way of Fox how -- where poetry and generous 
 life and ranging thought still dwell , and bring their benediction to the 
 passer - by . " Aunt Emma " in her beautiful home , unchanged but for its 
 vacant chair , be now as she ever be , the friend of old and young ; and 
 the child of to - day still press to her side as their elder do 
 before they . the parrot alas ! be go where parrot may ; but amid the 
 voice that breathe around Fox how -- the voice of seventy year -- his 
 mimic speech be still remember by the child who tease and love 
 he . for love , while love last , give life to all thing small and 
 great ; and in those who have once feel it , the love of the Fairfield 
 valley , of the gray stone house that front the fell , and of they that 
 dwell therein , be " not Time 's fool-- " 

   " or bend with the remover to remove . " 


 MARY A. WARD . 

 September 18 , 1907 . 
 CHAPTER I 

 make plan 


 " milly , come down ! come down directly ! mother want you . do make haste ! " 

 " I be just come , Olly . do not stamp so . Nurse be tie my sash . " 

 but Master Olly go on stamp , and jump up and down stair , as his 
 way be when he be very much excited , till Milly appear . presently 
 down she come , a sober fair - haired little maiden , with blue eye and a 
 turn - up nose , and a mouth that be generally rather solemn - look , 
 though it could laugh merrily enough when it try . milly be six year 
 old . she look old than six . at any rate she look a great deal 
 old than Olly , who be nearly five ; and you will soon find out that 
 she be a good deal more than a year and a half wiser . 

 " what be the matter , olly ? what make you shout so ? " 

 " oh , come along , come along ; " say the little boy , pull at his 
 sister 's hand to make her run . " Mother want to tell we something , and 
 she say it be a nice something , and I kiss she like anyfe ! but she 
 would not tell I without you . " 

 then the two child set off run , and they fly down a long passage 
 to the drawing - room , and be soon scramble about a lady who be 
 sit work by the window . 

 " well , monkey , do not choke I before I tell you my nice something . sit 
 on my knee Olly . now , Milly , guess -- what have father and I just be 
 talk about ? " 

 " send Olly to school , perhaps , " say Milly . " I hear Uncle Richard 
 talk about it yesterday . " 

 " that would not be such a nice something , " say Olly , make a long face . 
 " I would not like it -- not a bit . boy do not never like go to school . I 
 want to learn my lesson with mother . " 

 " I know a little boy that do not like learn lesson with mother very 
 much , " say the lady , laugh . " but my nice something be not send 
 Olly to school , Milly . you be quite wrong -- so try again . " 

 " oh , mother ! be it a strawberry tea ? " cry milly . " the strawberry be 
 just ripe , I know . Gardener tell nurse so this morning . and we can have 
 tea on the lawn , and ask Jacky and Francis ! " 

 " oh , jolly ! " say Oliver , jump off his mother 's knee and begin to 
 dance about . " and we will gather they ourselves -- won't you let we , 
 mother ? " 

 " but it be not a strawberry tea even , " say his mother . " now , look here , 
 child , what have I get here ? " 

 " it be a map -- a map of England , " say Milly , look very wise . milly have 
 just begin to learn geography , and think she know all about map . 

 " well , and what happen when father and I look at map in the 
 summertime ? " 

 " why , " say Milly , slowly , " you and father pack up your thing , and go 
 away over the sea , and we stay behind with nurse . " 

 " I do not call _ that _ a nice something , " say Olly , stand still again . 

 " oh , mother , _ be _ you go away ? " say Milly , hang round her 
 mother 's neck . 

 " yes , Milly , and so 's father , and so be nurse"--and their mother begin to 
 laugh . 

 " so 's nurse ? " say Milly and Olly together , and then they stop and 
 open two pair of round eye very wide , and star at their mother . 
 " oh , mother , mother , take we too ! " 

 " why , how should father and I get on , travel about with a pair of 
 monkey ? " say their mother , catch hold of the two child and 
 lift they on to her knee ; " we should want a cage to keep they in . " 

 " oh , mother , we will be _ ever _ so good ! but where be we go ? oh , do 
 take we to the sea ! " 

 " yes , the sea ! the sea ! " shout Olly , career round the room again ; 
 " we will have bucket and spade , and we will paddle and catch crabbie , and 
 wet our clothe , and have funny shoe , just like Cromer . and father'll 
 teach I to swim -- he say he would next time . " 

 " no , " say Mrs. Norton , for that be the name of Milly 's and Oliver 's 
 mother . " no , we be not go to the sea this summer . we be go to a 
 place mother love well than the sea , though perhaps you child 
 may not like it quite so well . we be go to the mountain . Uncle 
 Richard have lend father and mother his own nice house among the 
 mountain and we be all go there next week -- such a long way in the 
 train , Milly . " 

 " what be mountain ? " say Olly , who have scarcely ever see a hill 
 high than the church steeple . " they can not be so nice as the sea , 
 mother . nothing can . " 

 " they be hump , Olly , " answer milly eagerly . " great , big hump of 
 earth , you know ; earth mix with stone . and they reach up ever so high , 
 up into the sky . and it take you a whole day to get up to the top of 
 they , and a whole day to get down again . do not it , mother ? Fräulein 
 tell I all about mountain in my geography . and some mountain have get 
 snow on their top all year , even in summer , when it be so hot , and we be 
 have strawberry . will the mountain we be go to , have snow on 
 they ? " 

 " oh , no . the snow mountain be far away over the sea . but these be 
 english mountain , kind , easy mountain , not too high for you and I to 
 climb up , and cover all over with soft green grass and wild flower , 
 and tiny sheep with black face . " 

 " and , mother , be there a garden to Uncle Richard 's house , and be there 
 any child there to play with ? " 

 " there be a delightful garden , full of rose , and strawberry and 
 grape , and everything else that be nice . and it have a baby river all to 
 itself , that run and jump and chatter all through the middle of it , 
 so perhaps Olly may have a paddle sometimes , though we be not go to 
 the sea . and the gardener have get two little child , just about your 
 age , Aunt Mary say : and there be two more at the farm , two dear little 
 girl , who be not a bit shy , and will like play with you very much . 
 but who else shall we see there , Milly ? who live in the mountain too , 
 near Uncle Richard ? " 

 olly look puzzle , but milly think a minute , and then say quickly , 
 " Aunt Emma , be not it , mother ? do not she come here once ? I think I 
 remember . " 

 " yes , she come once , but long ago , when you be quite small . but now we 
 shall see a great deal of she I hope , for she live just on the other 
 side of the mountain from Uncle Richard 's house , in a dear old house , 
 where I spend many , many happy day when I be small . great - grandpapa 
 and grandmamma be alive then . but now Aunt Emma live there quite 
 alone . except for one creature , at least , an old gray poll - parrot , that 
 chatter away , and behave as if it be quite sensible , and know all 
 about everything . " 

 " have not she get any pussy , mother ? " ask Olly . 

 " yes , two I believe ; but they do not get on with Polly very well , so they 
 live in the kitchen out of the way-- " 

 " I like pussy well than pollie , " say olly gravely . 

 " why , what do you know about pollie , old man ? " 

 " pollie bite , I know they do . there be a polly bite Francis once . " 

 " well , and pussy scratch , " say Milly . 

 " no , they do not , not if you be nicey to they , " say Olly ; who be just 
 then very much in love with a white kitten , and think there be no 
 creature so delightful as pussy . 

 " well , suppose you do not make up your mind about Aunt Emma 's Polly till 
 you have see she , " say Mrs. Norton . " now sit down on the rug there and 
 let we have a talk . " 

 down squat the child on the floor opposite their mother , with 
 their little head full of plan and their eye as bright as spark . 

 " I will take my cart and horse , " begin Olly ; " and my big ball , and my 
 whistle , and my wheelbarrow , and my spade , and all my book , and the big 
 scrap - book , and-- " 

 " you can not , Olly , " exclaim Milly . " Nurse could never pack all those 
 up . there would be no room for our clothe . you can take your whistle , and 
 the top , and the picture book , and I can take my doll . that will be 
 quite enough , will not it , mother ? " 

 " quite enough , " say Mrs. Norton . " if it be fine weather you will see -- you 
 will not want any toy . but now , look here , child , " and she hold up the 
 map . " shall I show you how we be go to get to the mountain ? " 

 " oh yes , " say Milly , " that will be like my geography lesson -- come , Olly . 
 now mother'll teach _ you _ geography , like Fräulein do I . " 

 " that be lesson , " say Olly , with half a pout , " not fun a bit . it be only 
 girl like lesson -- boy never do -- Jacky do not , and Francis do not , 
 and I do not . " 

 " never mind about it be be lesson , Olly . come and see if it be not 
 interesting , " say Mrs. Norton . " now , Milly , find Willingham . " 

 Willingham be the name of the town where Milly and Oliver live . it be 
 a little town in Oxfordshire , and if you look long enough on the map you 
 _ may _ find it , though I will not promise you . 

 " there it be , " say Milly triumphantly , show it to her mother and 
 Olly . 

 " quite right . now look here , " and Mrs. Norton take a pencil out of her 
 pocket and draw a little line along the map . " first of all we shall get 
 into the train and go to a place call -- look , Milly . " 

 " Bletchley , " say Milly , follow where the pencil point . " what an 
 ugly name . " 

 " it be an ugly place , " say Mrs. Norton , " so perhaps it do not deserve a 
 well name . and after Bletchley -- look again , Milly . " 

 " rugby , " say Milly , read the name as her mother point , " and then 
 Stafford , and then Crewe -- what a funny name , mother!--and then Wigan , 
 and then Warrington , and then Lancaster . Ox - en - holme , Kendal , 
 wind - er - mere . oh , mother , what a long way ! why , we have get right to the 
 top of England . " 

 " stop a bit , Milly , and let I tell you something about these place . 
 first of all we shall get out of the train at Bletchley , and get into 
 another train that will go fast than the first . and it will take we 
 past all kind of place , some pretty and some ugly , and some big and 
 some small . at Stafford there be an old castle , Milly , where fierce 
 people live in old day and fight their neighbour . and at Crewe we 
 shall get out and have our dinner . and at Wigan all the tree grow on 
 one side as if some one have come and give they a push in the night ; and 
 at Lancaster there be another old castle , a very famous one , only now 
 they have turn it into a prison , and people be shut up inside it . 
 then a little way after Lancaster you will begin to see some mountain , 
 far , far away , but first you will see something else -- just a little bit of 
 blue sea , with mountain on the other side of it . and then will come 
 Windermere , where we shall get out and drive in a carriage . and we shall 
 drive right into the mountain , Olly , till they stand up all round we 
 with their dear kind old face that mother have love ever since she be 
 a baby . " 

 the child look up wonderingly at their mother , and they see she 
 face shin and her eye as bright as theirs , as if she too be a child 
 go out for a holiday . 

 " oh ! and , mother , " say Olly , " you will let we take Spot . she can go in my 
 box . " 

 now Spot be the white kitten , so Milly and mother begin to laugh . 

 " suppose you go and ask Spot first , whether she would like it , Olly , " say 
 Mrs. Norton , pat his sunburnt little face . 




 CHAPTER II 

 a JOURNEY north 


 Milly and Oliver live at Willingham , a little town in Oxfordshire , as I 
 have already tell you . their father be a doctor , and they live in an 
 old - fashioned house , in a street , with a long shady garden stretching 
 away behind it . milly and Oliver love their father , and whenever he put 
 his brown face inside the nursery door , two pair of little foot go 
 run to meet he , and two pair of little hand pull he eagerly 
 into the room . but they see he very seldom ; whereas their mother be 
 always with they , teach they their lesson , play with they in the 
 garden , tell they story , mend their frock , tuck they up in 
 their snug little bed at night , sometimes praise they , sometimes 
 scold they ; always love and look after they . milly and Olly 
 honestly believe that theirs be the good mother in the whole world . 
 nobody else could find out such nice play , or tell they such wonderful 
 story , or dress doll half so well . two little neighbour of theirs , 
 Jacky and Francis , have a poor sick mother who always lay on the sofa , 
 and could hardly bear to have her little boy in the room with she . 
 Milly and Oliver be never tired of wonder how Jacky and Francis get 
 on with a mother like that . " how funny , and how dreadful it must be . 
 Poor Jacky and Francis ! " it never come into their , head to say , " Poor 
 Jacky 's mother " too , but then you see they be such little people , and 
 little people have only room in their head for a very few thought at a 
 time . 

 however , Milly have be away from her mother a good deal lately . about 
 six month before my story begin she have be send to school , to a 
 kindergarten , as she be teach to call it . and there Milly have learn 
 all kind of wonderful thing -- she have learn how to make mat out of 
 paper , blue mat , and pink mat , and yellow mat , and red mat ; she have 
 learn how to make a bit of soft clay look like a box , or a stool , or a 
 bird 's nest with three clay egg inside it ; she have begin to add up and 
 take away ; and , above all , she have begin to learn geography , and 
 Fräulein -- for Milly 's mistress be a german , and have a german name -- be 
 just now teach she about island , and lake , and cape , and 
 peninsula , and many other thing that all little girl have to learn 
 about some time or other , unless they wish to grow up dunce . 

 as for Milly 's look , I have tell you already that she have blue eye and 
 a turn - up nose , and a dear sensible little face . and she have very thick 
 fair hair , that be always tumble about her eye , and make she look , 
 as nurse tell she , like " a yellow owl in an ivy bush . " milly love most 
 people , except perhaps John the gardener , who be rather cross to the 
 child , and be always call to they not to walk " on they bed , " and 
 to be sure not to touch any of his fruit or flower . she love she 
 father and her mother ; she love Olly with all her whole heart , though 
 he be a tease , she love her nurse , whom she and Olly call Nana , and 
 who have be with they ever since Milly be bear ; and she love 
 Fräulein , and be always beg flower from her mother that she might 
 take they to school for Fräulein 's table . so you see Milly be make up 
 of love . and she be a thoughtful little girl too , tidy with her 
 dress , quick and quiet at her lesson , and always ready to sit still 
 with her fairy - book or her doll , when mother be busy or tired . but 
 there be two thing in which Milly be not at all sensible in spite of 
 her sensible face . she be much too ready to cry when any little thing 
 go wrong , and she be dreadfully afraid of creature of all sort . she 
 be afraid of her father 's big dog , she be afraid of the dear brown cow 
 that live in the field beyond the garden , she be afraid of earwig . I 
 be even ashamed to say she be afraid of spider . once she run away as 
 if a lion be behind she from a white kitten that pull her dress with 
 its frolicsome paw to make she play with it ; but that , Milly would tell 
 you , be " when I be little , " and she be quite sure she be a good deal 
 braver now . 

 now what be I to tell you about Olly ? 

 Olly be just a round ball of fun and mischief . he have brown hair , brown 
 eye , a brown face , and brown hand . he be always touch and meddle 
 with everything , indoor and out , to see what be inside it , or what it 
 be make of . he like tease Milly , he like his walk , he like his 
 sleep in the morning , he like his dinner , he like his tea , he like 
 everything in the world , except learn to read , and that he hat . he 
 could only do one thing besides mischief . he could sing all kind of 
 tune -- quick tune , slow tune , and merry tune . he have be able to 
 sing tune ever since he be quite a tiny baby , and his father and 
 mother often talk together of how , in about a year , he should be 
 teach to play on the piano , or perhaps on the violin , if he like it 
 well . you might hear his sharp , shrill little voice , sing about the 
 house and the garden all day long . John the gardener call it 
 " squealin ' , " and tell Olly his song be " capital good " for frightening 
 away the bird . 

 now , perhaps , you know a little more about Milly and Olly than you do 
 when I begin to tell you about they , and it be time you should hear of 
 what happen to they on that wonderful journey of theirs up to the 
 mountain . 

 first of all come the packing up . milly could not make up her mind about 
 her doll ; she have three -- Rose , Mattie , and Katie -- but Rose 's frock 
 be very dirty , Mattie have a leg break , and Katie 's paint have be all 
 wash off one wet night , when Olly leave she out on the lawn . now which 
 of these be the tidiest and most respectable doll to take out on a 
 visit ? milly do not know how to settle it . 

 [ illustration : " ' I can not do without my toy , Nana ' " ] 

 " I think , Nana , " she say at last to her nurse , who be pack the 
 child 's trunk , " I will take Katie . mother always send we away when 
 we get white face to make we look nice and red again ; so , perhaps , if I 
 take Katie her colour will come back too , you know . " 

 " perhaps it will , Miss Milly , " say nurse , laugh ; " anyhow , you have 
 well give I the doll you want directly , for it be time I pack all 
 the toy now . now , Master Olly , you know I can not let you take all those 
 thing . " 

 for there be olly drag along his wheelbarrow heap up with toy 
 with one hand , and his cart and horse with a box of brick stand up 
 in it with the other . he would not listen to what Milly say about it , 
 and he would scarcely listen to nurse now . 

 " I can not do without my toy , Nana . I _ must _ do mischief if you will not let 
 I take all my toy ; I can not help it . " 

 " I have not get room for half those , Master Olly , and you will have ever so 
 many new thing to play with when we get to ravensn . " 

 " there will be the new child , Olly , " say Milly , " and the little river 
 and all the funny new flower . " 

 " those be not toy , " say Olly , look ready to cry . " I do not know 
 nothing about they . " 

 " now , " say nurse , make a place in the box , " bring I your brick and 
 your big ball , and your picture - book . there , that be all I can spare 
 you . " 

 " wait one minute , " say Olly , rush off ; and just then Mrs. Norton 
 call nurse away to speak to she in the drawing - room . when nurse come 
 back she see nobody in the nursery . milly have go out in the garden , 
 Olly be nowhere to be see . and who have shut down the trunk , which be 
 open when she leave it ? I - ow , sound very softly from somewhere close 
 by . 

 " why -- Spot ! Spot ! " call nurse . 

 I - ow , Me - ow , come again ; a sad choky little mew , right from the middle 
 of the child 's trunk . " Master Olly and his trick again , " say nurse , 
 run to the box and open it . there , on the top , lie a quantity of 
 frock that nurse have leave fold up on the floor , throw in anyhow , 
 with some toy scatter among they , and the frock and toy be all 
 dance up and down as if they be bewitch . Nurse take out the 
 frock , and there be the child 's collar - box , a large round 
 cardboard - box with a lid , jump from side to side like a box in a 
 fairy tale ; and such dreadful pitiful little mew come from the 
 inside ! Nurse undo the lid , and out sprang Spot like a flash of 
 lightning , and run as if she be run for her life out of the door 
 and down the stair , and safe into the kitchen , where she cuddle 
 herself up in a corner of the fender , wish with all her poor 
 tremble little heart that there be no such thing in the world as 
 small boy . and then nurse hear a kind of kicking and scuffle in the 
 china cupboard , and when she open it there sit Olly double up , his 
 brown eye dance like will - o'-the - wisps , and his little white tooth 
 grinning . 

 " oh ! Nana , she _ do _ make a funny me - ow ! I just say to she , now , 
 Spottie , _ would not _ you like to go in my box ? and she say , yes ; and I 
 make she such a comfy bed , and then I stick all those frock on the top 
 of she to keep she warm . why do you let she out , Nana ? " 

 " you little mischief , " say Nana , " do you know you might have smother 
 poor little spot ? and look at all these frock ; do you think I have get 
 nothing well to do than to tidy up after your trick ? " 

 but nurse never know how to be very hard upon Olly ; so all she do be 
 to set he up on a high chair with a picture - book , where she could see 
 all he be do . there be no say what he might take a fancy to pack 
 up next if she do not keep an eye on he . 

 well , presently all the packing be do , and Milly and Olly have go to 
 say good - bye to Fräulein , and to Jacky and Francis . Wednesday evening 
 come , and they be to start early on Thursday morning . olly begged 
 nurse to put he to bed very early , that he might " wake up krick"--quick 
 be a word olly never could say . so to bed he go at half - past six , and 
 his head have scarcely touch the pillow two minute before he have go 
 canter away into dreamland , and be see all the sight and hearing 
 all the delicious story that child do see and hear in dreamland , 
 though they do not always remember they when they wake up . both Milly and 
 he wake up very early on Thursday morning ; and directly his eye be 
 open Olly jump out of bed like an india - rubber ball , and begin to put 
 on his stocking in a terrible hurry . the noise of his jump wake nurse , 
 and she call out in a sleepy voice : 

 " get into bed again , Master Olly , directly . it be only just six o'clock , 
 and I can not have you out of bed till seven . you will only be under my 
 foot , and in everybody 's way . " 

 " Nana , I will not be in _ anybody 's _ way , " exclaim Olly , run up to she 
 and scramble on to her bed with his little bare toe half way into his 
 stocking . " I can not keep still in my bed all such a long time . there be 
 something inside of I , Nana , keep jump up and down , and will not let 
 I keep still . now , if I get up , you know , Nana , I can help you . " 

 " help I , indeed ! " say nurse , kiss his little brown face , or as much 
 of it as could be see through his curl . " a nice helping that would be . 
 come back to bed , sir , and I will give you some picture - book till I be 
 ready to dress you . " 

 so back to bed Master Olly go , sorely against his will , and there he 
 have to stay till nurse and Milly be dress , and the breakfast thing 
 lay . then nurse give he his bath and dress he , and put he up to 
 eat his bread and milk while she finish the packing . Olly be always 
 very quiet over his meal , and it be the only time in the day when he 
 be quiet . 

 presently up rattle the cab , and down run the child with their 
 walk thing on to see father and John lift the box on to the top ; 
 and soon they be say good - bye to Susan the cook , and Jenny the 
 housemaid , who be go to stay and take care of the house while they 
 be away ; and then crack go the whip , and off they go to the 
 station . on the way they pass Jacky and Francis stand at their 
 gate , and all the child wave their hat and shout " Hurrah ! 
 hurrah ! " at the station nurse keep tight hold of Olly till father have 
 get the ticket and put all the box into the train , and then he and 
 Milly be safely lift up into the railway carriage , and nurse and 
 father and mother come next , with all the bag and shawl and umbrella . 

 such a settling of leg and arm and package there be ; and in the 
 middle of it " whew " go the whistle , and off they go away to the 
 mountain . 

 but they have a long way to go before they see any mountain . first of 
 all they have to get to Bletchley , and it take about an hour do that . 
 and oh ! what a lovely morning it be , and how fresh and green the field 
 look as the train hurry along past they . olly and Milly could see 
 hundred and thousand of moon - daisy and buttercup grow among the 
 wet grass , and every now and then come great bush of wild - rose , some 
 pink and some white , and long pool with yellow iris grow along the 
 side ; and sometimes the train go rush through a little village , and 
 they could see the little child trot along to school , with their 
 book and slate tuck under their arm ; and sometimes they go along 
 for mile together without see anything but the white - and - brown cow 
 in the field , and the great mother - sheep with their fat white lamb 
 beside they . the sun shine so brightly , the buttercup be so yellow , 
 the rose so pink , and the sky so blue , it be like a fairy world . olly 
 and Milly be always shout and clap their hand at something or 
 other , for Milly have grow almost as wild as Olly . 

 sh - sh - sh - sh go the train , get slow and slow till at last it 
 stop altogether . 

 " Bletchley , Bletchley ! " shout Olly , jump down off the seat . 

 " no , my boy , " say his father , catch hold of he , " we shall stop five 
 more time before we get to Bletchley ; so do not be impatient . " 

 but at last come Bletchley , and the child be lift out into the 
 middle of such a bustle , as it seem to Milly . there be crowd of 
 people at the station , and they be all push backward and forward , 
 and shout and talk . 

 " keep hold of I , Olly , " say Milly , with an anxious little face . " oh , 
 Nana , do not let he go ! " 

 but nurse hold he fast ; and very soon they be through the crowd , and 
 father have put they safe into their new train , into a carriage mark 
 " windermere , " which would take they all the way to their journey 's end . 

 " that be like lion and bear , be not it , mother ? " say Olly , point 
 to the crowd in the station , as they go puff away . now , " lion and 
 bear " be a favourite game of the child 's , a romp game , where 
 everybody run about and pretend to be somebody else , and where the 
 more people play , and the more they run and push and tumble about , 
 the funny , it be . and the running , scramble people at the station 
 do look rather as if they be play at lion and bear . 

 and now the child have a long day before they . on rush the train , 
 past town and village , and house and train . the sun get hot and 
 hotter , and the child begin to get a little tired of look out of 
 window . milly ask for a story - book , and be soon very happy reading 
 " Snow White and Rose Red . " she have read it a hundred time before , but 
 that never matter a bit . olly come to sit on nurse 's knee while she 
 show he picture , and so the time pass away . and now the train 
 stop again , and father lift Olly on his knee to see a great church 
 far away over the house , and teach he to say " Lichfield Cathedral . " 
 and then come Stafford ; and milly look out for the castle , and 
 wonder whether the castle in her story - book look like that , and 
 whether princess and fairy godmother and giant ever live there in 
 old time . 

 after they have leave Stafford , Olly begin to get tired and fidgety . first 
 he go to sit on his father 's knee , then on mother 's , then on 
 nurse's -- none of they could keep he still , and nothing seem to amuse 
 he for long together . 

 " come and have a sleep , Master Olly , " say nurse . " you be just tired 
 and hot . this be a long way for little boy , and we have get ever so far 
 to go yet . " 

 " I be not sleepy , Nana , " say Olly , sit straight up , with a little 
 flushed face and wide - open eye . " I be go to keep awake like father . " 

 " Father 's go to sleep , then , " say Mr. Norton , tuck himself up in 
 a shady corner ; " so you go too , Olly , and see which of we can go 
 quickest . " 

 when Olly have see his father 's eye tight shut , and hear he give just 
 one little snore -- it be rather a make - believe snore -- he do let nurse 
 draw he on to her knee ; and very soon the little gipsy creature be 
 fast asleep , with all his brown curl lie like a soft mat over nurse 's 
 arm . milly , too , shut her eye and sit very still ; she do not mean to 
 go to sleep , but presently she begin to think a great many sleepy 
 thought : why do the hedge run so fast ? and why do the telegraph 
 wire go up and down as if they be always make curtsy ? and be 
 that really mother opposite , or be it Cinderella 's fairy godmother ? and 
 all of a sudden Milly come bump up against a tall blue mountain that have 
 a face like a man , and cry out when she bump upon it ! 

 " Crewe , I declare , " exclaim father , jump up with a start . " why , 
 Olly and I have be asleep nearly an hour ! wake up , child , it be 
 dinner - time . " 

 Nurse have to shake Olly a great many time before he would open his 
 sleepy eye , and then he stand up rub they as if he would rub they 
 quite away . Father lift he out , and carry he into a big room , with 
 a big table in it , all ready for dinner , and hungry people sit round 
 it . what fun it be have dinner at a station , with all the grow - up 
 people . milly and Olly think there never be such nice bread and such 
 nice apple - tart . nothing at home ever taste half so good . and after 
 dinner father take they a little walk up and down the platform , and at 
 last , just as it be time to get into the train again , he buy they a 
 paper full of picture , call the _ Graphic _ , that amuse Olly for a 
 long way . 

 but it be a long long way to windermere , and poor Milly and Olly begin 
 to get very tired . the tree at Wigan do make they laugh a little bit , 
 but they be too tired to think they as funny as they would have 
 think they in the morning . they be such comical tree ! first of all , 
 the smoke from the smoky chimney at Wigan have make they black , and 
 stop the leaf from grow , and then the wind have blow they all 
 over on one side , so that they look like ugly little twisted dwarf , as 
 if some cruel fairy have touch they with her wand . but Olly soon forget 
 all about they ; and he begin to wander from one end to the other of the 
 carriage again , scramble and jump about , till he give himself a 
 hard knock against the seat ; and that make he begin to cry -- poor tired 
 little Olly . then mother lift he on to her knee , and say to he , 
 very softly , " be you very tired , Olly ? never mind , poor little man , we 
 shall not be very long now , and we be all tired , darling -- father 's tired , 
 and I be tired ; and look at Milly there , she look like a little white 
 ghost . suppose you be brave , and try a little extra hard to be good . 
 then mother'll love you an extra bit . and what do you think we shall see 
 soon ? such a lovely bit of blue sea with white ship on it . just you 
 shut your eye a little bit till it come , I will be sure to tell you . " 

 and sure enough , after Lancaster , mother give a little cry , and Olly 
 jump up , and Milly come run over , and there before they lie the 
 dancing windy blue sea , cover over with little white wave , run 
 and tumble over each other . and on the other side of it , what do the 
 child see ? 

 " Mother , mother ! what be it ? " cry Olly , point with his little brown 
 hand far away ; " be it a fairy palace , mother ? " 

 " perhaps it be , olly ; anyway , the hill - fairy live there . for those be 
 the mountain , the beautiful mountain we be go to see . " 

 " but how shall we get across the sea to they ? " ask Milly , with a 
 puzzled face . 

 " this be only a corner of the sea , Milly -- a bay . do not you remember bay 
 in your geography ? we can not go across it , but we can go round it , and we 
 shall find the mountain on the other side . " 

 oh ! how fast the train seem to go now that there be something to look 
 at . everywhere mountain be begin to spring up . and when they have 
 say good - bye to the sea , the mountain begin to grow tall and tall . 
 what have happen to the house too ? they have all turn white or gray ; 
 there be no red one leave . and the field have stone wall instead of 
 hedge ; and inside the wall there be small sheep , about as big as the 
 lamb they have see near Oxford in the morning . 

 Oxenholme , Kendal , windermere . how glad the tired child be when the 
 train run slowly down into windermere station , and they could jump out 
 and say good - bye to it for a long , long time ! they have to wait a little , 
 till father have find all the box and put they in the carriage that 
 be wait for they , and then in they tumble , nurse have first 
 wrap they up in big shawl , for it be evening now , and the wind have 
 grow cold . that be a nice drive home among the mountain . how tall and 
 dark and quiet they be . and what be this shin on their left hand , 
 like a white face run beside they , and peep from behind the 
 tree ? why , it be a lake ; a great wide lake , with tiny boat upon it , 
 some with white sail and some without . 

 " Mother ! mother ! may we go in those boat some day ? " shout Olly , in a 
 little sharp tired voice , and his mother smile at he , and said--"yes , 
 very likely . " 

 how happy mother look . she know all the mountain like old friend , 
 she could tell all their name ; and every now and then , when they come 
 to a house , she and father would begin to talk about the people who 
 live in it , just as if they be talk about people they know quite 
 well . and now come a little town , the town of Wanwick mother call it , 
 right among the mountain , with a river run round it , and a tall 
 church spire . it begin to get dark and dark , and the tree hang down 
 over the road , so that the child could hardly see . on they go , and 
 Olly be very nearly asleep again , when the carriage begin to crunch 
 over gravel , and then it stop , and father call out--"Here we be , 
 child , here we be at ravensn . " 

 and out they all jump . what be those bright light shin ? olly and 
 Milly hardly know where they be go as nurse take they in , and one 
 of Uncle Richard 's servant show they the way upstairs to the nursery . 
 such a nice nursery , with candle light , and a little fire burning , two 
 bowl of hot bread and milk on the table , and in the corner two little 
 white bed , as soft and fresh as nest ! in twenty minute Olly be in 
 one of these little white bed , and milly in the other . and you may 
 guess whether they be long about go to sleep . 




 CHAPTER III 

 RAVENSNEST 


 " poor little soul ! how late they be sleep . they must have be 
 tired last night . " 

 so say nurse at eight o'clock , when she come back into the nursery from 
 a journey to the kitchen after the breakfast thing , and find the 
 child still fast asleep ; so fast that it look as if they mean to 
 go on sleep till dinner - time . 

 " Milly ! " she call softly , shake she very gently , " milly , it be 
 breakfast - time , wake up ! " 

 milly begin to move about , and mutter something about " whistle " and 
 " hedge " in her sleep . 

 then nurse give she another little shake , and at last Milly 's eye do 
 try very hard to open--"what be it ? what do you want , Nana ? where be 
 we?--oh , I know ! " 

 and up sprang Milly in a second and run to the window , her sleepy eye 
 wide open at last . " yes , there they be ! come and look , Nana ! there , 
 past those tree -- don't you see the mountain ? and there be father 
 walk about ; and oh ! do look at those rose over there . dress I 
 quick , dress I quick , please , dear Nana . " 

 thump ! bump ! and there be olly out of bed , sit on the floor rub 
 his eye . olly use always to jump out of bed half asleep , and then sit 
 a long time on the floor wake up . Nurse and Milly always leave he 
 alone till he be quite wake up . it make he cross if you begin to talk 
 to he too soon . 

 " milly , " say Olly presently , in a sleepy voice , " I be go right up the 
 mountain after breakfast . be not you ? " 

 " wait till you see they , Master Olly , " say nurse , take he up and 
 kiss he , " perhaps your little leg will not find it quite so easy to 
 climb up the mountain as you think . " 

 " I can climb up three , four , six , seven mountain , " say olly stoutly ; 
 " mountain be not a bit hard . mother say they be mean to climb up . " 

 " well , I suppose it be like go up stair a long way , " say milly , 
 thoughtfully , pull on her stocking . " you do not like go up the 
 stair in Auntie Margaret 's house , Olly . " 

 Auntie Margaret 's house be a tall London house , with ever so many 
 stair . the child when they be stay there be put to sleep at 
 the top , and Olly use to sit down on the stair and pout and grumble 
 every time they have to go up . 

 but olly shake his obstinate little head . 

 " I do not believe it be a bit like go up stair . " 

 however , as they could not know what it be like before they try , nurse 
 tell they it be no good talk about it . so they hurry on with their 
 dressing , and presently there stand as fresh a pair of morning child 
 as anyone could wish to see , with rosy cheek , and smooth hair , and 
 clean print frock -- for Olly be still in frock -- though when the winter 
 come mother say she be go to put he into knickerbocker . 

 and then nurse take they each by the hand and lead they through some long 
 passage , down a pretty staircase , and through a swing door , into what 
 look like a great nag kitchen , only there be no fireplace in it . 
 the real kitchen open out of it at one side , and through the door come 
 a smell of coffee and toast that make the child feel as hungry as 
 little hunter . but their own room be straight in front , across the 
 kitchen without a fireplace , a tiny room with one large window hung 
 round with rose , and look out on to a green lawn . 

 " Nana , be not it pretty ? Nana , I think it be lovely ! " say Milly , look 
 out and clap her hand . and it _ be _ a pretty garden they could see 
 from the window . an up - and - down garden , with bed full of bright 
 flower , and grass which be nearly all moss , and so soft that no 
 cushion could be soft . in the distance they could hear a little 
 splish - splash among the tree , which come , Milly suppose , from the 
 river mother have tell they about ; while , reach up all round the 
 house , so that they could not see the top of it from the window , be the 
 green wild mountain itself , the mountain of Brownholme , under which 
 Uncle Richard 's house be build . 

 the child hurry through their breakfast , and then nurse cover 
 they up with garden pinafore , and take they to the dining - room to find 
 father and mother . Mr. and Mrs. Norton be read letter when the 
 child 's curly head appear at the open door , and Mrs. Norton be 
 just say to her husband : 

 " Aunt Emma send a few line just to welcome we , and to say that she 
 can not come over to we to - day , but will we all come over to she to - morrow 
 and have early dinner , and perhaps a row afterward-- " 

 " oh , a row , mother , a row ! " shout Olly , clamber on to his mother 's 
 knee and half - strangle she with his strong little arm ; " I can row , 
 father say I might . be we go to - day ? " 

 " no , to - morrow , Olly , when we have see a little bit of ravensn first . 
 which of you remember Aunt Emma , I wonder ? " 

 " I remember she , " say Milly , nod her head wisely , " she have a big 
 white cap , and she tell I story . but I do not quite remember her face , 
 mother -- not _ quite _ . " 

 " I do not remember she , not one bit , " say Olly . " Mother , do she keep 
 say , ' do not do that ; ' ' go up stair , naughty boy , ' like Jacky 's aunt 
 do ? " 

 for the child 's playfellow , Jacky and Francis , have an aunt living 
 with they whom milly and Olly could not bear . they believe that she 
 could not say anything else except " do not ! " and " go up stair ! " and they 
 be always in dread lest they should come across an aunt like she . 

 " she be the dear aunt in the whole world , " say mother , " and she never 
 say , ' do not , ' except when she be oblige , but when she do say it 
 little boy have to mind . when I be a little girl I think there be 
 nobody like Aunt Emma , nobody who could make such plan or tell such 
 splendid story . " 

 " and , mother , can not she cut out card doll ? ask Milly . do not you know 
 those beautiful card doll you have in your drawer at home -- didn't Aunt 
 Emma make they ? " 

 " yes , of course she do . she make I a whole family once for my 
 birthday , a father and a mother , and two little girl and two little 
 boy . and each of the child have two paper dress and two hat , one 
 for good and one for every day -- and the mother have a white evening dress 
 trim with red , and a hat and a bonnet . " 

 " I know , mother ! they be all in your drawer at home , only one of the 
 little boy have his head break off . do you think Aunt Emma would make 
 I a set if I ask she ? " 

 " I can not say , Milly . but I believe Aunt Emma 's finger be just as quick 
 as ever they be . now , child , father say he will take you out while 
 I go and speak to cook . olly , how do you think we be go to get any 
 meat for you and Milly here ? there be no shop on the mountain . " 

 " then we will eat fisse , little fisse like those ! " cry olly , point 
 to a plate of tiny red - spot fish that father and mother have be 
 have for breakfast . 

 " thank you , Olly , " say Mr. Norton , laugh ; " it would cost a good deal 
 to keep you in trout , sir . I think we will try for some plain mutton for 
 you , even if we have to catch the sheep on the mountain ourselves . but 
 now come along till mother be ready , and I will show you the river where 
 those little fish live . " 

 out run the child , ready to go anywhere and see anything in this 
 beautiful new place , which seem to they a palace of wonder . and 
 presently they be skip over the soft green grass , each hold one 
 of father 's hand , and chatter away to he as if their little tongue 
 would never stop . what a hot day it be go to be ! the sky overhead 
 be deep blue , with scarcely a cloud , they could hear nothing in the 
 still air but the sleepy cooing of the dove in the tree by the gate , 
 and the tree and flower all look as if they be go to sleep in 
 the heat . 

 " Father , why do that old gentleman at Willingham last week tell mother 
 that it always rain in the mountain ? " ask Milly , look up at the 
 blue sky . 

 " well , Milly , I be afraid you will find out before you go home that it do 
 know how to rain here . sometimes it rain and rain as if the sky be 
 come down and all the world be go to turn into water . but never 
 mind about that now -- it be not go to rain to - day . " 

 down they go through the garden , across the road , and into a field on 
 the other side of it , a beautiful hay - field full of flower , with just a 
 narrow little path through it where the child and Mr. Norton could 
 walk one behind another . and at the end of the path what do you think 
 they find ? why , a chatter sparkle river , run along over 
 hundred and thousand of brown and green pebble , so fast that it 
 seem to be try to catch the bird as they skim across it . the 
 child have never see a river like this before , where you could see 
 right to the very bottom , and count the stone there if you like , and 
 which behave like a river at play , scramble and dance and rush 
 along as if it be out for a holiday , like the child themselves . 

 " what do you think of that for a river , child ? " say Mr. Norton . 
 " very early this morning , when you little sleepyhead be in bed , I get 
 up and come down here , and have my bath over there , look -- in that nice 
 brown pool under the tree . " 

 " oh , father ! " cry both child , dance round he . " let we have our 
 bath in the river too . do ask Nana -- do , father ! we can have our bathing 
 thing on that we have at the sea , and you can come too and teach we to 
 swim . " 

 " well , just once perhaps , if mother say yes , and it be very warm 
 weather , and you get up very _ very _ early . but you will not like it quite 
 as much as you think . river be very cold to bathe in , and those pretty 
 stone at the bottom will not feel at all nice to your little toe . " 

 " oh , but , father , " interrupt milly , " we could put on our sand shoe . " 

 " and would not we splash ! " say Olly . " Nurse will not let we splash in our 
 bath , father , she say it make a mess . I be sure it do not make a 
 _ great _ mess . " 

 " what do you know about it , shrimp ? " say Mr. Norton , " you do not have to 
 tidy up . hush , be not that mother call ? let us go and fetch she , and 
 then we will go and see Uncle Richard 's farm , where the milk you have for 
 breakfast come from . there be three child there , Milly , besides cow 
 and pig , and duck and chicken . " 

 Back run Milly and Olly , and there be mother watch for they with a 
 basket on her arm which have already get some rose lie in it . 

 " oh , mother ! where do you get those rose ? " cry Milly . 

 " Wheeler , the gardener , give they to I . and now suppose we go first of 
 all to see Mrs. Wheeler , and gardener 's two little child . they live 
 in that cottage over there , across the brook , and the two little one 
 have just be peep over the wall to try and get a look at you . " 

 up clamber Milly and Olly along a steep path that seem to take they 
 up into the mountain , when suddenly they turn , and there be another 
 river , but such a tiny river , Milly could almost jump across it , and it 
 be tumble and leap down the rock on its way to the big river 
 which they have just see , as if it be a little child hurry to its 
 mother . 

 " why , mother , what a lot of river , " say Olly , run on to a little 
 bridge that have be build across the little stream , and look over . 

 " just to begin with , " say Mrs. Norton . " you will see plenty more before 
 you have do . but I can not have you call this a river , Olly . these baby 
 river be call beck in Westmoreland -- some of the big one , too , 
 indeed . " 

 on the other side of the little bridge be the gardener 's cottage , and 
 in front of the door stand two funny fair - haired little child with 
 their finger in their mouth , star at Milly and Olly . one be a 
 little girl who be really about Milly 's age , though she look much 
 young , and the other be a very shy small boy , with blue eye and 
 straggle yellow hair , and a face that might have be pretty if you 
 could have see it properly . but Charlie seem to have make up his mind 
 that nobody ever should see it properly . however often his mother might 
 wash he , and she be a tidy woman , who like to see her child look 
 clean and nice , Charlie be always black . his face be black , his hand 
 be black , his pinafore be sure to be cover with black mark ten 
 minute after he have put it on . do what you would to he , it be no use , 
 Charlie always look as if he have just come out of the coal - hole . 

 " well , Bessie , " say Mrs. Norton to the little girl , " be your mother 
 in ? " 

 " Naw , " say Bessie , without take her finger out of her mouth . 

 " oh , I be sorry for that . do you know when she be likely to be in ? " 

 " Naw , " say Bessie again , begin to eat she pinafore as well as her 
 finger . meanwhile Charlie have be creep behind Bessie to get out of 
 Olly 's way ; for Olly , who always want to make friend , be try to 
 shake hand with he , and Charlie be dreadfully afraid that he want 
 to kiss he too . 

 " what a pity , " say Mrs. Norton , " I want to ask she a question . come 
 away , Olly , and do not tease Charlie if he do not want to shake hand . 
 can you remember , Bessie , to tell your mother that I come to see she ? " 

 " Yis , " say Bessie . 

 " and can you remember , too , to ask she if she will let you and Charlie 
 come down to tea with Miss Milly and Master Olly , this afternoon , at 
 five o'clock ? " 

 " Yis , " say Bessie , get shyer and shyer , and eat up her pinafore 
 fast than ever . 

 " good - bye , then , " say Mrs. Norton . 

 " good - bye , Bessie , " say Milly , softly , take her hand . 

 Bessie star at she , but do not say anything . 

 olly , have quite fail in shake hand , be now try to kiss 
 Charlie ; but Charlie would not have it at all , and every time olly come 
 near , Charlie push he away with his little fist . this make olly 
 rather cross , and he begin to try with all his strength to make Charlie 
 kiss he , when suddenly Charlie get away from he , and run to a pile 
 of log of wood which be lie in the yard he climb up the log like 
 a little squirrel , and be soon at the top of the heap , look down on 
 Olly , who be very much astonish . 

 " Mother , _ do _ let I climb up too ! " entreat Olly , as Mrs. Norton take 
 his hand to lead he away . " I want to climb up krick like that ! oh , do 
 let I try ! " 

 " no , no , Olly ! come along . we shall never get to the farm if you stay 
 climbing here . and you would not find it as easy as Charlie do , I can 
 tell you . " 

 " why , I be big than Charlie , " say Olly , pouting , as they walk away . 

 " but you have not get such stout leg ; and , besides , Charlie be always 
 out of door all day long , climbing and poking about . I daresay he can 
 do outdoor thing well than you can . you be a little town boy , you 
 know . " 

 " Charlie 's get a black face , " say Olly , who be not at all pleased that 
 Charlie , who be small than he be , and dirty beside , could do 
 anything well than he could . 

 " well , you see , he have not get a Nana always look after he as you 
 have . " 

 " have not he get _ any _ Nana ? " ask Olly , look as if he do not 
 understand how there could be little child without Nanas . 

 " he have not get any nurse but his mother , and Mrs. Wheeler have a great 
 deal else to do than look after he . what would you be like , do you 
 think , Olly , if I have to do all the housework , and cook the dinner , and 
 mind the baby , and there be no nurse to wash your face and hand for 
 you ? " 

 " I should get just like shock - head Peter , " say Olly , shake his head 
 gravely at the idea . shock - head Peter be a dirty little boy in one of 
 Olly 's picture - book ; but I be sure you must have hear about he 
 already , and must have see the picture of he with his bushy hair , and 
 his terrible long nail like bird ' claw . Olly be never tired of 
 hear about he , and about all the other child in that 
 picture - book . 

 " what a funny little girl Bessie be , mother ! " say Milly . " do they 
 always say _ Naw _ and _ yis _ in this country , instead of say no and 
 yes , like we do ? " 

 " well , most of the people that live here do , " say Mrs. Norton . " their 
 way of talk sound odd and queer at first , Milly , but when you get 
 use to it you will like it as I do , because it seem like a part of the 
 mountain . " 

 all this time they have be climb up a steep path behind the 
 gardener 's house , and now Mr. Norton open a door in a high wall , and 
 let the child into a beautiful kitchen - garden make on the mountain 
 side , so that when they look down from the gate they could see the 
 chimney of ravensn just below they . inside there be all kind of 
 fruit and vegetable , but gooseberry bush and the strawberry have 
 nothing but green gooseberry and white strawberry to show , to Olly 's 
 great disappointment . 

 " why be not the strawberries red , mother ? " he ask in a discontent 
 voice , as if it must be somebody 's fault that they be not red . " our at 
 home be ripe . " 

 " well , Olly , I suppose the strawberry know well . all I can tell you 
 be , that thing always get ripe here later than at Willingham . their 
 summer begin a little later than ours do , and so everything get 
 push on a little . but there will be plenty by - and - by . and suppose just 
 now , instead of look at the strawberry , you give just one look at 
 the mountain . count how many you can see all round . " 

 " one , two , three , five , " count Olly . " what great big hump ! should we 
 be able to touch the sky if we get up to the top of that one , mother ? " 
 and he point to a great blue mountain where the cloud seem to be 
 rest on the top . 

 " well , if you be up there just now , you would be all among the cloud , 
 and it would seem like a white fog all round you . so you would be 
 touch the cloud at any rate . " 

 olly open his eye very wide at the idea of touch the cloud . 

 " why , mother , we can not touch the cloud at home ! " 

 " that come of live in a country as flat as a pancake , " say Mr. 
 Norton . " just you wait till we can buy a tame mountain , and carry it to 
 Willingham with we . then we will put it down in the middle of the garden , 
 and the cloud will come down to sit on the top of it just as they do 
 here . but now , who can scramble over that gate ? " 

 for the gate at the other end of the garden be lock , and as the 
 gardener could not be find , everybody have to scramble over , mother 
 include . however , Mr. Norton help they all over , and then they find 
 themselves on a path run along the green mountain side . on they 
 go , through pretty bit of steep hay - field , where the grass seem 
 all clover and moon - daisy , till presently they come upon a small 
 hunch - up house , with a number of shed on one side of it and a 
 kitchen - garden in front . this be Uncle Richard 's farm ; a very tiny 
 farm , where a man call John Backhouse live , with his wife and two 
 little girl and a baby - boy . except just in the hay - time , John Backhouse 
 have no man to help he , and he and his wife have to do all the work , to 
 look after the sheep , and the cow , the pig , the horse , and the 
 chicken , to manage the garden and the hayfield , and to take the butter 
 and milk to the people who want to buy it . when their child grow up 
 and be able to help , Backhouse and his wife would be able to do it all 
 very well ; but just now , when they be still quite small , it be very 
 hard work ; it be all the farmer and his wife could do to make enough to 
 keep themselves and their child feed and clothe . 

 Milly and Olly be very anxious to see the farmer 's child and look 
 out for they in the garden as they walk up to the house , but there 
 be no sign of they . the door be open by Mrs. Backhouse , the 
 farmer 's wife , who hold a fair - haired baby in her arm suck a great 
 crust of brown bread , and when Mr. and Mrs. Norton have shake hand with 
 her--"I'm sure , ma'am , I be very pleased to see you here , " say Mrs. 
 Backhouse . " John tell I you be come ( only Mrs. Backhouse say 
 ' coom ' ) , and Becky and Tiza go down with their father when he take the 
 milk this morning , hop they would catch a sight of your child . 
 they have be just wild to see they , but I tell they they be not 
 likely to be up at that time in the morning . " 

 " where be they now ? " ask Mrs. Norton . " mine have be look out for 
 they as we come along . " 

 " well , ma'am , I can not say , unless they be in the cherry - tree . Becky ! 
 Tiza ! " 

 a faint " Yis " come from the other end of the garden , but still Milly and 
 Olly could see nothing but a big cherry - tree grow where the voice 
 seem to come from . 

 " you go along that path , missy , and call again . you will be sure to find 
 they , " say Mrs. Backhouse , point to the tree . " and will not you come 
 in , ma'am , and rest a bit ? you will be maybe tired with walk this hot 
 day . " 

 so Mr. and Mrs. Norton go into the farmhouse , and the child go 
 hand - in - hand down the garden , look for Becky and Tiza . 

 suddenly , as they come close to the cherry - tree , they hear a laugh and 
 a little scuffling , and look up , what should they see but two little 
 girl perch up on one of the cherry - tree branch , one of they sewing , 
 the other nursing a baby kitten . both of they have colour print 
 bonnet , but the small have take hers off and be roll the kitten 
 up in it . the little girl sewing have a sensible , sober face ; as for the 
 other , she could not have look sober if she have try for a week of 
 Sundays . it make you laugh only to look at Tiza . from the top of her 
 curly head to the sol of her skip little foot , she be the 
 sauciest , merriest , noisy creature . it be she who be always play 
 trick on the cow and the horse , and the big sheep - dog ; who like 
 nothing so well as tease Becky and dress up the kitten , and who 
 be always tumble into the milkpail , or roll downstairs , or lose 
 herself in the wood , without somehow ever come to any harm . if she 
 and Olly have be leave alone in the world together they _ must _ have come 
 to a bad end , but luckily each of they have wise people to take care of 
 they . 

 " Becky , " say Milly , shyly , look up into the tree , " will you come 
 down and say how do you do to we ? " 

 Becky stick her needle in her work and scramble down with a red shy 
 face to shake hand ; but Tiza , instead of come down , only climb a 
 little high , and peep at the other between the branch . 

 " we come down to the house when fayther take the milk this morning , " 
 say Becky . " we think maybe we would see you in the garden . only Tiza say 
 she would run away if she do see you . " 

 " why do not Tiza come down ? " ask Olly , look hard up into the tree . 
 " I want to see she . " 

 Thump ! what be that rattle down on Olly 's head ? he look down at his 
 foot very much astonish , and see a bunch of green cherry which Tiza 
 have just throw at he . 

 " throw some more ! throw some more ! " he cry out , and Tiza begin to pelt 
 he fast , while olly run here and there pick they up , and every now 
 and then try to throw they back at Tiza ; but she be too high up for 
 he to reach , and they only come rattle about his head again . 

 " she will not come down , " say Becky , look up at her sister . " maybe she 
 will not speak to you for two or three day . and if you run after she she 
 hide in such queer place you can never find she . " 

 " but mother want you and she to come to tea with we this afternoon , " 
 say milly ; " will not Tiza come ? " 

 " I suppose mother'll make she , " say Becky , " but she do not like it . 
 have you be on the fell ? " 

 milly look puzzle . " do you mean on the mountain ? no , not yet . we be 
 go to - morrow when we go to Aunt Emma 's . but we have be to the river 
 with father . " 

 " do you go over the step - stone ? " 

 " no , " say Milly , " I do not know what they be . can we go this evening 
 after tea ? " 

 " oh yes , " say Becky , " they be just close by your house . do your 
 mother let you go in the water ? " 

 now Becky say a great many of these word very funnily , so that milly 
 could hardly understand she . she say " doos " and " oop , " and " knaw , " and 
 " jist , " and " la - ike , " but it sound quite pretty from her soft little 
 mouth , and milly think she have a very nice way of talk . 

 " no , mother do not let we go in the water here , at least , not unless 
 it be very warm . we paddle when we go to the sea , and some day father 
 say we may have our bath in the river if it be very fine . " 

 " we never have a bath in the river , " say Becky , look very much 
 astonish at the idea . 

 " do you have your bath in the nursery like we do ? " ask Milly . 

 " we have not get a nursery , " say Becky , star at she , " mother put we 
 in the toob on Saturday night . I do not mind it but Tiza do not like it 
 a bit . sometimes she hide when it be Saturday night , so that mother 
 can not find she till it be too late . " 

 " do not you have a bath except on Saturday ? " say Milly . " olly and I have 
 one every morning . Mother say we should get like shock - head Peter if 
 we do not . " 

 " I do not know about he , " say Becky , shake her head . 

 " he be a little boy in a picture - book . I will show he you when you come to 
 tea . but there be mother call . come along , Olly . Tiza will not come down 
 Becky say . " 

 " she be a very rude girl , " say Olly , who be rather hot and tired with 
 his game , and do not think it be all fun that Tiza should always hit 
 he and he should never be able to hit Tiza . " I will not sit next she when 
 she come to tea with we . " 

 " Tiza 's only in fun , " say Becky , " she be always like that . Tiza , be you 
 come down ? I be go to get baby out , I hear he cry just now . " 

 " may you take baby out all by yourself ? " ask Milly . 

 " why , I always take he out , and I put he to sleep at night ; and 
 mother say he will not go to sleep for anybody as quick as for I , " say 
 Becky proudly . 

 milly feel a good deal puzzle . it _ must _ be funny to have no Nana . 

 " will you and he , " say Becky , point to Olly , " come up this afternoon 
 and help we call the cow ? " 

 " if we may , " say Milly ; " who call they ? " 

 " Tiza and I , " answer Becky ; " when I be a big girl I shall learn how to 
 milk , but fayther say I be too little yet . " 

 " I wish I live at a farm , " say Milly disconsolately . 

 Becky do not quite know what to say to this , so she begin to call Tiza 
 again . 

 " Swish ! " go something past they as quick as lightning . it be Tiza 
 run to the house . olly set out to run after she as fast as he could 
 run , but he come bang up against his mother stand at the farmhouse 
 door , just as Tiza get safely in and be see no more . 

 " ah , you will not catch Tiza , master , " say Mrs. Backhouse , pat his 
 head ; " she be a rough girl , always at some trick or other -- we think she 
 ought to have be a boy , really . " 

 " Mother , be not Becky very nice ? " say Milly , as they walk away . " she 
 mother let she do such a lot of thing -- nurse the baby , and call the 
 cow , and make pinafore . oh , I wish father be a farmer . " 

 " well , it be not a bad kind of life when the sun shin , and everything 
 be go right , " say Mrs. Norton ; " but I think you have well wait a 
 little bit till the rain come before you quite make up your mind about 
 it , Milly . " 

 but Milly be quite sure she know enough about it already to make up her 
 mind , and all the way home she keep say to herself , " if I could only 
 turn into a little farmer 's girl ! why do not people have fairy godmother 
 now like Cinderella ? " 




 CHAPTER IV 

 OUT on the HILLS 


 Milly and Olly , and the four little Westmoreland child , have a very 
 pleasant tea together in the afternoon of the Nortons 's first day at 
 ravensn . Bessie and Charlie certainly do not talk much ; but Tiza , 
 when once her mother have make she come , think proper to get rid of a 
 great deal of her shyness , and to chatter and romp so much that they 
 quite fall in love with she , and could not be persuade to go anywhere 
 or do anything without she . Nurse would not let Milly and Olly go to 
 call the cow , though she promise they should some other day ; but she 
 take the whole party down to the stepping - stone after tea , and great 
 fun it be to see Becky and Tiza run over the stepping - stone , and 
 jump from one stone to another like little fawn . milly and Olly 
 want sorely to go too , but there be no persuade Nana to let they go 
 without their father to fish they out if they tumble in , so they have to 
 content themselves with dangle their leg over the first 
 step - stone and watch the other . but perhaps you do not quite 
 know what stepping - stone be ? they be large high stone , with flat 
 top , which people put in , a little way apart from each other , right 
 across a river , so that by step from one to the other you can cross 
 to the opposite side . of course they only do for little river , where 
 the water be not very deep . and they do not always do even there . 
 sometimes in the river Thora , where Milly and Olly 's stepping - stone 
 be , when it rain very much , the water rise so high that it dash 
 right over the stepping - stone and nobody could go across . milly and 
 Olly see the stepping - stone cover with water once or twice while they 
 be at ravensn ; but the first evening they see they the river be 
 very low , and the stone stand up high and dry out of the water . milly 
 think that step - stone be much nice than bridge , and that it 
 be the most amusing and interesting way of get across a river that 
 she know . but then Milly be inclined to think everything wonderful and 
 interesting at Ravensnest -- from the tall mountain that seem to shut 
 they in all around like a wall , down to the tiny gleam wild 
 strawberry , that be just begin to show their little scarlet 
 ball on the bank in the ravensn wood . both she and Olly go to 
 bed after their first day at ravensn with their little heart full of 
 happiness , and their little head full of plan . to - morrow they be to 
 go to Aunt Emma 's , and perhaps the day after that father would take they 
 to bathe in the river , and nurse would let they go and help Becky and 
 Tiza call the cow . holiday _ be _ nice ; still geography lesson be 
 nice too sometimes , think milly sleepily , just as she be slip , 
 slip away into dreamland , and in her dream her faithful little 
 thought go back lovingly to Fräulein 's kind old face , and to the 
 cape and island and sea she have be learn about a week ago . 

 [ illustration : " the flower milly gather for her mother " ] 

 the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Norton be busy indoor till about twelve 
 o'clock ; and the child wander about the garden with nurse , find 
 out many new nook and corner , especially a delightful steep path which 
 lead up and up into the wood , till at last it take the child to a 
 little brown summer - house at the top , where they could sit and look over 
 the tree below , away to the river and the hay - field and the mountain . 
 and between the stone and this path grow the prettiest wild 
 strawberry , only , as Milly say , it be not much good look for they 
 yet , for there be so few red one you could scarcely get enough to 
 taste what they be like . but in a week or two , she and Olly plan 
 that they would take up a basket with some green leaf in it , and 
 gather a lot for father and mother -- enough for regular dessert -- and some 
 wild raspberry too , for these also grow in the wood , to the great 
 delight of the child , who have never see any before . they begin to 
 feel presently as if it would be nothing very extraordinary to find 
 tree cover with barley sugar or jam tart in this wonderful wood . and 
 as for the flower milly gather for her mother , they be a sight to 
 see -- moon - daisy and meadow - sweet , wild rose and rag - robin , and 
 bright bit of rhododendron . for both the wood and the garden at 
 Ravensnest be full of rhododendron of all colour , pink and red , and 
 white and flame colour ; and Milly and Olly amuse themselves with make 
 up bunch of different coloured flower with as many different colour 
 in they as they could find . there be no rhododendron at Willingham ; 
 and the child think they the lovely , gay thing they have ever 
 see . 

 but at last twelve o'clock come . Nurse tidy the child , give they 
 some biscuit and milk , and then send they to the drawing - room to find 
 father and mother . only Mrs. Norton be there , but she say there be no 
 need to wait for father , as he be out already and would meet they on 
 the way . they be to go straight over the mountain instead of walk 
 round by the road , which would have take much long . so off they 
 set -- olly skipping , and chatter as he always do ; while milly stick 
 close to her mother , tell she every now and then , when Olly leave off 
 talk , about their morning in the wood , the flower they have gather 
 and the strawberry they have find . at the top of the garden be a 
 little gate , and beside the gate stand Bessie and Charlie , who have 
 really be watch for the child all the morning , though they 
 do not dare to come into the garden without leave . 

 " Bessie , we be go to Aunt Emma 's , " say Milly , run up to they . 
 " where be you and Charlie go to ? " 

 " nawhere , " say Bessie , who , as usual , have she pinafore in her mouth , 
 and never say more than one word at a time if she could help it . 

 " nowhere ! what do you do all the morning , Bessie ? " 

 " I doan't know , " say Bessie , gravely look up at she ; " sometimes I 
 mind the baby . " 

 " do you mind the baby , too ? dear , dear ! and what do Charlie do ? " 

 " nawthe , " say Bessie again . " he only make himself dirty . " 

 " do not you go to school ever ? " 

 " no , but mother be go to send we , " say Bessie , whose big eye grow 
 round and frighten at the idea , as if it be a dreadful prospect . " be 
 you go to be away for all day ? " 

 " yes ; we shall not be back till quite evening , mother say . here she be . 
 good - bye , Bessie ; good - bye , Charlie . will you come and play with we 
 to - morrow morning ? " 

 Bessie nod , but Charlie run off without answer ; for he see Olly 
 coming , and be afraid he might want to kiss he . on the other side of 
 the gate they have to begin to climb up a steep bit of soft green grass ; 
 and very hard work it be . after quite a little way the child begin 
 to puff and pant like two little steam engine . 

 " it _ be _ a little bit like go upstairs , do not you think , Olly ? " say 
 milly , sit down by her mother on a flat bit of gray stone . 

 " no , it be not a bit like go upstairs , " say Olly , shake his head ; 
 for Olly always like contradict Milly if he could . " it be like -- it be 
 like -- walk up a house ! " 

 suddenly they hear far above they a shout of " Hullo ! " both the child 
 start up and look about they . it be like father 's voice , but they 
 could not see he anywhere . 

 " where be you , father ? " 

 " Hullo ! " again . and this time it sound much near to they . where 
 could it be ? the child begin to run about and look behind the bush 
 and the rock , till all of a sudden , just as Milly get near a big rock , 
 out jump Mr. Norton from behind it with a great shout , and begin to 
 run after she . Away run milly and Olly as fast as their small foot could 
 carry they , up and down , up and down , till at last there come a steep 
 place -- one of Milly 's foot trip up , down she go , roll over and 
 over -- down come olly on the top of she , and the two of they roll away 
 together till they stop at the bottom of the steep place , all mixed 
 up in a heap of leg and arm and hat and pinafore . 

 " here be a boy and girl tie up in a knot , " say Mr. Norton , scramble 
 down after they and lift they up . " there be no harm do , be there ? " 

 " I have get a bump on my arm , " say Milly , turn up her sleeve . 

 " and I have get a scratch on my nose , " say Olly , rub it . 

 " that be not much for a nice tumble like that , " say Mr. Norton , " you 
 would not mind another , would you , milly ? " 

 " not a bit , " say Milly , merrily skip along beside he . " hide again , 
 father . " 

 " another day , not now , for we want to get to Aunt Emma 's . but tomorrow , 
 if you like , we will come up here and have a capital game . only we must 
 choose a nice dry place where there be no bog . " 

 " what be bog ? " ask Olly . 

 " wet place , where your foot go sink deeply and deep into the mud , 
 and you can not find any stiff firm bit to stand on . sometimes people sink 
 down and down into a bog till the mud come right over their head and 
 face and choke they ; but we have not get any bog as bad as that here . 
 now , child , step along in front . very soon we shall get to the top of 
 the mountain , and then we shall see wonderful thing on the other side . " 

 so Milly and Olly run on , push their way through the great tall fern , 
 or scamper over the short green grass where the little mountain sheep 
 be nibble , and where a beautiful creep moss grow all over the 
 ground , which , mother tell Milly , be call " stag ' horn moss , " because 
 its little green branch be so like stag ' horn . 

 " now look , child , " shout their father to they from behind . " here we 
 be at the top . " 

 and then , all of a sudden , instead of only the green mountain and the 
 sheep , they could see far away on the other side of the mountain . there , 
 all round they , be number of other mountain ; and below , at their 
 foot , be house and tree and field , while straight in front lie a 
 great big blue lake stretch away ever so far , till it seem to be 
 lose in the sky . 

 " look , look , mother ! " cry milly , clap her hand , " there be 
 windermere lake , the lake we see when we be come from the station . 
 look at that steamer , with all the people on board ! what funny little 
 black people . and oh , mother , look at that little boat over there ! how 
 can people go out in such a weeny boat as that ? " 

 " it be not such a weeny boat , Milly . it only look so small because it be 
 such a long way off . when father and I take you and Olly on the lake , we 
 shall go in a boat just like that . and now , instead of look so far 
 away , look just down here below you , and tell I what you see . " 

 " some chimney , and some tree , and some smoke , ever so far down , " 
 shout the child . " be it a house , mother ? " 

 " that be Aunt Emma 's house , the old house where I use to come and stay 
 when I be a little girl , and when your dear great - grandfather and 
 great - grandmother be alive . I use to think it the nice place in the 
 world . " 

 " be you a very little girl , mother , and be you ever naughty ? " ask 
 Milly , slip she little hand into her mother 's and begin to feel 
 rather tired with her long walk . 

 " I be afraid I be very often naughty , Milly . I use to get into great 
 rage and scream , till everybody be quite tired out . but Aunt Emma be 
 very good to I , and take a great deal of pain to cure I of go into 
 rage . besides , it always do naughty child good to live in the same 
 house with great - grandmamma , and so after a while I get well . take 
 care how you go , child , it be very steep just here , and you might soon 
 tumble over on your nose . olly , take care ! take care ! where _ be _ you 
 go ? " 

 where , indeed , be olly go ? just the moment before the little man have 
 spy a lovely flower grow a little way off the path , in the middle 
 of some bright yellow - green moss . and without think of anything but 
 get it , off he rush . but oh ! splish , splash , splish , down go 
 Olly 's foot , up splash the muddy water , and there be olly stuck in a 
 bog . 

 " Father , pull I out , pull I out ! " cry the little boy in terror , as 
 he feel his foot stick fast . but almost before he could speak there be 
 father close beside he , stand on a round little hump of dry grass 
 which be stick up out of the bog , and with one grip he get hold of 
 Olly under his arm , and then jump ! on to another little hump of grass , 
 jump ! on to another , and there they be safe on the path again . 

 " oh , you black boy ! " cry father and mother and Milly all together . be 
 there ever such a little object ! all his nice clean holland frock be 
 splash with black mud ; and what have happen to his stocking ? 

 " I have get mud - stocking on , " shout Olly , caper about , and point 
 to his leg which be cake with mud up to his knee . 

 " you be a nice respectable boy to take out to dinner , " say Mrs. Norton . 
 " I think we will leave you on the mountain to have dinner with the sheep . " 

 " oh no , father , " plead milly , take olly fast by the hand . " we can 
 wash he at Aunt Emma 's , you know . " 

 " do not go too close to he , Milly ! " exclaim Mrs. Norton , " or you will 
 get as black as he be . we shall have to put he under the pump at Aunt 
 Emma 's , that be quite certain . but there be nothing to wash he with here , 
 so he must just go as he be for a bit . now , Olly , run along and your 
 foot will soon dry . Father 's go first , you go next , just where he 
 go , I be come after you , and milly shall go last . perhaps in that way 
 we shall get you down safe . " 

 " oh , but , mother , look at my flower , " say Olly , hold it up 
 triumphantly . " be not it a beauty ? " 

 " shall I tell you what it be call , Olly ? it be call a butterwort , and 
 it always grow in boggy place ; I would not advise you to go after one 
 again without ask father first . " 

 it be a very different thing go down the mountain from climb up 
 it . it seem only a few minute before they have get almost to the 
 bottom , and there be a gate lead into a road , and a little village 
 of white house in front of they . they walk up the road a little way , 
 and then father open a big gate and let they into a beautiful garden 
 full of rhododendron like the ravensn garden . and who be this 
 walk down the drive to meet they ? such a pretty little elderly lady , 
 with gray hair and a white cap . 

 " Dear Aunt Emma ! " say Mrs. Norton , run up to she and take both 
 her hand and kiss she . 

 " well , Lucy , " say the little lady , hold her hand and look at she 
 ( Lucy be Mrs. Norton 's christian name ) , " it _ be _ nice to see you all 
 here . and there be dear little Milly , I remember she . but where be Olly ? 
 I have never see that small creature , you know . come , Olly , do not be shy . 
 little boy be never shy with Aunt Emma . " 

 " except when they tumble into bog , " say Mr. Norton , laugh and 
 pull Olly forward , who be try to hide his mud - stocking behind 
 his mother . " there be a clean tidy boy to bring to dinner , be not he , Aunt 
 Emma ? I think I will take he to the yard and pump on he a little before 
 we bring he in . " 

 Aunt Emma put up her spectacle to look at Olly . 

 " why , Olly , I think Mother Quiverquake have be catch hold of you . 
 do not you know about old Mother Quiverquake , who live in the bog ? oh , 
 I can tell you splendid story about she some day . but now catch hold 
 of my hand , and keep your little leg away from my dress , and we will soon 
 make a proper boy of you again . " 

 and then Aunt Emma take one of Milly 's hand and one of Olly 's , and up 
 they go to the house . but I must start another chapter before I begin 
 to tell you what the child see in Aunt Emma 's house , and of the happy 
 time they spend there . 




 CHAPTER V 

 AUNT EMMA 's PICNIC 


 instead of take they straight into the house , however , Aunt Emma take 
 the child up a little shady path which very soon bring they to a 
 white cottage cover with honeysuckle and climb rose . 

 " this be where my coachman 's wife live , " say Aunt Emma , " and she own 
 a small boy who might perhaps find you a pair of stocking , Olly , to put 
 on while your own be wash . " 

 olly open his brown eye very wide at the idea of wear some other 
 little boy 's stocking , but he say nothing . 

 Aunt Emma tap at the door , and out come a stout kind - look woman . 

 " Mrs. Tyson , do you think your Johnny could lend my little nephew a pair 
 of his stocking while we get his own washed ? Master Olly have be 
 tumble into a bog by way of make friend with the mountain , and I 
 do not quite know how I be to let those leg into my dining - room . " 

 " Dear I , ma'am , but Johnny'll be proud if he be get any clean , but I will 
 not answer for it . will not ye come in ? " 

 in they walk , and there be a nice tidy kitchen , with a wooden cradle 
 in the corner , and a little fair - haired boy sit by it and rock 
 the baby . this be Johnny , and Olly look at he with great curiosity . 
 " I have get big leg than Johnny , " he whisper solemnly at last to 
 Aunt Emma , while they be wait for Mrs. Tyson , who have go upstairs 
 to fetch the stocking . 

 " perhaps you eat more bread and milk than Johnny do , " say Aunt Emma , 
 very solemnly too , " however , most likely Johnny 's stocking will 
 stretch . how be the baby , Johnny ? " 

 " she be a great deal well , ma'am , " say the little boy , smile at she . 
 Milly and Olly make he feel shy , but he love Aunt Emma . 

 " have you be take care of she all the morning for mother ? " 

 " yes , ma'am , and she be never cry but once , " say Johnny proudly . 

 " well do ! ah ! there come Mrs. Tyson . now , Olly , sit up on that chair , 
 and we will see to you . " 

 Off come the dirty stocking , and Mrs. Tyson slip on a pair of woolen 
 sock that tickle Olly very much . they be very thick , and not a bit 
 like his own stocking ; and when he get up again he keep turn round 
 and round to look at his leg , as if he could not make they out . 

 " do they feel funny to you ? " say Mrs. Tyson , pat his shoulder . 
 " never you mind , little master ; I know they be nice and warm , for I 
 knit they myself . " 

 " Mother buy our stocking in the shop , " say Olly , when they get 
 outside again ; " why do not Mrs. Tyson ? " 

 " perhaps we have not so many shop , or such nice one here , Olly , as you 
 have at Willingham ; and the people here have always be use to do a 
 great many thing for themselves . some of they live in such lonely 
 place among the mountain that it be very difficult for they to get to 
 any shop . not very long ago the mother use to make all the stuff for 
 their own dress and their child 's . what would you say , Milly , if 
 mother have to weave the stuff for it every time you have a new dress ? " 

 " mother would not give I a great many new dress , " say Milly , gravely , 
 shake her head . " I like shop well , Aunt Emma . " 

 " well , I suppose it be good to like what we have get , " say Aunt Emma , 
 laugh . 

 indoor , Olly 's muddy stocking be give to Aunt Emma 's maid , who 
 promise to have they wash and dry by the time they have to go home , 
 and then , when Mrs. Norton have cover up the black spot on his frock 
 with a clean pinafore she have bring with she , Olly look quite 
 respectable again . 

 the child think they have never see quite such a nice house as Aunt 
 Emma 's . first of all it have a large hall , with all kind of corner in 
 it , just make for play hide - and - seek in ; and the drawing - room be 
 full of the most delightful thing . there be stuff bird in case , 
 and little ivory chessman rid upon ivory elephant . there be 
 picture - book , and there be mysterious drawer full of card and 
 puzzle , and glass marble and old - fashioned toy , that the child 's 
 mother and aunt and uncle , and their great - aunt and uncle before 
 that , have love and play with year and year ago . on the wall hang a 
 great many picture , some of they of funny little stiff boy in blue 
 coat with brass button , and some of they of little girl with mob - cap 
 and mitten , and these little boy and girl be all either dead now , 
 or elderly man and woman , for they be the great - aunt and uncle ; and 
 over the mantelpiece hang a picture of a lovely old lady , with bright , 
 soft brown hair and smile eye and lip , that look as if they be 
 just go to speak to the two strange little child who have come for 
 their first visit to their mother 's old home . milly know quite well that 
 it be a picture of great - grandmamma . she have see other like it 
 before , only not so large as this one , and she look at it quietly , 
 with her grave blue eye , while Olly be eagerly wander round the 
 room , spy into everything , and long to touch this , that , and the 
 other , if only mother would let go his hand . 

 " you know who that be , do not you , little woman ? " say Aunt Emma , take 
 she up on her knee . 

 " yes , " say Milly , nodding , " it be great - grandmamma . I wish we could have 
 see she . " 

 " I wish you could , Milly . she would have smile at you as she be smile 
 in the picture and you would have be sure to have love she ; all 
 little child do . I can remember see your mother , Milly , when she 
 be about as old as you , cuddle up in a corner of that sofa over there , 
 in ' grandmamma 's pocket , ' as she use to call it , listen with all her 
 ear to great - grandmamma 's story . there be one story call ' Leonora ' 
 that go on for year and year , till all the little child in 
 it -- and the little child who listen to it -- be almost grow up ; 
 and then great - grandmamma always carry about with she a wonderful 
 blue - silk bag full of treasure , which we use to be allow to turn out 
 whenever any of we have be quite good at our lesson for a whole week . " 

 " Mother have a bag like that , " say milly ; " it have lot of little toy in 
 it that father have when he be a little boy . she let we look at it on 
 our birthday . can you tell story , Aunt Emma ? " 

 " tell we about old Mother Quiverquake , " cry Olly , run up and 
 climb on his aunt 's knee . 

 " oh dear , no ! " say Aunt Emma ; " it be much too fine to - day for 
 story -- indoor , at any rate . wait till we get a real wet day , and then 
 we will see . after dinner to - day , what do you think we be go to do ? 
 suppose we have a row on the lake to get water - lily , and suppose we 
 take a kettle and make ourselves some tea on the other side of the lake . 
 what would you say to that , Master Olly ? " 

 the child begin to dance about with delight at the idea of a row and 
 a picnic both together , when suddenly there be a knock at the door , and 
 when Aunt Emma say , " come in ! " what do you think appear ? why , a great 
 green cage , carry by a servant , and in it a gray parrot , swing 
 about from side to side , and cock his head wickedly , first over one 
 shoulder and then over the other . 

 " now , child , " say Aunt Emma , while the child stand quite still 
 with surprise , " let I introduce you to my old friend , Mr. Poll Parrot . 
 perhaps you think I live all alone in this big house . not at all . 
 here be somebody who talk to I when I talk to he , who sing and 
 chatter and whistle and cheer I up wonderfully in the winter 
 evening , when the rain come and make I feel dull . put he down here , 
 Margaret , " say Aunt Emma to the maid , clear a small table for the 
 cage . " now , Olly , what do you think of my parrot ? " 

 " can it talk ? " ask Olly , look at it with very wide open eye . 

 " it _ can _ talk ; whether it _ will _ talk be quite another thing . parrot 
 be contradictious bird . I feel very often as if I should like to beat 
 Polly , he be so provoking . now , Polly , how be you to - day ? " 

 " Polly be get a bad cold ; fetch the doc-- " say the bird at once , in such 
 a funny crack voice , that it make olly jump as if he have hear one of 
 the witch in Grimm 's " Fairy Tales " talk . 

 " come , Polly , that be very well behave of you ; but you must not leave off 
 in the middle , begin again . olly , if you do not keep your finger out of 
 the way polly will snap they up for his dinner . parrot like finger 
 very much . " olly put his hand behind his back in a great hurry , and 
 mother come to stand behind he to keep he quiet . by this time , 
 however , Polly have begin to find out that there be some new people in 
 the room he do not know , and for a long time Aunt Emma could not make 
 he talk at all . he would do nothing but put his head first on one side 
 and then on the other and make angry click with his beak . 

 " come , Polly , " say Aunt Emma , " what a cross parrot you be . 
 one -- two -- three -- four . now , Polly , count . " 

 " Polly be get a bad cold , fetch the doc-- " say Polly again while Aunt 
 Emma be speak . " one -- two -- six -- seven -- eight -- nine -- two--_Quick _ 
 march ! " 

 and then Polly begin to lift first one claw and then the other as if he 
 be march , while the child shout with laughter at his 
 ridiculous way and his gruff crack voice . 

 then Aunt Emma go behind he and rap gently on the table . the 
 parrot stop marching , stick his head on one side and listen . Aunt 
 Emma rap again . 

 " come in ! " say the parrot suddenly , quite softly , as if he have turn 
 into quite another person . " hush -- sh -- sh , cat 's get a mouse ! " 

 " well , Polly , " say Aunt Emma , " I suppose she may have a mouse if she 
 like . be that all you have get to tell we ? polly , where 's gardener ? " 

 " get away ! get away ! " scream polly , while all his feather begin to 
 stand up straight , and his eye look fierce and red like two little 
 live coal . 

 " that always make he cross , " say Aunt Emma ; " he can not bear gardener . 
 come , Polly , do not get in such a temper . " 

 " oh , be not he like the witch on the broom - stick in our fairy - book , 
 Olly ? " cry milly . " do not you think , Aunt Emma , he must have be 
 change into something ? perhaps he be a wicked witch once , or a 
 magician , you know , and the fairy change he into a parrot . " 

 " well , Milly , I can not say . he be a parrot when I have he first , twelve 
 year ago . that be all I know about it . but I believe he be very old . some 
 people say he be old than I be -- think of that ! so you see he be have time 
 to be a good many thing . well , polly , good - night . you be not a nice 
 bird to - night at all . take he away , Margaret . " 

 " jane ! jane ! " scream polly , as the maid lift up the cage again . 
 " make haste , Jane ! cat 's in the larder ! " 

 " oh , you bad polly , " say Aunt Emma , " you be always tell tale . 
 Jane be my cook , Milly , and Polly do not like cat , so you see he try 
 to make Jane believe that our old cat steal the meat out of the larder . 
 good - bye , Polly , good - bye . you be an ill - natured old bird , but I be very 
 fond of you all the same . " 

 " do get we a parrot , mother ! " say Olly , jump about round his mother , 
 when Polly be go . 

 " how many more thing will you want before you get home , Olly , do you 
 think ? " ask his mother , kiss he . " perhaps you will want to take home 
 a few mountain , and two or three little river , and a bog or two , and a 
 few sheep -- eh , young man ? " 

 by this time dinner be ready , and there be the dinner - bell ringing . up 
 run the child to Aunt Emma 's room to get their hand wash and their 
 hair brush , and presently there be two tidy little folk sit on 
 either side of Aunt Emma 's chair , and think to themselves that they 
 have never feel quite so hungry before . but hungry as Milly be she 
 do not forget to look out of the window before she begin her dinner , and 
 it be worth while look out of the window in Aunt Emma 's dining - room . 

 before the window be a green lawn , like the lawn at ravensn , only 
 this lawn go slop away , away till there be just a little rim of 
 white beach , and then beyond come the wide , dance blue lake , that the 
 child have see from the top of the mountain . here it be close to 
 they , so close that milly could hear the little wave plash , through 
 the open window . 

 " milly , " whisper Aunt Emma when they be all wait for pudding , " do 
 you see that little house down there by the water 's edge ? that be where 
 the boat live -- we call it a boathouse . do you think you will be 
 frightened of the water , little woman ? " 

 " no , I do not think so , " say Milly , shake her little wise head 
 gravely . " I be frightened sometimes , very . mother call I a little 
 goose because I run away from Jenny sometimes -- that be our cow at home , 
 Aunt Emma , but then she be get such long horn , and I can not help feel 
 afraid . " 

 " well , the lake have not get horn , Milly , " say Aunt Emma , laugh , " so 
 perhaps you will manage not to be afraid of it . " 

 how kind and nice Aunt Emma look as she sit between the child , with 
 her pretty soft gray hair , and her white cap and large white collar . 
 Mrs. Norton could not help think of the time when she be a little 
 girl , and use always to insist on sit by Aunt Emma at dinner - time . 
 that be before Aunt Emma 's hair have turn gray . and now here be she 
 own little child sit where she use to sit at their age , and 
 steal their small hand into Aunt Emma 's lap as she use to do so 
 long ago . 

 after dinner the child have to sit quiet in the drawing - room for a 
 time , while Aunt Emma and father and mother talk ; but they have 
 picture - book to look at , and Aunt Emma give they leave to turn out 
 everything in one of the toy - drawer , and that keep they busy and happy 
 for a long time . but at last , just when Olly be begin to get tire 
 of the drawer , Aunt Emma call to they from the other end of the room 
 to come with she into the kitchen for a minute . up jump the child 
 and run after their aunt across the hall into the kitchen . 

 " now , child , " say Aunt Emma , point to a big basket on the kitchen 
 table , " suppose you help I to pack up our tea - thing . olly , you go and 
 fetch the spoon , and , Milly , bring the plate one by one . " 

 the tea thing be all pile up on the kitchen table , and the child 
 bring they one after another to Aunt Emma to pack they carefully into 
 the big basket . 

 " be not I a useful boy , Aunt Emma ? " ask olly proudly , come up laden 
 with a big table - cloth which he could scarcely carry . 

 " very useful , Olly , though our table - cloth will not look over tidy at tea 
 if you crumple it up like that . now , Milly , bring I that tray of bread 
 and the little bundle of salt ; and , Olly , bring I that bit of butter 
 over there , do up in the green leaf , but mind you carry it 
 carefully . now for some knife too ; and there be the cup and saucer , 
 milly , look , in that corner ; and there be the cake all ready cut up , and 
 there be the bread and butter . now have we get everything ? everything , I 
 think , but the kettle , and some wood and some match , and these must go 
 in another basket . " 

 " Aunt Emma , " say Milly , creep up close to she , " be you ever a 
 fairy godmother ? " 

 " not that I know of , Milly . would you like I well if I have a wand and 
 a pair of pet dragon , like old Fairy Blackstick ? " 

 " no , " say Milly , stroke her aunt 's hand , " but you do such nice 
 thing , just like fairy godmother do . " 

 " do I , little woman ? Aunt Emma like do nice thing for good 
 child . but now come along , it be quite time we be off . let we go 
 and fetch father and mother . Gardener will bring the basket . " 

 such a merry party they be , troop down to the boathouse . there lie 
 the boat ; a pretty new boat , paint dark blue , with a little red flag 
 float at her bow , and her name , " Ariel , " write in large white 
 letter on the stern . and all around the boathouse stretch the 
 beautiful blue water , so clear and sunny and sparkle that it dazzle 
 Milly 's eye to look at it . she and Olly be lift into the boat 
 beside Aunt Emma and mother , father sit in the middle and take the oar , 
 while gardener put the basket into the stern , and then , untie the 
 rope which keep the boat tie into the boathouse , he give it a good push 
 with one hand and off she go out into the blue lake , rise up and 
 down on the water like a swan . 

 " oh ! mother , mother , look up there , " shout Olly , " there be the 
 mountain . be not that where we climb up this morning ? " 

 yes , there it be , the beautiful green rocky mountain , rise up above 
 Aunt Emma 's house . they could see it all so clearly as they get far 
 out into the lake ; first the blue sky , then the mountain with the little 
 white dot on it , which Milly know be sheep ; then some tree , and in 
 front , Aunt Emma 's house with the lawn and the boathouse . and as they 
 look all round they they could see far big and grander mountain 
 than Brownholme , some near and green like Brownholme , and some far away 
 and blue like the sky , while down by the edge of the lake be hayfield 
 full of flower , or bit of rock with tree grow on the top of they . 
 the child hardly know what it be make they so quiet ; but I think it 
 be because everything be so beautiful . they be really in the 
 hill - fairy ' palace now . 

 " be not there any water - fairy in this lake , mother ? " whisper Milly , 
 presently , look down into the clear blue water , and try to see the 
 bottom . 

 " I can not tell , Milly , I never see any . but there use to be 
 water - fairy in old day . after tea suppose we ask Aunt Emma to tell we 
 a story about a king in olden time whom the water - fairy love ; she 
 use to tell it to I when I be small , and I like it well of all 
 story . but , Olly , you must sit still , or the boat will go tip over 
 to one side , and father will not be able to row . " 

 " do let I row , father , " beg Olly . 

 " not yet , old man -- I must get use to the boat first , and find out how 
 to manage she , but presently you shall come and try , and so shall Milly 
 if she like . " 

 on they row , far and far from the shore , till Aunt Emma 's 
 house begin to look quite small , and they could hardly see the gardener 
 work on the lawn . 

 " Father , what a long way we have come , " cry milly , look all round . 
 " where be we go to ? " 

 " well , presently , Milly , I be go to turn the boat a little bit , so as 
 to make she go over to that side of the lake over there . do you see a 
 big rock with some tree on it , far away , stick out into the lake ? " 

 " yes , " say the child , look very hard . 

 " well , that be where we be go to have tea . it be call Birdsnest 
 Point , because the rock come out in a point into the lake . but first I 
 think I would bring you right out into the middle of the lake , that 
 you might see how big it be , and look at the mountain all round . " 
 " Father , " say Olly , " if a big stone fall down out of the sky and make 
 ever such a big hole in the boat , and the water come into the hole , 
 should we all be dead ? " 

 " I daresay we should , Olly , for I do not think I could carry mother , and 
 Aunt Emma , and Milly , and you on my back , safe home again , and you see 
 none of you can swim but I . " 

 " then I hope a big stone will not come , " say milly , feel just a little 
 bit frightened at Olly 's suggestion . 

 " well , big stone do not grow in the sky generally , Milly , if that be any 
 comfort to you . but do you know , one day long ago , when I be out row 
 on this lake , I think all of a sudden I hear some one shout and 
 screaming , and for a long time I look and wait , but could see 
 nothing ; till at last I fancy I could see , a long distance off , what 
 look like a pole , with something white tie to it . and I row , and 
 row , and row , as fast as I could , and all the time the shouting and 
 screaming go on , and at last what do you think I see ? I see a boat , 
 which look as if something be drag it down into the water . part 
 of it have already sink down into the lake , and in the part which be 
 still above the water there be three people sit , a gentleman , and 
 two little girl who look about ten year old . and they be shout 
 ' help ! help ! ' at the top of their voice , and wave an oar with a 
 handkerchief tie to it . and the boat in which they sit be sink 
 far and far into the water , and if I had'n't come up just when I 
 do , the gentleman and the two little girl would have be drown . " 

 " oh , father ! " cry Milly , " what make their boat do like that ? and do 
 they get into your ? " 

 " there be a great hole in the bottom of their boat , Milly , and the 
 water be come through it , and make the boat so heavy that it be 
 sink down and down into the lake , just as a stone would sink if you 
 throw it in . how the hole come there we never quite know : I think they 
 must have knock their boat against a sharp rock -- in some part of the 
 lake there be rock under the water which you can not see -- and the rock 
 have make the hole ; but other people think it have happen in some 
 other way . however , there they be , and when I take they all into my 
 boat you never see such miserable little creature as the two little 
 girl be . they be wet through , they be as white as little ghost , 
 and when they be safe in my boat they begin to cry and shake so , poor 
 little soul , though their father and I wrap they up in our coat , 
 that I do want their mother to come and comfort they . " 

 " oh , but , father , you take they safe home to their mother , do not you ? 
 and do tell I what she say . " 

 " they have no mother , Milly , they have only their father , who be with 
 they . but he be very good to they , and I think on the whole they be 
 happy little girl . the Christmas after that I get a little parcel one 
 morning , and what do you think be in it ? why , two photograph of the 
 same little girl , look so neat and tidy and happy , I could hardly 
 believe they be really the same as the little drowned rat I have 
 pull out of the water . ask mother to show you the picture when we get 
 home ; she have they somewhere . now , Olly , would you like to row ? " 

 " oh , father , do not bump against any rock , " say Milly , whose thought 
 be very full of the little girl . 

 " do not you trouble your head about rock , old woman . I know a good deal 
 more about this lake than those little girl ' father do , and I will not 
 take you into any harm . come along , Olly . " 

 Olly be help along the boat by mother and Aunt Emma till his father 
 catch hold of he and pull he on to his seat , where he let he put 
 his two small paw on one of the oar , and try what he could do with it . 
 Mr. Norton pull too ; but olly think it be all his doing , and that 
 it be really he who be make the boat go . 

 " do not we go fast , father ? " he cry out presently , his little face 
 flush with pleasure and excitement . " you could not row so fast without 
 I , could you , father ? " 

 " you little fly - on - the - wheel , " say his father , smile at he . 

 " what do that mean , father ? " 

 " never mind , you will know when you be big . but now look , child , how 
 close we be come to the shore . and quick , Milly , quick ! what do you 
 see over there ? " 

 Mr. Norton point over the water to a place where some green rush 
 be stand up out of the water , not very far from the edge . what be 
 those great white and gold thing shin among the rush ; and what 
 be those large round green leaf lie on the water all about they ? 

 " water - lily ! water - lily ! " cry Milly , stamp her little foot with 
 delight . " oh , mother , look ! it be on one of those leaf that the old 
 toad put little tiny in my fairy - book , do not you remember ? only the 
 little fish come and bite off the stalk and set she free . oh , I wish we 
 could see little tiny sit on one of those leaf ! " 

 " well , " say Aunt Emma , " there be no saying what you may find in these 
 part if you look long enough . this be a very strange country . but now , 
 milly , look out for the lily . Father 's go to take we in among they , 
 and I will hold you , while you gather they . " 

 and presently , swish go the boat up against the rush , and there be 
 the lovely white lily lie spread out on the water all round they , 
 some quite open and show their golden middle , and some still bud , 
 with their wet green case just fall off , and their white petal 
 begin to unclose . but what slippery stalk they have . Aunt Emma hold 
 Milly , and father hold Olly , while they dive their hand under the 
 water and pull hard . and some of the lily come out with such short 
 bit of stalk you could scarcely hold they , and sometimes , flop ! out 
 come a long green stalk , like a long green snake curling and twisting 
 about in the boat . the child dabble , and splash , and pull , to 
 their heart ' content , till at last Mr. Norton tell they they have get 
 enough and now they must sit quite still while he row they in to the 
 land . 

 " oh , father , just those two over there ! " plead Milly , who could not 
 bear leave so many beauty behind . 

 " no , Milly , no more . look where the sun be now . if we do not make haste 
 and have our tea , we shall never get back to ravensnest to - night . " 

 Milly 's face look as if it would like to cry , as the boat begin to 
 move away from the rush , and the beautiful lily be leave behind . I 
 tell you , to begin with , that Milly be ready to cry oftener than a 
 sensible little girl should . but Aunt Emma be not go to have any 
 cry at her picnic . 

 " who be go to gather I stick to make my fire ? " she say suddenly , in 
 a solemn voice . 

 " I be ! I be ! " shout both the child at once , and out come Milly 's 
 smile again , like the sun from behind a cloud . 

 " and who be go to lay the table - cloth ? " 

 " we be ! we be ! " 

 " and who be go to hand the bread and butter ? " 

 " I be ! " exclaim Milly , " and olly shall hand the cake . " 

 " and who be go to _ eat _ the bread and butter ? " 

 " all of we ! " shout the child , and Milly add , " Father will want a 
 _ big _ plate of bread and butter , I daresay . " 

 " I should think he would , after all this rowing , " say Mr. Norton . " now 
 then , look out for a bump ! " 

 [ illustration : " so they put olly up on a tall piece of rock , and he 
 sing . " ] 

 bump ! Splash ! there be the boat scrap along the pebble near the 
 shore ; out spring Mr. Norton , first on to a big stone , then on to the 
 shore , and with one great pull he bring the boat in till it be close 
 enough for Aunt Emma and Mrs. Norton to step on to the rock , and for 
 the child to be lift out . 

 " oh ! what a nice place ! " cry milly , look about she , and clap 
 her hand , as she always do when she be pleased . it be a point of 
 rock run out into the lake , a " peninsula " milly call it , when she 
 have be all round it , and it be cover with brown heather spread all 
 over the ground , and be delightfully soft and springy to sit upon . in 
 the middle of the bit of rock there be two or three tree stand up 
 together , birch tree with silvery stem , and on every side but one 
 there be shallow brown water , so clear that they could see every stone 
 at the bottom . and when they look away across the lake , there be the 
 grand old mountain push their head into the cloud on the other 
 side , and far away near the edge of the lake they see a white dot which 
 they know be Aunt Emma 's house . how the sun shine on everything ! how it 
 make the water of the lake sparkle and glitter as if it be alive ! and 
 yet the air be not hot , for a little wind be come to they across the 
 water , and move the tree gently up and down . 

 and what be this under the tree ? why , a kind of fireplace make of 
 stone , and in front of it a round green bit of grass , with tuft of 
 heather all round it , just like a table with seat . 

 " who put these stone here , Aunt Emma ? " ask Olly , as she and mother 
 and Mr. Norton bring up the basket , and put they in the green place 
 by the stone . 

 " well , Olly , long ago , when all your uncle and aunt be little , and 
 they use to come here for picnic , they think it would be very nice 
 to have a stone fireplace , build up properly , so that they need not make 
 one every time . it be Uncle Richard 's idea , and we have such fun 
 build it up . the little one bring the stone ; and the big one 
 pile they together till you see we make quite a nice fireplace . and it 
 have last ever since . whenever I come here I mend it up if any of the 
 stone have tumble down . number of little child come to picnic here 
 every summer , and they always use our fireplace . but now , come along 
 into the wood , child , and gather stick . " 

 off they run after Aunt Emma , and soon they be scramble about the 
 wood which grow along the shore , pick up the dry stick and dry fern 
 under the tree . milly fill her cotton frock full , and gather it up 
 with both her hand ; while olly of course go straight at the big 
 branch he could see , and stagger along with it , puff and panting . 

 " you grasshopper , you ! " say Mr. Norton , catch hold of he , " do not 
 you think you would well try a whole tree next time ? there , let I break 
 it for you . " Father break it up into short length , and then off run 
 Olly with his little skirt full to Aunt Emma , who be laden too with an 
 armful of stick . " that will do to begin with , old man . come along , and 
 you and I will light the fire . " 

 what fun it be , heap up the stick on the stone , and how they do 
 blaze and crackle away when Aunt Emma put a match to they . puff ! puff ! 
 out come the smoke ; fizz -- crack -- sputter -- go the dry fir branch , as 
 if they be Christmas firework . 

 " have not we make a blazey fire , Aunt Emma ? " say Olly , out of breath 
 with drag up stick , and stand still to look . 

 " Splendid , " say Mr. Norton , who have just come out of the wood with his 
 bundle . " now , Olly , let I just put you on the top of it to finish it 
 off . how you would fizz ! " 

 Off run Olly , with his father after he , and they have a romp among the 
 heather till Mr. Norton catch he , and carry he kick and laugh 
 under his arm to Aunt Emma . 

 " now , Aunt Emma , shall I put he on ? " 

 " oh dear , no ! " say Aunt Emma , " my kettle would not sit straight on he , 
 and it be just boil beautifully . we will put he on presently when the 
 fire get low . " 

 " Olly , do come and help mother and I with the tea - thing , " cry Milly , 
 who be lay the cloth as busily and gravely as a little housemaid . 

 " run along , shrimp , " say his father , set he down . 

 and off run Olly , while Mr. Norton and Aunt Emma heap the wood on the 
 fire , and keep the kettle straight , so that it should not tip over and 
 spill . 

 lay the cloth be delightful , Milly think . first of all , they put a 
 heavy stone on each corner of the cloth to keep it down , and prevent the 
 wind from blow it up , and then they put the little plate all round , 
 and in the middle two pile of bread and butter and cake . 

 " but we have not get any flower , " say Milly , look at it presently , 
 with a dissatisfied face , " you always have flower on the table at home , 
 mother . " 

 " why , Milly , have you forget your water - lily ; where do you leave 
 they ? " 

 " down by the water , " say Milly . " Father tell I just to put their 
 stalk in the water , and he put a stone to keep they safe . oh ! that will 
 be splendid , mother . do give I a cup , and we will get some water for 
 they . " 

 Mother find a cup , and the child scramble down to the edge of the 
 lake . there lie the lily with their stalk in the water , close to the 
 boat . 

 " they look rather sad , mother , do not they ? " say Milly , gather they 
 up . " perhaps they do not like be take away from their home . " 

 " they never look so beautiful out of the water , " say mother ; " but when 
 we get home we will put they into a soup - plate , and let they swim about in 
 it . they will look very nice then . now , Olly , fill the cup with water , and 
 we will put five or six of the big in , and gather some leaf . " 

 " there , look ! look ! Aunt Emma , " shout Milly , when they have put the 
 lily and some fern leaf in the middle of the table . " have not we make 
 it beautiful ? " 

 " that you have , " say Aunt Emma , come up with the kettle which have 
 just boil . " now for the tea , and then we be ready . " 

 " we never have such a nice tea as this before , " say Olly , presently 
 look up from a piece of bread and butter which have keep he quiet for 
 some time . " it be nice than have dinner at the railway station even . " 

 Aunt Emma and mother laugh ; for it do not seem so delightful to 
 grown - up people to have dinner at the railway station . 

 " well , Olly , " say mother , " I hope we shall often have tea out of door 
 while we be at ravensn . " 

 milly shake her head . " it will rain , mother . that old gentleman say it 
 would be sure to rain . " 

 " that old gentleman be about right , Milly , " say Mr. Norton . " I think it 
 rain dreadfully here , but mother do not seem to mind it a bit . once 
 upon a time when mother be a little girl , there come a funny old fairy 
 and throw some golden dust in her eye , and ever since then she can not 
 see straight when she come to the mountain . it be all right everywhere 
 else , but as soon as she come here , the dust begin to fly about in her 
 eye , and make the mountain look quite different to she from what they 
 look to anybody else . " 

 " let I look , mother , " say Olly , pull she down to he . 

 Mrs. Norton open her eye at he , smile . 

 " I can not see any dust , father . " 

 " ah , that be because it be fairy dust , " say Mr. Norton , gravely . " now , 
 Olly , do not you eat too much cake , else you will not be able to row . " 

 " it will be my turn first , father , " say Milly , " you know I have not row 
 at all yet . " 

 " well , do not you catch any crab , Milly , " say Aunt Emma . 

 " catch crab , Aunt Emma ! " say Milly , very much puzzle . " crab be only 
 in the sea , be not they ? " 

 " there be a very big kind just about here , " say Mr. Norton , " and they be 
 always look out for little child , particularly little girl . " 

 " I do not understand , father , " say Milly , open her eye very wide . 

 " have some more tea , then , " say Mr. Norton , " that always make people 
 feel wise . " 

 " Father , be not you talk nonsense ? " say Olly , stop in the middle 
 of a piece of cake to think about what his father be say . 

 " very likely , Olly . People always do at picnic . Aunt Emma , when be you 
 go to tell we your story ? " 

 " when we have wash the thing and put they away , " say Aunt Emma , " then 
 olly shall sing we two song , and I will tell you my story . " 

 but the child be so hungry that it be a long time before they give 
 up eat bread and butter , and then , when at last tea be over , what 
 fun it be wash the cup and plate in the lake ! Aunt Emma and Olly 
 wash , and mother and Milly dry the thing on a towel , and then 
 everything be pack away into the basket , and mother and Aunt Emma 
 fold up the table - cloth , and put it tidily on the top of everything . 

 " I do like that , " say Milly , sigh as the last basket be fasten 
 down . " I wish you would let I help Sarah wash up the tea - thing at home , 
 mother . " 

 " if Sarah like to let you , I should not say no , Milly , " say Mrs. 
 Norton . " how soon would you get tired of it , old woman , I wonder ? but 
 come along , let us put olly up on a rock , and make he sing , and then 
 we will have Aunt Emma 's story . " 

 so they put olly up on a tall piece of rock , and he sing " the Minstrel 
 Boy , " and " Bonnie Dundee , " and " Hot Cross Buns , " just as if he be a 
 little musical box , and you have nothing to do but to wind he up . he have 
 a sweet , clear , little voice , and he look a delightful brown gipsy , as 
 he sit perch up on the rock with his long leg dangle , and his curl 
 blow about his face . 

 " there ! " say Olly , when he have shout out the last note of " Hot Cross 
 Buns . " " I have sing three whole song ; and now , Aunt Emma , tell we 
 about the king and the fairy . Krick , please . " 

 " it must be ' krick ' indeed , " say Aunt Emma , " if we want to get home 
 to - night . " 

 for the sun have almost sink behind the mountain at their back , and the 
 wind blow across the lake be begin to get a little cold , while 
 over their head the rook go fly , sing " caw , caw , " on their way 
 to bed . and how the sun be turn the water to gold ! it seem to be 
 make a great golden pathway across the lake , and the mountain be 
 turn a deep blue , and plash , plash , go the little wave on the 
 rock , so softly they seem to be say " good - night ! good - night ! " 

 " well , " say Aunt Emma , settle herself on a soft piece of heather , and 
 put her arm round Milly and Olly , " once upon a time there be a 
 great king . he be a good king and a wise man , and he try to make all 
 the people round about he wise and well than they be before he 
 come to rule over they ; and for a long time he be very powerful and 
 happy , and he and the brave man who help he and be his friend do 
 a great deal of good , and keep the savage people who live all about he 
 in order , and teach they a great many thing . but at last some of the 
 savage people get tired of obey the king , and they say they would 
 not have he to reign over they any more ; so they make an army , and they 
 come together against the king to try and kill he and his friend . and 
 the king make an army too , and there be a great battle ; and the savage 
 people be the strong , and they kill nearly all the king 's brave 
 man , and the king himself be terribly hurt in the fight . and at last , 
 when night come on , there be leave only the king and one of his 
 friend -- his knight , as they be call . the king be hurt so much 
 that he could not move , and his friend think he be die . they be 
 leave alone in a rocky desert place , and close by there be a great lake 
 with mountain round it -- like this , Olly . it be very cold , and the moon 
 be shin , and the king lie so still that once or twice his friend 
 almost think that he be dead . but at last , about the middle of the 
 night , he begin to speak , and he tell his friend to take his sword that 
 be by his side and to go down to the side of the lake and throw it as 
 far as he could into the water . now , this sword be a magic sword . long 
 before , the king be once walk beside this lake , when he suddenly see 
 an arm in a long white sleeve rise out of the lake , and in the hand at 
 the end of it be a splendid sword with a glistening handle . and the 
 king get into a boat and row as fast as he could till he get near 
 enough to take hold of the sword , and then the arm sink down under the 
 water and be see no more . and with the sword the king win a great many 
 battle , and he love it , and never would part with it ; but now that he 
 be die , he tell his friend to take the sword and throw it back into 
 the lake where he have find it , and see what would happen . and his 
 friend take it , and go away over the rock till he come to the edge of 
 the lake , and then he take the sword out of its case and swing it above 
 his head that he might throw it far into the water ; but as he lift it 
 up the precious stone in the handle shine so splendidly in the 
 moonlight that he could not make up his mind to throw it into the water , 
 it seem such a pity . so he hide it away among the rush by the water 
 side , and go back to the king . and the king say , ' what do you see by 
 the lake ? ' 

 " and the knight say , ' I see nothing except the water , and the 
 mountain , and the rush . ' 

 " and the king say , ' oh , unkind friend ! why will you not do as I ask 
 you , now that I be die and can do nothing for myself ? go back and 
 throw the sword into the lake , as I tell you . ' 

 " and the knight go back , and once more he lift the sword to throw it 
 into the water but it look so beautiful that he _ could _ not throw it 
 away . there would be nothing leave , he think , to remember the king by 
 when he be dead if he throw away the sword ; so again he hide it among 
 the rush , and then he go back to the king . and again the king ask , 
 ' what do you see by the lake ? ' and again the knight answer , ' I see 
 nothing except the water and the mountain . ' 

 " ' oh , unkind , false friend ! ' cry the king , ' you be cruell to I 
 than those who give I this wound . go back and throw the sword into the 
 water , or , weak as I be , I will rise up and kill you . ' 

 " back go the knight , and this time he seize the sword without look 
 at it , so that he should not see how beautiful it be , and then he swing 
 it once , twice , thrice , round his head , and away it go into the lake . 
 and as it fall , up rise a hand and arm in a long white sleeve out of the 
 water , and the hand catch the sword and draw it down under the water . 
 and then for a moment , all round the lake , the knight fancy he hear a 
 sound of sobbing and weeping , and he think in his heart that it must 
 be the water - fairy weep for the king 's death . 

 " ' what do you see by the lake ? ' ask the king again , when he come 
 back , and the knight tell he . then the king tell he to lift he up and 
 carry he on his back down to the edge of the lake , and when they get 
 there , what do you think they see ? " 

 but the child could not guess , and milly press Aunt Emma 's hand 
 hard to make she go on . 

 " they see a great black ship come slowly over the water , and on the 
 ship be number of people in black , sob and cry , so that the 
 air be full of a sound of weeping , and in front sit three queen in 
 long black dress , and with gold crown on their head , and they , too , 
 be weep and wring their hand . 

 " ' lift I up , ' say the king , when the ship come close beside they , ' and 
 put I into the ship . ' and the knight lift he up , while the three 
 queen stretch out their hand and draw he into the ship . 

 " ' oh , king ! take I with you , ' say the knight , ' take I too . what shall 
 I do all alone without you ? ' but the ship begin to move away , and the 
 knight be leave stand on the shore . only he fancy he hear the 
 king 's voice say , ' wait for I , I shall come again . farewell ! ' 

 " and the ship go fast and fast away into the darkness , for it be 
 a fairy ship , till at last the knight could see it no more . so then he 
 know that the king have be carry away by the fairy of the lake -- the 
 same fairy who have give he the sword in old day , and who have love 
 he and watch over he all his life . but what do the king mean by 
 say , ' I shall come again ' ? " 

 then Aunt Emma stop and look at the child . 

 " what do he mean , auntie ? " ask Milly , who have be listen with all 
 her ear , and whose little eye be wet , " and do he ever come back 
 again ? " 

 " not while the knight live , Milly . he grow to be quite an old man , and 
 be always hop that the fairy would bring the king again . but the 
 king never come , and his friend die without see he . " 

 " but do he _ ever _ come again ? " ask Olly . 

 " I do not know , Olly . some people think that he be still hide away 
 somewhere by the kind water - fairy , and that some day , when the world 
 want he very much , he will come back again . " 

 " do you think he be here in this lake ? " whisper Milly , look at the 
 water . 

 " how can we tell what be at the bottom of the lake ? " say Aunt Emma , 
 smile . " but no , I do not think the king be hide in this lake . he 
 do not live near here . " 

 " what be his name ? " ask Milly . 

 " his name be King Arthur . but now , child , hurry ; there be father 
 put all the basket into the boat . we must get home as quick as we 
 can . " 

 they row home very quickly , except just for a little time when Milly 
 row , and they do not go quite so fast as if father be row alone . 
 it be quite evening now on the lake , and there be great shadow from 
 the mountain lie across the water . somehow the child feel much 
 quieter now than when they start in the afternoon . milly have curl 
 herself up inside mother 's arm , and be think a great deal about King 
 Arthur and the fairy ship , while Olly be quite take up with watch 
 the oar as they dip in and out of the water , and occasionally ask 
 his father when he should be big enough to row quite by himself . it 
 seem a very little time after all before they be step out of the 
 boat at Aunt Emma 's boathouse , and the picnic and the row be both 
 over . 

 " good - bye , dear lake , " say Milly , turn with her hand full of 
 water - lily to look back before they go up to the house . " good - night , 
 mountain ; good - night , Birdsnest Point . I shall soon come and see you 
 again . " 

 a few minute more , and they be safely pack into a carriage which 
 drive they back to ravensn , and Aunt Emma be say good - bye to 
 they . 

 " next time , I shall come and see you , Milly , " she say , as she kiss 
 Milly 's little sleepy face . " do not forget I till then . " 

 " then you will tell we about old Mother Quiverquake , " say Olly , hug 
 she with his small arm . " Aunt Emma , I have not give Johnny back his 
 stocking . they do tickle I so in the boat . " 

 " we will get they some time , " say Aunt Emma . " good - night , good - night . " 

 it be a sleepy pair of child that nurse lift out of the carriage 
 at ravensn . and though they try to tell she something about it , she 
 have to wait till next morning before she could really understand 
 anything about their wonderful day at Aunt Emma 's house . 




 CHAPTER VI 

 WET day AT ravensnest 


 for about a week after the row on the lake the weather be lovely , and 
 milly wonder more than ever what the old gentleman who warn they of 
 the rain in the mountain could have be think about . she and Olly 
 be out all day , and nearly every afternoon nurse lift the tea - table 
 through the low nursery window on to the lawn , and let they have their 
 tea out of door among the flower and tree and twitter bird . they 
 have find out a fly - catcher 's nest in the ivy above the front door , and 
 every evening the two child use to fetch out their father to watch 
 the parent bird catch fly and carry they to the hungry little 
 one , whom they could just hear chirp up above the ivy . Olly be wild 
 to get the gardener 's ladder that he might climb up and look into the 
 nest , but Mr. Norton would not have it lest it should frighten away the 
 old bird . 

 one delicious warm morning , too , the child have their long - promise 
 bathe , and what fun it be . Nurse wake they up at five o'clock in the 
 morning -- fancy wake up as early as that!--and they slip on their 
 little blue bathing gown , and their sand shoe that mother have buy 
 they in Cromer the year before , and then nurse wrap they up in 
 shawl , and she and they and father go down and open the front door 
 while everybody else in the house be asleep , and slip out . what a 
 quiet strange world it seem , the grass and the flower dripping with 
 dew , and overhead such a blue sky with white cloud sail slowly about 
 in it . 

 " why do not we always get up at five o'clock , father ? " ask Olly , as he 
 and Milly skip along -- such an odd little pair of figure -- beside Mr. 
 Norton . " be not it nice and funny ? " 

 " very , " say Mr. Norton . " still , I imagine Olly , if you have to get up 
 every day at five o'clock , you might think it funny , but I be sure you 
 would not always think it nice . " 

 " oh ! I be sure we should , " say Milly , seriously . " why , father , it be just 
 as if everything be ours and nobody else 's , the garden and the river I 
 mean . be there _ anybody _ up yet do you think -- in those house ? " and 
 milly point to the few house they could see from the ravensn 
 garden . 

 " I can not tell , Milly . but I will tell you who be sure to be up now , and 
 that be John Backhouse . I should think he be just begin to milk the 
 cow . " 

 " oh then , Becky and Tiza'll be up too , " cry Milly , dance about . " I 
 wish we could see they . somehow it would be quite different see they 
 now , father . I feel so queer , as if I be somebody else . " 

 if you have ever be up _ very _ early on a summer morning , you will know 
 what Milly mean , but if not I can hardly explain it . such a pretty 
 quiet little walk they have down to the river . nobody on the road , nobody 
 in the field , but the bird chatter and the sun shin , as if they 
 be have a good time all to themselves , before anybody wake up to 
 interrupt they . Mr. Norton take the child down to the 
 step - stone , and then , while milly and nurse stay on the bank he 
 lift Olly up , and carry he to the middle of the stepping - stone , 
 where the water would about come up to his chest . Mr. Norton have already 
 take off his own shoe and stocking , and when they come to the middle 
 stone , he put olly down on the stone , and step into the water 
 himself . " now , Olly , give I your hand and jump in . mind , it will feel 
 very cold . " 

 olly shut his eye , and open his mouth , as he always do when he feel 
 just a little frightened , and then in he go ; splash ! ugh ! it be so 
 cold -- much cold than the sea use to feel -- but after a few splash 
 olly begin to get use to it , and to think it fine fun . 

 " oh , father , fetch Milly , and then we will all dance about , " entreat 
 Olly . 

 " come , Milly , " call Mr. Norton . " try whether you can manage the 
 step - stone by yourself . " so Milly come , hold up her bathing 
 dress , and step from one big stone to another with a very grave 
 face , as if she feel that there would be an end of she altogether if she 
 tumble in . and then , splash ! in she jump by the side of Olly , and 
 after a little shiver or two she also begin to think that the river be 
 a delightful bathing place , almost as nice as the sea , perhaps in some 
 way nice , because it be such a strange and funny one . they dance and 
 splash about in the brown sparkling water till they be tired , and at 
 last Olly stop to take breath . 

 " I should think the fish must be frightened of we , " he say , peer 
 down into the river . " I can not see any , father . " 

 " well , they would not choose to swim about just where little child be 
 shout and caper . the fish be hide safe away under the bank 
 and the big stone . besides , it be go to be a very hot day , and they 
 like the shady bit of the river . just here there be no shade . " 

 suddenly there be a great commotion in the river , and when Mr. Norton 
 look round for a second he could see nothing of Milly , till up come a 
 dripping head and a pair of hand , and there be Milly kneel on the 
 stone at the bottom of the river , with just her head above water , 
 look very much astonished and rather frightened . 

 " why , what happen , old woman ? " say Mr. Norton , hold out his hand 
 to help she up . 

 " I -- I -- don't quite know , father ; I be stand on a big stone , and all 
 of a sudden it tip up , and I tumble right in . " 

 " first of all I think you be a big fish , and then I think you be 
 go to be drown , " say Olly , cheerfully . " I be glad you be not 
 drown . " 

 " Miss Milly ! Miss Milly ! " shout nurse from the bank , " it be quite time 
 you come out now . if you stay in so long you will get cold , and you , too , 
 Master Olly . " 

 Olly be not inclined to come . he would have like to go on dabble and 
 splash till breakfast - time , but Mr. Norton hurry he out , and the 
 two dripping little creature be well wrap up in large shawl which 
 nurse have bring with she . then nurse take up olly in her arm , and 
 father take up Milly , who be small and light for her age , and they set 
 off up the bit of road to the house . by this time it be past six 
 o'clock , and whom should they meet at the ravensn gate but John 
 Backhouse , with Becky and Tiza , and his two dog . he be just bring 
 the milk , and both he and his child look as brisk and wide awake as 
 if they have be up and about for hour . 

 Milly and Olly be very much excited at the sight of they , and Olly 
 struggle hard to get down , but nurse hold he tight . 

 " oh , Becky ! we have have such a nice bathe , " cry milly , as she pass 
 they muffle up in her shawl , her little wet foot dangle out . 

 Becky and Tiza look longingly after they as they disappear into the 
 house . they wish they could have have a bathe too , but they know very 
 well that their hard - work father and mother have something else to do 
 on a fine summer 's morning than to take they to bathe , and in a few 
 minute they have forget all about it , and be busy play with the 
 dog , or chatter to their father about the hay - making , which be soon 
 to begin now . 

 that evening there be strange cloud at sunset time , and Mr. Norton 
 shake his head as he hear Mrs. Norton arrange to take the child next 
 day to a small mountain village near Ravensnest , to call on some old 
 friend of her . 

 " I would not make much of a plan for to - morrow if I be you , " he say to 
 his wife , " the weather do not look promising . " 

 " oh , father ! " say Milly , protest . " there be some red cloud over 
 there -- look ! and Nana always say it be go to be fine when there be 
 red cloud . " 

 " well , Milly , your red cloud may be right and I may be wrong . we shall 
 see . " 

 but , alas ! father be quite right . when milly wake up next morning there 
 be no nice sunshine creep on to her bed as it have do almost ever 
 since they come to ravensnest ; but instead there be rain beat 
 steadily against the window , come down out of a heavy gray sky , and 
 look as if it mean to go on for ever . 

 " oh dear ! " sigh Milly , as she begin to dress , " we can not go out , and 
 the wild strawberry will get so wet . I mean to have gather some for 
 mother to - day . there would have be such nice one in the wood . " 

 but it be no use think about wood or strawberry , and when Mrs. 
 Norton come into the child 's room just as they be finish 
 breakfast , she find a pair of dull little face star out at the 
 rain , as if look at it would make it stop . 

 " nasty rain , " say Olly , climb up on his mother 's knee . " go to Spain . 
 I do not want you to come and spoil my nicey time . " 

 " I be afraid scold the rain will not make it go away , " say his mother , 
 smile into his brown face as he kneel on her lap , with his arm round 
 her neck . " now what be we go to do to - day ? " 

 " I do not know , " say Milly , sit down opposite her mother , and 
 rest her face gravely on her hand . " well , we bring _ some _ toy , 
 you know , mother . Olly 's get his top ; I can help he spin it , and I can 
 play with Katie a bit . " 

 " that will not take very long , " say Mrs. Norton . " suppose we do some 
 lesson first of all . " 

 " oh , mother , lesson ! " say Milly , in a very doubtful voice . 

 " it be holiday , mother , it be holiday , " cry olly . " I do not like 
 lesson -- not a bit . " 

 " well , but , Olly , think a bit ; you can not spin your top and look at 
 picture - book all day , and I be afraid it be go to rain all day -- it 
 look very like it . if you come and do some reading and count with I 
 this morning , I can give you some spill to make , or some letter to 
 tear up for I afterwards . that will save the toy for this afternoon ; 
 and some time this afternoon , if it do not stop rain , we will all 
 have a romp . and as for you , milly , do not you think it be quite time 
 Katie have a new frock ? I believe I can find a beautiful bit of blue silk 
 in my bag , and I be sure nurse will show you how to make it . " 

 Milly 's face brighten up very much at this , and the two child go 
 skip upstairs to the drawing - room after their mother , in very fair 
 spirit again . olly do some reading , while Milly write in her copybook , 
 and then Olly have his counting - slate and try to find out what 6 and 4 
 make , and 5 and 3 , and other little sum of the same kind . he yawn a 
 good deal over his reading , and be quite sure several time that h - a - y 
 spelt " ham , " and s - a - w spelt " be , " but still , on the whole , he get 
 through very well . Milly write her copy , then she learn some verse of 
 a poem call " Lucy Gray , " and last of all mother find she a big map of 
 Westmoreland , the county in which the mountain be , and they have a most 
 delightful geography lesson . Mother pretend to take Milly a drive all 
 about the mountain , and make she find out their name , and the name of 
 the town and the lake , begin with Lake Windermere . olly be 
 interested too , for Mrs. Norton tell they a great many thing about the 
 place , and make quite a story out of it . 

 [ illustration : " he be quite sure that h - a - y spelt ' ham ' and s - a - w spelt 
 ' be . ' " ] 

 " why , mother , I never could go all that long way all at once--_really _ , 
 could I ? " ask Milly , when they have be all round the mountain , in 
 and out and round about . 

 " no , Milly , not quite , " say Mrs. Norton , laugh , " but it be very easy 
 to go a long way in a pretendy drive . it would only take we about ten 
 minute that way to get to the other side of the world . " 

 " how long would it take really ? " ask Olly . 

 " about three month . " 

 " if we could fly up , and up , ever so far , " say Olly , stand on 
 tiptoe , and stretch out his little arm as high as they would reach , 
 " it would not take we long . mother , do not you wish you be a bird ? " 

 " no , I do not think so , Olly ; why do you ? " 

 " because I should like to go so _ krick _ . mother , the fly - catcher do fly 
 so krick ; I can not see they sometimes when they be fly , they go so 
 fast . oh , I do wish father would let I get up a ladder to look at 
 they . " 

 " No Olly , you will frighten they , " say Milly , put on her wise face . 
 " besides , father say you be too little , and you would tumble down . " 

 olly look as if he do not believe a word of it , as he generally do 
 when milly talk wisely to he ; but just then he find that mother have 
 put into his lap a whole basketful of letter to tear up , and that 
 interested he so much that he forget the fly - catcher . Nurse cut out a 
 most fashionable blue dress for Katie , and Milly be quite happy all the 
 rest of the morning in run up the seam and hem the bottom . so 
 the morning pass away . after dinner there be the toy to play with , 
 and Katie 's frock to try on , for nurse have take a turn at the body 
 while Milly have be make the skirt . it fit very well , and Milly 
 have only the band to put on and the sleeve to make before it would be 
 quite finish . then nurse promise to put a little white lace round the 
 neck , and cut out a blue sash , that Katie might be quite turn into an 
 elegant young lady . Tea come very soon , and when it be clear away 
 father and mother come into the big kitchen without a fireplace , next to 
 the child 's room , and they all have a splendid romp . Mr. Norton make 
 himself into a tiger , with a tiger - skin in the hall , that Uncle Richard 
 have bring home from India , and olly shoot he all over with a 
 walking - stick from the tip of his nose to the tip of his tail . when they 
 be tired of this , mother set they to play hide - and - seek , and milly hide 
 herself in such out - of - the - way cupboard , and squeeze herself into such 
 small corner , that mother say she be like a needle in a bundle of 
 hay -- there be no find she . 

 seven o'clock come before they have time to think about it , and the 
 child go chatter and skip up to bed , though on fine evening 
 they have be stay up much later . how the rain do rattle on the 
 window while they be undressing . 

 " oh , you tiresome rain , " say Milly , stand by the window in her 
 nightdress , and gaze up into the sky . " where do it all come from , I 
 wonder ? will not it be wet to - morrow , Nana ? and oh , what be that roar 
 over there ? " 

 " that be the beck , " say nurse , who be brush Olly 's hair , and try 
 hard to make he stand still for two minute . 

 " the beck ! why , what be the matter with it ? " 

 " it be the rain have make it so full I suppose , " say nurse . " to - morrow , 
 gardener say , it will be over the lawn if the rain go on . " 

 " oh , but it must not go on , " say Milly . " now , rain , dear rain , good 
 rain , do go away to - night , right away up into the mountain . there be 
 plenty of room for you up there , and down here we do not want you a bit . 
 so do be polite and go away . " 

 but the rain do not see any good reason for go away , in spite of 
 Milly 's pretty speech , and next morning there be the same patter on 
 the window , the same gray sky and dripping garden . after breakfast there 
 be just a hope of its clearing up . for about an hour the rain seem to 
 get less and the cloud a little bright . but it soon come on again as 
 fast as ever , and the poor child be very much disappointed . 

 " Mother , " say Milly , when they have settle down to their lesson again 
 in the drawing - room , " when we get back to Willingham , do you know what I 
 shall do ? " 

 " no , Milly . " 

 " I shall ask you to take I to see that old gentleman -- you know who I 
 mean -- who tell you about the rain . and I shall say to he , ' please , Mr. 
 Old Gentleman , at first I think you be quite wrong about the rain , 
 but afterwards I think you be quite right , and it do rain 
 dreadfully much in the mountain . ' " 

 " very well , Milly . but you have only just have a taste of what the rain 
 can do in the lake you know , so far . Father and I have be here 
 sometimes when it have rain two or three week without stop . " 

 " oh dear ! " say Milly , look extremely melancholy . " I like the 
 mountain very much , mother ; but _ do _ you think we would well come to 
 Ravensnest again after this year ? " 

 " oh you ungrateful little woman ! " say Mrs. Norton , whose love for the 
 place be so real that Milly 's speech give she quite a pang . " have you 
 forget all your happy sunshiny day here , just because it have rain 
 for two ? why , when I be a little girl , and use to come here , the rainy 
 day never make I love the place a bit the less . I always use to think 
 the fine day make up . " 

 " but then , mother , you be a nice little girl , " say Milly , throw 
 her arm round her mother 's neck and kiss she . " now , I do not feel a 
 bit nice this morning . it make I so cross not to be able to go out and 
 get flower and wild strawberry . and you know at home it hardly ever 
 rain all day . " 

 " Gardener say sometimes it rain all over the road , " interrupt olly , 
 " and people can not walk along , and they have to go right up on the 
 mountain to get past the water place . and sometimes they have to get a 
 boat to take people across . do you think we shall have to go in a boat 
 to church on Sunday , mother ? " 

 " well , we be a long way off that yet , Olly . it will take a good many 
 day ' rain to flood the road so deep that we can not get along they , and 
 this be only the second rainy day . come , I do not think we have get much 
 to complain of . now suppose , instead of do all your lesson this 
 morning , you be presently to write to Jacky and Francis -- you write to 
 Jacky , Milly , and Olly to Francis . do not you think that would be a good 
 thing ? " 

 " oh yes , yes ! " cry Milly , shut up her copybook in a great hurry . 
 " they will be so much astonish , mother , for we do not _ promise _ to write 
 to they . I do not believe they ever get any letter . " 

 the child have a great deal of affection and some secret pity for 
 these playfellow of theirs , who have a sick mother , and who do not get 
 half the pleasure and amusement that they do . and , as I have already 
 tell you , they could not bear Miss Chesterton , the little boy ' aunt , 
 who live with they . they feel sure that Jacky and Francis must be 
 unhappy , only because they have to live with Miss Chesterton . 

 this be Milly 's letter when it be do . milly could only write very 
 slowly , in rather big hand , so that her letter be never very long : 

     MY DEAR JACKY -- don't you think it very odd get a letter from 
     I ? it be nearly a fortnight since we come here . at first it be 
     _ very _ nice . we go up the mountain , and Aunt Emma take we in 
     a boat on the lake . and we gather some wild strawberry , only 
     some of they be quite white -- not red a bit . but now it have 
     begin to rain , and we do not like it at all . perhaps we sha'n't 
     be able to get home because the rain will cover up the road . it 
     be _ very _ dull stay in , only mother make we such nice play . 
     good - bye , Jacky . I send my love to Francis . mind you do not 
     forget we . 

     your love little friend , 
     MILLY . 

 Olly write a much long letter , that be to say , mother write for he , 
 and he tell she what to say , and as this be a much easy way of 
 writing than Milly 's way , he get on very fast , and Mrs. Norton have to 
 write as quickly as she could , to keep up with he . and this be what 
 Olly have to say : 

     MY DEAR FRANCIS -- I wonder what you will say to - morrow morning 
     when the postman bring you this letter . I hope you will write 
     back , because it will not be fair if you do not . it be not such fun 
     here now because it do rain so . milly and I be always tell 
     the rain to go away , but it won't -- though it do at home . last 
     week we go out in a boat , and I row . I row a great way , 
     much far than Milly . we go very slow when milly row . it 
     be very jolly at the picnic . Aunt Emma give I some cake , and 
     mother give I some bread and jam . Nana will not let we have cake 
     and jam both , when we have tea at home . Aunt Emma tell we a 
     story about King Arthur . I do not believe you ever hear it . the 
     water - fairy take he away , and his friend want to go too , 
     but the king say ' no ! you must stop behind . ' milly cry 
     because she feel sad about the king . I do not cry , because I be a 
     little boy . Mother say you will not understand about the story , 
     and she say we must tell it you when we get home . so we will , 
     only perhaps we sha'n't remember . do you do lesson now ? we 
     do not do any -- only when it rain . Milly 's write a letter to 
     Jacky -- mine be much long than her . 

     your little friend , 
     OLLY . 

 then come the putting up the letter , address they , and stamp 
 they , all of which the child enjoy very much , and by the time they 
 be lay on the hall table ready to go to the post it be nearly 
 dinner - time . 

 how the beck do roar that afternoon . and when the child look out 
 from the drawing - room window they could see a little flood on the lawn , 
 where the water have come over the side of the stream . while they be 
 have their tea , with mother sit by , work and chatter to 
 they , they hear a knock at the door , and when they open it there be 
 father stand in the unused kitchen , with the water run off his 
 waterproof coat , make little stream all over the stone floor . 

 " I have be down to look at the river , " he say to Mrs. Norton . " keep 
 off , child ! I be much too wet to touch . such rain ! it do know how 
 to come down here ! the water be over the road just by the 
 step - stone . John Backhouse say if it go on another twenty - four 
 hour like this , there will be no get to Wanwick by the road , on 
 foot . " 

 " Father , " say Milly , look at he with a very solemn face , " would not 
 it be dreadful if it go on rain and raining , and if the river come 
 up and up , right up to the drive and into the hall , and we all have to 
 sit upstairs , and the butcher could not bring we any meat , and John 
 Backhouse could not bring we any milk , and we all _ die _ of hunger . " 

 " then they would put we into some black box , " say Olly , cheerfully , 
 with his mouth full of bread and butter , " and they would put the black 
 box into some boat , and take we right away and bury we 
 krick -- wouldn't they , mother ? " 

 " well , but-- " say Mr. Norton , who have by this time get rid of his wet 
 coat , and be seat by Milly , help himself to some tea , " suppose we 
 get into the boat before we be dead , and row away to windermere 
 station ? " 

 " oh no ! father , " say Milly , who always like her story to be as 
 gloomy as possible , " they would not know anything about we till we be 
 dead you know , and then they would come and find we , and be _ very _ sorry for 
 we , and say , ' oh dear ! oh dear ! what a pity ! ' " 

 Olly begin to look so dismal as Milly 's fancy grow more and more 
 melancholy , that Mrs. Norton take to laugh at they all . what do they 
 know about Westmoreland rain indeed . this be nothing -- just nothing at 
 all ; she _ could _ remember some flood in the wintertime , when she be a 
 little girl , and use to stay with Aunt Emma and great - grandmamma ; but 
 as for this , why , it be a good summer wetting , and that be all . 

 a romp send the child to bed in excellent spirit again . this time 
 both Milly and Olly stand at the window together , and tell the rain to 
 be sure to go to Spain that night , and never come back again while they 
 be at ravensn . 

 " or you might go to Willingham , you know , dear Mr. Rain , " say milly ; " I 
 daresay mother 's flower want a good watering . and there be Spot -- you 
 might give she a good washing -- she _ can _ wash herself , but she will not . 
 only we do not want you here , Mr. Rain . " 

 but what an obstinate disagreeable Mr. Rain it be ! all that night it 
 go on pour , till the little beck in the garden be so full it be 
 almost choke , and could only get along by sputtering and foaming as if 
 some wicked water - fairy be drive it along and torment it . and 
 all the little pool on the mountain , the " tarn , " as Becky and Tiza 
 call they , fill up , and the rain make the mountain itself so wet 
 that it be like one big bog all over . 

 when the child wake up the flood on the lawn be grow big , and 
 it seem to they as if the house and garden be all wrap up in a 
 wet white cloud - blanket . they could not see the mountain at all from the 
 window , it be all cover with a thick white mist , and the dark fir 
 tree in the garden look sad and droop , as if the weight of 
 raindrop be too much for they to carry . 

 the child have make up their mind so completely the night before that 
 it _ could not _ rain more than two day run , that they feel as if they 
 could hardly be expect to bear this third wet morning cheerfully . 
 Nurse find they cross and out of spirit at breakfast . even a prospect 
 of ask Becky and Tiza to tea do not bring any smile to their 
 forlorn little face . it would be no fun have anybody to tea . they 
 could not go out , and there be nothing amusing indoor . 

 after breakfast , olly set to work to get into mischief , as he generally 
 do when he feel dull . Nurse discover he smear Katie 's cheek with 
 raspberry jam " to make they get red kricker " as he say , and alas ! some 
 of the jam have stick to the new silk frock , and spoilt all its smart 
 fresh look . 

 when milly find it out she begin to cry , and when Mrs. Norton come in 
 she see a heap on the floor , which be Milly , sob , while olly sit 
 beside she with his mouth wide open , as if he be a good deal astonish 
 at the result of his first attempt at doctoring . 

 " pick up the piece , old woman , " say Mrs. Norton , take hold of the 
 heap and lift it up . " what be the matter with you both ? " 

 " Olly 's spoilt my doll , " sob Milly , " and it _ will _ go on raining -- and 
 I feel so -- so -- dull . " 

 " I do not spoil her doll , mother , " cry olly , eagerly . " I only rub 
 some jam on its cheek to make they a nicey pink -- only some of it 
 _ would _ sticky her dress -- I do not mean to . " 

 " how would you like some jam rub on your cheek , sir ? " say Mrs. 
 Norton , who could scarcely help laugh at poor Katie 's appearance when 
 nurse hand the doll to she . " suppose you leave Milly 's doll alone for 
 the future ; but cheer up , Milly ! I think I can make Katie very nearly 
 right again . come upstairs to my room and we will try . " 

 after a good deal of sponge and rub , and careful dry by the 
 kitchen fire , Katie come very nearly right again , and then Mrs. Norton 
 try whether some lesson would drive the rain out of the child 's 
 head . but the lesson do not go well . it be all milly could do to 
 help cry every time she get a figure wrong in her sum , and Olly take 
 about ten minute to read two line of his reading - book . Olly have just 
 begin his sum , and Milly be stand up to say some poetry to her 
 mother , look a woebegone little figure , with pale cheek and heavy 
 eye , when suddenly there be a noise of wheel outside , and both the 
 child turn to look out of the window . 

 " a carriage ! a carriage ! " shout Olly , jump down , and run to the 
 window . 

 there , indeed , be one of the shut - up " car , " as the Westmoreland people 
 call they , come up the ravensn drive . 

 " it be Aunt Emma , " say Mrs. Norton , start up , " how good of she to 
 come over on such a day . Run , child , and open the front door . " 

 down fly Milly and Olly , tumble over one another in their hurry ; but 
 father have already throw the door open , and who should they see 
 step down the carriage - step but Aunt Emma herself , with her soft 
 gray hair shin under her veil , and her dear kind face as gentle and 
 cheery as ever . 

 " Aunt Emma ! Aunt Emma ! " shout Olly , dance up to she , and throw 
 his arm round she , " _ be _ you come to tell we about old Mother 
 Quiverquake ? " 

 " you gipsy , do not strangle I ! well , Lucy dear , here I be . will you have 
 I to dinner ? I think we would all be company for each other this bad day . 
 why , Milly , what have you be do to your cheek ? " 

 " she be be cry , " say Olly , in spite of Milly 's pull he by the 
 sleeve to be quiet , " because I stickene her doll . " 

 " well , and quite right too . doll be not make to be stickie . but now , 
 who be go to carry my bag upstairs ? take it gently , Milly , it be get my 
 cap inside , and if you crumple my cap I shall have to sit with my head 
 in a bandbox at dinner . old lady be _ never _ see without their cap 
 you know . the most dreadful thing would happen if they be ! olly , you 
 may put my umbrella away . there now , I will go to mother 's room and take 
 off my thing . " 




 CHAPTER VII 

 a STORY - telling game 


 when Aunt Emma be safely settle , cap and all , in one of the 
 drawing - room arm - chair , it seem to the child as if the rain and 
 the gray sky do not matter nearly so much as they have do half an hour 
 before . in the first place , her come make something new and 
 interesting to think about ; and in the second place , they feel quite 
 sure that Aunt Emma have not bring she little black bag into the 
 drawing - room with she for nothing . if only her cap have be in it , why 
 of course she would have leave it in mother 's bedroom . but here it be in 
 her lap , with her two hand fold tight over it , as if it contain 
 something precious ! how very puzzling and interesting ! 

 however , for a long time it seem as if Aunt Emma have nothing at all to 
 say about her bag . she begin to tell they about her drive -- how in two 
 place the horse have to go splash through the water , and how once , 
 when they be cross a little river that run across the road , the 
 water come so far up the wheel that " I put my head out of the window , " 
 say Aunt Emma , " and say to my old coachman , ' now , John , if it be go 
 to get any deep than this , you would well turn he round and go home , 
 for I be an old woman , not a fish , and I can not swim . of course , if the 
 horse can swim with the carriage behind he it be all right , but I have 
 my doubt . ' now John , my dear , have be with I a great many year , and 
 he know very well that I be rather a nervous old woman . it be very sad , 
 but it be so . do not you be nervous when you be old people . so all he 
 say be ' all right , ma'am . bless you , he can swim like a trout . ' and 
 crack go the whip , splash go the water ! it seem to I it be just 
 go to come in under the door , when , lo and behold ! there we be safe 
 and sound on dry ground again . but whether my old horse swam through or 
 walk through I can not tell you . I like to believe he swam , because I be 
 so fond of he , and one like to believe the creature one love can do 
 clever thing . " 

 " I will ask John when he come to take you away , Aunt Emma , " say Olly . " I 
 do not believe horse can swim when they be in a carriage . " 

 " you be a matter - of - fact monkey , " say Aunt Emma . " dear I , what be 
 that ? " 

 for a loud squeak have suddenly startle the child , who be now 
 look about they everywhere in vain , to find out where it come from . 
 Squeak ! again . this time the voice certainly come from near Aunt Emma 's 
 chair , but there be nothing to be see . 

 " what a strange house you live in , " say Aunt Emma , with a perfectly 
 grave face . " you must have catch a magician somehow . that be a 
 magician 's squeak . " 

 again come the noise ! 

 " I know , I know ! " shout Olly . " it be Aunt Emma 's bag ! I be sure it come 
 out of the bag . " 

 " my bag!"--holde it up and look at it . " now do it look like a bag 
 that squeak ? it be a perfectly well - behave bag , and never do such a 
 thing in its life . " 

 " I know , Aunt Emma , " say Olly , dance round she in great excitement . 
 " you have get the parrot in there ! " 

 " well now , " say Aunt Emma . " this be really serious . if you think I be 
 such a cruel old woman as to shut up a poor poll - parrot in a bag , 
 there be no help for it , we must open the bag . but it be a very curious 
 bag -- I would not stand too near it if I be you . " 

 Click ! go the fastening of the bag , and out jump -- what do you think ? 
 why , the very big frog that be ever see , in this part of the world 
 at any rate , a green speckled frog , that hop on to Aunt Emma 's knee , 
 and then on to the floor , where it go hop and squeak along the 
 carpet , till all of a sudden , when it get to the door , it turn over on 
 its back , and lie there quite quiet with its leg in the air . 

 the child follow it with look half of horror , half of amazement . 

 " what be it , Aunt Emma ? be it alive ? " ask Milly , jump on to a chair 
 as the frog come near she , and draw her little skirt tight round her 
 leg , while Olly go cautiously after it , with his hand on his knee , 
 one step at a time . 

 " you would well ask it , " say Aunt Emma , who have at last begin to laugh a 
 little , as if it be impossible to keep grave any long . " I be sure it 
 look very peaceable just now , poor thing . " 

 so the child creep up to it , and examine it closely . yes , it be a 
 green speckled frog , but what it be make of , and whether it be alive , 
 and if it be not alive how it manage to hop and squeak -- these be the 
 puzzle . 

 " take hold of it , milly , " say Mr. Norton , who have just come up from his 
 work , and be stand laugh near the door . " turn it over on its leg 
 again . " 

 " no , I will turn it , " cry Olly , make a dash , and turn it over in a 
 great hurry , keep his leg and foot well out of the way . Hop ! squeak ! 
 there it be off again , right down the room with the child after it , 
 till it suddenly come up against a table leg , and once more turn over 
 on its back and lie quite still . 

 " oh , Aunt Emma , be it a toy ? " ask Milly , who now feel brave enough to 
 take it up and look at it . 

 " well , Milly , I believe so -- a very lively one . bring it here , and I will 
 tell you something about it . " 

 so the child bring it very cautiously , as if they be not quite 
 sure what it would do next , and then Aunt Emma explain to they that 
 she have once pay a visit to a shop in London where japanese toy -- toy 
 make in the country of Japan -- far away on the other side of the 
 world -- be sell , and that there she find master froggy . 

 " and there never be such a toy as froggy for a wet day , " say Aunt 
 Emma . " I have try he on all sort of boy and girl , and he never 
 fail . he be as good a cure for a cross face as a poultice be for a sore 
 finger . but , Milly , listen ! I declare there be something else go on in 
 my bag . I really think , my dear bag , you might be quiet now that you 
 have get rid of froggy ! what can all this chattering be about ? sh ! sh ! " 
 and Aunt Emma hold up her finger at the child , while she hold the bag 
 up to her ear , and listen carefully . olly be almost beside himself 
 with excitement , but Milly have get his little brown hand tight in her 
 for fear he should make a jump at the bag . " yes , " say Aunt Emma . " it be 
 just as I think . the bag declare it be not his fault at all , but that 
 if I will give he such noisy creature to carry I must take the 
 consequence . he say there be a whole family now inside he , make such 
 a noise he can hardly hear himself speak . it be enough , he say , to drive 
 a respectable bag mad , and he must blow up if it go on . dear I ! I 
 must look into this . milly , come here ! " 

 milly come near , and Aunt Emma open the bag solemnly . 

 " now , Milly , I will hold it for fear it should take it into its poor head 
 to blow up , and you put your hand in and see what you can find . " 

 so milly put her hand in , feel a good deal excited as to what might 
 happen -- and what do you think she bring out ? a whole handful of the 
 most delicious dolls:--cardboard doll of all sort and kind , like 
 those in mother 's drawer at home ; paper doll , mamma doll , little boy 
 doll and little girl doll , baby doll and nurse doll ; doll in suit 
 and doll in frock ; doll in hat and doll in nightgown ; a papa in 
 trouser and a mamma in a magnificent blue dress with flounce and a 
 train ; a nurse in white cap and apron and the most bewitch baby doll 
 you ever see , with a frille paper cap that slip on and off , and a 
 white frock with pink ribbon . and the good of these doll be , that 
 each of they have a piece of cardboard fasten on behind and a little 
 bit of cardboard to stand on , so that when you spread out the piece 
 behind they stand up as naturally as possible , and look as if they 
 be go to talk to you . 

 " oh , Aunt Emma , dear Aunt Emma ! " cry Milly , beside herself with 
 delight as she spread they all out in her lap . " they be just like 
 mother 's at home , mother 's that you make for she when she be a little 
 girl -- only ever so many more . " 

 " well , Milly , I make mother 's for she long ago , when it rain for day 
 and day without stop , and she have grow tired of pretty nearly 
 everything and everybody indoor ; and now I have be spend part of 
 these rainy day in make a new set for mother 's little girl . there , 
 dear little woman , I think you must have give I a kiss for each of 
 they by this time . suppose you try and make they stand up . " 

 " but , Aunt Emma , " say Olly , who be busy examine the mysterious 
 bag -- how could the doll talk ? they be only paper . " 

 " I know nothing about it , " answer Aunt Emma , rescue the bag , and 
 put it safely under her chair . " you _ might _ ask the bag -- but it 
 would not answer you . magical bag never do talk except to their master 
 or mistress . " 

 so Olly have to puzzle it out for himself while he play with the 
 japanese frog . that be an extraordinary frog ! you should have see 
 nurse 's start when olly hide himself in the passage and send the frog 
 hopping and squeak through the open door of the night nursery , where 
 nurse be sit sewing ; and as for cook , when the creature come 
 flop over her kitchen floor she very nearly spoil the hash she be 
 make for dinner by drop a whole pepper - box into the middle of it ! 
 there be no end to the fun to be get out of froggy , and Olly amuse 
 himself with it the whole of the morning , while Milly go through long 
 story with her doll upstairs , help every now and then by Aunt Emma , 
 who sit knitting and talk to mother . 

 at dinner the child have to sit quiet while Mr. and Mrs. Norton and 
 Aunt Emma talk . Father and mother have be almost as much cheer up 
 by Aunt Emma 's come as the child themselves , and now the 
 dinner - table be lively with pleasant talk ; talk about book , and talk 
 about picture , and talk about foreign place , and talk about the 
 mountain and the people live near Ravensnest , many of whom mother have 
 know when she be a little girl . milly , who be old enough to listen , 
 could only understand a little bit here and there ; but there be always 
 Aunt Emma 's friendly gentle face to look at , and her soft old hand in 
 its black mitten , to slip her own little finger into ; while Olly be so 
 take up with the prospect of the black - currant pudding which he have 
 see cook make in the morning , and the delight of it when it come , 
 that it seem no trouble to he to sit still . 

 as for the rain , there be not much difference . perhaps there be a few 
 break in the cloud , and it might be beat a little less heavily on 
 the glass conservatory outside the dining - room , still , on the whole , the 
 weather be much the same as it have be . it be wonderful to see how 
 little notice the child have take of it since Aunt Emma come , and 
 when they escort she upstairs after dinner , they quite forget to rush 
 to the window and look out , as they have be do the last three day 
 at every possible opportunity . 

 the child get she safe into a chair , and then Olly bring a stool to 
 one side of she , and milly bring a stool to the other . 

 " _ now , _ can you remember about old Mother Quiverquake ? " say Olly , 
 rest his little sunburnt chin on Aunt Emma 's knee , and look up to 
 she with eager eye . 

 [ illustration : " ' suppose we have a story - tell game ' " ] 

 " well , I daresay I shall begin to remember about she presently ; but 
 suppose , child , we have a _ story - tell game _ . we will tell 
 story -- you and Olly , father , mother , and everybody . that be much fairer 
 than that one person should do all the telling . " 

 " we could not , " say milly , shake her head gravely , " we be only little 
 child . little child can not make up story . " 

 " suppose little child try , " say mother . " I think Aunt Emma 's be an 
 excellent plan . now , father , you will have to tell one too . " 

 " Father 's lazy , " say Mr. Norton , come out from behind his newspaper . 
 " but , perhaps , if you all of you tell very exciting story you may stir 
 he up . " 

 " oh , father ! " cry Olly , who have a vivid remembrance of his father 's 
 story , though they only come very seldom , " tell we about the rat with 
 three tail , and the dog that walk on its nose . " 

 " oh dear , no ! " say Mr. Norton , " those will not do for such a grand 
 story - telling as this . I must think of some story which be all long 
 word and good child . " 

 " _ do not _ father , " say Milly , imploringly , " it be ever so much nicer when 
 they get into scrape , you know , and tumble down , and all that . " 

 " who be to begin ? " say Aunt Emma . " I think mother have well begin . 
 afterwards it will be your turn , olly ; then father , then Milly , and then 
 I . " 

 " I do not believe I have get a scrap of a story in my head , " say Mrs. 
 Norton . " it be week since I catch one last . " 

 " then look here , Olly , " say Aunt Emma , " I will tell you what to do . go up 
 gently behind mother , and kiss she three time on the top of the head . 
 that be the way to send the story in . Mother will soon begin to feel 
 one fidgeting inside her head after that . " 

 so Olly go gently up behind his mother , climb on a stool at the back 
 of her chair , and kiss she softly three time at the back of her head . 
 Mrs. Norton lie still for a few moment after the kiss , with closed 
 eye . 

 " ah ! " she say at last . " now I think I have catch one . but it be a very 
 little one , poor little thing . and yet , strange to say , though it be very 
 little , it be very old . now , child , you must be kind to my story . I 
 catch he first a great many year ago in an old book , but I be afraid 
 you will hardly care for he as much as I do . well , once upon a time 
 there be a great king . " 

 " be it King Arthur , mother ? " interrupt olly , eagerly . 

 " oh no ! this king live in a different country altogether . he live in a 
 beautiful hot country over the sea , call Spain . " 

 " oh , mother ! a _ hot _ country ! " protest Milly , " that be where the rain 
 go to . " 

 " well , Milly , I do not think you know any more about it , except that you 
 _ tell _ the rain to go there . do not you know by this time that the rain 
 never do what it be tell ? really , very little rain go to Spain , and 
 in some part of the country the people would be very glad indeed if we 
 could send they some of the rain we do not want at ravensn . but now , 
 you must not interrupt I , or I shall forget my story -- well there be 
 once a king who live in a _ very _ hot part of Spain , where they do not 
 have much rain , and where it hardly ever snow or freeze . and this king 
 have a beautiful wife , whom he love very much . but , unluckily , this 
 beautiful wife have one great fault . she be always wish for the most 
 unreasonable and impossible thing , and though the king be always 
 try to get she what she want she be never satisfied , and every day 
 she seem to grow more and more discontented and exact . at last , one 
 day in the winter , a most extraordinary thing happen . a shower of snow 
 fall in Cordova , which be the name of the town where the king and queen 
 live , and it whiten the hill all around the town , so that they 
 look as if somebody have be dust white sugar over they . now snow 
 be hardly ever see in Cordova , and the people in the town wonder at 
 it , and talk about it a great deal . but after she have look at it a 
 little - while the queen begin to cry bitterly . none of her lady could 
 comfort she , nor would she tell any of they what be the matter . there 
 she sit at her window , weeping , till the king come to see she . when he 
 come he could not imagine what she be cry about , and beg she to 
 tell he why . ' I be weep , ' she say , sob all the time , ' because 
 the hill -- be not always -- cover with snow . see how pretty they look ! 
 and yet -- I have never , till now , see they look like that . if you really 
 love I , you would manage some way or other that it should snow once a 
 year at any rate . ' 

 " ' but how can I make it snow ? ' cry the king in great trouble , because 
 she would go on weeping and weeping , and spoil her pretty eye . 

 " ' I be sure I do not know , ' say the queen , crossly , ' but you can not love 
 I a bit , or you would certainly try . ' 

 " well , the king think and think , and at last he hit upon a beautiful 
 plan . he send into all part of Spain to buy almond tree , and plant 
 they on the hill all round the town . now the almond tree , as you know , 
 have a lovely pinky - white blossom , so when the next spring arrive all 
 these thousand of almond tree come out into bloom all over the hill 
 round Cordova , so that they look at a distance as if they be cover 
 with white snow . and for once the queen be delighted , and could not 
 help say a nice ' thank you ' to the king for all the trouble he have 
 take to please she . but it be not very long before she grow 
 discontent again , and begin once more to wish for all kind of 
 ridiculous thing . one day she be sit at her window , and she see 
 some ragged little child play by the river that run round the 
 palace . they be dabble in the mud at the side , stick their little 
 bare foot into it , or scoop up piece which they roll into ball 
 and throw at one another . the queen watch they for some time , and at 
 last she begin to weep bitterly . one of her maiden run and tell the 
 king that the queen be weep , and he come in a great hurry to see 
 what be the matter . 

 " ' just look at those child down there ! ' say the queen , sob and 
 point to they . ' do you ever see anybody so happy ? why can not I have 
 mud to dabble in too , and why can not I take off my shoe and stocking , 
 and amuse myself like the child do , instead of be so dull and 
 stick - up all day long ? ' 

 " ' because it be not proper for queen to dabble in the mud , ' say the 
 poor king in great perplexity , for he do not at all like the idea of 
 his beautiful queen dabble in the mud with the little ragged child . 

 " ' that be just like you , ' say the queen , begin to cry fast than 
 ever , ' you never do anything to please I . what be the good of be 
 proper ? what be the good of be a queen at all ? ' 

 " this make the king very unhappy , and again he think and think , till 
 at last he hit upon a plan . he order a very large shallow bath of 
 white marble to be make in the palace - garden . then he pour into it all 
 kind of precious stone , and chip of sweet - smell wood , besides a 
 thousand cartload of rose - leaf and a thousand cartload of orange 
 flower . all these he order to be stir up together with a great 
 ivory spoon , till they make a kind of wonderful mud , and then he have the 
 bath fill up with scented water . 

 " ' now then , ' he say to the queen , when he have bring she down to look 
 at it , ' you may take off your shoe and stocking and paddle about in 
 this mud as much as you like . ' you may imagine that this be a very 
 pleasant kind of mud to dabble in , and the queen and her lady amuse 
 themselves with it immensely for some time . but nothing could keep this 
 tiresome queen amuse for long together , and in about a fortnight she 
 have grow quite tired of her wonderful bath . it seem as if the king 's 
 pain have be all throw away . she grow cross and discontent again , 
 and her lady begin to say to each other , ' what will she wish for next , 
 I wonder ? the king might as well try to drink up the sea as try to get 
 she all she want . ' at last , one day , when she and her lady be 
 walk near the palace , they meet a shepherdess drive a flock of sheep 
 up into the hill . the shepherdess look so pretty and bright in her 
 red petticoat and tall yellow cap , that the queen stop to speak to 
 she . 

 " ' where be you go , pretty maiden , with your woolly white sheep ? ' she 
 ask . 

 " ' I be go up to the hill , ' say the shepherdess . ' now the sun have 
 scorch up the field down below we must take our sheep up to the cool 
 hill , where the grass be still fresh and green . good - day , good - day , the 
 sheep be go so fast I can not wait . ' so on she trip , sing and 
 call to her sheep , who come every now and then to rub their soft 
 coat against she , as if they love she . the queen look after she , and 
 her face begin to pucker up . 

 " ' why be I not a shepherdess ? ' she exclaim , burst into tear . ' I 
 _ hate _ be a queen ! I never sing as merrily as that little maiden in 
 all my life . I must and will be a shepherdess , and drive sheep up into 
 the mountain , or I shall die ! " 

 " and all that night the foolish queen sit at her window crying , and when 
 the morning come she have make herself look quite old and ugly . when the 
 king come to see she he be dreadfully troubled , and beg she to tell 
 he what be the matter now . 

 " ' I want to be a shepherdess , and drive sheep up into the mountain , ' 
 sob the queen . ' why should the little shepherdess girl look always 
 so happy and merry , while I be die of dulness ? ' 

 " the king think it be very unkind of she to say she be die of 
 dulness when he have take so much trouble to get she all she want ; but 
 he know it be no good talk to she while she be in such a temper . so 
 all he say be : 

 " ' how can I turn you into a shepherdess ? these shepherdess stay out 
 all night with their sheep on the hill , and live on water and a crust 
 of bread . how would you like that ? ' 

 " ' of course I - should like it , ' say the queen , ' anything for a change . 
 besides , nothing could be nice than stay out of door these lovely 
 night . and as for food , you know very well that I be never hungry here , 
 and that it do not matter in the least to I what I eat ! ' 

 " ' well , ' say the king , ' you shall go up to the hill , if you promise to 
 take your lady with you , and if you will let I send a tent to shelter 
 you at night , and some servant to look after you . ' 

 " ' as if that would give I any pleasure ! ' say the queen , ' to be 
 follow about and wait upon be just what I detest . I will go alone ; 
 just like that pretty little shepherdess , if I go at all . ' 

 " but the king declare that nothing would induce he to let she go 
 alone . so the queen set to work to cry , and she cry for two day and 
 two night without stop , and at the end of that time the poor king 
 be ready to let she go anywhere or do anything for the sake of a little 
 peace . 

 " so she have her own way . they find she a flock of the lovely white 
 sheep , all with blue ribbon round their neck , and blue rosette on 
 their little white tail ; and the queen dress herself up in a red silk 
 petticoat and a cap embroider in gold and silver , and then she set out 
 by herself . 

 " at first it be all delightful . she drive the sheep up the soft green 
 hillside , and laugh with delight to see they nibble the fresh 
 grass , and run hither and thither after she , and after each other . 
 the evening sun shine brightly , and she sit herself down on a rock and 
 sing all the tune she know , that she might be just like the little 
 shepherdess . but while she be sing the sheep stray away , and she 
 have to run after they as fast as she could , to catch they up . this make 
 her hot and tired , so she try to make they lie down under a chestnut 
 tree , that she might rest beside they . but the sheep be not a bit 
 tired , and have no mind to rest at all . while she be call one set of 
 they together the other set run scamper off , and the queen find out 
 that she must just give up her way for once and follow theirs . on go 
 the sheep , up hill and down dale , nibble and frisk and trot to 
 their heart ' content , till the queen be wear out . 

 " at last , by the time the sun be set , the poor queen be so tired 
 that she could walk no long . down she sit , and the ungrateful sheep 
 kick up their little hind leg and trot away out of sight as fast 
 as they could trot . there she be leave on the hillside all alone . it 
 begin to get dark , and the sky , instead of be blue and clear as it 
 have be , fill with black cloud . 

 " ' oh dear ! oh dear ! ' sigh the queen , ' here be a storm come . if I 
 could only find my way down the hill , if I could only see the town ! ' 

 " but there be tree all about she , which hide the view , and soon it be 
 so dark there be nothing to be see , not even the star . and presently , 
 crash come the thunder , and after the thunder the rain -- such rain ! it 
 soak the queen 's golden cap till it be so heavy with water she be 
 oblige to throw it away , and her silk petticoat be as wet as if she 
 have be take a bath in it . in vain she run hither and thither , try 
 to find a way through the tree , while the rain blind she , and the 
 thunder deafen she , till at last she be force to sink down on the 
 ground , feel more wretched and frightened and cold than any queen 
 ever feel before . oh , if she be only safe back in her beautiful 
 palace ! if only she have the tent the king want to send with she ! but 
 there all night she have to stay , and all night the storm go on , till 
 the queen be lie in a flood , and the owl and bat , startle out of 
 their hole , go fly past she in the dark , and frightening she out 
 of her sens . when the morning come there be such a shivering , 
 crumple up queen sit on the grass , that even her own lady would 
 scarcely have know she . 

 " ' oh , husband ! husband ! ' she cry , get up and wring her cold 
 little hand . ' you will never find I , and your poor wicked wife will 
 die of cold and hunger . ' 

 " tirra - lirra ! tirra - lirra ! what be that sound in the forest ? 
 surely -- surely -- it be a hunting horn . but who could be blow it so 
 early in the cold gray morning , when it be scarcely light ? on run the 
 queen toward where the sound come from . over rock and grass she run , 
 till , all of a sudden , step out from behind a tree , come the king 
 himself , who have be look for she for hour . and then what do you 
 think the discontent queen do ? she fold her hand , and hang her 
 head , and say , quite sadly and simply : 

 " ' oh , my lord king , make I a shepherdess really . I do not deserve to be 
 a queen . send I away , and let I knit and spin for my living . I have 
 plague you long enough . ' 

 " and suddenly it seem to the king as if there have be a black speck 
 in the queen 's heart , which have be all wash away by the rain ; and he 
 take her hand , and lead her home to the palace in joy and gladness . and 
 so they live happy ever afterward . " 

 " thank you _ very _ much , mother , " say Milly , stretch up her arm and 
 draw down Mrs. Norton 's face to kiss she . " do you really think the 
 queen be never discontent any more ? " 

 " I can not tell you any more than the story do , " say Mrs. Norton . " you 
 see there would always be that dreadful night to think about , if she 
 ever feel inclined to be ; but I daresay the queen do not find it very 
 easy at first . " 

 " I would have make she be a shepherdess , " say Olly , shake his head 
 gravely . " she be not nice , not a bit . " 

 " Little Mr. Severity ! " say Aunt Emma , pull his brown curl . " it be 
 your turn next , Olly . " 

 " then Milly must kiss I first , " say Olly , look rather scared , as if 
 something he do not quite understand be go to happen to he . 

 so Milly go through the operation of kiss he three time on the 
 back of the head , and then Olly 's eye , find it do no good to stare 
 at Aunt Emma or mother , go wander all round the room in search of 
 something else to help he . suddenly they come to the window , where a 
 brown speck be dance up and down , and then Olly 's face brighten , 
 and he begin in a great hurry : 

 " once upon a time there be a daddy - long - legs-- " 

 " well , " say Milly , when they have wait a little while , and nothing 
 more come . 

 " I do not know any more , " say Olly . 

 " oh , that _ be _ silly , " say Milly , " why , that be not a story at all . shut 
 your eye tight , that be much the good way of make a story . " 

 so Olly shut his eye , and press his two hand tightly over they , and 
 then he begin again : 

 " once upon a time there be a daddy - long - legs-- " 

 another stop . 

 " be it a _ good _ daddy - long - leg ? " ask Milly , anxious to help he on . 

 " yes , " say Olly , " that be it , milly . once upon a time there be a good 
 daddy - long - legs-- " 

 " well , what do he do ? " ask Milly , impatiently . 

 " he -- he -- flewe on to father 's nose ! " say Olly , keep his hand tight 
 over his eye , while his little white tooth appear below in a broad 
 grin . 

 " and father say , ' who be that on my nose ? ' and the daddy - long - leg say , 
 ' it be I , do not you know ? ' and father say , ' get away off my nose , I 
 do not like you a bit . ' and the daddy - long - leg say , ' I shall not go away . 
 it be hot on the window , the sun get in my eye . I like sit up here 
 well . ' so father take a big sofa - cushion and give his nose _ ever _ such a 
 bang ! and the daddy - long - leg tumble down dead . and the cushion tumble 
 down dead . and father tumble down dead . and that be all , " say Olly 
 open his eye , and look extremely proud of himself . 

 " oh , you silly boy ! " cry Milly , " that be not a bit like a real story . " 

 but Aunt Emma and father and mother laugh a good deal at Olly 's story , 
 and Aunt Emma say it would do very well for such a small boy . 

 whose turn be it next ? 

 " Father 's turn ! father 's turn ! " cry the child , in great glee , 
 look round for he ; but while Olly 's story have be go on , Mr. 
 Norton , who be sit behind they in a big arm - chair , have be 
 cover himself up with sofa cushion and newspaper , till there be 
 only the tip of one of his boot to be see , come out from under the 
 heap . the child be a long time drag he out , for he pelt they 
 with cushion , and crumple the newspaper over their head , till they 
 be so tired with laugh and struggle they have no strength leave . 

 " Father , it be not fair , I do not think , " say milly at last , sit a 
 breathless heap on the floor . " of course little people can not _ make _ big 
 people do thing , so the big people ought to do they without make . " 

 " that be not at all good reasoning , Milly , " say Mr. Norton , who could 
 not resist the temptation of throw one more sofa cushion at her 
 laugh face . " you can not _ make _ nurse stand on her head , but that be no 
 reason why nurse should stand on her head . " 

 just then Olly , move up a stool behind his father 's chair , bring his 
 little mouth suddenly down on his father 's head , and give he three 
 kiss in a great hurry , with a shout of triumph at the end . 

 " dear I ! " say Mr. Norton , shut his eye and fall back as if 
 something have happen to he . " this be very serious . Aunt Emma , that 
 spell of yours be really _ too _ strong . my poor head ! it will certainly 
 burst if I do not get this story out directly ! come , jump up , 
 child -- quick ! " 

 up jump the child , one on each knee , and Mr. Norton begin at once . 




 CHAPTER VIII 

 the STORY of BEOWULF 


 once upon a time there be a great-- " 

 " Father , " interrupt milly , " I shall soon be get tired of ' once 
 upon a time there be a great king . ' " 

 " do not cry till you be hurt , Milly ; which mean , wait till I get to the 
 end of my sentence . well , once upon a time there be a great -- hero . " 

 " what be a hero ? " ask Olly . 

 " I know , " say Milly , eagerly , " it be a brave man that be always fight 
 and kill giant and dragon and cruel people . " 

 " that will do to begin with , " say Mr. Norton , " though , when you grow 
 old , you will find that people can be hero without fight or 
 killing . however , the man I be go to tell you about be just the kind 
 of hero you be think of , Milly . he love fight with giant and 
 dragon and wild people , and my story be go to be about two of his 
 fight -- the great he ever fight . the name of this hero be Beowulf , 
 and he live in a country call Sweden ( Milly know all about Sweden , 
 Olly , and you must get she to show it you on the map ) , with a number of 
 other brave man who be his friend , and help he in his battle . and 
 one day a messenger come over the sea from another country close by , 
 call Denmark , and the messenger say , ' which of all you brave man will 
 come over and help my master , King Hrothgar , who be in sore trouble ? ' 
 and the messenger tell they how Hrothgar , for many year past , have be 
 plague by a monster -- the hateful monster Grendel -- half a man and half a 
 beast , who live at the bottom of a great bog near the king 's palace . 
 every night , he say , Grendel the monster come out of the bog with his 
 horrible mother beside he -- a wolf - like creature , fearful to look 
 upon -- and he and she would roam about the country , kill and slay 
 all whom they meet . sometimes they would come stalk to the king 's 
 palace , where his brave man be sleep round the fire in the big 
 hall , and before anyone could withstand he Grendel would fall upon the 
 king 's warrior , kill they by ten and twenty , and carry off their 
 dead body to his bog . many a brave man have try to slay the monster , 
 but none have be able so much as to wound he . 

 " when Beowulf and his friend have hear this story they think a while , 
 and then each say to the other , ' let we go across the sea and rid King 
 Hrothgar of this monster . ' so they take ship and go across the sea to 
 Hrothgar 's country , and Hrothgar welcome they royally , and make a great 
 feast in their honour . and after the feast Hrothgar say to Beowulf , 
 ' now , I give over to you the hall of my palace , that you may guard it 
 against the monster . ' so Beowulf and the brave man who have come over 
 with he make a great fire in the hall , and they all lie down to sleep 
 beside it . you may imagine that they do not find it very easy to get to 
 sleep , and some of they think as they lie there that very likely they 
 should never see their home in Sweden again . but they be tired with 
 journeying and feasting , and one after another they all fall asleep . 
 then in the dead of the night , when all be still , Grendel rise up out 
 of the bog , and come stalk over the moor to the palace . his eye 
 flame with a kind of horrible light in the darkness , and his step 
 seem to shake the earth ; but those inside the palace be sleep so 
 heavily that they hear nothing , not even when Grendel burst open the 
 door of the hall and come in among they . before anyone have waken , the 
 monster have seize one of the sleep man and tear he to piece . then 
 he come to Beowulf ; but Beowulf spring up out of his sleep and lay hold 
 upon he boldly . he use no sword to strike he , for there be no sword 
 which man could make be strong enough to hurt Grendel ; but he seize 
 he with his strong hand , and the two struggle together in the palace . 
 and they fight till the bench be tear from the wall , and 
 everything in the hall be smash and break . the brave man , spring 
 up all round , seize their sword and would gladly have help their 
 lord , but there be no one but Beowulf could harm Grendel . 

 " so they fight , till at last Beowulf tear away Grendel 's hand and arm , 
 and the monster flee away howl into the darkness . over the moor he 
 rush till he come to his bog , and there he sink down into the middle 
 of the bog , wail and shriek like one whose last hour be come . 
 then there be great rejoicing at Heorot , the palace , and King Hrothgar , 
 when he see Grendel 's hand which Beowulf have tear away , embrace he and 
 bless he , and he and all his friend be laden with splendid gift . 

 " but all be not over yet . when the next night come , and Hrothgar 's man 
 and Beowulf 's man be asleep together in the great hall , Grendel 's 
 horrible mother , half a woman and half a wolf , come rush to the 
 palace and while they be all asleep she carry off one of Hrothgar 's 
 dearest friend -- a young noble whom he love good of all his noble . and 
 she kill he , and carry his body back to the bog . then the next 
 morning there be grief and weeping in Heorot ; but Beowulf say to the 
 king , ' grieve not , o king ! till we have find out Grendel 's mother and 
 punish she for her evil deed . I promise you she shall give an account 
 for this . she shall not be able to hide herself in the water , nor under 
 the earth , nor in the forest , nor at the bottom of the sea ; let she go 
 where she will , I will find a way after she . ' 

 " so Beowulf and his friend put on their armour and mount their 
 horse , and set out to look for she . and when they have ride a long and 
 weary way over steep lonely path and past cave where dragon and 
 serpent live , they come at last to Grendel 's bog -- a fearful place 
 indeed . there in the middle of it lie a pool of black water , and over 
 the water hang wither tree , which seem as if they have be poison 
 by the air rise from the water beneath they . no bird or beast would 
 ever come near Grendel 's pool . if the hound be hunt a stag , and 
 they drive he down to the edge , he would soon let they tear he to 
 piece than hide himself in the water . and every night the black water 
 seem to burn and flame , and it hiss and bubble and groan as if 
 there be evil creature toss underneath . and now when Beowulf and 
 his man come near it , they see fierce water dragon lie near the edge 
 or swim about the pool . there also , beside the water , they find the 
 dead body of Hrothgar 's friend , who have be kill by Grendel 's mother , 
 and they take it up , and mourn over he afresh . 

 " but Beowulf take an old and splendid sword that Hrothgar have give he , 
 and he put on his golden helmet and his iron war shirt that no sword 
 could cut through , and when he have bid his friend farewell he leapt 
 straight into the middle of the bog . down he sink , deep and deep 
 into the water , among strange water beast that strike at he with their 
 tusk as he pass they , till at last Grendel 's mother , the water - wolf , 
 look up from the bottom and see he come . then she spring upon he , 
 and seize he , and drag he down , and he find himself in a sort of 
 hall under the water , with a pale strange light in it . and then he 
 turn from the horrible water - wolf and raise his sword and strike she 
 on the head ; but his blow do she no harm . no sword make by mortal man 
 could harm Grendel or his mother ; and as he strike her Beowulf stumble 
 and fall . then the water - wolf rush forward and sit upon he as he lie 
 there , and raise aloft her own sharp dagger to drive it into his 
 breast ; but Beowulf shake she off , and spring up , and there , on the 
 wall , he see hang a strange old sword that have be make in the old 
 time , long , long ago , when the world be full of giant . so he throw 
 his own sword aside and take down the old sword , and once more he smite 
 the water - wolf . and this time his sword do he good service , and 
 Grendel 's fierce mother sink down dead upon the ground . 

 " then Beowulf look round he , and he see lie in a corner the body of 
 Grendel himself . he cut off the monster 's head , and lo and behold ! when 
 he have cut it off the blade of the old sword melt away , and there be 
 nothing leave in his hand but the hilt , with strange letter on it , 
 tell how it be make in old day by the giant for a great king . so 
 with that , and Hrothgar 's sword and Grendel 's head , Beowulf rise up 
 again through the bog , and just as his brave man have begin to think they 
 should never see their dear lord more he come swim to land , bear 
 the great head with he . 

 " then Hrothgar and all his people rejoice greatly , for they know that 
 the land would never more be trouble by these hateful monster , but 
 that the plougher might plough , and the shepherd might lead their 
 sheep , and brave man might sleep at night , without fear any more of 
 Grendel and his mother . " 

 " oh , father ! " say Milly , breathlessly , when he stop . " be that all ? " 

 but Olly sit quite still , without speak , gaze at his father with 
 wide open brown eye , and a face as grave and terrify as if Grendel 
 be actually beside he . 

 " that be all for this time , " say Mr. Norton . " why , Olly , where be your 
 little wit go to ? do it frighten you , old man ? " 

 " oh ! " say Olly , draw a long breath . " I do think he would never have 
 come up out of that bog ! " 

 " it be splendid , " say Milly . " but , father , I do not understand about 
 that pool . why do not Beowulf get drown when he go down under the 
 water ? " 

 " the story do not tell we anything about that , " say Mr. Norton . " but 
 hero in those day , Milly , must have have something magical about they 
 so that they be able to do thing that man and woman can not do now . do 
 you know , child , that this story that you have be listen to be 
 more than a thousand year old ? can you fancy that ? " 

 " no , " say Milly , shake her head . " I can not fancy it a bit , father . 
 it be too long . it make I puzzled to think of so many year . " 

 " year and year and year and _ year _ ! " say Olly . " when father 's 
 grandfather be a little boy . " 

 Mr. Norton laugh . " can not you think of anything far back than that , 
 olly ? it would take a great many grandfather , and grandfather ' 
 grandfather , to get back to the time when the story of Beowulf be 
 make . and here be I tell it to you just in the same way as father 
 use to tell it to their child a thousand year ago . " 

 " I suppose the child like it so , they would not let their father 
 forget it , " say Milly . " and then when they grow up they tell it to 
 their child . I shall tell it to my child when I grow up . I think I 
 shall tell it to Katie to - morrow . " 

 " Father , " say Olly , " do Beowulf die -- ever ? " 

 " yes . when he be quite an old man he have another great fight with a 
 dragon , who be guard a cave full of golden treasure on the 
 sea - shore ; and though he kill the dragon , the dragon give he a 
 terrible wound , so that when his friend come to look for he they find 
 he lie all but dead in the cave . he be just able to tell they to 
 make a great mound of earth over he when he be dead , on a high rock 
 close by , that sailor might see it from their ship and think of he 
 when they see it , and then he die . and when he be dead they carry 
 he up to the rock , and there they burn his body , and then they build 
 up a great high mound of earth , and they put Beowulf 's bone inside , and 
 all the treasure from the dragon 's cave . they be ten day build up 
 the mound . then when it be all do they ride around it weep and 
 chant sorrowful song , and at last they leave he there , say as 
 they go away that never should they see so good a king or so true a 
 master any more . and for hundred of year afterwards , when the sailor 
 out at sea see the high mound rise on its point of rock , they say one 
 to another , ' there be Beowulf 's Mount , ' and they begin to tell each 
 other of Beowulf 's brave deed -- how he live and how he die , and how he 
 fight with Grendel and the wild sea dragon . there , now , I have tell 
 you all I know about Beowulf , " say Mr. Norton , get up and turn 
 the child off his knee , " and if it be not somebody else 's turn now it 
 ought to be . " 

 " Aunt Emma ! Aunt Emma ! " shout Olly , who be so greedy for story that 
 he could almost listen all day long without be tired . 

 but Aunt Emma only smile through her spectacle and point to the 
 window . the child run to look out , and they could hardly believe 
 their eye when they see that it have actually stop rain , and that 
 over the tree - top be a narrow strip of blue sky , the first they have 
 see for three whole day . 

 " oh you nice blue sky ! " exclaim Milly , dance up and down before the 
 window with a beam face . " mind you stay there and get big . we will 
 get on our hat presently and come out to look at you . oh ! there be John 
 Backhouse come down the hill with the dog . mother , may we go up 
 ourselves and ask Becky and Tiza to come to tea ? " 

 " but Aunt Emma must tell we her story first , " persist Olly , who hat 
 be cheat out of a story by anything or anybody . " she promise . " 

 " you silly boy ! " say Aunt Emma , " as if I be go to keep you indoor 
 listen to story just now , when the sun 's shin for the first time 
 for three whole day . I promise you my story on a wet day , and you 
 shall have it -- never fear . there will be plenty more wet day before you 
 go away from ravensn , I be afraid . there go my knitting , and 
 mother 's put away her work , and father 's stretching himself -- which 
 mean we be all go for a walk . " 

 " to fetch Becky and Tiza , mother ? " ask Milly ; and when mother say 
 " yes , if you like , " the two child race off down the long passage to 
 the nursery in the high possible spirit . 

 soon they be all walk along the dripping drive past high bank of 
 wet fern , and under tree which throw down shower of rain - drop at 
 every puff of wind . and when they get into the road beside the river the 
 child shout with glee to see their brown shallow little river 
 turn into a rag flood of water , which go sweeping and hurry 
 through the field , and every now and then spread itself over they 
 and make great pool among the poor drown hay . they run on to look 
 for the stepping - stone , but to their amazement there be not a stone to 
 be see . the water be rush over they with a great roar and swirl , 
 and milly shiver a little bit when she remember their bathe there a 
 week before . 

 " well , old woman , " say Mr. Norton , come up to they , " I do not suppose 
 you would like , a bathe to - day -- quite . " 

 " if we be in there now , " say Olly , watch the river with great 
 excitement , " the water would push we down krick ! and the fish would 
 come and etten we all up . " 

 " they would be a long time gobble you up , Master Fatty , " say his father . 
 " come , run along ; it be too cold to stand about . " 

 but how brilliant and beautiful it be after the rain ! little tiny 
 trickle river be run down all the road , and sparkle in the 
 sun ; the wet leaf and grass be glitter , and the great mountain 
 all around stand up green and fresh against the blue sky , as if the rain 
 have wash the dust off they from top to toe , and leave they clean and 
 bright . two thing only seem the bad for the rain -- the hay and the 
 wild strawberry . milly peer into all the bank along the road where 
 she generally find her favourite little red berry , but most of they 
 be wash away , and the few miserable thing that be leave taste of 
 nothing but rain water . and as for the hay - field , they look so wet 
 and drench that it be hard to believe any sunshine could ever dry 
 they . 

 " Poor John Backhouse ! " say Aunt Emma ; " I be afraid his hay be a good 
 deal spoilt . be not you glad father 's not a farmer , Milly ? " 

 " why , Aunt Emma , " say Milly , " I be always wish father _ be _ a farmer . 
 I want to be like Becky , and call the cow , and mind the baby all by 
 myself . it must be nice feed the chicken , and make the hay , and 
 take the milk around . " 

 " yes , all that be very nice , but how would you like your hay wash away , 
 and your corn beat down , and your fruit all spoilt ? those be thing 
 that be constantly happen to John Backhouse , I expect , in the rainy 
 country . " 

 " yes , and it will not always be summer , " say Milly , consider . " I do not 
 think I should like to stay in that little weeny house all the winter . 
 be it very cold here in the winter , Aunt Emma ? " 

 " not very , generally . but last winter be very cold here , and the snow 
 lie on the ground for week and week . on Christmas eve , do you know , 
 milly , I want to have a child 's party in my kitchen , and what do 
 you think I do ? the snow be lie deep on the road , so I send out two 
 sledge . " 

 " what be sledge ? " ask Olly . 

 " Carriages with the wheel take off and two long piece of wood 
 fasten on instead , so that they slip along smoothly over the snow . and 
 my old coachman drive one and my gardener the other , and they go round 
 all the farmhouse near by , and gather up the child , little and 
 big , into the sledge , till the coachman have get eight in his sledge , 
 and the gardener have get nine in his , and then they come trot back 
 with the bell round the horse ' neck jingle and clatter , and two 
 such merry load of rosy - face child . I wish you have be there ; I 
 give they tea in the kitchen , and afterward we have a Christmas tree in 
 the drawing - room . " 

 " oh what fun , " say Milly . " why do not you ask we too , Aunt Emma ? we 
 could have come quite well in the train , you know . but how do the 
 child get home ? " 

 " we cover they up warm with rug and blanket , and send they back in 
 the sledge . and they look so happy with their toy and bun cuddle 
 up in their arm , that it do one 's heart good to see they . " 

 " mind you ask we next time , Aunt Emma , " say Milly , hang round her 
 neck coaxingly . 

 " mind you get two pair of wing by that time , then , " say Aunt Emma , 
 " for mother 's not likely to let you come to my Christmas tree unless you 
 promise to fly there and back . but suppose , instead of your come to 
 I , I come to you next Christmas ? " 

 " oh yes ! yes ! " cry Olly , who have just join Aunt Emma and Milly , 
 " come to our Christmas tree , Aunt Emma . we will give you ever such nice 
 thing -- a ball and a top , and a train -- perhaps -- and-- " 

 " as if Aunt Emma would care for those kind of thing ! " say Milly . " no , 
 you shall give she some muffetee , you know , to keep her hand warm , and 
 I will make she a needlebook . but , Aunt Emma , do listen ! what can be the 
 matter ? " 

 they be just climb the little bit of steep road which lead to the 
 farm , and suddenly they hear somebody roar and screaming , and then 
 an angry voice scold , and then a great clatter , and then louder 
 roar than ever . 

 " what _ be _ the matter ? " cry Milly , run on to the farm door , which 
 be open . but just as she get there , out rush a tattered little figure 
 with a tear - stain face , and hair fly behind . 

 " Tiza ! " cry Milly , try to stop she . but Tiza run past she as quick 
 as lightne down the garden path towards the cherry tree , and in 
 another minute , in spite of the shower of wet she shake down on herself 
 as she climb up , she be sit high and safe among the branch , 
 where there be no catch she nor even see she . 

 " ay , that be the good place for ye , " say Mrs. Backhouse , appear at 
 the door with an angry face , " you will not get into so much mischief there 
 perhaps as you will indoor . oh , be that you , Miss Elliot ( that be Aunt 
 Emma 's surname ) ? walk in please , ma'am , though you will find I sadly 
 untidy this afternoon . Tiza be be at her trick again ; she keep I 
 sweep up after she all day . just look here , if you please , ma'am . " 

 Aunt Emma go in , and the child press in after she , full of 
 curiosity to see what crime Tiza have be commit . poor Mrs. 
 Backhouse ! all over her clean kitchen floor there be stream of water 
 run about , with little piece of cabbage and carrot stick up in 
 they here and there , while on the kitchen table lie a heap of meat and 
 vegetable , which Mrs. Backhouse have evidently just pick up out of the 
 grate before Aunt Emma and the child arrive . 

 " yes , " say Mrs. Backhouse , point to the floor , " there be the supper 
 just spoil . Tiza be never easy but when she be in mischief . I be sure 
 these wet day I have'nt know what to do with her indoor all day . and 
 what must she do this afternoon but tie her tin mug to the cat 's tail , 
 till the poor creature be nearly beside herself with fright , and go 
 rush about upstairs like a mad thing . and then , just when I happen 
 to be out a minute look after something , she let the cat in here , 
 and the poor thing jump into the saucepan I have just put on with the 
 broth for our supper , and in her fright and all turn it right over . and 
 now look at my grate , and the fender , and the floor , and the meat there 
 all mess ! I expect her father'll give Tiza a good beating when he 
 come in , and I be sure I shall not stand in the way . " 

 " oh no , please , Mrs. Backhouse ! " say Milly , run up to she with a 
 grave implore little face . " do not let Mr. Backhouse beat she ; she 
 do not mean it , she be only in fun , I be sure . " 

 " well , missy , it be very troiblesome fun I be sure , " say Mrs. Backhouse , 
 pat milly kindly on the shoulder , for she be a good - natured woman , 
 and it be not her way to be angry long . " I do not know what I be to give 
 John for his supper , that I do not . I have nothing in the house but just 
 those little odd and end of meat , that I think would make a nice bit 
 of broth for supper . and now he will come in wet and hungry , and there will 
 be nothing for he . well , we must do with something else , I suppose , but 
 I expect her father'll beat she . " 

 Milly and Olly look rather awestruck at the idea of a beating from 
 John Backhouse , that great strong brawny farmer ; and Milly , whispering 
 something quickly to Aunt Emma , slip out into the garden again . by 
 this time father and mother have come up , and Becky appear from the 
 farmyard , wheel the baby in a little wooden cart , and radiant with 
 pleasure at the sight of Aunt Emma , whose godchild she be , so that 
 Milly 's disappearance be not notice . 

 she run down the garden path to the cherry tree , and as , in the various 
 time they have be together , Becky and Tiza have teach she a good deal 
 of climb , she too clamber up into the wet branch , and be soon 
 sit close by Tiza , who have turn her cotton pinafore over her head 
 and would not look at Milly . 

 " Tiza , " say Milly softly , put her hand on Tiza 's lap , " do you feel 
 very bad ? " 

 no answer . 

 " we come to take you down to have tea with we , " say Milly , " do you 
 think your mother will let you come ? " 

 " Naw , " say Tiza shortly , without move from behind her pinafore . 

 it certainly be not very easy talk to Tiza . milly think she would 
 well try something else . 

 " Tiza , " she begin timidly , " do your father and mother tell you story 
 when it rain ? " 

 " Naw , " say Tiza , in a very astonished voice , throw down her pinafore 
 to stare at Milly . 

 " then what do you do , Tiza , when it rain ? " 

 " nothing , " say Tiza . " we have our dinner and tea , and sometimes Becky 
 mind the baby and sometimes I do , and father mostly go to sleep . " 

 " Tiza , " say Milly hurriedly , " do you _ mean _ pussy to jump into the 
 saucepan ? " 

 up go Tiza 's pinafore again , and Milly be in dismay because she 
 think she have make Tiza cry ; but to her great surprise Tiza suddenly 
 burst into such fit of laughter , that she nearly tumble off the cherry 
 tree . " oh , she do jump so , and the mug make such a rattling ! and when 
 she come out there be just a little bit of carrot stick to her 
 nose , and her tail be all over cabbage leaf . oh , she do look funny ! " 

 milly could not help laugh too , till she remember all that Mrs. 
 Backhouse have be say . 

 " oh , but , Tiza , Mrs. Backhouse say your father will not have anything for 
 his supper . be not you sorry you spoil his supper ? " 

 " Yis , " say Tiza , quickly . " I know father'll beat I , he say he would 
 next time I vex mother . " 

 and this time the pinafore go up in earnest , and Tiza begin to cry 
 piteously . 

 " do not cry , Tiza , " say Milly , her own little cheek get wet , too . 
 " I will beg he not . can not you make up anyway ? mother say we must always 
 make up if we can when we have do any harm . I wish I have anything to 
 give you to make up . " 

 Tiza suddenly dry her eye and look at Milly , with a bright 
 expression which be very puzzling . 

 " you come with I , " she say suddenly , swing herself down from the 
 tree . " come here by the hedge , do not let mother see we . " 

 so they run along the far side of the hedge till they get into the 
 farmyard , and then Tiza lead milly past the hen - house , up to the corner 
 where the hayrick be . in and out of the hayrick they go , till in 
 the very farth corner of all , where hardly anybody ever come , and 
 which nobody could see into from the yard , Tiza suddenly kneel down and 
 put her hand under the hay at the bottom of the rick . 

 " you come , " she whisper eagerly to Milly , pull she by the skirt , 
 " you come and look here . " 

 milly stoop down , and there in a soft little place , just between the 
 hayrick and the ground , what do you think she see ? three large brownish 
 egg lie in a sort of rough nest in the hay , and look so round and 
 fresh and tempting , that Milly give a little cry of delight . 

 " oh , Tiza , how be -- utiful ! how do they get there ? " 

 " it be old Sally , our white hen you know , lay they . I find they just 
 after dinner . mother do not know nothing about they . I never tell 
 Becky , nor nobody . be not they beautie ? " 

 and Tiza take one up lovingly in her rough , little brown hand , and lay 
 it against her cheek , to feel how soft and satiny it be . 

 " oh , and Tiza , I know , " exclaim milly eagerly , " you mean these would 
 do for supper . that would be a lovely make up . there be three . one for 
 Mr. Backhouse , one for Mrs. Backhouse , and one for becky.--there 's none 
 for you , Tiza . " 

 " nor none for Becky neither , " answer Tiza shortly . " Father'll want 
 two . becky and me'll get bread and dripping . " 

 " well , come along , Tiza , let us take they in . " 

 " no , you take they , " say Tiza . " Mother will not want to see I no more , 
 and father'll perhaps be come in . " 

 " oh , but , Tiza , you will come to tea with we ? " 

 " I do not know , " say Tiza . " you ask . " 

 and off she run as quick as lightning , off to her hiding - place in the 
 cherry tree , while Milly be leave with the three brown egg , feel 
 rather puzzled and anxious . however , she put they gently in the skirt of 
 her frock , and hold it up in both hand she pick her way through 
 the wet yard back to the house . 

 when she appear at the kitchen door , Aunt Emma and Mrs. Backhouse be 
 chat quietly . Mr. and Mrs. Norton , and Olly , have go on for a 
 little stroll along the Wanwick road , and Becky be sit on the 
 window - sill with the baby , who seem very sleepy , but quite determine 
 not to go to sleep in spite of all Becky 's rocking and patting . 

 " oh , Mrs. Backhouse , " begin Milly , come in with a bright flushed face , 
 " just look here , what I have bring . Tiza find they just after dinner 
 to - day . they be under the hayrick right away in the corner , and she 
 want to make up , so she show I where they be , so I bring they 
 in , and there be two for Mr. Backhouse , and one for you , you know . and , 
 please , will not you let Tiza come to tea with we ? " 

 Mrs. Backhouse look in astonishment at the three egg lie in Milly 's 
 print skirt , and at Milly 's plead little face . 

 " ay , that be Sally , I suppose . she be always hide her egg be Sally , 
 where I can not find they . so it be Tiza find they , be it , Missy ? well , 
 they will come , in very handy for supper as it happen . thank you kindly 
 for bring they in . " 

 and Mrs. Backhouse take the egg and put they safely away in a pie - dish , 
 while Becky secretly pull milly by the sleeve , and smile up at she as 
 much as to say , 

 " thank you for help Tiza out of her scrape . " 

 " and you will let Becky and Tiza come to tea ? " ask Milly again . 

 " well , I be sure , Miss , I do not know , " say Mrs. Backhouse , look 
 puzzle ; " Becky may come and welcome , but perhaps it would do Tiza good 
 to stay at home . " 

 " do not you think she would well have a little change ? " say Aunt Emma in 
 her kind voice , which make milly want to hug she . " I daresay stay 
 indoor so long make she restless . if you will let I carry they both 
 off , I daresay between we , Mrs. Backhouse , we can give Tiza a talking 
 to , and perhaps she will come back in a more sensible mood . " 

 " well , Miss Elliot , she shall go if you wish it . come Becky , give I the 
 baby , and go and put your thing on . " and then go to the door , Mrs. 
 Backhouse shout " Tiza ! " after a second or two a little figure drop 
 down out of the cherry tree and come slowly up the walk . Tiza have shake 
 her hair about her face so that it could hardly be see , and she never 
 look once at Aunt Emma and Milly as she come up to her mother . 

 " there , go along , Tiza , and get your thing on , " say Mrs. Backhouse , 
 take she by the arm . " I would not have let you go out to tea , you know , 
 if Miss Elliot and Missy have not ask particular . mind you do not get 
 into no more mischief . and very like those eggs'll do for father 's 
 supper ; so , I daresay , I will not say anything to he this time -- just for 
 once . now go up . " 

 Tiza do not want to be tell twice , and presently , just as Mr. and Mrs. 
 Norton and Olly be come back from their walk , they meet Aunt Emma 
 come back from the farm hold Becky 's hand , while Milly and Tiza 
 walk in front . 

 " well , Tiza , " say Mr. Norton , pat her curly head , I declare I think 
 you beat olly for mischief . olly never spoil my dinner yet , that I 
 remember . what should I do to he do you think , if he do ? " 

 " beat he , " say Tiza , look up at Mr. Norton with her quick birdlike 
 eye . 

 " oh dear , no ! " say Mr. Norton , " that would not do my dinner any good . I 
 should eat he up instead . " 

 " I do not believe little boy taste good a bit , " say Olly , who always 
 believe firmly in his father 's various threat . " if you ettene I , 
 father , you would be ill . " 

 " oh no , " say Mr. Norton , " not if I eat you with plenty of bread - sauce . 
 that be the good way to cook little boy . now , Milly , which of you three 
 girl can get to that gate first ? " 

 Off run the three little girl full tilt down the hill lead to 
 Ravensnest , with olly puffing and pant after they . milly lead the way 
 at first , for she be light and quick , and a very fair runner for her 
 age ; but Tiza soon get up to she and pass she , and it be Tiza 's 
 little stout leg that arrive first at ravensn gate . 

 " oh , Becky ! " say Milly , put her arm round Becky 's neck as they go 
 into the house together , " I hope you may stay a good long time . what 
 time do you go to bed ? " 

 " oh , I do not know , " say Becky . " we go when fayther go . " 

 " when fayther go ! " exclaim Milly . " why , we go ever so long before 
 father . why do you stay up so late ? " 

 " why , it be not late , " say Becky . " fayther go to bed , now it be 
 summertime , about half - past eight ; but in winter , of course , he go 
 early . and we all go together , except baby . mother put he out of 
 the way before supper . " 

 " well , but how funny , " say Milly , " I can not think why you should be so 
 different from we . " 

 and Milly go on puzzle over Becky and she go to bed , till nurse 
 drive it all out of her head by fetch they to tea . such a merry tea 
 they have , and after tea a romp in the big kitchen with father , which 
 delight the little farm child beyond measure . some time in the 
 evening , I believe , Aunt Emma manage to give Tiza a little talk to , 
 but none of the other child know anything about it , except perhaps 
 Becky , who generally know what be happen to Tiza . 




 CHAPTER IX 

 MILLY be BIRTHDAY 


 now we have come to a chapter which be go to be half merry and half 
 sad . I have not tell you any sad thing about milly and Olly up till 
 now , I think . they be such happy little people , that there be nothing 
 sad to tell you . they cry sometimes , of course -- you remember Milly 
 cry when olly stickie her doll -- but generally , by the time they have 
 dry up their tear they have quite forget what they be cry 
 about ; and as for any real trouble , why they do not know what it could 
 possibly be like . but now , just as they be go away from ravensn , 
 come a real sad thing , and you will hear very soon how it happen . 

 after those three wet day it be sometimes fine and sometimes rainy at 
 Ravensnest , but never so rainy as to keep the Nortons in all day . and 
 every now and then there be splendid day , when the child and their 
 father and mother be out all day long , wander over the mountain , 
 or walk over to Aunt Emma 's or tramp along the well - know road to 
 Wanwick on one side , and the little village of Rydal and Rydal Lake on 
 the other . they have another row on windermere ; and one fine evening Mr. 
 Norton borrow a friend 's boat , and they go out fish for perch on 
 Rydal Lake , the lovely little lake in the world , lie softly in a 
 green mountain cup , and dot with island , which seem to the 
 child when they land on they like little bit of fairyland drop 
 into the blue water . 

 [ illustration : " haymake " ] 

 and then ! crown of delight ! come the haymaking . there be long fine 
 day , when the six small creature -- Milly , Olly , Becky , Tiza , Bessie , 
 and Charlie -- follow John Backhouse and his man about in the hayfield 
 from early morning till evening , help to make the hay , or simply 
 roll about like a parcel of kitten in the flowery fragrant heap . 

 Aunt Emma be often at ravensn , and the child learn to love she 
 well and well , so that even wild little Olly would remember to bring 
 her stool , and carry her shawl , and change her plate at dinner ; and 
 Milly , who be always cling to somebody , be constantly puzzle to 
 know whose pocket to sit in , mother 's or Aunt Emma 's . 

 then there be the farmyard , the cow , and the milking , and the 
 chicken . everything about they seem delightful to Milly and Olly , and 
 the top of everything be reach when one evening John Backhouse 
 mount both the child on his big carthorse Dobbin , and they and 
 Dobbin together drag the hay home in triumph . 

 and now they have only one week more to stay at ravensn . but that week 
 be a most important week , for it be to contain no less a day than 
 Milly 's birthday . milly would be seven year old on the 15th of July , 
 and for about a week before the 15th , Milly 's little head could think of 
 nothing else . olly too be very much excited about it , for though Milly 
 of course be the queen of the day , and all the present be for she , 
 not for he , still it be good time for everybody on Milly 's birthday ; 
 besides which , he have his own little secret with mother about his 
 present to Milly , a secret which make he very happy , but which he be 
 on the point of tell at least a hundred time a day . 

 " Father , " say Milly , about four day before the birthday , when they 
 be all wander about after tea one evening in the high garden which 
 be now a paradise of ripe red strawberry and fruit of every kind , 
 " do everybody have birthday ? do policeman have birthday ? " 

 " I expect so , Milly , " say Mr. Norton , laugh , " but they have not any 
 time to remember they . " 

 " but , father , what be the good of have birthday if you do not keep 
 they , and have present and all that ? and do cat and dog have 
 birthday ? I should like to find out Spot 's birthday . we would give she 
 cream instead of milk , you know , and I would tie a blue ribbon round her 
 neck , and one round her tail like the queen 's sheep in mother 's story . " 

 " I do not suppose Spot would thank you at all , " say Mr. Norton . " the 
 cream would make she ill , and the ribbon would fidget she dreadfully 
 till she pull it off . " 

 " oh dear ! " sigh Milly . " well , I suppose Spot have well not have any 
 birthday then . but , father , what do you think ? Becky and Tiza do not care 
 about their birthday a bit . Becky could hardly remember when hers be , 
 and they never have any present unless Aunt Emma give they one , or 
 people to tea , or anything . ' 

 " well , you see , Milly , when people have only just penny and shilling 
 enough to buy bread and meat to eat , and clothe to put on , they can not 
 go spend money on present ; and when they be very anxious and busy 
 all the year round they can not be remember birthday and take pain 
 about they like rich people can , who have less to trouble they , and 
 whose work do not take up quite so much time . " 

 " well , but why do not the rich people remember the poor people 's 
 birthday for they , father ? then they could give they present , and ask 
 they to tea and all , you know . " 

 " yes , that would be a very good arrangement , " say Mr. Norton , smile 
 at her eager little face . " only , somehow , Milly , thing do not come right 
 like that in this world . " 

 " well , I be go to try and remember Becky 's and Tiza 's birthday , " say 
 Milly . " I will tell mother to put they down in her pocket - book -- won't you , 
 mother ? oh , what fun ! I will send they birthday card , and they will be so 
 surprised , and wonder why ; and then they will say , ' oh , why , of course 
 it be our birthday!'--no , not _ our _ birthday -- but you know what I mean , 
 father . " 

 " well , but , Milly , " ask Mrs. Norton , " have you make up your mind what 
 you want to do this birthday ? " 

 milly stop suddenly , with her hand behind she , opposite her mother , 
 with her lip tightly press together , her eye smile , as if there 
 be a tremendous secret hide somewhere . 

 " well , monkey , out with it . what have you get hide away in your little 
 head ? " 

 " well , mother , " say Milly , slowly , " I do not want to _ have _ anybody to 
 tea . I want to go out to tea with somebody . now can you guess ? " 

 " with Aunt Emma ? " 

 " oh no , Aunt Emma 's come over here all day . she promise she would . " 

 " with Becky and Tiza ? " 

 milly nod , and screw up her little lip tight than ever . 

 " but I do not expect Mrs. Backhouse will want the trouble of have you 
 two to tea . 

 " oh mother , she will not mind a bit . I know she will not ; because Becky tell 
 I one day her mother would like we very much to come some time if you would 
 let we . and Nana could come and help Mrs. Backhouse , and we could all 
 wash up the tea - thing afterwards , like we do at the picnic . " 

 " then Tiza must not sit next I , " say Olly , who have be listen in 
 silence to all the arrangement . " she take away my bread and butter 
 when I be not look , and I do not like it , not a bit . " 

 " no , Olly dear , she shall not , " say Milly , take his hand and fondle 
 it , as if she be at least twenty year old . " I will sit on one side of 
 you and Becky on the other , " a prospect with which Olly be apparently 
 satisfied , for he make no more objection . 

 " well , you must ask Mrs. Backhouse yourselve , " say Mrs. Norton . " and 
 if it be her washing - day , or inconvenient to she at all , you must not 
 think of go , you know . " 

 so early next morning , Milly and Nana and Olly go up to the farm , and 
 come back with the answer that Mrs. Backhouse would be very pleased to 
 see they at tea on Thursday , the 15th , and that John Backhouse would 
 have cut the hay - field by the river by then , and they could have a romp 
 in the hay afterwards . 

 Wednesday be a deeply interesting day to Olly . he and his mother go 
 over by themselves to Wanwick , and they buy something which the 
 shopwoman at the toy - shop wrap up in a neat little parcel , and which 
 olly carry home , look as important as a little king . 

 " milly , " he begin at dinner , " _ would not _ you like to know about your 
 present ? but of course I shall not tell you about mine . perhaps I be not 
 go to give you one at all . oh , mother , " in a loud whisper to Mrs. 
 Norton , " do you put it away safe where she can not see ? " 

 " oh , you silly boy , " say Milly , " you will tell I if you do not take 
 care . " 

 " no , I shall not . I would not tell you if you be to go on ask I all 
 day . it be not very big , you know , Milly , and -- and -- it be not pretty 
 outside -- only-- " 

 " be quiet , chatterbox , " say Mr. Norton put his hand over Olly 's 
 mouth , " you will tell in another minute , and then there will be no fun 
 to - morrow . " 

 so Olly with great difficulty keep quiet , and begin eat up his 
 pudding very fast , as if that be the only way of keep his little 
 tongue out of mischief . 

 " Father , " he say after dinner , " do take milly out for a walk , and 
 mother shall take I . then I can not tell , you know . " 

 so the two go out different way , and Olly keep away from Milly all 
 day , in great fear lest somehow or other his secret should fly out of 
 he in spite of all his effort to keep it in . at night the child 
 make nurse hurry they to bed , so that when mother come to tuck they up , 
 as she generally do , she find the pair fast asleep , and nothing leave 
 to kiss but two curly head bury in the pillow . 

 " bless their heart , " say nurse to Mrs. Norton , " they can think of 
 nothing but to - morrow . they will be sadly disappointed if it rain . " 

 but the star come out , and the new moon shine softly all night on the 
 great fir tree and the rosebud and the little dancing beck in the 
 ravensn garden ; and when milly awake next morning the sun be 
 shin , and Brownholme be tower up clear and high into the breezy 
 blue sky , and the tree be throw cool shadow on the dewy lawn 
 around the house . 

 " oh dear ! " say Milly , jump up , her face flush with joy " it be my 
 birthday , and it be fine . Nana , bring I my thing , please.--but where be 
 Olly ? " 

 where indeed be olly ? there be his little bed , but there be a 
 nightdress roll up in it , and not a wisp of his brown curl be to be 
 see anywhere . 

 " why , Miss Milly , be you wake up at last ? I hardly think you would have 
 sleep so late this morning . many happy return of the day to you , " say 
 nurse , give she a hearty hug . 

 " thank you , _ dear _ nurse . oh , it be so nice have birthday . but where 
 can olly be ? " 

 " do not you trouble your head about he , " say nurse mysteriously , and 
 not another word could milly get out of she . she have just slip on her 
 white cotton frock when mother open the door . 

 " well , birthday - girl ! the top of the morning to you , and many , many 
 happy return of the day . " 

 Whereupon Milly and mother go through a great deal of kiss which 
 need not be describe , and then mother help she brush her hair , and 
 put on her ribbon and tie her sash , so that in another minute or two she 
 be quite ready to go down . 

 " now , Milly , wait one minute till you hear the bell ring , and then you 
 may come down as fast as you like . " 

 so Milly wait , her little foot dance with impatience , till the bell 
 begin to ring as if it have go quite mad . 

 " oh , that be olly ringing , " cry milly , rush off . and sure enough 
 when she get to the hall there be olly ringing as if he mean to bring 
 the house down . he drop the bell when he see Milly , and drag she 
 breathlessly into the dining - room . 

 and what do milly see there I wonder ? why , a heap of red and white 
 rose lie on the breakfast table , a big heap , with odd corner and 
 point stick up all over it , and under the rose a white napkin , and 
 under the napkin treasure of all sort -- a book from father , a little 
 work - box from mother , with a picture of windermere on the outside , and 
 inside the most delightful cotton and needle and bit of 
 bright - coloured stuff ; a china doll 's dinner - service from Aunt Emma , a 
 mug from nurse , a little dish full of big red strawberry from 
 gardener , and last , but not least , Olly 's present -- a black paint - box , 
 with colour and brush and all complete , and tie up with a little 
 drawing - book which mother have add to make it really useful . at the top 
 of the heap , too , lie two letter address in very big round hand to 
 " Miss Milly Norton , " and one be sign Jacky and the other sign 
 Francis . each of these present have neat little label fasten on to 
 they , and they be smother in rose -- deep red and pale pink rose , 
 with the morning dew sprinkle over they . 

 " we get all those rose , mother and I , this morning , when you be fast 
 asleep , Milly , " shout Olly , who be caper about like a mad 
 creature . " Mother pull I out of bed ever so early , and I putt on my 
 golosh , and do not we get wet just ! milly , _ be not _ my paint - box a 
 beauty ? " 

 but it be no good try to describe what Milly feel . she feel as every 
 happy little girl feel on a happy birthday , just a little bit 
 bewitch , as if she have get into another kind of world altogether . 

 " now , " say father , after breakfast , " I be your , Milly , for all this 
 morning . what be you go to do with I ? " 

 " make you into a tiger , father , and shoot you , " say Olly , who would 
 have like to play at hunting and shoot game all day long . 

 " I do not ask you , sir , " say Mr. Norton , " I be not your , I be milly 's . 
 now , Milly , what shall we do ? " 

 " will you take we right to the top of Brownholme , father ? you know we 
 have not be to the very top yet . " 

 " very well , we will go if your leg will carry you . but you must ask they 
 very particularly first how they feel , for it will be stiff work for 
 they . " 

 not very long after breakfast , and before they start for their walk , 
 Aunt Emma 's pony carriage come rattle up the drive , and she , too , 
 bring flower for Milly , above all a bunch of water - lily all wet 
 from the lake ; and then she and mother settle under the tree with 
 their book and work while the child start on their walk . 

 but first Milly have draw mother into a corner where no one could see , 
 and there , with a couple of tear in her two blue eye , she have 
 whisper in a great hurry , so that Mrs. Norton could scarcely hear , " I 
 do not want to have everything just as _ i _ like , to - day , mother . can not I 
 do what somebody else like ? I would rather . " 

 which mean that Milly be a good deal excited , and her heart very full , 
 and that she be think of how , a year before , her birthday have be 
 rather spoilt toward the end of it by a little bit of crossness and 
 self - will , that she remember afterward with a pang for many a long 
 day . since then , Milly have learn a good deal more of that long , long 
 lesson , which we go on learn , big people and little people , all our 
 life -- the lesson of self - forgetting -- of how love bring joy , and to be 
 selfish be to be sad ; and her birthday seem to bring back to she all 
 that she have be learn . 

 " dear little woman , " say Mrs. Norton , put back her tangled hair 
 from her anxious little face , " go and be happy . that be what we all like 
 to - day . besides , you will find plenty of way of do what other people 
 like before the end of the day without my invent any . run along now , 
 and climb away . mind you do not let olly tumble into bog , and mind you 
 bring I a bunch of fern for the dinner - table -- and there will be two 
 thing do at any rate . " 

 so away run Milly ; and all the morning she and Olly and father scramble 
 and climb , and race and chat , on the green back of old Brownholme . 
 they go to say good - morning to John Backhouse 's cow in the " intake , " 
 as he call his top field , and they just peep over the wall at the 
 fierce young bull he have buy at Penrith fair a few day before , and 
 which look as if , birthday or no birthday , he could have eat milly 
 at two mouthful , and swallow olly down afterwards without know it . 

 then they climb and climb after father , till , just as Olly be 
 begin to feel his leg to make sure they be not fall off , they 
 be so tired and shaky -- there they be stand on the great pile of 
 stone which mark the top of the mountain -- the very tip - top of all its 
 green point and rock and grassy stretch . by this time the child 
 know the name of most of the mountain around , and of all the lake . 
 they go through they now like a lesson with their father ; and even 
 olly remember a great many , and could chatter about Helvellyn , and 
 Fairfield , and Langdale Pikes , as if he have trudge to the top of they 
 all himself . 

 then come the getting down again . Father and Milly and Olly 
 hand - in - hand , race over the short fine grass , startle the little 
 black - face sheep , and race down the steep bit , where Milly and Olly 
 generally tumble over in some sort of a heap at the bottom . as for the 
 flower they gather , there be so many I have no time to tell you 
 about they -- wood - flower and bog - flower and grass - flower , and fern of 
 all size to mix with they , from the great Osmunda , which grow along the 
 Ravensnest Beck , down to the tiny little parsley fern . it be all 
 delightful -- the sight and the sound , and the fresh mountain wind that 
 blow they about on the top so that long afterward milly use to look 
 back to that walk on Brownholme when she be seven year old as one of 
 the merry time she ever spend . 

 Dinner be very welcome after all this scramble ; and after dinner come 
 a quiet time in the garden , when father read aloud to mother and Aunt 
 Emma , and the child keep still and listen to as much as they could 
 understand , at least until they go to sleep , which they both do lie 
 on a rug at Aunt Emma 's foot . milly could not understand how this have 
 happen at all , when she find herself wake up and rub her eye , 
 but I think it be natural enough after their long walk in the sun and 
 wind . 

 at four o'clock nurse come for they , and when they have be put into 
 clean frock and pinafore , she take they up to the farm . milly and Olly 
 feel that this be a very solemn occasion , and they walk up to the 
 farmhouse door hand - in - hand , feel as shy as if they have never be 
 there before . but at the door be Becky and Tiza wait for they , as 
 smart as new pin , with shin hair , and red ribbon under their little 
 white collar ; and the child no soon catch sight of one another 
 than all their shyness fly away , and they begin to chatter as usual . 

 in the farmhouse kitchen be Bessie and Charlie , and such a comfortable 
 tea spread out on a long table , cover with a red and black woollen 
 table - cloth instead of a white one . Becky and Tiza have fill two 
 tumbler with meadow - sweet and blue campanula , which stand up grandly in 
 the middle , and there be two home - make cake at each end , and some of 
 Sally 's brown egg , and pile of tempt bread and butter . 

 each of the child have their gift for Milly too : Becky have plait she 
 a basket of rush , a thing she have often try to teach milly how to 
 make for herself , and Tiza push a bunch of wild raspberry into her 
 hand , and run away before milly could say thank you ; Bessie shyly 
 produce a Christmas card that somebody have once send to she ; and even 
 Charlie have manage to provide himself with a bunch of the wild yellow 
 poppy which grow on the wall of the ravensn garden , and be a joy 
 to all beholder . 

 then Mrs. Backhouse put milly at one end of the table , while she begin 
 to pour out tea at the other , and the feast begin . certainly , Milly 
 thought , it be much more exciting go out to tea at a farmhouse than 
 have child to tea with you at home , just as you might anywhere , on 
 any day in the year . there be the big hen come up to the door and 
 poking in their long neck to take a look at they ; there be the 
 pigeon circle round and round in the yard ; there be the sound of 
 milking go on in the shed close by , and many other sight and sound 
 which be new and strange and delightful . 

 as for Olly , he be very much take up for a time with the red and black 
 table - cloth , and could not be keep from peer underneath it from time 
 to time , as if he suspect that the white table - cloth he be generally 
 accustomed to have be hide away underneath for a joke . but when the 
 time for cake come , Olly forget the table - cloth altogether . he have never 
 see a cake quite like the bun - loaf , which kind Mrs. Backhouse have make 
 herself for the occasion , and of which she have give he a hunch , so in 
 his usual inquisitive way he begin to turn it over and over , as if by 
 look at it long enough he could find out how it be make and all 
 about it . presently , when the other be all quietly enjoy their 
 bun - loaf , Olly 's shrill little voice be hear say -- while he put two 
 separate finger on two out of the few currant in his piece : 

 " _ this _ currant say to _ that _ currant , ' I be here , where be you ? you be 
 so far off I can not see you nowhere . ' " 

 " Olly , be quiet , " say Milly . 

 " well , but , Milly , I can not help it ; it be so funny . there be only three 
 currant in my bit , and cookie put such a lot in at home . I be 
 pretend they be little child want to play , only they can not , 
 they be so far off . there , I have etten one up . now there be only two . 
 that be you and I , Milly . I will eat you up first -- krick ! " 

 " never mind about the currant , little master , " say Mrs. Backhouse , 
 laugh at he . " it be nice and sweet any way , and you can eat as much 
 of it as you like , which be more than you can of rich cake . " 

 olly think there be something in this , and by the time he have get 
 through his second bit of bun - loaf he have quite make up his mind that he 
 would get Susan to make bun - loaf at home too . 

 they be just finish tea when there be a great clatter outside , and 
 by come the hay - cart with John Backhouse lead the horse , and two man 
 walk beside it . 

 " we be go to carry all the hay in yon low field presently , " he 
 shout to his wife as he pass . " send the young ' uns down to see . " 

 up they all start , and presently the whole party be race down the 
 hill to the riverfield , with Mrs. Backhouse and her baby walk soberly 
 with nurse behind they . yes , there lie the hay pile up in large cock 
 on the fresh clean - sweep carpet of bright green grass , and in the middle 
 of the field stand the hay - cart with two horse harness , one man 
 stand in it to press down and settle the hay as John Backhouse and 
 two other man hand it up to he on pitchfork . olly go head over 
 heel into the middle of one of the cock , follow by Charlie , and 
 would have like to go head over heel into all the rest , but Mr. 
 Norton , who have come into the field with mother and Aunt Emma , tell he 
 he must be content to play with two cock in one of the far corner of 
 the field without disturb the other , which be all ready for 
 carry , and that if he and Charlie strew the hay about they must 
 tidy it up before John Backhouse want to put it on the cart . so Olly 
 and Charlie go off to their corner , and for a little while all the 
 other child play there too . milly have invent a game call the 
 " Babes in the Wood , " in which two child be the babe and pretend 
 to die on the grass , and all the rest be the robin , and cover they 
 up with hay instead of leaf . she and Tiza make beautiful babe : they 
 put their handkerchief over their face and lie as still as mouse , till 
 Olly have pile so much hay on the top of they that there be not a bit 
 of they to be see anywhere , while Bessie begin to cry out as if she be 
 suffocate before they have put two good armful over she . 

 presently , however , Milly get tired ; and she and Tiza walk off by 
 themselves and sit down by the river to get cool . the water in the river 
 be quite low again now , and the child could watch the tiny minnow 
 dart and flash about by the bank , and even amuse themselves by 
 fancy every now and then that they see a trout shoot across the 
 clear brown water . Tiza have quite leave off be shy now with Milly , and 
 the two chatter away , milly tell Tiza all about her school , and 
 Jacky and Francis , and Spot and the garden at home ; and Tiza telling 
 Milly about her father 's new bull , how frightened she and Becky be of 
 he , and how father mean to make the fence strong for fear he should 
 get out and toss people . 

 " what a happy little party , " say Aunt Emma to mother look round the 
 field ; " there be nothing like hay for child . " 

 by this time the hay - cart be quite full , and crack go John 
 Backhouse 's whip , as he take hold of the first horse 's head and give he 
 a pull forward to start the cart on its way to the farm . 

 " Gee - up , " shout John in his loud cheery voice , and the horse make a 
 step forward , while the child round cry " Hurrah ! " and wave their 
 hand . but suddenly there be a loud piteous cry which make John give 
 the horse a sudden push back and drop his whip , and then , from where 
 they sit , Milly and Tiza hear a sound of crying and scream , while 
 everybody in the field run toward the hay - cart . they run too ; what could 
 have happen ? 

 just as they come up to the crowd of people round the cart , Milly see 
 her father with something in his arm . and this something be 
 Becky -- poor little Becky , with a great mark on her temple , and her eye 
 quite shut , and such a white face ! 

 " oh , mother ! mother ! " cry Milly , rush up to she , " tell I , mother , 
 what be the matter with Becky ? " 

 but Mrs. Norton have no time to attend to she . she be run to meet 
 Mrs. Backhouse , who have come hurry up from another part of the field 
 with the baby in her arm . 

 " she be under the cart when it move on , " say Mrs. Norton , take the 
 baby from she . " we none of we know how it happen . she must have be 
 try to hand up some hay at the last moment and tumble under . I do not 
 think her head be much hurt . " 

 on run Mrs. Backhouse , and Milly and her mother follow . 

 " well let I carry she up now without move she , " say Mr. Norton , as 
 Mrs. Backhouse try to take the little bundle from he . " she have 
 faint , I think . we must get some water at the stream . " so on he go , 
 with the pale frightened mother , while the other follow . Aunt Emma 
 have get Tiza and Milly by the hand , and be try to comfort they . 

 " we hope she be not much hurt , darling ; the wheel do not go over she , 
 thank God . it be just upon she when her father back the horse . but it 
 must have crush she I be afraid , and there be something hang under 
 the cart which give she that knock on the temple . look , there be one of 
 the man start off for the doctor . " 

 Whereupon Tiza , who have keep quiet till then , burst into a loud fit of 
 crying , and throw herself down on the grass . 

 " Nurse , " call Aunt Emma , " stay here with these two poor little one 
 while I go and see if I can be of any use . " 

 so nurse come and sit beside they , and milly creep up to she for 
 comfort . but poor little Tiza lie with her face bury in the grass and 
 nothing they could say to she seem to reach her little deaf ear . 

 meanwhile , Aunt Emma hurry after the other , and presently catch they 
 up at a stream where Mr. Norton have stop to bathe Becky 's head and 
 face . the cold water have just revive she when Aunt Emma come up , and 
 for one moment she open her heavy blue eye and look at her mother , 
 who be bend over she , and then they shut again . but her little hand 
 go feebly search for her mother , who catch it up and kiss it . 

 " oh , Miss Emma , Miss Emma , " she say , point to the child , " I be afeard 
 but she be badly hurt . " 

 " I hope not , with all my heart , " say Aunt Emma , gently take her arm . 
 " but the doctor will soon be here ; we must get her home before he 
 come . " 

 so on they go again , Mr. Norton still carry Becky , and Mr. 
 Backhouse help his wife along . Mrs. Norton have get the baby safe in 
 her motherly arm , and so they all toil up the hill to the farmhouse . 
 what a difference from the merry party that run down the hill only an 
 hour before ! 

 they lay Becky down on her mother 's bed , and then Aunt Emma , find 
 that Mrs. Norton wish to stay till the doctor come , go back to the 
 child . she find a sad little group sit in the hay - field ; milly 
 in nurse 's lap cry quietly every now and then ; Tiza still sob on 
 the grass , and Olly who have just creep down from the farmhouse , where he 
 and Charlie have see Becky carry in , talk to nurse in eager 
 whisper , as if he dare not talk out loud . 

 " oh , Aunt Emma , " cry Milly , when she open the gate , " be she well ? " 

 " a little , I think , Milly , but the doctor will soon be here , and then we 
 shall know all about it . Tiza , you poor little woman , Mrs. Wheeler say 
 you must sleep with they to - night . your mother will want the house very 
 quiet , and to - morrow , you know , you can go and see Becky if the doctor 
 say you may . " 

 at this Tiza begin to cry again more piteously than ever . it seem so 
 dreary and terrible to she to be shut out from home without Becky . but 
 Aunt Emma sit down on the grass beside she , and lift she up and talk 
 to she ; with anybody else Tiza would have kick and struggle , for she 
 be a curious , passionate child , and her grief be always wild and 
 angry , but nobody could struggle with Aunt Emma , and at last she let 
 herself be comfort a little by the tender voice and soft caressing 
 hand . she stop cry , and then they all take she up to the 
 Wheelers 's cottage , where Mrs. Wheeler , a kind motherly body , take she 
 in , and promise that she should know everything there be to be know 
 about Becky . 

 " Aunt Emma , " say Milly , presently , when they be all sit in the 
 conservatory which run round the house , wait for Mr. Norton to bring 
 they news from the farm , " how do Becky tumble under the cart ? " 

 " she be lift up some hay , I think , which have fall off , and one of 
 the man be stoop down to take it on his fork , and then she must have 
 slip and fall right under the cart , just as John Backhouse tell the 
 horse to go on . " 

 " oh , if the wheel _ have _ go over ! " say Milly , shudder . " be not it a 
 sad birthday , Aunt Emma , and we be so happy a little while ago ? and 
 then I can not understand . I do not know why it happen like this . " 

 " like what , milly ? " 

 " why , Aunt Emma , always in story , you know , it be the bad people get 
 hurt and die . and now it be poor little Becky that be hurt . and she be such 
 a dear little girl , and help her mother so . I do not think she ought to 
 have be hurt . " 

 " we do not know anything about ' ought , ' milly , darling , you and I. God 
 know , we trust , and that help many people who love God to be patient 
 when they be in trouble or pain . but think if it have be poor 
 mischievous little Tiza who have be hurt , how she would have fret . 
 and now very likely Becky will bear it beautifully , and so , without 
 know it , she will be teach Tiza to be patient , and it will do Tiza 
 good to have to help Becky and take care of she for a bit , instead of 
 let Becky always look after she and get she out of scrape . " 

 " oh , and Aunt Emma , can not we all take care of Becky ? what can Olly and I 
 do ? " say Milly , imploringly . 

 " I can go and sing all my song to Becky , " say Olly , look up 
 brightly . 

 " by - and - by , perhaps , " say Aunt Emma , smile and pat his head . " but 
 hark ! be not that father 's step ? " 

 it have grow so dark that they could hardly see who it be open the 
 gate . 

 " oh yes , it be , " cry milly . " it be father and mother . " away they run to 
 meet they , and Mrs. Norton take Milly 's little pale face in both her 
 hand and kiss it . 

 " she be not _ very _ badly hurt , darling . the doctor say she must lie 
 quite quiet for two or three week , and then he hop she will be all 
 right . the wheel give she a squeeze , which jar her poor little back 
 and head very much , but it do not break anything , and if she lie very 
 quite the doctor think she will get quite well again . " " oh mother ! and 
 do Tiza know ? " 

 " yes , we have just be to tell she . Mrs. Wheeler have put she to bed , 
 but she go up to give she our message , and she say poor little Tiza 
 begin to cry again , and want we to tell her mother she would be _ so _ 
 quiet if only they would let she come back to Becky . " 

 " will they , mother ? " 

 " in a few day , perhaps . but she be not to see anybody but Mrs. 
 Backhouse for a little while . " 

 " oh dear ! " sigh milly , while the tear come into her eye again . " we 
 shall be go away so soon , and we can not say good - bye . be not it sad , 
 mother , just happen last thing ? and we have be so happy all the 
 time . " 

 " yes , Milly , " say Mr. Norton , lift she on to his knee . " this be the 
 first really sad thing that ever happen to you in your little life I 
 think . mother , and I , and Aunt Emma , tell you story about sad thing , 
 but that be very different , be not it ? " 

 " yes , " say Milly , think . " Father , be there as many sad thing 
 really as there be in stories?--you know what I mean . " 

 " there be a great many sad thing and sad people in the world , Milly . 
 we do not have monster plague we like King Hrothgar , but every day 
 there be trouble and grief go on somewhere , and we happy and strong 
 people must care for the sad one if we want to do our duty and help to 
 straighten the world a little . " 

 " Father , " whisper Milly , softly , " will you tell we how -- olly and I ? 
 we would if we know how . " 

 " well , Milly , suppose you begin with Becky , and poor Tiza too , indeed . I 
 wonder whether a pair of little people could make a scrap - book for Becky 
 to look at when she be get well ? " 

 " oh yes , yes ! " say Milly , joyfully , " I have get ever so many picture in 
 mother 's writing - book , she let I cut out of her ' graphic , ' and Olly 
 can help paste ; can not you , Olly ? " 

 " olly generally paste his face more than anything else , " say Mr. 
 Norton , give a sly pull at his brown curl . " if I be not very much 
 mistaken , there be a little fairy paste up your eye , old man . " 

 " I be not sleepy , not a bit , " say Olly , sit bolt upright and 
 blink very fast . 

 " I think you be not sleepy , but just asleep , " say Mr. Norton , catch 
 he up in his arm , and carry he to his mother to say good - night . 

 milly go very soberly and quietly up to bed , and for some little time 
 she lie awake , her little heart feel very sore and heavy about the 
 " sad thing " in the world . then with her thought full of Becky she fall 
 asleep . 

 so end Milly 's birthday , a happy day and a sorrowful day , all in one . 
 when milly grow old there be no birthday just before or after it she 
 remember half so clearly as that on which she be seven year old . 




 CHAPTER x 

 last day AT ravensnest 


 on Friday morning the child and their father trudge up very early to 
 the farm to get news of Becky . she have have a bad night Mr. Backhouse 
 say , but she have take some milk and beef - tea ; she know her father and 
 mother quite well , and she have ask twice for Tiza . the doctor say 
 they must just be patient . quiet and rest would make she well again , and 
 nothing else , and Tiza be not to go home for a day or two . 

 as for poor Tiza , a long sleep have cheer she up greatly , and when 
 Milly and Olly go to take she out with they after breakfast , they 
 find she almost as merry and chatty as usual . but she do not like be 
 keep at the Wheelers 's , though they be very kind to she ; and it be 
 all Mrs. Wheeler could do to prevent she from slip up to the farm 
 unknown to anybody . 

 " they do not have porridge for breakfast , " say Tiza , toss her head , 
 when she and Milly be out together . " mother always give we porridge . 
 and I will not sit next Charlie . he be always dirty hisself . he stickie 
 hisself just all over this morning with treacle . Mother would have give 
 he a clout . " 

 however , on the whole , she be as good as such a wild creature could be , 
 and the child and she have some capital time together . wheeler the 
 gardener let they gather strawberry and currant for make jam , a 
 delightful piece of work , which help to keep Tiza out of mischief and 
 make she content with stay away from home more than anything else . 
 at last , after three day , the doctor say she might come home if she 
 would promise to be quiet in the house . so one bright evening Tiza 
 slip into the farmhouse and squeeze in after her mother to the 
 little room where Becky be lie , a white - faced feverish little 
 creature , low down among the pillow . 

 " Becky , " say Tiza , sit down beside her sister , as if nothing have 
 happen , " here be some strawberry . wheeler give I some . you can have 
 some if you want . " 

 " just one , " say Becky , in her weak shaky voice , smile at she ; and 
 Tiza knelt on the bed and stuff one softly into her mouth . 

 " you will have to nurse baby now , Tiza , " say Becky presently ; " he be be 
 under mother 's foot terrible . mind you do not let he eat nasty thing . 
 he will get at the coal if you do not mind he . " 

 " I will not let he , " say Tiza shortly , set to work on her own 
 strawberry . 

 all this do not sound very affectionate ; but I think all the same Tiza 
 do love Becky , and I believe she try to do she good in her own funny 
 way while Becky be ill . Baby scream a good deal certainly when she 
 nurse he , and it be quite impossible of course for Tiza to keep out 
 of mischief altogether for two or three week . still , on the whole , she 
 be a help to her mother ; while as for Becky she be never quite happy 
 when Tiza be out of the house . Becky , like Milly , have a way of love 
 everybody about she , and next to her mother she love Tiza good of 
 anybody . 

 after all , the child be able to say good - bye to Becky . just the day 
 before they be to go away Mr. Backhouse come down to say that Becky 
 would like to see they very much if they could come , and the doctor say 
 they might . 

 so up they go ; milly a good deal excite , and olly very curious to see 
 what Becky would look like . Mr. Backhouse take they in , and they find 
 Becky lie comfortably on a little bed , with a patchwork counterpane , 
 and her shoulder and arm cover up in a red flannel dressing - gown 
 that Aunt Emma have send she . 

 [ illustration : " ' have not you get a bump ? ' ask Olly " ] 

 milly kiss she , and olly shake her hand , and they do not all quite 
 know what to say . 

 " be your back well ? " say milly at last . " I be so glad the doctor let 
 we come . " 

 " have not you get a bump ? " ask Olly , look at she with all his eye . 
 " we think you would have a great black bump on your fore - head , you 
 know -- ever so big . " 

 " no , it be a cut , " say Becky ; " there now , you can see how it be plaster 
 up . " 

 " do it hurt ? " say Olly , " do you kick ? I should have kick . and do 
 the doctor give you nasty medicine ? " 

 " no , " say Becky , " I do not have any now . and it be not nasty at all what 
 I have first . and now I may have strawberry and raspberry , and Mr. 
 Wheeler send mother a plate everyday . " 

 " I do not think it be fair that little boy should not never be ill , " say 
 Olly , with his eye fasten on Becky 's plate of strawberry , which be 
 on the chest of drawer . 

 " oh , you funny boy , " say Milly , " why , mother give you some every day 
 though you be not ill ; and I be sure you would not like stay in bed . " 

 " yes , I should , " say Olly , just for the sake of contradict . " do you 
 know , Becky , we have get a secret , and we be not to tell it you , only 
 Milly and I be go to-- " 

 " do not ! " say Milly , put her hand over , his mouth . " you will tell in a 
 minute . you be always tell secret . " 

 " well , just half , Milly , I will not tell it all you know . it be just like 
 something burn inside my mouth . we be go to make you something , 
 Becky , when we get home . something be -- ootiful , you know . and you can 
 look at it in bed , and we will not make it big , so you can turn over the 
 page , and-- " 

 " be quiet , Olly , " say Milly , " I should think Becky'll guess now . it will 
 come by post , Becky . Mother 's go to help we make it . you will like it 
 I know . " 

 " it' -- it's -- a picture - book ! " say Olly , in a loud whisper , put his 
 head down to Becky . " you will not tell , will you ? " 

 " oh , you unkind boy , " say Milly , pouting . " I will never have a secret 
 with you again . " 

 but Becky look very pleased , and say she would like a picture - book 
 she think very much , for it be dull sometimes when mother be busy 
 and Tiza be nursing baby . so perhaps , after all , it do not matter 
 have tell she . 

 " I be go to write to you , Becky , " say Milly , when the time come to go 
 away , " and at Christmas I will send you a Christmas card , and perhaps 
 some day we will come here again you know . " 

 " and then we will milk the cow , " say Olly , " will not we , Becky ? and I will 
 ride on your big horse . Mr. Backhouse say I may ride all alone some day 
 when I be big ; when I be sixty -- no , when I be ninety - five you know . " 

 and then Milly and Olly kiss Becky 's pale little face and go away , 
 while poor little Becky look after they as if she be _ very _ sorry to 
 see the last of they ; and outside there be Tiza and baby and Mrs. 
 Backhouse and even John Backhouse himself , wait to say good - bye to 
 they . it make milly cry a little bit , and she run away fast down the 
 hill , while Tiza and Olly be still try which could squeeze hand 
 hard . 

 " oh , you dear mountain , " say Milly , as she and nurse walk along 
 together . " look Nana , be not they lovely ? " 

 they do look beautiful this last evening . the sun be shin on they 
 so brightly that everything on they , up to the very top , be clear and 
 plain , and high up , ever so far away , be little white dot move , 
 which Milly know be cow feed . 

 " good - bye river , good - bye stepping - stone , good - bye dove , good - bye 
 fly - catcher ! mind you do not any of you go away till we come back 
 again . " 

 but I should find it very hard to tell you all the good - bye that Milly 
 and Olly say to the place and people at Ravensnest , to the wood and 
 the hay - field , and the beck , to Aunt Emma 's parrot , John Backhouse 's 
 cow , to Windermere Lake and Rydal Lake , above all to dear Aunt Emma 
 herself . 

 " mind you come at Christmas , " shout both the child , as the train 
 move away from windermere station and leave Aunt Emma stand on the 
 platform ; and Aunt Emma nod and smile and wave her handkerchief to 
 they till they be quite out of sight . 

 " Mother , " say Milly , when they could not see Aunt Emma any more , and 
 the last bit of Brownholme be slip away , away , quite out of sight , 
 " I think Ravensnest be the nice place we ever stop at . and I do not 
 think the rain matter either . I be go to tell your old gentleman so . 
 he say it rain in the mountain , and it do , mother -- doesn't it ? but 
 he say the rain spoil everything , and it doesn't -- not a bit . " 

 " why , there be that curious old fairy be sprinkle dust in your eye 
 too , Milly ! " 

 but something or other have be sprinkle tear in mother 's . for to the 
 old people there be nothing sweet than to see the young one open 
 their heart to all that they themselves have love and rejoice over . 
 so the chain of life go on , and joy give birth to joy and love to 
 love . 
