the marriage 
 of 
 William Ashe 

 BY 

 MRS . HUMPHRY WARD 
 to 

 D.M.W. 

 DAUGHTER and FRIEND 

 I INSCRIBE this BOOK 


 MARCH , 1905 
 part I 

 ACQUAINTANCE 

                               " just oblige I and touch 
      with your scourge that minx Chloe , but do not hurt she much . " 




 the Marriage of William Ashe 




 I 


 " he ought to be here , " say Lady Tranmore , as she turn away from the 
 window . 

 Mary Lyster lay down her work . it be a fine piece of church 
 embroidery , which , see that it have be design for she by no less a 
 person than young Mr. Burne Jones himself , make she the envy of her 
 pre - raphaelite friend . 

 " yes , indeed . you make out there be a train about twelve . " 

 " certainly . they can not have take more than an hour to speechify after 
 the declaration of the poll . and I know William mean to catch that 
 train if he possibly could . " 

 " and take his seat this evening ? " 

 Lady Tranmore nod . she move restlessly about the room , fidget 
 with a book here and there , and evidently full of thought . Mary Lyster 
 watch she a little long , then quietly take up her work again . her 
 air of well - breed sympathy , the measured ease of her movement , 
 contrast with Lady Tranmore 's impatience . yet in truth she be 
 listen no less sharply than her companion to the sound in the 
 street outside . 

 Lady Tranmore make her way to the window , and stand there look out on 
 the park . it be the week before Easter , and the plane - tree be not 
 yet in leaf . but a few thorn inside the park railing be already 
 lavishly green and there be a glitter of spring flower beside the park 
 walk , not show , however , in such glorious abundance as become the 
 fashion a few year later . it be a mild afternoon and the drive be 
 full of carriage . from the bow - window of the old irregular house in 
 which she stand , Lady Tranmore could watch the throng pass and 
 repassing , could see also the traffic in Park Lane on either side . 
 London , from this point of sight , wear a cheerful , friendly air . the dim 
 sunshine , the white - clouded sky , the touch of revive green and 
 flower , the soft air blow in from a farth window which be open , 
 bring with they impression of spring , of promise , and rebirth , which 
 insensibly affect Lady Tranmore . 

 " well , I wonder what William will do , this time , in Parliament ! " she 
 say , as she drop again into her seat by the fire and begin to cut 
 the page of a new book . 

 " he be sure to do extremely well , " say Miss Lyster . 

 Lady Tranmore shrug her shoulder . " my dear -- do you know that William 
 have be for eight year -- since he leave Trinity -- one of the idle young 
 man alive ? " 

 " he have one brief ! " 

 " yes -- somewhere in the country , where all the junior get one in turn , " 
 say Lady Tranmore . " that be the year he be so keen and go on 
 circuit , and never miss a session . next year nothing would induce 
 he to stir out of town . what have he do with himself all these eight 
 year ? I can not imagine . " 

 " he have grow -- uncommonly handsome , " say Mary Lyster , with a momentary 
 hesitation as she thread her needle afresh . 

 " I never remember he anything else , " say Lady Tranmore . " all the 
 artist who come here and to Narroways want to paint he . I use to 
 think it would make he a spoiled little ape . but nothing spoil he . " 

 Miss Lyster smile . " you know , Cousin Elizabeth -- and you may as well 
 confess it at once!--that you think he the able , handsome , and 
 charmingest of man ! " 

 " of course I do , " say Lady Tranmore , calmly . " I be certain , 
 moreover -- now -- that he will be Prime Minister . and as for idleness , 
 that , of course , be only a _ façon de parler _ . he have work hard enough 
 at the thing which please he . " 

 " there -- you see ! " say Mary Lyster , laugh . 

 " not politic , anyway , " say the eld lady , reflectively . " he go 
 into the House to please I , because I be a fool and want to see 
 he there . but I must say when his constituent turn he out last 
 year I think they would have be a mean - spirited set if they 
 have not . they know very well he would never do a stroke for they . 
 attendance -- division -- perfectly scandalous ! " 

 " well , here he be , in triumphantly for somewhere else -- with all sort of 
 delightful prospect ! " 

 Lady Tranmore sigh . her white finger pause in their task . 

 " that , of course , be because -- now -- he be a personage . Everything'll be 
 make easy for he now . my dear Mary , they talk of England 's be a 
 democracy ! " 

 the speaker raise her handsome shoulder ; then , as though to shake off 
 thought of loss and grief which have suddenly assail she , she abruptly 
 change the subject . 

 " well -- work or no work -- the first thing we have get to do be to marry 
 he . " 

 she look up sharply . but not the small tremor could she detect in 
 Mary Lyster 's gently move hand . there be , however , no reply to her 
 remark . 

 " do not you agree , polly ? " say Lady Tranmore , smile . 

 her smile -- which still give great beauty to her face -- be charming , but 
 a little sly , as she observe her companion . 

 " why , of course , " say Miss Lyster , incline her head to one side that 
 she might judge the effect of some green shade she have just put in . 
 " but that surely will be make easy for he , too . " 

 " well , after all , the girl can not propose ! and I never see he take any 
 interest in a girl yet -- outside his own family , of course , " add Lady 
 Tranmore , hastily . 

 " no -- he do certainly devote himself to the married woman , " reply 
 Miss Lyster , in the half - absent tone of one more truly interested in her 
 embroidery than in the conversation . 

 " he would soon have an hour with Madame d'Estrées than a week with the 
 prettiest miss in London . that be quite true , but I vow it be the girl ' 
 own fault ! they should stand on their dignity -- snub the creature 
 more ! in my young days-- " 

 [ illustration : LADY TRANMORE and MARY LYSTER ] 

 " ah , there be not a glut of we then , " say Mary , calmly . " listen!"--she 
 hold up her hand . 

 " yes , " say Lady Tranmore , spring up . " there he be . " 

 she stand wait . the door fly open , and in come a tall young man . 

 " William , how late you be ! " say Lady Tranmore , as she fly into his 
 arm . 

 " well , mother , be you pleased ? " 

 her son hold she at arm' - length , smile kindly upon she . 

 " of course I be , " say Lady Tranmore . " and you -- be you horribly tired ? " 

 " not a bit . ah , mary!--how do you do ? " 

 Miss Lyster have rise , and the cousin shake hand . 

 " but I do not deny it be very jolly to come back -- out of all that beastly 
 scrimmage , " say the new member , as he throw himself into an arm - chair 
 by the fire with his hand behind his head , while Lady Tranmore prepare 
 he a cup of tea . 

 " I expect you have enjoy it , " say Miss Lyster , also move towards the 
 fire . 

 " well , when you be in it there be a certain excitement in wonder how 
 you be go to come out of it ! but one might say that , of course , of 
 the infernal region . " 

 " not quite , " say Mary Lyster , smile demurely . 

 " polly ! you _ be _ a tory . everybody else 's hell have move -- but your ! 
 thank you , mother , " as Lady Tranmore give he tea . then , stretch out 
 his great frame in lazy satisfaction , he turn his brown eye from one 
 lady to the other . " I say , mother , I have not see anything as 
 good - look as you -- or polly there , if she will forgive I -- for week . " 

 " hold your tongue , goose , " say his mother , as she replenish the 
 teapot . " what -- there be no pretty girl -- not one ? " 

 " well , they do not come my way , " say William , contentedly munch at 
 bread - and - butter . " I have go through all the usual humbug -- and 
 perjure my soul in all the usual way -- without any consolation worth 
 speaking of . " 

 " do not talk nonsense , sir , " say Lady Tranmore . " you know you like 
 speak -- and you like compliment -- and you have have plenty of both . " 

 " you do not read I , mother ! " 

 " do not I ? " she say , smile . he groan , and take another piece of 
 tea - cake . 

 " my own family at least , do not you think , might omit that ? " 

 " H'm , sir -- so you do not believe a word of your own speech ? " say Lady 
 Tranmore , as she stand behind he and smooth his hair back from his 
 forehead . 

 " well , who do ? " he look up gayly and kiss the tip of her finger . 

 " and it be in that spirit you be go back into the House ? " Mary Lyster 
 throw he the question -- with a slight pinching of the lip -- as she 
 resume her work . 

 " Spirit ? what do you mean , polly ? one play the game , of course -- and it 
 have its moment -- its hot corner , so to speak -- or I suppose no one would 
 play it ! " 

 " and the goal ? " she lift a gently disapprove face , in a movement 
 which show anew the large comeliness of head and neck . 

 " why -- to keep the other fellow out , of course ! " he lift an arm and 
 draw his mother down to sit on the edge of his chair . 

 " William , you be not to talk like that , " say Lady Tranmore , decidedly , 
 lay she cheek , however , against his hand the while . " it be all very 
 well when you be quite a free - lance -- but now -- oh ! never mind 
 Mary -- she be discreet -- and she know all about it . " 

 " what -- that they be think of give I Hickson 's place ? Parham have 
 just write to I -- I find the letter down - stair -- to ask I to go and 
 see he . " 

 " oh ! it be come ? " say Lady Tranmore , with a start of pleasure . Lord 
 Parham be the Prime Minister . " now do not be a humbug , William , and 
 pretend you be not pleased . but you will have to work , mind ! " she hold up 
 an admonish finger . " you will have to answer letter , mind!--you'll 
 have to keep appointment , mind ! " 

 " Shall I ? ... ah!--hudson-- " 

 he turn . the butler be in the room . 

 " his lordship , my lady , would like to see Mr. William before dinner if 
 he could make it convenient . " 

 " certainly , Hudson , certainly , " say the young man . " tell his lordship 
 I will be with he in ten minute . " 

 then , as the butler departed--"How 's father , mother ? " 

 " oh ! much as usual , " say Lady Tranmore , sadly . 

 " and you ? " 

 he lay his arm boyishly round her waist , and look up at she , his 
 handsome face all affection and life . Mary Lyster , observe they , 
 think they a remarkable pair -- he in the very prime and heyday of 
 brilliant youth , she so beautiful still , in spite of the filling - out of 
 middle life -- which , indeed , be at the moment somewhat toned and 
 disguise by the deep mourning , the sweeping crape and dull silk in 
 which she be dress . 

 " I be all right , dear , " she say , quietly , put her hand on his 
 shoulder . " now , go on with your tea . Mary -- feed he ! I will go and talk to 
 father till you come . " 

 she disappear , and William Ashe approach his cousin . 

 " she _ be _ well ? " he say , with an anxiety that become he . 

 " oh yes ! your election have be everything to she -- and your letter . you 
 know how she adore you , William . " 

 Ashe draw a long breath . 

 " yes -- isn't it bad luck ? " 

 " William ! " 

 " for she , I mean . because , you know -- I can not live up to it . I know it be 
 she do -- bless her!--that old Parham 's go to give I this thing . 
 and it be a perfect scandal ! " 

 " what nonsense , William ! " 

 " it be ! " he maintain , spring up and stand before she , with his 
 hand in his pocket . " they be go to offer I the Under - secretaryship 
 for Foreign Affairs , and I shall take it , I suppose , and be thankful . 
 and do you know"--he drop out the word with emphasis--"that I do not 
 know a word of German -- and I can not talk to a Frenchman for half an hour 
 without disgrace myself . there -- that be how we be govern ! " 

 he stand star at she with his bright large eye -- amuse , yet 
 strangely detach -- as though he have very little to do with what he be 
 talk about . 

 Mary Lyster meet his look in some bewilderment , conscious all the time 
 that his neighborhood be very agreeable and stirring . 

 " but every one say -- you speak so well on foreign subject . " 

 " well , any fool can get up a Blue Book . only -- luckily for I -- all the 
 fool do not . that be how I have score sometimes . oh ! I do not deny 
 that -- I've score ! " he thrust his hand deeply into his pocket , his 
 whole tall frame vibrant , as it seem to she , with will and good - humor . 

 " and you will score again , " she say , smile . " you have get a wonderful 
 opportunity , William . that be what the Bishop say . " 

 " much oblige to he ! " 

 Ashe look down upon she rather oddly . 

 " he tell I he have never believe you be such an idler as other people 
 think you -- that he feel sure you have great endowment , and that you 
 would use they for the good of your country , and"--she hesitate 
 slightly--"of the Church . I wish you would talk to he sometimes , William . 
 he see so clearly . " 

 " oh ! do he ? " say Ashe . 

 Mary have drop her work , and her face -- a little too broad , with 
 feature a trifle too strongly mark -- be raise towards he . its pale 
 color have pass into a slight blush . but the more strenuous expression 
 have somehow not add to her charm , and her voice have take a slightly 
 nasal tone . 

 through the mind of William Ashe , as he stand look down upon she , 
 pass a multitude of fly impression . he know perfectly well that 
 Mary Lyster be one of the maiden whom it would be possible for he to 
 marry . his mother have never press she upon he , but she would 
 certainly acquiesce . it would have be mere mock modesty on his part 
 not to guess that Mary would probably not refuse he . and she be 
 handsome , well provide , well connected -- oppressively so , indeed ; a man 
 might quail a little before her relation . moreover , she and he have 
 always be good friend , even when as a boy he could not refrain from 
 tease she for a slow - coach . during his electoral week in the country 
 the thought of " Polly " have often steal kindly upon his rare moment of 
 peace . he must marry , of course . there be no particular excitement or 
 romance about it . now that his eld brother be dead and he have become 
 the heir , it simply have to be do . and Polly be very nice -- quite 
 sweet - temper and intelligent . she look well , move well , would fill 
 the position admirably . 

 then , suddenly , as these half - thought rush through his brain , a 
 breath of something cold and distract -- a wind from the land of 
 _ ennui_--seemed to blow upon they and scatter they . be it the mention 
 of the Bishop -- tiresome , pompous fellow -- or her slightly pedantic 
 tone -- or the infinitesimal hint of " management " that her speech imply ? 
 who know ? but in that moment perhaps the scale of life incline . 

 " much oblige to the Bishop , " he repeat , walk up and down . " I be 
 afraid , however , I do not take thing as seriously as he do . oh , I hope 
 I shall behave decently -- but , good Lord , what a comedy it be ! you know 
 the sort of articles"--he turn towards her--"our paper will be 
 write to - morrow on my appointment . they will make I out no end of a 
 fine fellow -- you'll see ! and , of course , the real truth be , as you and I 
 know perfectly well , that if it have not be for poor Freddy 's death -- and 
 mother -- and her dinner -- and the chap who come here -- I might have 
 whistle for anything of the sort . and then I go down to Ledmenham and 
 stand as a Liberal , and get all the pious Radicals to work for I ! it be 
 a humbug world -- isn't it ? " 

 he return to the fireplace , and stand look down upon she -- grin . 

 Mary have resume her embroidery . she , too , be dimly conscious of 
 something disappointing . 

 " of course , if you choose to take it like that , you can , " she say , 
 rather tartly . " of course , everything can be make ridiculous . " 

 " well , that be a blessing , anyway ! " say Ashe , with his merry laugh . " but 
 look here , Mary , tell I about yourself . what have you be 
 doing?--dance -- riding , eh ? " 

 he throw himself down beside she , and begin an eld - brotherly 
 cross - examination , which last till Lady Tranmore return and beg 
 he to go at once to his father . 

 when he return to the drawing - room , Ashe find his mother alone . it 
 be grow dark , and she be sit idle , her hand in her lap , 
 wait for he . 

 " I must be off , dear , " he say to she . " you will not come down and see I 
 take my seat ? " 

 she shake her head . 

 " I think not . what do you think of your father ? " 

 " I do not see much change , " he say , hesitate . 

 " no , he be much the same . " 

 " and you ? " he slide down on the sofa beside she and throw his arm round 
 she . " have you be fret ? " 

 Lady Tranmore make no reply . she be a self - contain woman , not readily 
 move to tear . but he feel her hand tremble as he press it . 

 " I sha'n't fret now"--she say after a moment--"now that you have come 
 back . " 

 Ashe 's face take a very soft and tender expression . 

 " Mother , you know -- you think a great deal too much of I -- you're too 
 ambitious for I . " 

 she give a sound between a laugh and a sob , and , raise her hand , she 
 smooth back his curly hair and hold his face between they . 

 " when do you see Lord Parham ? " she ask . 

 " eight o'clock -- in his room at the House . I will send you up a note . " 

 " you will be home early ? " 

 " no -- don't wait for I . " 

 she drop her hand , after give he a kiss on the cheek . 

 " I know where you be go ! it be Madame d'Estrées ' evening . " 

 " well -- you do not object ? " 

 " object ? " she shrug her shoulder . " so long as it amuse you -- you 
 will not find _ one _ woman there to - night . " 

 " last time there be two , " he say , smile , as he rise from the sofa . 

 " I know -- Lady Quantock -- and Mrs. Mallory . now they have desert she , I 
 hear . what fresh gossip have turn up I do not know . of course , " she 
 sigh , " I have be out of the world . but I believe there have be 
 development . " 

 " well , I do not know anything about it -- and I do not think I want to know . 
 she be very agreeable , and one meet everybody there . " 

 " _ everybody _ . ungallant creature ! " she say , give a little pull to his 
 collar , the set of which do not please she . 

 " sorry ! mother!"--his laugh eye pursue her--"Do you want to marry 
 I off directly?--I know you do ! " 

 " I want nothing but what you yourself should want . of course , you must 
 marry . " 

 " the young woman do not care twopence about I ! " 

 " william!--be a bear if you like , but not an idiot ! " 

 " perfectly true , " he declare ; " not the dazzler and the high - flier , 
 anyway -- the only one it would be an excitement to carry off . " 

 " you know very well , " she say , slowly , " that now you might marry 
 anybody . " 

 he throw his head back rather haughtily . 

 " oh ! I be not think about money , and that kind of thing . well , give 
 I time , mother -- don't hurry I ! and now I would well stop talk 
 nonsense , change my clothe , and be off . good - bye , dear -- you shall hear 
 when the job 's perpetrate ! " 

 " William , really!--don't say these thing -- at least to anybody but I . 
 you understand very well"--she draw herself up rather finely--"that if I 
 have not know , in spite of your apparent idleness , you would do any work 
 they _ set _ you to do , to your own credit and the country 's , I would never 
 have lift a finger for you ! " 

 William Ashe laugh out . 

 " oh ! intriguing mother ! " he say , stoop again to kiss she . " so you 
 admit you do it ? " 

 he go off gayly , and she hear he fly up - stair three step at a 
 time , as though he be still an untamed Eton boy , and there be no 
 three week ' hard political fighting behind he , and no interview which 
 might decide his life before he . 

 he enter his own sitting - room on the second floor , shut the door 
 behind he , and glance round he with delight . it be a large room 
 look on a side street , and obliquely to the park . its wall be 
 cover with book -- book which almost at first sight betray to the 
 accustomed eye that they be the familiar companion of a student . 
 almost every volume have long paper slip inside it , and when open 
 would have be find to contain note and underlining in a somewhat 
 reckless and destructive abundance . a large table , also load untidily 
 with book and paper , stand in the centre of the room ; many of they 
 be note - book , store with evidence of the most laborious and patient 
 work ; a Cambridge text lie beside they face downward , as he have leave it 
 on departure . his mother 's housekeeper , who have be one of his good 
 friend from babyhood , be the only person allow to dust his room -- but 
 on the strict condition that she replace everything as she find it . 

 he take up the volume , and plunge a moment headlong into the greek 
 chorus that meet his eye . " _ jolly ! _ " he say , put it down with a sigh 
 of regret . " these beastly politic ! " 

 and he go mutter to his dressing - room , summon his valet almost 
 with ill - temper . yet half his library be the library of a politician , 
 admirably choose and exhaustively read . 

 the footman who answer his call understand his mood and serve he at 
 a look . Ashe complain hotly of the brushing of his dress - clothe , and 
 work himself into a fever over the set of his tie . nevertheless , 
 before he leave he have manage to get from the young man the whole story 
 of his engagement to the under - housemaid , give he thereupon some bit 
 of advice , jocular but trenchant , which James accept with a readiness 
 quite unlike his normal behavior in the circle of his class . 




 II 


 Ashe take his seat , din , and see the Prime Minister . these thing take 
 time , and it be not till past eleven that he present himself in the 
 hall of Madame d'Estrées ' house in St. James 's Place . Most of her guest 
 be already gather , but he mount the stair together with an old 
 friend and an old acquaintance , Philip Darrell , one of the able 
 writer of the moment , and Louis Harman , artist and man of fashion , the 
 friend of duchess and painter of portrait , a person much in request 
 in many world . 

 " what a _ cachet _ they have , these house ! " say Harman , look round 
 he . " St. James 's Place be the top ! " 

 " where else would you expect to find Madame d'Estrées ? " ask Darrell , 
 smile . 

 " yes -- what taste she have ! however , it be I really who advise she to 
 take the house . " 

 " naturally , " say Darrell . 

 Harman throw a dubious look at he , then stop a moment , and with a 
 complacent proprietary air straighten an engraving on the staircase 
 wall . 

 " I suppose the dear lady have a hundred slave of the lamp , as usual , " 
 say Ashe . " you advise she about her house -- somebody else help she to 
 buy her wine-- " 

 " not at all , my dear fellow , " say Harman , offended--"as if I could not 
 do that ! " 

 " Hullo ! " say Darrell , as they near the drawing - room door . " what a 
 crowd there be ! " 

 for as the butler announce they , the din of talk which burst through 
 the door imply indeed a multitude -- much at their ease . 

 they make their way in with difficulty , shape their course towards 
 that corner in the room where they know they should find their hostess . 
 Ashe be greet on all side with friendly word and congratulation , 
 and a passage be open for he to the famous " blue sofa " where Madame 
 d'Estrées sit enthrone . 

 she look up with animation , break off her talk with two elderly 
 diplomat who seem to have take possession of she , and beckon Ashe 
 to a seat beside she . 

 " so you be in ? be it a hard fight ? " 

 " a hard fight ? oh no ! one would have have to be a great fool not to get 
 in . " 

 " they say you speak very well . I suppose you promise they everything 
 they want -- from the crown downward ? " 

 " yes -- all the usual harmless thing , " say Ashe . 

 Madame d'Estrées laugh ; then look at he across the top of her fan . 

 " well!--and what else ? " 

 " you can not wait for your newspaper ? " he say , smile , after a moment 's 
 pause . 

 she shrug her shoulder good - humoredly . 

 " oh ! I _ know_--of course I know . be it as good as you expect ? " 

 " as good as-- " the young man open his mouth in wonder . " what right 
 have I to expect anything ? " 

 " how modest ! all the same , they want you -- and they be very glad to get 
 you . but you can not save they . " 

 " that be not generally expect of under - secretary , be it ? " 

 " a good deal 's expect of _ you _ . I talk to Lord Parham about you last 
 night . " 

 William Ashe flush a little . 

 " do you ? very kind of you . " 

 " not at all . I do not flatter you in the least . nor do he . but they be 
 go to give you your chance ! " 

 she bent forward and lightly pat the sleeve of his coat with the 
 finger of a very delicate hand . in this sympathetic aspect , Madame 
 d'Estrées be no doubt exceedingly attractive . there be , of course , 
 many people who be not move by it ; to whom it be the conjuring of an 
 arch pretender . but these be generally of the female sex . man , at any 
 rate , lend themselves to the illusion . Ashe , certainly , have always do 
 so . and to - night the spell still work ; though as her action draw his 
 particular attention to her face and expression , he be aware of slight 
 change in she which recall his mother 's word of the afternoon . the 
 eye be tired ; at last he perceive in they some slight sign of year 
 and harass . up till now her dominating charm have be a kind of timeless 
 softness and sensuousness , which breathe from her whole 
 personality -- from her fair skin and hair , her large , smile eye . she 
 put , as it be , the question of age aside . it be difficult to think of 
 she as a child ; it have be impossible to imagine she as an old woman . 

 " well , this be all very surprising , " say Ashe , " consider that four 
 month ago I do not matter an old shoe to anybody . " 

 " that be your own fault . you take no trouble . and besides -- there be 
 your poor brother in the way . " 

 Ashe 's brow contract . 

 " no , that he never be , " he say , with energy . " Freddy be never in 
 anybody 's way -- least of all in mine . " 

 " you know what I mean , " she say , hastily . " and you know what friend he 
 and I be -- poor Freddy ! but , after all , the world 's the world . " 

 " yes -- we all grow on somebody 's grave , " say Ashe . then , just as she 
 become conscious that she have jar upon he , and must find a new 
 opening , he himself find it . " tell I ! " he say , bend forward with a 
 sudden alertness--"who be that lady ? " 

 he point out a little figure in white , sit in the opening of the 
 second drawing - room ; a very young girl apparently , surround by a group 
 of man . 

 " ah ! " say Madame d'estrées--"i be come to that -- that be my girl 
 kitty-- " 

 " Lady Kitty ! " say Ashe , in amazement . " she be leave school ? I think she 
 be quite a little thing . " 

 " she be eighteen . be not she a darling ? do not you think she very pretty ? " 

 Ashe look a moment . 

 " extraordinarily bewitching!--unlike other people ? " he say , turn to 
 the mother . 

 Madame d'Estrées raise her eyebrow a little , in apparent amusement . 

 " I be not go to describe Kitty . she be indescribable . besides -- you 
 must find she out . do go and talk to she . she be to be half with I , half 
 with her aunt -- Lady Grosville . " 

 Ashe make some polite comment . 

 " oh ! do not let us be conventional ! " say Madame d'Estrées , flirt her 
 fan with a little air of weariness--"It 's an odious arrangement . Lady 
 Grosville and I , as you probably know , be not on term . she say 
 atrocious thing of I -- and I-- " the fair head fall back a little , and 
 the white shoulder rise , with the slight air of languid 
 disdain--"well , bear I witness that I do not retaliate ! it be not worth 
 while . but I know that Grosville House can help Kitty . So!-- " her 
 gesture , half ironical , half resign , complete the sentence . 

 " do Lady Kitty like society ? " 

 " Kitty like anything that flatter or excite she . " 

 " then of course she like society . anybody as pretty as that-- " 

 " ah ! how sweet of you ! " say Madame d'Estrées , softly--"how sweet of 
 you ! I like you to think her pretty . I like you to say so . " 

 Ashe feel and look a trifle disconcert , but his companion bent 
 forward and added--"i do not know whether I want you to flirt with she ! 
 you must take care . Kitty 's the most fantastic creature . oh ! my life 
 now'll be very different . I find she take all my thought and most of 
 my time ! " 

 there be something extravagant in the sweetness of the smile which 
 emphasize the speech , and altogether , Madame d'Estrées , in this new 
 maternal aspect , be not as agreeable as usual . part of her charm 
 perhaps have always lain in the fact that she have no domestic topic of 
 her own , and so be endlessly ready for those of other people . those , 
 indeed , who come often to her house be accustom to speak warmly of 
 her " unselfishness"--by which they mean the easy patience with which 
 she could listen , smile , and flatter . 

 perhaps Ashe make this tacit demand upon she , no less than other people . 
 at any rate , as she talk cooingly on about her daughter , he would have 
 find she tiresome for once but for some arresting quality in that 
 small , distant figure . as it be , he follow what she say with 
 attention , and as soon as she have be recapture by the impatient 
 italian Ambassador , he move off , intend slowly to make his way to 
 Lady Kitty . but he be catch in many congratulation by the road , and 
 presently he see that his friend Darrell be be introduce to she by 
 the old habitué of the house , Colonel Warington , who generally divide 
 with the hostess the " lead " of these social evening . 

 Lady Kitty nod carelessly to Mr. Darrell , and he sit down beside she . 

 " that be a cool hand for a girl of eighteen ! " think Ashe . " she have the 
 air of a princess -- except for the chatter . " 

 Chatter indeed ! wherever he move , the sound of the light hurrying voice 
 make itself persistently hear through the hum of male conversation . 

 yet once , Ashe , look round to see if Darrell could be dislodge , 
 catch the chatterer silent , and find himself all at once invade by a 
 slight thrill , or shock . 

 what do the girl 's expression mean?--what be she think of ? she be 
 look intently at the crowded room , and it seem to Ashe that 
 Darrell 's talk , though his lip move quickly , be not reach she at 
 all . the dark brow be draw together , and beneath they the eye 
 look sorely out . the delicate lip be slightly , piteously open , and 
 the whole girlish form in its young beauty appear , as he watch , to 
 shrink together . suddenly the girl 's look , so wide and search , catch 
 that of Ashe ; and he move impulsively forward . 

 " present I , please , to Lady Kitty , " he say , catch Warington 's arm . 

 " poor child ! " say a low voice in his ear . 

 Ashe turn and see Louis Harman . the tone , however -- allusive , intimate , 
 patronizing -- in which Harman have speak , annoy he , and he pass on 
 without take any notice . 

 " Lady Kitty , " say Warington , " Mr. Ashe wish to be present to you . 
 he be an old friend of your mother 's . congratulate he -- he have just get 
 into Parliament . " 

 Lady Kitty draw herself up , and all trace of the look which Ashe have 
 observe disappear . she bow , not carelessly as she have bow to 
 Darrell , but with a kind of exaggerated stateliness , not less girlish . 

 " I never congratulate anybody , " she say , shake her head , " till I know 
 they . " 

 Ashe open his eye a little . 

 " how long must I wait ? " he say , smile , as he draw a chair beside she . 

 " that depend . be you difficult to know ? " she look up at he 
 audaciously , and he on his side could not take his eye from she , so 
 singular be the small , sparkling face . the hair and skin be very 
 fair , like her mother 's , the eye dark and full of fire , the neck most 
 daintily white and slender , the figure undevelope , the foot and hand 
 extremely small . but what arrest he be , so to speak , the embody 
 contradiction of the personality -- as between the wild intelligence of 
 the eye and the extreme youth , almost childishness , of the rest . 

 he ask she if she have ever know any one confess to be easy , to 
 know . 

 " well , I be easy to know , " she say , carelessly , lean back ; " but , 
 then , I be not worth know . " 

 " be one allow to find out ? " 

 " oh yes -- of course ! do you know -- when you be over there , I _ will _ 
 that you should come and talk to I , and you come . only , " she sit up 
 with animation , and begin to tick off her sentence on she 
 fingers--"don't ask I how long I have be in town . do not ask where I be 
 in Paris . do not inquire whether I like ball ! you see , I warn you at 
 once"--she look up frankly--"that we may not lose time . " 

 " well , then , I do not see how I be ever to find out , " say Ashe , stoutly . 

 " whether I be worth know ? " she consider , then bent forward eagerly . 
 " look here ! I will just tell you everything in a lump , and then that will 
 do -- won't it ? listen . I be just eighteen . I be send to the Soeurs 
 Blanches when I be thirteen -- the year papa die . I _ do not _ like 
 papa -- i'm very sorry , but I do not ! however , that be by - the - way . in all 
 those year I have only see maman once -- she do not like child . but 
 my aunt Grosville have some french relation -- very , _ very _ ' comme il 
 faut , ' you understand -- and I use to go and stay with they for the 
 holiday . tell me!--did you ever hunt in France ? " 

 " never , " say Ashe , startle and amuse by the sudden glance of 
 enthusiasm that light up the face and express itself in the clasp 
 hand . 

 " oh ! it be such heaven , " she say , lift her shoulder with an 
 extravagant gesture--"such _ heaven _ ! first there be the old 
 dress -- the man look such darlings!--and then the horn , and the old 
 way they have--_si noble!--si distingué!_--not like your stupid English 
 hunting . and then the dog ! ah ! the _ dogs_"--the shoulder go high 
 still ; " do you know my cousin Henri actually give I a puppy of the 
 great breed--_the _ breed , you know -- the Dogs of St. Hubert . or at least 
 he _ would _ if maman would have let I bring it over . and she would not ! 
 just think of that ! when there be thousand of people in France who have 
 give the eye out of their head for one . I cry all one 
 night -- Allons!--faut pas y penser!"--she shake back the hair from her 
 eye with an impatient gesture . " my cousin have get a château , you 
 know , in the Seine - et - Oise . they have promise to ask I next year -- when 
 the Grand - Duke Paul come -- if I will promise to behave . you see , I be not a 
 bit like french girl -- I have so many affair ! " 

 her eye flash with laughter . 

 Ashe laugh too . 

 " be you go to tell I about they also ? " 

 she draw herself up . 

 " no ! I play fair , always -- ask anybody ! oh , I _ do _ want to go back to 
 France so badly ! " once more she be all appeal and childishness . 
 " anyway , I will not stay in England ! I have make up my mind to that ! " 

 " how long have it take ? " 

 " a fortnight , " she say , slowly--"just a fortnight . " 

 " that hardly seem time enough -- do it ? " say Ashe . " give we a little 
 long . " 

 " no -- I -- I hate you ! " say Lady Kitty , with a strange drop in her voice . 
 her little finger begin to drum on the table near she , and to Ashe 's 
 intense astonishment he see her eye fill with tear . 

 suddenly a movement towards the other room set in around they . Madame 
 d'Estrées could be hear give direction . a space be make in the 
 large drawing - room -- a little table appear in it , and a footman place 
 thereon a glass of water . 

 Lady Kitty look up . 

 " oh , that _ detestable _ man ! " she say , draw back . " no -- I can not , I 
 can not bear it . come with I ! " and beckon to Ashe she flee with 
 precipitation into the farther part of the inner drawing - room , out of 
 her mother 's sight . Ashe follow she , and she drop pant and elate 
 into a chair . 

 meanwhile the outer room gather to hear the recitation of some _ ver 
 de société _ , fondly believe by their author to be of a very pretty and 
 praedian make . they certainly amuse the company , who laugh and 
 clap as each neat personality emerge . Lady Kitty pass the time 
 either in a running commentary on the reciter , which occasionally 
 convulse her companion , or else in hold her small hand over her 
 ear . 

 when it be over , she draw a long breath . 

 " how maman _ can ! _ oh ! how _ bête _ you English be to applaud such a man ! 
 you have only _ one _ poet , have not you -- one living poet ? ah ! I should not 
 have laugh if it have be he ! " 

 " I suppose you mean Geoffrey Cliffe ? " say Ashe , amuse . " nobody abroad 
 seem ever to have hear of any one else . " 

 " well , of course , I just long to know he ! every one say he be so 
 dangerous!--he make all the woman fall in love with he . that be 
 _ delicious _ ! he should not make I ! do you know he ? " 

 " I know he at Eton . we be ' swish ' together , " say Ashe . 

 she inquire what the phrase might mean , and when inform , flushed 
 hotly , denounce the english school system as quite unfit for gentleman 
 and man of honor . her french cousin would soon die than suffer such a 
 thing . then in the midst of she tirade she suddenly pause , and fix 
 Ashe with her brilliant eye , she ask he a surprising question , in a 
 change and steady voice : 

 " be Lady Tranmore not well ? " 

 Ashe be fairly startled . 

 " thank you , I leave she quite well . have you-- " 

 " do maman ask she to come to - night ? " 

 it be Ashe 's turn to redden . 

 " I do not know . but -- we be in mourning , you see , for my brother . " 

 her face change and soften instantly . 

 " be you ? I be so sorry . I -- I always say something stupid . then -- Lady 
 Tranmore use to come to maman 's party -- before-- " 

 she have grow quite pale ; it seem to he that her hand shake . Ashe 
 feel an extraordinary pang of pity and concern . 

 " it be I , you see , to whom your mother have be kind , " he say , gently . 
 " we be an independent family ; we each make our own friend . " 

 " no-- " she say , draw a deep breath . " no , it be not that . look at that 
 room . " 

 follow her slight gesture , Ashe look . it be an old , low - ceile 
 room , panel in white and gold , show here and there an italian 
 picture -- saint , or holy family , agreeable school - work -- from which might 
 be infer the taste if not the _ expertise _ of Madame d'Estrées ' first 
 husband , Lord Blackwater . the floor be hold by a plentiful collection 
 of seat , neither too easy nor too stiff ; arrange by one who understand 
 to perfection the physical condition at least which should surround the 
 " great art " of conversation . at this moment every seat be full . a sea 
 of black coat overflow on the farth side , into the staircase 
 landing , where through the open door several stand group could be 
 see ; and in the inner room , where they sit , there be but little space 
 between its margin and themselves . it be a remarkable sight ; and in his 
 past visit to the house Ashe have often say to himself that the 
 element of which it be make up be still more remarkable . minister 
 and Opposition ; ambassador , traveller , journalist ; the man of fashion 
 and the man of reform ; here a french republican official , and beyond 
 he , perhaps , a man whose ancestor be already of the most ancient 
 _ noblesse _ in Saint - Simon 's day ; artist , great and small , man of 
 letter good and indifferent ; all these have be among the guest of 
 Madame d'Estrées , bring to the house , each of they , for some quality 's 
 sake , some power of keep up the social game . 

 but now , as he look at the room , not to please himself but to obey 
 Lady Kitty , Ashe become aware of a new impression . the crowd be no 
 less , numerically , than he have see it in the early winter ; but it 
 seem to he less distinguished , make up of coarser and commoner item . 
 he catch the face of a shady financier long since banish from Lady 
 Tranmore 's party ; beyond he a red - faced colonel , conspicuous alike 
 for doubtful money - matter and matrimonial trouble ; and in a far 
 corner the sallow profile of a writer whose book be apt to rouse even 
 the man of the world to a healthy and contemptuous disgust . surely these 
 person have never be there of old ; he could not remember one of they . 

 he look again , more closely . be it fancy , or be the gathering itself 
 aware of the change which have pass over it ? as a whole , it be 
 certainly noisy than of old ; the shouting and laughter be incessant . 
 but within the general uproar certain group have separate from other 
 group , and be talk with a study quiet . Most of the habitué 's 
 be still there ; but they hold themselves apart from their neighbor . 
 be the old intimacy and solidarity begin to break up?--and with 
 they the peculiar charm of these " evening , " a charm which have so far 
 defy a social boycott that have be active from the first ? 

 he glance back uncertainly at Lady Kitty , and she look at he . 

 " why be there no lady ? " she say , abruptly . 

 he collect his thought . 

 " it -- it have always be a man 's gathering . perhaps for some man 
 here -- i'm sorry there be such barbarian , Lady kitty!--that make the 
 charm of it . look at that old fellow there ! he be a most famous old 
 boy . everybody invite he -- but he never stir out of his den but to 
 come here . my mother can not get he -- though she have try often . " 

 and he point to a dishevel , gray - haired gentleman , short in 
 stature , round in figure , something , in short , like an animate egg , who 
 be address a group not far off . 

 Lady Kitty 's face show a variety of expression . 

 " be there many party like this in London ? be the lady ask , and 
 do not come ? I -- I don't -- understand ! " 

 Ashe look at she kindly . 

 " there be no other hostess in London as clever as your mother , " he 
 declare , and then try to change the subject ; but she pay no heed . 

 " the other day , at Aunt Grosville 's , " she say , slowly , " I ask if my 
 two cousin might come to - night , and they look at I as though I be 
 mad ! oh , _ do _ talk to I ! " she come impulsively near , and Ashe notice 
 that Darrell , stand against the doorway of communication , look 
 round at they in amusement . " I like your face -- the very first moment 
 when I see you across the room . do you know -- you're -- you're very 
 handsome ! " she draw back , her eye fix gravely , intently upon he . 

 for the first time Ashe be conscious of annoyance . 

 " I hope you will not mind my say so"--his tone be a little short--"but 
 in this country we do not say those thing . they be not -- quite polite . " 

 " be not they ? " her eyebrow arch themselves and her lip fall in 
 penitence . " I always call my french cousin , Henri la Fresnay , _ beau ! _ 
 I be sure he like it ! " the accent be almost plaintive . 

 Ashe 's natural impulse be to say that if so the french cousin must be 
 an ass . but all in a moment he find himself seize with a desire to 
 take her little hand in his own and press they -- she look such a 
 child , so exquisite , and so forlorn . and he do in fact bend forward 
 confidentially , forget Darrell . 

 " I want you to come and see my mother ? " he say , smile at she . " ask 
 Lady Grosville to bring you . " 

 " May I ? But-- " she search his face , eager still to pour out the 
 impulsive , uncontrolled confidence that be in her mind . but his 
 expression stop she , and she give a little , resentful sigh . 

 " yes -- i'll come . _ we_--you and I -- be a little bit cousin too -- aren't 
 we ? we talk about you at the grosville . " 

 " be our ' great - great ' the same person ? " he say , laugh . " hope it be 
 a decent ' great - great . ' some of mine be not much to boast of . well , at 
 any rate , let us _ be _ cousin -- whether we be or no , shall we ? " 

 she assent , her whole face light up . 

 " and we be go to meet -- the week after next ! " she say , triumphantly , 
 " in the country . " 

 " be we?--at Grosville Park . that be delightful . " 

 " and _ then _ I will ask your advice -- i'll make you tell I -- a hundred 
 thing ! that be a bargain -- mind ! " 

 " Kitty ! come and help I with tea -- there be a darling ! " 

 Lady Kitty turn . a path have open through the crowd , and Madame 
 d'Estrées , much escort , a vision of diamond and pale - pink satin , 
 appear , lead the way to the supper - room , and the light 
 " refection , " accompany by much champagne , which always close these 
 evening . 

 the girl rise , as do her companion also . Madame d'Estrées throw a 
 quick , half - satirical glance at Ashe , but he have eye only for Lady 
 Kitty , and her transformation at the touch of her mother 's voice . she 
 follow Madame d'Estrées with a singular and conscious dignity , her 
 white skirt sweep , her delicately fine head throw back on her thin 
 neck and shoulder . the black crowd close about she ; and Ashe 's eye 
 pursue the slender figure till it disappear . 

 extreme youth -- innocence -- protest -- pain -- be it with these touching and 
 plead impression , after all , that his first talk with Kitty Bristol 
 have leave he ? yet what a little _ étourdie _ ! how lack in the reserve , 
 the natural instinct and shrinking of the well - breed english girl ! 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Darrell and Ashe walk home together , through a windy night which be 
 bring out April scent even from the London grass and lilac - bush . 

 " well , " say Darrell , as they step into the Green Park , " so you be 
 safely in . congratulate you , old fellow . anything else ? " 

 " yes . they have offer I Hickson 's place . More fool they , do not you 
 think ? " 

 " good ! upon my word , Bill , you have get your foot in the stirrup now ! Hope 
 you will continue to be civil to poor devil like I . " 

 the speaker look up smile , but neither the tone nor the smile be 
 really cordial . Ashe feel the embarrassment that he have once or twice 
 feel before in tell Darrell news of good fortune . there seem to be 
 something in Darrell that resent it -- under an outer show of 
 felicitation . 

 however , they go on talk of the political moment and its prospect , 
 and of Ashe 's personal affair . as to the last , Darrell question , and 
 Ashe somewhat reluctantly reply . it appear that his allowance be to 
 be largely raise , that his paralyzed father , in fact , be anxious to 
 put he in possession of a substantial share in the income of the 
 estate , that one of the country - house be to be make over to he , and 
 so on . 

 " which mean , of course , that they want you to marry , " say Darrell . 
 " well , you have only to throw the handkerchief . " 

 they be pass a lamp as he speak , and the light shine on his long , 
 pale face -- a face of discontent -- with its large sunken eye and hollow 
 cheek . 

 Ashe treat the remark as " rot , " and endeavor to get away from his 
 own affair by discuss the party they have just leave . 

 " how do she get all those people together ? it be astonishing ! " 

 " well , I always like Madame d'Estrées well enough , " say Darrell , " but , 
 upon my word , she have do a beastly mean thing in bring that girl 
 over . " 

 " you mean?"--Ashe hesitated--"that her own position be too doubtful ? " 

 " doubtful , my dear fellow ! " darrell laugh unpleasantly . " I never 
 really understand what it all mean till the other night when old Lady 
 Grosville take and tell I -- more at any rate than I know before . the 
 grosville be on the war - path , and they regard the coming of this poor 
 child as the last straw . " 

 " why ? " say Ashe . 

 Darrell give a shrug . " well , you know the story of Madame d'Estrées ' 
 step - daughter -- old Blackwater 's daughter ? " 

 " ah ! by his first marriage ? I know it be something about the 
 step - daughter , " say Ashe , vaguely . 

 Darrell begin to repeat his conversation with Lady Grosville . the tale 
 threaten presently to become a black one indeed ; and at last Ashe 
 stand still in the broad walk cross the Green Park . 

 " look here , " he say , resolutely , " do not tell I any more . I do not want 
 to hear any more . " 

 " why ? " ask Darrell , in amazement . 

 " because"--ashe hesitate a moment . " well , I do not want it to be make 
 impossible for I to go to Madame d'Estrées ' again . besides , we have just 
 eat her salt . " 

 " you be a good friend ! " say Darrell , not without something of a sneer . 

 Ashe be ruffle by the tone , but try not to show it . he merely 
 insist that he know Lady Grosville to be a bit of an old cat ; that of 
 course there be something up ; but it seem a shame for those at least 
 who accept Madame d'Estrées ' hospitality to believe the bad . there 
 be a curious mixture of carelessness and delicacy in his remark , very 
 characteristic of the man . it appear as though he be at once too 
 indolent to go into the matter , and too chivalrous to talk about it . 

 Darrell presently maintain a rather angry silence . no man like to be 
 check in his story , especially when the check imply something like 
 a snub from his good friend . suddenly , memory bring before he the 
 little picture of Ashe and Lady Kitty together -- he bend over she , in 
 his large , handsome geniality , and she look up . Darrell feel a twinge 
 of jealousy -- then disgust . really , man like Ashe have the world too 
 easily their own way . that they should pose , besides , be too much . 




 III 


 rather more than a fortnight after the evening at Madame d'Estrées ' , 
 William Ashe find himself in a Midland train on his way to the 
 Cambridgeshire house of Lady Grosville . while the April country slip 
 past he -- like some blanched face to which life and color be 
 return -- Ashe divide his time between an idle skimming of the 
 Saturday paper and a no less idle dreaming of Kitty Bristol . he have 
 see she two or three time since his first introduction to she -- once at 
 a ball to which Lady Grosville have take she , and once on the terrace of 
 the House of Commons , where he have stroll up and down with she for a 
 most amusing and stimulating hour , while her mother entertain a group 
 of elderly politician . and the follow day she have come alone -- her 
 own choice -- to take tea with Lady Tranmore , on that lady 's invitation , 
 as prompt by her son . Ashe himself have arrive towards the end of the 
 visit , and have find a Lady Kitty in the height of the fashion , stiff 
 mannered , and flush to a deep red by her own consciousness that she 
 could not possibly be make a good impression . at sight of he she 
 relax , and talk a great deal , but not wisely ; and when she be go , 
 Ashe could get very little opinion of any kind from his mother , who have , 
 however , express a wish that she should come and visit they in the 
 country . 

 since then he frankly confess to himself that in the interval of his 
 new official and administrative work he have be a good deal haunt by 
 memory of this strange child , her eye , her grace -- even in her fit of 
 proud shyness -- and the way in which , as he have put she into her cab 
 after the visit to Lady Tranmore , her tiny hand have linger in his , a 
 mute , astonishing appeal . haunted , too , by what he hear of her fortune 
 and surrounding . what be the real truth of Madame d'Estrées ' 
 situation ? during the precede week some ugly rumor have reach Ashe 
 of financial embarrassment in that quarter , of debt rise to 
 mountainous height , of crisis and possible disappearance . then these 
 rumor be meet by other , to the effect that Colonel Warington , the old 
 friend and support of the d'Estrées ' household , have come to the rescue , 
 that the crisis have be avert , and that the three weekly evening , so 
 well known and so well attend , would go on ; and with this phase of the 
 story there mingle , as Ashe be well aware , not the slight breath of 
 scandal , in a case where , so to speak , all be scandal . 

 and meanwhile what new and dolorous truth have Lady Kitty be learn 
 as to her mother 's history and her mother 's position ? by Jove ! it _ be _ 
 hard upon the girl . Darrell be right . why not leave she to her french 
 friend and relations?--or relinquish she to Lady Grosville ? Madame 
 d'Estrées have see little or nothing of she for year . she could not , 
 therefore , be necessary to her mother 's happiness , and there be a real 
 cruelty in thus claim she , at the very moment of her entrance into 
 society , where Madame d'Estrées could only stand in her way . for 
 although many a man whom the girl might profitably marry be to be 
 find among the mother 's guest , the influence of Madame d'Estrées ' 
 " evening " be certainly not matrimonial . still the unforeseen be 
 surely the probable in Lady Kitty 's case . what sort of man ought she to 
 marry -- what sort of man could safely take the risk of marry 
 she -- with that mother in the background ? 

 he descend at the way - side station prescribe to he , and look round 
 he for fellow - guest -- much as the card - player examine his hand . Mary 
 Lyster , a cabinet minister -- fill an ornamental office and hand on 
 from ministry to ministry as a kind of necessary appendage , the public 
 never know why -- the minister 's second wife , an attaché from the austrian 
 embassy , two member of Parliament , and a well - know journalist -- Ashe 
 say to himself flippantly that so far the trump be not many . but he 
 be always reasonably glad to see Mary , and he go up to she , care for 
 her bag , and make she put on her cloak , with cousinly civility . in the 
 omnibus on the way to the house he and Mary gossip in a corner , while 
 the cabinet minister and the editor go to sleep , and the two member 
 of Parliament practise some courageous French on the austrian attaché . 

 " be it to be a large party ? " he ask of his companion . 

 " oh ! they always fill the house . a good many come down yesterday . " 

 " well , I be not curious , " say Ashe , " except as to one person . " 

 " who ? " 

 " Lady Kitty Bristol . " 

 Mary Lyster smile . 

 " yes , poor child , I hear from the Grosville girl that she be to be 
 here . " 

 " why ' poor child ' ? " 

 " I do not know . quite the wrong expression , I admit . it should be ' poor 
 hostess . ' " 

 " oh!--the grosville complain ? " 

 " no . they be only on tenter - hook . they never know what she will do 
 next . " 

 " how good for the grosville ! " 

 " you think society be the well for shock ? " 

 " Lady Grosville can do with they , anyway . what a masterful woman ! but 
 I will back Lady Kitty . " 

 " I have not see she yet , " say Mary . " I hear she be a very odd - look 
 little thing . " 

 " extremely pretty , " say Ashe . 

 " really ? " Mary lift incredulous eyebrow . " well , now I shall know what 
 you admire . " 

 " oh , my taste be horribly catholic -- I admire so many people , " say 
 Ashe , with a glance at the well - dress elegance beside he . Mary 
 color a little , unseen ; and the rattle of the carriage as it enter 
 the covered porch of Grosville Park cut short their conversation . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " well , I be glad you get in , " say Lady Grosville , in her full , loud 
 voice , " because we be connection . but of course I regard the loss of a 
 seat to our side just now as a great disaster . " 

 " very grasping , on your part ! " say Ashe . " you have have it all your own 
 way lately . think of Portsmouth ! " 

 Lady Grosville , however , as she meet his banter look , do not find 
 herself at all inclined to think of Portsmouth . she be much more 
 inclined to think of William Ashe . what a good - look fellow he have 
 grow ! she heave an inward sigh , of mingled envy and appreciation , 
 direct towards Lady Tranmore . 

 Poor Susan indeed have suffer terribly in the death of her eld son . 
 but the handsomer and abler of the two brother still remain to 
 she -- and the estate be safe . Lady Grosville think of her own three 
 daughter , plain and almost dowerless ; and of that conceited young man , 
 the heir , whom she could hardly persuade her husband to invite , once a 
 year , for appearance sake . 

 " why be we so early ? " say Ashe , look at his watch . " I think I 
 should be disgracefully late . " 

 for he and Lady Grosville have the library to themselves . it be a fine , 
 book - wall room , with giallo antico column and Adam decoration ; and in 
 its richly color lamp - light space , the seat figure -- stiffly erect -- of 
 Lady Grosville , her profile , say by some to be like a horse and by 
 other to resemble Savonarola , the cap of old Venice point that crown 
 her grizzle hair , her black velvet dress , and the long - finger , ugly , 
 yet distinguish hand which lie upon her lap , tell significantly ; 
 especially when contrast with the negligent ease and fresh - color 
 youth of her companion . 

 Grosville Park be rich in second - rate antique ; and there be a 
 Greco - roman head above the bookcase with which Ashe have be often 
 compare . as he stand now lean against the fireplace , the close - pile 
 curl , and eye -- somewhat " à fleur de tête"--of the bust be 
 undoubtedly repeat with some closeness in the live man . those whom 
 he have offend by some social carelessness or other say of he when 
 they wish to run he down , that he be " floridly " handsome ; and there 
 be some truth in it . 

 " do not you get the message about dinner ? " say Lady Grosville . then , as 
 he shake his head : " very remiss of Parkin . I always tell he he lose 
 his head directly the party go into double figure . we have to put off 
 dinner a quarter of an hour because of Kitty Bristol , who miss she 
 train at St. Pancras , and only arrive half an hour ago . by - the - way , I 
 suppose you have already see she -- at that woman 's ? " 

 " I meet she a week or two ago , at Madame d'Estrées ' , " say Ashe , 
 apparently preoccupy with something wrong in the set of his white 
 waistcoat . 

 " what do you think of she ? " 

 " a charming young lady , " say Ashe , smile . " what else should I think ? " 

 " a lamb throw to the wolf , " say Lady Grosville , grimly . " how that 
 woman _ could _ do such a thing ! " 

 " I see nothing lamblike about Lady Kitty , " say Ashe . " and do you 
 include I among the wolf ? " 

 Lady Grosville hesitate a moment , then stick to her color . 

 " you should not go to such a house , " she say , boldly--"I suppose I may 
 say that without offence , William , as I have know you from a boy . " 

 " say anything you like , my dear Lady Grosville ! so you -- believe evil 
 thing -- of Madame d'Estrées ? " 

 his tone be light , but his eye seek the distant door , as though 
 invoke some fellow - guest to appear and protect he . 

 Lady Grosville do not answer . Ashe 's look return to she , and he be 
 startle by the expression of her face . he have always know and 
 unwillingly admire she for a fine Old Testament Christian , one from 
 whom the language of the imprecatory Psalms with regard to her enemy , 
 personal and political , might have flow more naturally than from any 
 other person he know , of the same class and breeding . but this 
 loathing -- this passion of contempt -- this heat of memory!--these be new 
 indeed , and the fire of they transfigure the old , gray face . 

 " I have know a fair number of bad people , " say Lady Grosville , in a 
 low voice--"and a good many wicked woman . but for meanness and vileness 
 combine , the thing I know of the woman who be Blackwater 's wife have 
 no equal in my experience ! " 

 there be a moment 's pause . then Ashe say , in a voice as serious as she 
 own : 

 " I be sorry to hear you say that , partly because I like Madame 
 d'Estrées , and partly -- because -- I be particularly attract by Lady 
 Kitty . " 

 Lady Grosville look up sharply . " do not marry she , william!--don't 
 marry she ! she come of a bad stock . " 

 Ashe recover his gayety . 

 " she be your own niece . might not a man dare -- on that guarantee ? " 

 " not at all , " say Lady Grosville , unappeased . " I be a hop out of kin . 
 besides -- a Methodist governess save I ; she convert I , at eighteen , 
 and I owe she everything . but my brother -- and all the rest of we ! " she 
 throw up her eye and hand . " what be the good of be mealy mouthed 
 about it ? all the world know it . a good many of we be mad -- and I 
 sometimes think I see more than eccentricity in Kitty . " 

 " who be Madame d'Estrées ? " say Ashe . why should he wince so at the 
 girl 's name?--in that hard mouth ? 

 Lady Grosville smile . 

 " well , I can tell you a good deal about that , " she say . " ah!--another 
 time ! " 

 for the door open , and in come a group of guest , with a gush of talk 
 and a rustling of silk and satin . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 everybody be gather ; dinner have be announce ; and the white - haired 
 and gouty Lord Grosville be in a state of seethe impatience that not 
 even the mild - voice Dean of the neighboring cathedral , engage in 
 compliment he on his speech at the Diocesan Conference , could 
 restrain . 

 " Adelina , need we wait any long ? " say the master of the house , 
 turn an angry eye upon his wife . 

 " certainly not -- she have have ample time , " say Lady Grosville , and rang 
 the bell beside she . 

 suddenly there be a whirlwind of noise in the hall , the angry barking 
 of a small dog , the sound of a girl 's voice laugh and scolding , the 
 swish of silk skirt . a scandalize butler , obey Lady Grosville 's 
 summon , throw the door open , and in burst Lady Kitty . 

 " oh ! I be so sorry , " say the new - comer , in a tone of despair . " but I 
 could not leave he up - stair , Aunt Lina ! he would eaten one of my shoe , and 
 begin upon the other . and Julie 's afraid of he . he bite she last week . 
 _ May _ he sit on my knee ? I know I can keep he quiet ! " 

 [ illustration : " a slim girl in WHITE AT the far end of the large room " ] 

 every conversation in the library stop . twenty amazed person turn 
 to look . they behold a slim girl in white at the far end of the large 
 room struggle with a gray terri puppy which she hold under her 
 left arm , and turn appeal eye towards Lady Grosville . the dog , 
 half frightened , half fierce , be bark furiously . Lady Kitty 's voice 
 could hardly be hear through the din , and she be crimson with the 
 effort to control her charge . her lip laugh ; her eye implore . and 
 to add to the effect of the apparition , a marked strangeness of dress 
 be at once perceive by all the english eye turn upon she . Lady 
 Kitty be rob in the extreme of french fashion , which at that moment 
 be a fashion of flounce ; she be much _ décolletée ; _ and her fair , 
 abundant hair , carry to a great height , and arrange with a certain 
 calculate wildness around her small face , be surmount by a large 
 scarlet butterfly which shine defiantly against the dark background of 
 book . 

 " Kitty ! " say Lady Grosville , advance indignantly , " what a dreadful 
 noise ! pray give the dog to Parkin at once . " 

 Lady Kitty only hold the struggle animal tight . 

 " _ please _ , Aunt Lina!--I'm afraid he will bite ! but he will be quite good 
 with I . " 

 " why _ do _ you bring he , Kitty ? we can not have such a creature at 
 dinner ! " say Lady Grosville , angrily . 

 Lord Grosville advance behind his wife . 

 " how do you do , Kitty ? had not you well put down the dog and come and 
 be introduce to Mr. Rankine , who be to take you in to dinner ? " 

 Lady Kitty shake her fair head , but advanced , still cling to the dog , 
 give a smile and a nod to Ashe , and a bow to the young Tory member 
 present to she . 

 " you do not mind he ? " she say , a flash of laughter in her dark eye . 
 " we will manage he between we , will not we ? " 

 the young man , dazzle by her prettiness and her strangeness , murmur a 
 hopeful assent . Lord Grosville , with the air of a man determine on 
 dinner though the sky fall , offer his arm to Lady Edith Manley , the 
 wife of the cabinet minister , and make for the dining - room . the stream 
 of guest follow ; when suddenly the puppy , perceive on the floor a 
 ball of wool which have roll out of Lady Grosville 's work - table , 
 escape in an ecstasy of mischief from his mistress 's arm and fly upon 
 the ball . Kitty rush after he ; the wool first unroll , then catch ; 
 the table overturn and all its content be fling pell - mell in the 
 path of Lady Grosville , who , on the arm of the amused and astonished 
 minister , be wait in restrained fury till her guest should pass . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " I shall never get over this , " say Lady Kitty , as she lean back in 
 her chair , still pant , and quite incapable of eat any of the food 
 that be be offer to she in quick succession . 

 " I do not know that you deserve to , " say Ashe , turn a face upon she 
 which be as grave as he could make it . the attention of every one else 
 round the room be also in truth occupy with his companion . there be , 
 indeed , a general buzz of conversation and a general pretence that Lady 
 Kitty 's proceeding might now be ignore . but in reality every guest , 
 male or female , keep a stealthy watch on the red butterfly and the 
 sparkling face beneath it ; and Ashe be well aware of it . 

 " I vow it be not my fault , " say Kitty , with dignity . " I be not 
 allow to have the dog I should have have . you would never have find a dog 
 of St. Hubert condescend to bedroom slipper ! but as I have to have a 
 dog -- and Colonel Warington give I this one three day ago -- and he have 
 already ruin half maman 's thing , and no one could manage he but I , 
 I just have to bring he , and trust to Providence . " 

 " I have be here a good many time , " say Ashe , " and I never yet see a 
 dog in the sanctuary . do you know that Pitt once write a speech in the 
 library ? " 

 " do he ? I be sure it never make such a stir as Ponto do . " Kitty 's face 
 suddenly break into laughter , and she hide it a moment in her hand . 

 " you brazen it out , " say Ashe ; " but how be you go to appease Lady 
 Grosville ? " 

 Kitty cease to laugh . she draw herself up , and look seriously , 
 observantly at her aunt . 

 " I do not know . but I must do it somehow . I do not want any more worry . " 

 so changed be her tone and aspect that Ashe turn a friendly 
 examine look upon she . 

 " have you be worry ? " he say , in a low voice . 

 she shrug her shoulder and make no reply . but presently she 
 impatiently reclaim his attention , snatch he from the lady he have 
 take in to dinner , with no scruple at all . 

 " will you come a walk with I to - morrow morning ? " 

 " Proud , " say Ashe . " what time ? " 

 " as soon as we can get rid of these people , " she say , her eye run 
 round the table . then as it pause and linger on the face of Mary 
 Lyster opposite , she abruptly ask he who that lady might be . 

 Ashe inform she . 

 " your cousin ? " she say , look at he with a slight frown . " your 
 cousin ? I don't -- well , I do not think I shall like she . " 

 " that be a great pity , " say Ashe . 

 " for I ? " she say , distrustfully . 

 " for both , of course ! my mother 's very fond of Miss Lyster . she be often 
 with we . " 

 " oh ! " say Kitty , and look again at the face opposite . then he hear 
 she say behind her fan , half to herself and half to he : 

 " she do not interest I in the least ! she have no idea ! I be sure she 
 have no idea . have she ? " 

 she turn abruptly to Ashe . 

 " every one call she very clever . " 

 Kitty look contempt . 

 " that be nothing to do with it . it be not the clever people who have 
 idea . " 

 ashe banter she a little on the meaning of her word , till he 
 presently find that she be too young and unpractised to be able to 
 take his thrust and return they , with equanimity . she could make a 
 dare sally or reply ; but it be still the raw material of 
 conversation ; it want ease and polish . and she be evidently conscious 
 of it herself , for presently her cheek flush and her manner waver . 

 " I suppose you -- everybody -- think she very agreeable ? " she say , 
 sharply , her eye return to Miss Lyster . 

 " she be a most excellent gossip , " say Ashe . " I always go to she for the 
 news . " 

 Kitty glance again . 

 " I can see that already she detest I . " 

 " in half an hour ? " 

 the girl nod . 

 " she have look at I twice -- about . but she have make up her mind -- and 
 she never change . " then with an abrupt alteration of note she look 
 round the room . " I suppose your English dining - room be all like this ? 
 one might be sit in a hearse . and the picture -- no ! _ quelle 
 horreur _ ! " 

 she raise her shoulder again impetuously , frown at a huge 
 full - length opposite of Lord Grosville as M.F.H. , a masterpiece indeed 
 of early victorian vulgarity . 

 then suddenly , hastily , with that flashing softness which so often 
 transform her expression , she turn towards he , try to make 
 amend . 

 " but the library -- that be _ bien_--ah ! _ tr - rès , tr - rès _ bien _ ! " 

 her r 's roll a little as she speak , with a charming effect , and she 
 look at he radiantly , as though to strike and to make amend be 
 equally her prerogative , and she ask no man 's leave . 

 " you have not yet see what there be to see here , " say Ashe , smile . 
 " look behind you . " 

 the girl turn she slim neck and exclaim . for behind Ashe 's chair be 
 the treasure of the house . it be a " Dance of Children , " by one of the 
 most famous of the eighteenth - century master . from the dark wall it 
 shine out with a flower - like brilliance , a vision of color and of grace . 
 the child dance through a golden air , their body sway to one of 
 those " unheard melody " of art , sweet than all mortal tune ; their 
 delicate face alive with joy . the sky and grass and tree seem to 
 caress they ; a soft sunlight clothe they ; and flower brush their 
 foot . 

 Kitty turn back again and be silent . be it Ashe 's fancy , or have she 
 grow pale ? 

 " do you like it ? " he ask she . she turn to he , and for the second 
 time in their acquaintance he see her eye float in tear . 

 " it be too beautiful ! " she say , with an effort -- almost an angry effort . 
 " I do not want to see it again . " 

 " I think it would give you pleasure , " say Ashe , gently , suddenly 
 conscious of a hope that she be not aware of the slight look of 
 amusement with which Mary Lyster be contemplate they both . 

 " so it do , " say Kitty , furtively apply her lace handkerchief to her 
 tear ; " but"--her voice dropped--"when one 's unhappy -- very 
 unhappy -- thing like that -- thing like _ Heaven_--hurt ! oh , what a _ fool _ 
 I be ! " and she sit straightly up , look round she . 

 there be a pause ; then Ashe say , in another voice : 

 " look here , you know this will not do . I think we be to be cousin . " 

 " well ? " say Kitty , indifferently , not look at he . 

 " and I understand that I be to be take into respectable cousinly 
 counsel ? " 

 " well ? " say Kitty again , crumble her bread . " I can not do it here , can 
 I ? " 

 Ashe laugh . 

 " well , anyhow , we be go to sample the garden to - morrow morning , 
 be not we ? " 

 " I suppose so , " say Kitty . then , after a moment , she look at her 
 right - hand neighbor , the young politician to whom as yet she have 
 scarcely vouchsafe a word . 

 " what be his name ? " she ask , under her breath . Ashe repeat it . 

 " perhaps I ought to talk to he ? " 

 " of course you ought , " say Ashe , with smile decision , and turn to 
 the lady whom he have bring in he leave she free . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 when the lady rise , Lady Grosville lead the way to the large 
 drawing - room , a room which , like the library , have some character , and a 
 thin elegance of style , not , however , warm and harmonize by the 
 delightful presence of book . the wall , blue and white in color , be 
 panel in stucco relief . a few family portrait , stiff handling of 
 stiff people , be place each in the exact centre of its respective 
 panel . there be a few case of china and a few polished table . a 
 crimson Brussels carpet , choose by Lady Grosville for its 
 " cheerfulness , " cover the floor , and there be a large white sheepskin 
 rug before the fireplace . a few hyacinth in pot , and the bright fire 
 supply the only gay and living note -- before the lady arrive . 

 still , for an english eye , the room have a certain cold charm , be 
 moreover full of _ history _ . it hardly deserve at any rate the shiver 
 with which Kitty Bristol look round it . 

 but she have little time to dwell upon the room and its meaning , for 
 Lady Grosville approach she with a manner which still show sign of 
 the catastrophe before dinner . 

 " Kitty , I think you do not know Miss Lyster yet -- Mary Lyster -- she want 
 to be introduce to you . " 

 Mary advance smile ; Kitty hold out a limp hand , and they exchange a 
 few word stand in the centre of the floor , while the other guest 
 find seat . 

 " what a charming contrast ! " say Lady Edith Manley in Lady Grosville 's 
 ear . she nod smile towards the standing pair -- strike by the fine 
 straight line of Mary 's satin dress , the roundness of her fine figure , 
 the oval of her head and face , and then by the little , vibrating , 
 tempestuous creature beside she , so distinguished , in spite of the 
 billow flounce and ribbon , so direct and significant , amid all the 
 elaboration . 

 " Kitty be ridiculously overdress , " say Lady Grosville . " I hope we 
 shall soon change that . my girl be go to take she to their woman . " 

 Lady Edith put up her eye - glass slowly and look at the two Grosville 
 girl ; then back at Kitty . 

 meanwhile a few perfunctory question and answer be pass between 
 Miss Lyster and her companion . Mary 's aspect as she talk be extremely 
 amiable ; one might have call it indulgent , perhaps even by an 
 adjective that imply a yet further shade of delicate superiority . 
 Kitty meet it by the same " grand manner " that Ashe have several time 
 observe in she , a manner catch perhaps from some french model , and 
 caricature in the taking . her eye meanwhile take note of Mary 's face 
 and dress , and while she listen her small tooth torment she 
 under - lip , as though she restrain impatience . all at once in the midst 
 of some information that Miss Lyster be lucidly giving , Kitty make an 
 impetuous turn . she have catch some word on the farth side of the 
 room ; and she look hard , eagerly , at the speaker . 

 " who be that ? " she inquire . 

 Mary Lyster , with a sharp sense of interruption , reply that she 
 believe the lady in question be the Grosville 's french governess . but 
 in the very midst of her sentence Kitty desert she , leave her standing 
 in the centre of the drawing - room , while the deserter flee across it , 
 and sink down beside the astonished mademoiselle take the 
 Frenchwoman 's hand by assault and hold it in both her own . 

 " vous parlez français?--vous ête Française ? ah ! ça I fait tant de 
 bien ! voyon ! voyons!--causon un peu ! " 

 and bend forward , she break into a cataract of French , all the 
 element of her strange , small beauty rushing , as it be , into flame 
 and movement at the swift sound and cadence of the word , like a dancer 
 kindle by music . the occasion be of the slight ; the Frenchwoman 
 might well show a natural bewilderment . but into the slight occasion the 
 girl throw an animation , a passion , that glorify it . it be like the 
 leap of a wild rain - stream on the mountain , that pour into the first 
 channel which present itself . 

 " what beautiful French ! " say Lady Edith , softly , to Mary Lyster , who 
 have find a seat beside she . 

 Mary Lyster smile . 

 " she have be at school , of course , in a french convent . " somehow the 
 tone imply that the explanation dispose of all merit in the 
 performance . 

 " I be afraid these french convent school be not at all what they 
 should be , " say Lady Grosville . 

 and rise to a pyramidal height , her ample moiré dress swell behind 
 she , her gray head magnificently crown by its lace cap and black 
 velvet _ bandeau _ , she sweep across the room to where the Dean 's wife , 
 Mrs. Winston , sit in fascinated silence observe Lady Kitty . the 
 silence and the attention annoy her hostess . the first thing to be 
 do with girl of this type , it seem to Lady Grosville , be to prove 
 to they that they would _ not _ be allow to monopolize society . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 there be natural monopoly , however , and they be not easy to deal 
 with . 

 as soon as the gentleman return , Mr. Rankine , whom she have treat so 
 badly at dinner , the young agent of the estate , the clergyman of the 
 parish , the austrian attaché , the cabinet minister , and the Dean , all 
 show a strong inclination to that side of the room which seem to be 
 hold in force by Lady Kitty . the Dean especially be not to be gainsay . 
 he place himself in the seat shyly vacate by the french governess , and 
 cross his thin , stockinge leg with the air of one who mean to take 
 his ease . there be even a certain curious resemblance between he and 
 Kitty , as be notice from a distance by Ashe . the Dean , who be very 
 much a man of the world , and come of an historic family , be , in his 
 masculine degree , plan on the same miniature scale and with the same 
 fine finish as the girl of eighteen . and he carry his knee - breech , 
 his apron , and his exquisite white head with a natural charm and energy 
 akin to her -- mellow though it be by time , and dignify by office . 
 he begin eagerly to talk to she of Paris . his father have be 
 ambassador for a time under Louis Philippe , and he have boyish memory 
 of the great house in the Faubourg St. Honoré , and of the Orleanist 
 minister and man of letter . and lo ! Kitty meet he at once , in a glow 
 and sparkle that enchant the old man . moreover , it appear that this 
 much - beflounce young lady could talk ; that she have hear of the famous 
 name and the great affair to which the Dean make allusion ; that she 
 possess indeed a native and surprising interest in matter of the sort ; 
 and a manner , above all , with the old , alternately soft and daring , 
 calculate , as Lady Grosville would no doubt have put it , merely to make 
 fool of they . 

 in her cousin ' house , it seem , she have talk with old people , 
 survivor of the Orleanist and Bourbon régime -- even of the empire ; have 
 sit at their foot , a small , excited hero - worshipper ; and have then rush 
 blindly into the memoir and book that concern they . so , in this 
 french world the child have find time for other thing than hunt , and 
 the flattery of her cousin Henri ? Ashe be suppose to be devote 
 himself to the Dean 's wife ; but both he and she listen most of the 
 time to the sally and the laughter of the circle where Kitty preside . 

 " my dear young lady , " cry the delighted Dean , " I never find anybody 
 who can talk of these thing -- it be really astonishing . ah , _ now _ , we 
 English know nothing of France -- nor they of we . why , I be a mere 
 school - boy then , and I have a passion for their society , and their 
 book -- for their _ plays_--dare I confess it?"--he lower his voice and 
 glance at his hostess--"their play , above all ! " 

 Kitty clap her hand . the Dean look at she , and run on : 

 " my mother share it . when I come over for my Eton holiday , she and I 
 live at the Théâtre - Français . ah , those be day ! _ I _ remember 
 Mademoiselle Mars in ' Hernani . ' " 

 Kitty bound in her seat . whereupon it appear that just before she 
 leave Paris she have be take by a friend to see the reign idol of 
 the Comédie - Française , the young and astonishing actress , Sarah 
 Bernhardt , as Doña Sol . and there begin straightway an excited duet 
 between she and the Dean ; a comparison of old and new , a rivalry of 
 heroine , a hot and critical debate that presently silence all other 
 conversation in the room , and bring Lord Grosville to stand gap and 
 astounded behind the Dean , reflect no doubt that this be not 
 precisely the Dean of the Diocesan Conference . 

 the old man indeed forget his age , the girl her youth ; they meet as 
 equal , on poetic ground , till suddenly Kitty , spring up , and to 
 prove her point , begin an imitation of Sarah in the great love - scene of 
 the last act , before arrest fate , in the person of Don Ruy , break in 
 upon the rapture of the lover . she absolutely forget the Grosville 
 drawing - room , the star Grosville girl , the other face , astonish 
 or severe , neutral or friendly . out roll the tide of tragic verse , 
 fine poetry , and high passion ; and though it be not very much to say , it 
 must at least be say that never have such recitation , in such French , 
 be hear before within the wall of Grosville Park . nor have the lip 
 of any english girl ever deal there with a poetic diction so 
 unchastened and unashamed . Lady Grosville might well feel as though the 
 solid frame of thing be melt and crack round she . 

 Kitty cease . she fall back upon her chair , smite with a sudden 
 perception . 

 " you make I ! " she say , reproachfully , to the Dean . 

 the Dean say another " Brava ! " and give another clap . then , become 
 aware of Lord Grosville 's open mouth and eye , he sit up , catch his 
 wife 's expression , and come back to prose and the present . 

 " my dear young lady , " he begin , " you have the most extraordinary 
 talent-- " when Lady Grosville advance upon he . stand before he , 
 she majestically signal to her husband across his small person . 

 " William , kindly order Mrs. Wilson 's carriage . " 

 Lord Grosville awake from his stupor with a jerk , and do as he be 
 tell . Mrs. Wilson , the agent 's timid wife , who be not at all aware that 
 she have ask for her carriage , rise obediently . then the mistress of 
 the house turn to Lady Kitty . 

 " you recite very well , Kitty , " she say , with cold and stately emphasis , 
 " but another time I will ask you to confine yourself to Racine and 
 Corneille . in England we have to be very careful about french writer . 
 there be , however , if I remember right , some fine passage in 
 ' Athalie . ' " 

 Kitty say nothing . the austrian attaché who have be follow the 
 little incident with the lively interest , retire to a close 
 inspection of the china . but the Dean , whose temper be of the quick and 
 chivalrous kind , be rouse . 

 " she recite wonderfully ! and Victor Hugo be a classic , please , my 
 lady -- just as much as the rest of they . ah , well , no doubt , no doubt , 
 there might be thing more suitable . " and the old man come waver down 
 to earth , as the enthusiasm which Kitty have breathe into he escape , 
 like the gas from a balloon . " but , do you know , Lady Kitty " --he strike 
 into a new subject with eagerness , partly to cover the girl , partly to 
 silence Lady Grosville--"you remind I all the time so remarkably -- in 
 your voice -- certain inflection -- of your sister -- your step - sister , be not 
 it?--Lady Alice ? you know , of course , she be close to you to - day -- just 
 the other side the park -- with the Sowerbys ? " 

 the Dean 's wife spring to her foot in despair . in general it be to she 
 a matter for fond complacency that her husband have no memory for gossip , 
 and be in such matter as innocent and as dangerous as a child . but 
 this be too much . at the same moment Ashe come quickly forward . 

 " my sister ? " say Kitty . " my sister ? " 

 she speak low and uncertainly , her eye fix upon the Dean . 

 he look at she with a sudden odd sense of something unusual , then go 
 on , still flounder : 

 " we meet she at St. Pancras on our way down . if I have only know we be 
 to have have the pleasure of meet you -- do you know , I think she be 
 look decidedly well ? " 

 his kindly expression as he rise expect a word of sisterly assent . 
 meanwhile even Lady Grosville be paralyze , and the word with which 
 she have mean to interpose fail on her lip . 

 Kitty , too , rise , look round for something , which she seem to find 
 in the face of William Ashe , for her eye clung there . 

 " my sister , " she repeat , in the same low , strained voice . " my sister 
 Alice ? I -- I do not know . I have never see she . " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Ashe could not remember afterwards precisely how the incident close . 
 there be a bustle of depart guest , and from the midst of it Lady 
 Kitty slip away . but as he come down - stair in smoke trim , ten 
 minute later , he overhear the injured Dean wrestling with his wife , as 
 she light a candle for he on the landing . 

 " my dear , what do you look at I like that for ? what do the child 
 mean ? and what on _ earth _ be the matter ? " 




 IV 


 after the lady have go to bed , on the night of Lady Kitty 's 
 recitation , William Ashe stay up till past midnight talk with old 
 Lord Grosville . when relieve of the presence of his woman - kind , who 
 be apt either to oppress he , in the person of his wife , or to puzzle 
 he , in the person of his daughter , Lord Grosville be not by any 
 mean without value as a talker . he possess that narrow but still most 
 serviceable fund of human experience which the english land - owner , while 
 our english tradition subsist , can hardly escape , if he will . as 
 guardsman , volunteer , magistrate , lord - lieutenant , member -- for the sake 
 of his name and his acre -- of various important commission , as military 
 _ attaché _ even , for a short space , to an important embassy , he have 
 acquire , by mere living , that for which his intellectual better have 
 often envy he -- a certain shrewdness , a certain instinct , as to both 
 man and affair , which be often of more service to he than fine 
 brain to other person . but , like most accomplishment , these also 
 bring their own conceit with they . Lord Grosville have , in his own 
 opinion , do extremely well without much book education himself , have 
 but little appreciation for it in other . 

 nevertheless he rarely miss a chance of conversation with William 
 Ashe , not because the young man , in spite of his past indolence , be 
 generally hold to be both able and accomplish , but because the elder 
 find in he an invincible taste for man and woman , their fortune , 
 oddity , catastrophe -- especially the latter -- similar to his own . 

 like Mary Lyster , both be good gossip ; but of a much more 
 disintereste type than she . woman indeed as gossip be too apt to 
 pursue either the damnation of some one else or the apotheosis of 
 themselves . but here the stupider no less than the abler man show a 
 certain broad detachment not very common in woman -- amuse by the human 
 comedy itself , make no profit out of it , either for themselves or 
 moral , but ask only that the play should go on . 

 the incident , or rather the heroine of the evening , have give Lord 
 Grosville a topic which in the case of William Ashe he see no reason for 
 avoid ; and in the peace of the smoking - room , when he be no long 
 either hungry for his dinner or worry by his responsibility as host , 
 he fall upon his wife 's family , and , as though he have be the manager 
 of a puppet - show , unpack the whole box of they for Ashe 's 
 entertainment . 

 figure after figure emerge , one more besmirched than another , till 
 finally the most beflecke of all be shake out and display -- Lady 
 Grosville 's brother and Kitty 's father , the late Lord Blackwater . and on 
 this occasion Ashe do not try to escape the story which be thus a 
 second time bring across he . Lord Grosville , if he please , have a 
 right to tell it , and there be now a curious feeling in Ashe 's mind 
 which have be entirely absent before , that he have , in some sort , a 
 right to hear it . 

 Briefly , the outline of it fall into something like this shape : Henry , 
 fifth Earl of Blackwater , have begin life as an irish peer , with more 
 money than the majority of his class ; an initial advantage soon undo 
 by an insane and unscrupulous extravagance . he be , however , a fine , 
 handsome , voracious gentleman , bear to prey upon his kind , and when he 
 look for an heiress he be not long in find she . his first wife , a 
 very rich woman , bear he one daughter . before the daughter be three 
 year old , Lord Blackwater have develop a sturdy hatred of the mother , 
 chiefly because she fail to present he with a son ; and he could not 
 even appease himself by the free spending of her money , which , so far as 
 the capital be concern , be sharply look after by a pair of 
 trustee , Belfast manufacturer and Presbyterians , to whom the 
 Blackwater type be not at all congenial . 

 these restriction presently wear out Lord Blackwater 's patience . he 
 leave his wife , with a small allowance , to bring up her daughter in one 
 of his irish house , while he generously spend the rest of her large 
 income , and his own , and a great deal besides , in London and on the 
 Continent . 

 Lady Blackwater , however , be not long before she oblige he by die . 
 her girl , then twelve year old , live for a time with one of her 
 mother 's trustee . but when she have reach the age of seventeen her 
 father suddenly command her presence in Paris , that she might make 
 acquaintance with his second wife . 

 the new Lady Blackwater be an extremely beautiful woman , irish , as the 
 first have be , but like she in no other respect . Margaret Fitzgerald 
 be the daughter of a cosmopolitan pair , who after many shift for a 
 living , have settle in Paris , where the father act as correspondent 
 for various english paper . her beauty , her caprice , and her " affair " 
 be all well know in Paris . as to what the relation between she and 
 Lord Blackwater might have be before the death of the wife , Lord 
 Grosville take a frankly uncharitable view . but when that event 
 occur , Blackwater be begin to get old , and Miss Fitzgerald have 
 become necessary to he . she press all her advantage , and it end in 
 his marry she . the new Lady Blackwater present he with one child , 
 a daughter ; and about two year after its birth he send for his eld 
 daughter , Lady Alice , to join they in the sumptuous apartment in the 
 Place Vendôme which he have furnish for his new wife , in defiance both 
 of his english and irish creditor . 

 Lady Alice arrive -- a fair slip of a girl , possess , it be plain to 
 see , by a nervous terror both of her father and step - mother . but Lady 
 Blackwater receive she with effusion , caress she in public , dress 
 she to perfection , and make all possible use of the girl 's presence in 
 the house for the advancement of her own social position . within a year 
 the Belfast trustee , watch uneasily from a distance , receive a 
 letter from Lord Blackwater , announce Lady Alice 's runaway marriage 
 with a certain Colonel Wensleydale , formerly of the Grenadier Guards . 
 Lord Blackwater profess himself vastly annoyed and displease . the 
 young people , furiously in love , have manage the affair , however , with a 
 skill that baffle all vigilance . married they be , and without any 
 settlement , Colonel Wensleydale have nothing to settle , and Lady 
 Alice , like a little fool , be only anxious to pour all that she 
 possess into the lap of her beloved . the father throw himself on the 
 mercy of the trustee , remind they that in little more than three 
 year Lady Alice would become unfettered mistress of her own fortune , 
 and beg they meanwhile to make proper provision for the rash but 
 happy pair . Harry Wensleydale , after all , be a rattle good fellow , 
 with whom all the young woman be in love . the thing , though naughty , 
 be natural ; and the colonel would make an excellent husband . 

 one presbyterian trustee leave his business in Belfast and venture 
 himself among the abomination of Paris . he be much befool and 
 befeaste . he find a shy young wife tremulously in love ; a handsome 
 husband ; an amiable step - mother . he know no one in Paris who could 
 enlighten he , and be not clever enough to invent mean of get 
 information for himself . he be induce to promise a sufficient income 
 for the moment on behalf of himself and his co - trustee ; and for the rest 
 be oblige to be content with vague assurance from Colonel Wensleydale 
 that as soon as his wife come into her property fit settlement 
 should be make . 

 four year pass by . the young people live with the Blackwaters , and 
 their income keep the establishment go . Lady Alice have a child , and 
 be at first not altogether unhappy . she be little more than a timid 
 child herself ; and no doubt , to begin with , she be in love . then come 
 her majority . in defiance of all her trustee , she give her whole 
 fortune to her husband , and no power could prevent she from so do . 

 the Blackwater ménage blaze up into a sudden splendor . Lady 
 Blackwater 's carriage and Lady Blackwater 's jewel have never be fine ; 
 and amid the crowd who frequent the house , the slight figure , the 
 sallow face , and absent eye of her step - daughter attract little 
 remark . Lady Alice Wensleydale be say to be delicate and reserved ; she 
 make no friend , explain herself to no one ; and it be suppose that 
 she occupy herself with her little boy . 

 then one December she disappear from the apartment in the Place 
 Vendôme . it be say that she and the boy find the climate of Paris too 
 cold in winter , and have go for a time to Italy . Colonel Wensleydale 
 continue to live with the Blackwaters , and their apartment be no less 
 sumptuous , their dinner no less talk of , their extravagance no less 
 noisy than before . but Lady Alice do not come back with the spring ; and 
 some ugly rumor begin to creep about . they be check , however , by 
 the death of Lord Blackwater , which occur within a year of his 
 daughter 's departure ; by the monstrous debt he leave behind he ; and by 
 the sale of the content of the famous apartment , matter , all of they , 
 sufficiently ugly or scandalous in themselves to keep the tongue of 
 fame busy . Lady Blackwater leave Paris , and when she reappear , it be 
 in Rome as the Comtesse d'Estrées , the wife of yet another old man , 
 whose health oblige they to winter in the south and to spend the summer 
 in yachting . her _ salon _ in Rome under Pio Nono become a great 
 rendezvous for English and Americans , attract by the historic name 
 and title that M. d'Estrées ' connection among the black nobility , his 
 wealth , and his interest in several of the Catholic banking - house of 
 Rome and Naples enable his wife to command . 

 Colonel Wensleydale do not appear . Madame d'Estrées let it be 
 understand that her step - daughter be of a difficult temper , and now 
 spend most of her time in Ireland . her own daughter , her " darling 
 Kitty , " be be educate in Paris by the Soeurs Blanches , and she 
 pin for the day when the " little sweet " should join she , ready to 
 spread her wing in the great world . but mother must not be impatient , 
 Kitty must have all the advantage that befit her rank ; and to what 
 well hand could the most anxious mother intrust she than to those 
 charming , aristocratic , accomplished nun of the Soeurs Blanches ? 

 then one January day M. d'Estrées drive out to San Paolo fuori le Mura , 
 and catch a blast from the snowy Sabines come back . in three day he 
 be dead , and his well - provide widow have snatch the bulk of his 
 fortune from the hand of his needy and embitter kindre . 

 within six month of his death she have buy a house in St. James 's 
 Place , and her London career have begin . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " it be here that we come in , " say Lord Grosville , when , with more 
 digression and more plainness of speech with regard to his quondam 
 sister - in - law than can be here reproduce , he have bring his story to 
 this point . " blackwater -- the old ruffian -- when he be die have a moment 
 of remorse . he write to my wife and ask she to look after his girl , 
 ' for God 's sake , Lina , see if you can help Alice -- Wensleydale 's a 
 perfect brute . ' that be the first light we have on the situation , for 
 Adelina have long before wash her hand of he ; and we know that _ she _ 
 hat we . well , we try ; of course we try . but so long as she 
 husband live Alice would have nothing to say to any of we . I suppose 
 she think that for her boy 's sake she would well keep a bad business to 
 herself as much as possible-- " 

 " Wensleydale -- Wensleydale ? " say Ashe , who have be smoke hard and 
 silently beside his host . " you mean the man who distinguish himself in 
 the Crimea ? he die last year -- at Naples , be not it ? " 

 Lord Grosville assent . 

 it appear that during the last year of his life Lady Alice have nurse 
 her husband faithfully through disease and poverty ; for scarcely a 
 vestige of her fortune remain , and an application for money make by 
 Wensleydale to Madame d'Estrées , unknown to his wife , have be 
 peremptorily refuse . the colonel die , and within three month of his 
 death Lady Alice have also lose her son and only child , of 
 blood - poisoning develop in Naples , whither he have be summon from 
 school that his father might see he for the last time . 

 then , after seventeen year , Lady Alice come back to she kindre , who 
 have last see she as a young girl -- gentle , undeveloped , easily lead , and 
 rather stupid . she return a gray - haired woman of thirty - four , who have 
 lose youth , fortune , child , and husband ; whose aspect , moreover , 
 suggest loss still deep and more drear . at first she wrap 
 herself in what seem to some a dull and to other a tragic silence . 
 but suddenly a flame leap up in she . she become aware of the position 
 of Madame d'Estrées in London ; and one day , at a private view of the 
 Academy , her former step - mother go up to her smile , with 
 out - stretch hand . Lady Alice turn very pale ; the hand drop , and 
 Alice Wensleydale walk rapidly away . but that night , in the Grosville 
 house , she speak out . 

 " she tell Lina and myself the whole story . you would have think the woman 
 be possess . my wife -- she be not of the cry sort , nor be I. but she 
 cry , and I believe -- well , I can tell you it be enough to move a 
 stone . and when she have do , she just go away , and lock her door , and 
 let no one say a word to she . she have tell one or two other relation 
 and friend , and-- " 

 " and the relation and friend have tell other ? " 

 " well , I can answer for myself , " say Grosville after a pause . " this 
 happen three month ago . I never have tell , and never shall tell , all 
 the detail as she tell they to we . but we have let enough be known-- " 

 " enough?--enough to damn Madame d'Estrées ? " 

 " oh , well , as far as the woman be concern , she be mostly that 
 already . there be other tale go about . I expect you know they . " 

 " no , I do not know they , " say Ashe . 

 Lord Grosville 's face express surprise . " well , this finish it , " he 
 say . 

 " poor child ! " say Ashe , slowly , put down his cigarette and turn 
 a thoughtful look on the carpet . 

 " Alice ? " say Lord Grosville . 

 " no . " 

 " oh ! you mean Kitty ? yes , I have forget she for the moment . yes , poor 
 child . " 

 there be silence a moment , then Lord Grosville inquire : 

 " what do you think of she ? " 

 " I ? " say Ashe , with a laugh . " I do not know . she be obviously very 
 pretty-- " 

 " and a handful ! " say Lord Grosville . 

 " oh , quite plainly a handful , " say Ashe , rather absently . then the 
 memory of Kitty 's entry recur to they both , and they laugh . 

 " not much shyness leave in that young woman -- eh ? " say the old man . " she 
 tell my girl such story of her french doing -- my wife 's have to stop 
 it . she seem to have have all sort of love - affair already . and , of 
 course , she will have any number over here -- sure to . some unscrupulous 
 fellow'll get hold of she , for naturally the right sort will not marry she . 
 I do not know what we can do . Adelina offer to take she altogether . but 
 that woman would not hear of it . she write Lina rather a good letter -- on 
 her dignity -- and that kind of thing . we give she an opening , and , by 
 Jove ! she take it . " 

 " and meanwhile Lady Kitty have no dealing with her step - sister ? " 

 " you hear what she say . extraordinary girl ! to let the thing out plump 
 like that . just like the blood . they say anything that come into their 
 head . if we have know that Alice be to be with the Sowerbys this 
 week - end , my wife would certainly have put Kitty off . it would be 
 uncommonly awkward if they be to meet -- here for instance . Hullo ! be it 
 get late ? " 

 for the whist - player at the end of the library have push back their 
 chair , and man be stroll back from the billiard - room . 

 " I be afraid Lady Kitty understand there be something wrong with her 
 mother 's position , " say Ashe , as they rise . 

 " I dare say . bring up in Paris , you see , " say the white - haire 
 Englishman , with a shrug . " of course , she know everything she 
 should not . " 

 " bring up in a convent , please , " say Ashe , smile . " and I think 
 the French _ girl _ be the most innocent and ignorant thing alive . " 

 Lord Grosville receive the remark with derision . 

 " you ask my wife what she think about french convent . she know -- she be 
 have lot of catholic relation . she will tell you tale . " 

 Ashe think , however , that he could trust himself to see that she do 
 nothing of the sort . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the smoking - room break up late , but the new under - secretary sit up still 
 later , read and smoke in his bedroom . a box of Foreign Office 
 paper lie on his table . he go through they with a keen sense of 
 pleasure , enjoy his new work and his own competence to do it , of 
 which , notwithstanding his remark to Mary Lyster , he be not really at 
 all in doubt . then when his comment be do , and the paper replace 
 in the order in which they would now go up to the Secretary of State , he 
 feel the spring night oppressively mild , and walk to the window , he 
 throw it wide open . 

 he look out upon a dutch garden , full of spring flower in bloom . in 
 the midst be a small fountain , which murmur to itself through the 
 night . an orangery or conservatory , of a charming eighteenth - century 
 design , run round the garden in a semicircle , its flat pilaster and 
 moulding of yellow stone take under the moonlight the color and the 
 delicacy of ivory . beyond the terrace which border the garden , the 
 ground fall to a river , of which the reach , now dazzle , now sombre , 
 now slip secret under wood , and now silverly open to the gentle 
 slope of the park , bring wildness and romance into a scene that have 
 else be tame . beyond the river on a rise ground be a village church 
 with a spire . the formal garden , the georgian conservatory , the park , 
 the river , the church -- they breathe England and the traditional english 
 life . all that they imply , of custom and inheritance , of strength and 
 narrowness , of cramp prejudice and stubborn force , be very familiar 
 to Ashe , and on the whole very congenial . he be glad to be an 
 Englishman and a member of an english government . the ironic mood which 
 be tolerably constant in he do not in the least interfere with his 
 normal enjoyment of normal good . he see himself often as a shade among 
 shadow , as an actor among actor ; but the play be good all the same . 
 that a man should know himself to be a fool be in his eye , as it be 
 in Lord Melbourne 's , the first of necessity . but fool or no fool , let 
 he find the occupation that suit he , and pursue they . on those 
 term life be still amply worth living , and ginger be still hot in the 
 mouth . 

 this be his usual philosophy . religiously he be a sceptic , enormously 
 interested in religion . should he ever become Prime Minister , as Lady 
 Tranmore prophesy , he would know much more theology than the bishop 
 he might be call on to appoint . politically , at the same time , he be 
 an aristocrat , enormously interested in liberty . the absurdity of his 
 own class be still more plain to he perhaps than the absurdity of 
 the populace . but have he live a couple of generation early he would 
 have go with passion for catholic emancipation , and boggle at the 
 Reform Bill . and if fate have throw he on early day still , he would 
 not , like Falkland , have die ingeminate peace ; he would have fight ; 
 but on which side , no friend of his -- up till now -- could have be quite 
 sure . to have the reputation of an idler , and to be in truth a plodding 
 and unwearied student ; this , at any rate , please he . to avow an 
 enthusiasm , or an affection , generally seem to he an indelicacy ; only 
 two or three people in the world know what be the real quality of his 
 heart . yet no man feign shirk without in some measure learn to 
 shirk ; and there be certain true indolence and sybaritism in Ashe of 
 which he be fully and contemptuously aware , without either wish or 
 feel himself able to break the yoke of they . 

 at the present moment , however , he be rather conscious of much unusual 
 stirring and exaltation of personality . as he stand look out into the 
 English night the current of his blood run free and fast . never have he 
 feel the natural appetite for live so strong in he , combine with 
 what seem to be at once a divination of come change , and a thirst 
 for it . be it the mere advancement of his fortune -- or something 
 infinitely subtler and sweeter ? it be as though wave of softness and 
 of yearning well up from some unknown source , seek an object and an 
 outlet . 

 as he stand there dream , he suddenly become conscious of sound in 
 the room overhead . or rather in the now absolute stillness of the rest 
 of the house he realize that the movement and voice above he , which 
 have really be go on since he enter his room , persist when 
 everything else have die away . 

 two people be talk ; or rather one voice run on perpetually , break 
 at interval by the other . he begin to suspect to whom the voice 
 belong ; and as he do so , the window above his own be throw open . he 
 step back involuntarily , but not before he have catch a few word in 
 French , speak apparently by Lady Kitty . 

 " Ciel ! what a night!--and how the flower smell ! and the star -- I adore 
 the star ! mademoiselle -- come here ! Mademoiselle ! answer I -- I will not 
 tell tale -- now do you--_really and truly_--believe in God ? " 

 a laugh , which be a laugh of pleasure , run through Ashe , as he 
 hurriedly put out his light . 

 " Tormentor ! " he say to himself--"must you put a woman through her 
 theological pace at this time of night ? can not you go to sleep , you 
 little whirlwind?--what be to be do ? if I shut my window the noise will 
 scare she . but I can not stand eavesdropping here . " 

 he withdraw softly from the window and begin to undress . but Lady Kitty 
 be lean out , and her voice carry amazingly . hear in this way 
 also , apart from form and face , it become a separate living thing . Ashe 
 stand arrest , his watch that he be wind up in his hand . he have 
 know the voice till now as something sharp and light , the sign surely 
 of a chatterer and a flirt . to - night , as Kitty make use of it to expound 
 her own peculiar theology to the french governess -- whereof a few 
 fragment now and then float down to Ashe -- nothing could have be 
 more musical , melancholy , caressing . a voice full of sex , and the spell 
 of sex . 

 what have she be talk of all these hour to mademoiselle ? a lady 
 whom she could never have set eye on before this visit . he think of 
 her face , in the drawing - room , as she have speak of her sister -- of her 
 eye , so full of a bright feverish pain , which have hang upon his own . 

 have she , indeed , be confide all her home secret to this stranger ? 
 Ashe feel a movement of distaste , almost of disgust . yet he remember 
 that it be by her unconventionality , her lack of all proper reticence , 
 or , as many would have say , all delicate feeling , that she have make she 
 first impression upon he . ay , that have be an impression -- an 
 impression indeed ! he realize the fact profoundly , as he stand 
 linger in the darkness , try not to hear the voice that thrill 
 he . 

 at last!--was she go to bed ? 

 " ah!--but I be a pig , to keep you up like this ! Allez dormir ! " ( the 
 sound of a kiss . ) " I ? oh no ! why should one go to bed ? it be in the 
 night one begin to live . " 

 she fall to hum a little french tune , then break off . 

 " you remember ? you promise ? you have the letter ? " 

 asseveration apparently from mademoiselle , and a mention of eight 
 o'clock , follow by remorse from Kitty . 

 " eight o'clock ! and I keep you like this . I be a brute beast ! 
 Allez -- allez vite ! " and quick step scud across the floor above , 
 follow by the shutting of a door . 

 Kitty , however , come back to the window , and Ashe could still hear she 
 sigh and talk to herself . 

 what have she be plot ? a letter ? convey by mademoiselle ? to whom ? 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 long after all sound above have cease Ashe still lie awake , think of 
 the story he have hear from Lord Grosville . certainly , if he have know 
 it , he would never have go familiarly to Madame d'Estrées ' house . 
 Laxity , for a man of his type , be one thing ; lie , meanness , and 
 cruelty be another . what could be do for this poor child in her 
 strange and sinister position ? he be ironically conscious of a sudden 
 heat of missionary zeal . for if the creature to be save have not 
 possess such a pair of eye -- so slim a neck -- such a haunting and 
 teasing personality -- what then ? 

 the question presently plunge with he into sleep . but he have not 
 forget it when he awake . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 he have just finish dress next morning , when he chance to see from 
 the front window of his room , which command the main stretch of the 
 park , the figure of a lady on one of the path . she seem to be 
 return from the farth end of a long avenue , and be evidently 
 hurry to reach the house . as she approach , however , she turn 
 aside into a shrubbery walk and be soon lose to view . but Ashe have 
 recognize Mademoiselle D. the matter of the letter recur to he . he 
 guess that she have already deliver it . but where ? 

 at breakfast Lady Kitty do not appear . Ashe make inquiry of the 
 young Miss Grosville , who reply with some tartness that she suppose 
 Kitty have a cold , and hurry off herself to dress for Sunday - school . it 
 be not at all the custom for young lady to breakfast in bed on 
 sunday at Grosville Park , and Lady Grosville 's brow be cloud . Ashe 
 feel it a positive effort to tell she that he be not go to church , 
 and when she have marshal her flock and carry they off , those leave 
 behind know themselves , indeed , as heathen and publican . 

 Ashe wander out with some official paper and a pipe into the spring 
 sunshine . Mr. Kershaw , the editor , would gladly have catch he for a 
 political talk . but Ashe would not be catch . as to the interest of 
 England in the Persian Gulf , both they and Mr. Kershaw might for the 
 moment go hang . would Lady Kitty meet he in the old garden at 
 eleven - thirty , or would she not ? that be the only thing that matter . 

 however , it be still more than an hour to the time mention . Ashe 
 spend a while in roam a wood delicately pied with primrose and 
 anemone , and then saunter back into the garden , which be old and 
 famous . 

 suddenly , as he come upon a terrace border by a thick yew hedge , and 
 descend by step to a low terrace , he become aware of voice in a 
 strange tone and key -- not loud , but , as it be , intensify far beyond 
 the note of ordinary talk . Ashe stand still ; for he have recognize the 
 voice of Lady Kitty . but before he have make up his mind what to do a 
 lady begin to ascend the step which connect the upper terrace with 
 the low . she come straight towards he , and Ashe look at she with 
 astonishment . she be not a member of the Grosville house party , and 
 Ashe have never see she before . yet in her pale , unhappy face there be 
 something that recall another person ; something , too , in her gait and 
 her passionate energy of movement . she sweep past he , and he see that 
 she be tall and thin , and dress in deep mourning . her eye be set 
 on some inner vision ; he feel that she scarcely see he . she pass like 
 an embodied grief -- menacing and lamentable . 

 something like a cry pursue she up the step . but she do not turn . she 
 walk swiftly on , and be soon lose to sight in the tree . 

 Ashe hesitate a moment , then hurry down the step . 

 on a stone seat beneath the yew hedge , Kitty Bristol lie prone . he hear 
 her sob , and they go most strangely through his heart . 

 " Lady Kitty ! " he say , as he stand beside she and bent over she . 

 she look up , and show no surprise . her face be bath in tear , but 
 her hand seek his piteously and draw he towards she . 

 " I have see my sister , " she say , " and she hat I . what have I do ? 
 I think I shall die of despair ! " 




 V 


 the effect of the few sob word , with which Kitty Bristol have 
 greet his presence beside she , upon the feeling of William Ashe be 
 both sharp and deep , for they seem already to imply a peculiar 
 relation , a special link between they . have it not , indeed , begin in that 
 very moment at St. James 's Place when he have first catch sight of she , 
 sit forlorn in her white dress?--when she have " will " he to come 
 to she , and he come ? surely -- though as to this he have his qualm -- she 
 could not have speak with this abandonment to any other of her new 
 english acquaintance ? to Darrell , for instance , who be expect at 
 Grosville Park that evening . no ! from the beginning she have turn to 
 he , William Ashe ; she have be conscious of the same mutual 
 understanding , the same sympathy in difference that he himself feel . 

 it be , at any rate , with the feeling of one whose fate have most 
 strangely , most unexpectedly overtake he that he sit down beside she . 
 his own pulse be run at a great rate ; but there be to be no sign 
 of it for she . he try , indeed , to calm she by that mere cheerful 
 strength and vitality of which he be so easily master . " why should you 
 be in despair ? " he say , bend towards she . " tell I . let I try and 
 help you . be your sister unkind to you ? " 

 Kitty make no reply at once . the tear that brim her large eye 
 slip down her cheek without disfigure she . she be look 
 absently , intently , into a dark depth of wood as though she seek there 
 for some truth that escape she -- truth of the past or of the present . 

 " I do not know , " she say , at last , shake her head , " I do not know 
 whether it be unkind . perhaps it be only what we deserve , maman and 
 I. " 

 " you ! " cry Ashe . 

 " yes , " she say , passionately . " who be go to separate between maman 
 and I ? if she be do mean , shocking thing , the people she be do they 
 to will hate I too . they _ shall _ hate I ! it be right . " 

 she turn to he violently . she be very white , and her little hand as 
 she sit there before he , proudly erect , twist a lace handkerchief 
 between they that would soon be in tatter . somehow Ashe wince before 
 the wreck of the handkerchief ; what need to ruin the pretty , fragile 
 thing ? 

 " I be quite sure no one will ever hate you for what you have not do , " 
 he say , steadily . " that would be abominably unfair . but , you see , I 
 do not understand -- and I do not like -- I do not wish -- to ask question . " 

 " _ do _ ask question ! " she cry , look at he almost reproachfully . 
 " that be just what I want you to do -- only , " she add , hang her head 
 in depression , " I should not know what to answer . I be play with , and 
 treat as a baby ! there be something horrible the matter -- and no one 
 trust I -- every one keep I in the dark . no one ever think whether I 
 be miserable or not . " 

 she raise her hand to her eye and vehemently wipe away her tear 
 with the tattered lace handkerchief . in all these word and action , 
 however , she be graceful and touching , because she be natural . she be 
 not pose or conscious , she be hide nothing . yet Ashe feel certain 
 she could act a part magnificently ; only it would not be for the lie 's 
 sake , but for the sake of some romantic impulse or imagination . 

 " why should you torment yourself so ? " he ask she , kindly . her hand have 
 drop and lie beside she on the bench . to his own amazement he find 
 himself clasp it . " be not it well to forget old grief ? you can not 
 help what happen year ago -- you can not undo it . you have get to live your 
 own life--_happily _ ! and I just wish you would set about it . " 

 he smile at she , and there be few face more attractive than his when 
 he let his natural softness have its way , without irony . she let she 
 eye be draw to his , and as they meet he see a flush rise in her clear 
 skin and spread to the pale gold of her hair . the man in he be 
 marvellously please by that flush -- fascinated , indeed . but she give he 
 small time to observe it ; she draw herself impatiently away . 

 " of course , you do not understand a word about it , " she say , " or you 
 could not talk like that . but I will tell you . " her eye , half miserable , 
 half audacious , return to he . " my sister -- come here -- because I send 
 for she . I make mademoiselle go with a letter . of course , I know there 
 be a mystery -- I know the Grosvilles do not want we to meet -- I know 
 that she and maman hat each other . but maman will tell I nothing -- and 
 I have a _ right _ to know . " 

 " no , you have no right to know , " say Ashe , gravely . 

 she look at he wildly . 

 " I have -- I have ! " she repeat , passionately . " well , I tell my sister to 
 meet I here -- I have forget , you see , all about you ! my mind be so 
 full of Alice . and when she come I feel as if it be a dream -- a 
 horrible , tragic dream . you know -- she be _ so _ like I -- which mean , I 
 suppose , that we be both like papa . only her face -- it be not handsome , 
 oh no -- but it be stern -- and -- yes , noble ! I be proud of she . I would like 
 to have go on my knee and kiss her dress . but she would not take my 
 hand -- she would hardly speak to I . she say she have come , because it 
 be good , now that I be in England , that we should meet once , and 
 understand that we _ could not _ meet -- that we could never , never be 
 friend . she say that she hat my mother -- that for year she have keep 
 silence , but that now she mean to punish maman -- to drive she from 
 London . and then"--the girl 's lip tremble under the memory--"she come 
 close to I , and she look into my eye , and she say , ' yes , we be like 
 each other --- we're like our father -- and it would be well for we both 
 if we have never be born-- ' " 

 " ah , cruel ! " cry Ashe , involuntarily , and once more his hand find 
 Kitty 's small finger and press they in his . 

 Kitty look at he with a strange , exalt look . 

 " no . I think it be true . I often think I be not make to be happy . I can not 
 ever be happy -- it be not in I . " 

 " it be in you to say foolish thing then ! " say Ashe , lightly , and 
 cross his arm he try to assume the practical elder - brotherly air , 
 which he feel befit the situation -- if anything befit it . for in 
 truth it seem to he one singularly confused and ugly . their talk 
 float above tragic depth , guess at by he , wholly unknown to she . 
 and yet her youth shrink from it know not what--"as an animal shrink 
 from shadow in the twilight . " she seem to he to sit enwrap in a 
 vague cloud of shame , resent and hat it , yet not able to escape 
 from think and talk of it . but she must not talk of it . 

 she do not answer his last remark for a little while . she sit look 
 before she , overwhelmed , it seem , by an inward rush of image and 
 sensation . till , with a sudden movement , she turn to he and say , 
 smile , quite in her ordinary voice : 

 " do you know why I shall never be happy ? it be because I have such a bad 
 temper . " 

 " have you ? " say Ashe , smile . 

 she give he a curious look . 

 " you do not believe it ? if you have be in the convent , you would have 
 believe it . I be mad sometimes -- quite mad ; with pride , I suppose , and 
 vanity . the Soeurs say it be that . " 

 " they have to explain it somehow , " say Ashe . " but I be quite sure that 
 if I live in a convent I should have a furious temper . " 

 " you ! " she say , half contemptuously . " you could not be ill - temper 
 anywhere . that be the one thing I do not like about you -- you're too 
 calm -- too -- too satisfied . it' -- well ! you say a sharp thing to I , so I 
 do not see why I should not say one to you . you should not look as though 
 you enjoy your life so much . it be _ bourgeois _ ! it be , indeed . " and she 
 frown upon he with a little extravagant air that amuse he . 

 by some prescience , she have put on that morning a black dress of thin 
 material , make with extreme simplicity . no flounce , no fanfaronnade . a 
 little girlish dress , that make the girlish figure seem even frail and 
 light than he remember it the night before in the splendor of her 
 Paris gown . her large black hat emphasize the whiteness of her brow , 
 the brilliance of her most beautiful eye ; and then all the rest be 
 insubstantial sprite and airy nothing , to be crush in one hand . and 
 yet what untamed , indomitable thing breathe from it -- a self surely 
 more self , more intensely , obstinately alive than any he have yet know . 

 her attack have bring the involuntary blood to his cheek , which 
 annoy he . but he invite she to say why cheerfulness be a vice . she 
 reply that no one should look success -- as much as he do . 

 " and you scorn success ? " 

 " scorn it ! " she draw a long breath , clasp both her hand above her 
 head , then slowly let the thin arm fall again . " scorn it ! what 
 nonsense ! but everybody who have not get it hat those who have . " 

 " do not hate I ! " say Ashe , quickly . 

 " yes , " she say , with stubbornness , " I must . do you know why I be such 
 a wild - cat at school ? because some of the other girl be more 
 important than I -- much more important -- and rich -- and more 
 beautiful -- and people pay they more attention . and that seem to 
 _ burn _ the heart in I . " she press her hand to her breast with a 
 passionate gesture . " you know the french word _ panache _ ? well , that be 
 what I care for --that be what I _ adore _ ! to be the first -- the good -- the 
 most distinguished . to be envy -- and point at -- obey when I lift my 
 finger -- and then to come to some great , glorious , tragic end ! " 

 Ashe move impatiently . 

 " Lady Kitty , I do not like to hear you talk like this . it be wild , and 
 it be also -- I beg your pardon-- " 

 " in bad taste ? " she say , catch he up breathlessly . " that be what you 
 mean , be not it ? you say it to I before , when I call you handsome . " 

 " Pshaw ! " he say , in vexation . she watch he throw himself back and 
 feel for his cigarette - case ; a gesture of her hand give he leave ; she 
 wait , smile , till he have take a few calm whiff . then she gently 
 move towards he . 

 " do not be angry with I ! " she say , in a sweet , low voice . " do not you 
 understand how hard it be -- to have that nature -- and then to come here 
 out of the convent -- where one have live on dream -- and find one 's 
 self-- " 

 she turn her head away . Ashe put down his new - light cigarette . 

 " find yourself ? " he repeat . 

 " everybody scorn I ! " she say , her brow droop . 

 Ashe exclaim . 

 " you know it be true . my mother be not receive . can you deny that ? " 

 " she have many friend , " say Ashe . 

 " she be _ not receive _ . when I speak of her no one answer I . Lady 
 Grosville ask I here--_me_--out of charity . it would be think a 
 disgrace to marry me-- " 

 " look here , Lady Kitty!-- " 

 " and I"--she wring her small hand , as though she clasp the neck of 
 she enemies--"i would never _ look _ at a man who do not think it the 
 glory of his life to win I . so you see , I shall never marry . but then 
 the dreadful thing is-- " 

 she let he see a white , stormy face . 

 " that I have no loyalty to maman -- I -- I do not think I even love she . " 

 Ashe survey she gravely . 

 " you do not mean that , " he say . 

 " I think I do , " she persist . " I have a horrid childhood . I will not tell 
 tale ; but , you see , I do not _ know _ maman . I know the Soeurs much 
 well . and then for some one you do not know -- to have to -- to have to 
 bear -- this horrible thing-- " 

 she bury her face in her hand . Ashe look at she in perplexity . 

 " you sha'n't bear anything horrible , " he say , with energy . " there be 
 plenty of people who will take care of that . do you mind tell 
 I -- have there be special difficulty just lately ? " 

 " oh yes , " she say , calmly , look up , " awful ! Maman 's debt 
 be -- well -- ridiculous . for that alone I do not think she will be able to 
 stay in London -- apart from -- Alice . " 

 the name recall all she have just pass through , and her face 
 quiver . " what will she do ? " she say , under her breath . " how will she 
 punish us?--and why?--for what ? " 

 her dread , her ignorance , her fierce , bruised vanity , her struggle 
 pride , her helplessness , appeal amazingly to the man beside she . he 
 begin to talk to she very gently and wisely , beg she to let the past 
 alone , to think only what could be do to help the present . in the 
 first place , would she not let his mother be of use to she ? 

 he could answer for Lady Tranmore . why should not Lady Kitty spend the 
 summer with she in Scotland ? no doubt Madame d'Estrées would be abroad . 

 " then I must go with she , " say Kitty . 

 Ashe hesitate . 

 " of course , if she wish it . " 

 " but I do not know that she will wish it . she be not very fond of I , " 
 say Kitty , doubtfully . " yes , I would like to stay with Lady Tranmore . 
 but will your cousin be there ? " 

 " Miss Lyster ? " 

 Kitty nod . 

 " how can I tell ? of course , she be often there . " 

 " it be quite curious , " say Kitty , after reflection , " how we dislike 
 each other . and it be so odd . you know most people like I ! " 

 she look up at he without a trace of coquetry , rather with a certain 
 timidity that fear possible rebuff . " that be always be my 
 difficulty , " she go on , " till now . everybody spoil I . I always get 
 my own way . in the convent I be indulge and flatter , and then they 
 wonder that I make all sort of folly . I want a guide -- that be quite 
 certain -- somebody to tell I what to do . " 

 " I would offer myself for the post , " say Ashe , " but that I feel 
 perfectly sure that you would never follow anybody 's advice in 
 anything . " 

 " yes , I would , " she say , wistfully . " I would-- " 

 Ashe 's face change . 

 " ah , if you would-- " 

 she spring up . " do you see " --she point to some figure on a distant 
 path--"they be come back from church . you understand?--_nobody _ must 
 know about my sister . it will come round to Aunt Lina , of course ; but I 
 hope it will be when I be go . if she know now , I should go back to London 
 to - day . " 

 Ashe make it clear to she that he would be discretion itself . they leave 
 the bench , but , as they begin to ascend the step , Kitty turn back . 

 " I wish I have not see she , " she say , in a miserable tone , the tear 
 flooding once more into her eye . 

 Ashe look at she with great kindness , but without speak . the moment 
 of sharp pain pass , and she move on languidly beside he . but there 
 be an infection in his strong , handsome presence , and her smile soon 
 come back . by the time they near the house , indeed , she seem to be 
 in wild spirit again . 

 do he know , she ask he , that three more guest be come that 
 afternoon -- Mr. Darrell , Mr. Louis Harman , _ and_--mr . Geoffrey Cliffe ? 
 she lay an emphasis on the last name , which make Ashe say , carelessly : 

 " you want to meet he so much ? " 

 " of course . do not all the world ? " 

 Ashe reply that he could only answer for himself , and as far as he be 
 concerned he could do very well without Cliffe 's company at all time . 

 Whereupon Kitty protest with fire that other man be jealous of such 
 a famous person because woman like he -- because-- 

 " because the man be a coxcomb and the woman spoil he ? " 

 " a coxcomb ! " 

 Kitty be up in arm . 

 " pray , be he not a great traveller?--_a very _ great traveller ? " she 
 ask , with indignation . 

 " certainly , by his own account . " 

 " and a most brilliant writer ? " 

 " macaulayese , " say Ashe , perversely , " and not very good at that . " 

 Kitty be at first strike dumb , and then begin a voluble protest against 
 unfairness so monstrous . do not all intelligent people read and admire ? 
 it be mere jealousy , she repeat , to deny the gentleman 's claim . 

 Ashe let she talk and quote and excite herself , apply every now and 
 then a little sly touch of the goad , to make she still run on , and so 
 forget the tragic hour which have overshadow she . and meanwhile all he 
 care for be to watch the flashing of her face and eye , and the play 
 of the wind in her hair , and the springing grace with which she move . 
 poor child!--it all come back to that -- poor child!--what be to be do 
 with she ? 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 at luncheon -- the Sunday luncheon -- which still , at Grosville Park , as in 
 the early victorian day of Lord Grosville 's mother , consist of a huge 
 baronial sirloin to which all else upon the varied table appear as 
 appurtenance and appendage , Ashe allow himself the inward reflection 
 that the Grosville Park Sundays be degenerate . both Lord and Lady 
 Grosville have be good host in their day ; and the downrightness of the 
 wife have be as much to the taste of many as the agreeable gossip of 
 the husband . but on this occasion both be silent and absent - minded . 
 Lady Grosville show no generalship in place her guest ; the wrong 
 people sit next to each other , and the whole party drag -- without a 
 leader . 

 and certainly Kitty Bristol do nothing to enliven it . she sit very 
 silent , her black dress change she a good deal , to Ashe 's thinking , 
 bring back , as he choose to fancy , the pale convent girl . be it so 
 that she go through her pious exercises?--by - the - way , she be , of 
 course , a Catholic?--said her lesson , and go to her confessor ? have 
 the french cousin with whom she ride stag - hunting ever see she like 
 this ? no ; Ashe feel certain that " Henri " have never see she , except as a 
 fashion - plate , or _ en amazone _ . he could have make nothing of this ghost 
 in black -- this distinguished , piteous , little ghost . 

 after luncheon it become tolerably clear to Ashe that Lady Grosville 's 
 preoccupation have a cause . and presently catch he alone in the 
 library , whither he have retire with some official paper , she close 
 the door with deliberate care , and stand before he . 

 " I see you be interested in Kitty , and I feel as if I must tell you , 
 and ask your opinion . William , do you know what that child have be 
 do ? " 

 he look up from his writing . 

 " ah!--what have you be discover ? " 

 " Grosville tell you the story last night . " 

 Ashe nod . 

 " well -- Kitty write to Alice this morning -- and they meet . Alice have keep 
 her room since -- prostrate -- so the Sowerbys tell I . I have just have a 
 note from Mrs. Sowerby . be not it an extraordinary , an indelicate thing 
 to do ? " 

 Ashe study the frown lady a moment -- so large and daunt in her 
 black silk and white lace . she seem to suggest all those aspect of 
 the English Sunday for which he have most secret dislike -- its Pharisaism 
 and dulness and heavy meal . he feel himself through and through Lady 
 Kitty 's champion . 

 " I should have think it very natural , " be his reply . 

 Lady Grosville throw up her hand . 

 " natural!--when she knows-- " 

 " how can she know ? " cry Ashe , hotly . " how can such a child know or 
 guess anything ? she only know that there be some black charge against 
 her mother , on which no one will enlighten she . how can they ? but 
 meanwhile her mother be ostracize , and she feel herself drag into 
 the disgrace , not understand why or wherefore . could anything be more 
 pathetic -- more touching ? " 

 in his heat of feel he get up , and begin to pace up and down . Lady 
 Grosville 's countenance express first astonishment -- then waver . 

 " oh -- of course , it be very sad , " she said--"extremely sad . but I should 
 have think Kitty be clever enough to understand at least that Alice 
 must have some grave reason for break with her mother-- " 

 " do not you all forget what a child she be , " say Ashe , indignantly--"not 
 yet nineteen ! " 

 " yes , that be true , " say Lady Grosville , grudgingly . " I must confess I 
 find it difficult to judge she fairly . she be so different from my own 
 girl . " 

 Ashe hastily agree . then it strike he as odd that he should have 
 fall so quickly into this position of Kitty 's defender with her 
 father 's family ; and he draw in his horn . he resume his work , and Lady 
 Grosville sit for a while , her hand in her lap , quietly observe he . 

 at last she say : 

 " so you think , William , I have well leave Kitty alone ? " 

 " about what ? " Ashe raise his curly head with a laugh . " do not put too 
 much responsibility on I . I know nothing about young lady . " 

 " I do not know that I do -- much , " say Lady Grosville , candidly . " my own 
 daughter be so exceptional . " 

 Ashe hold his peace . distant cousin as they be , he hardly know the 
 Grosville girl apart , and have never yet grasp any reason why he 
 should . 

 " at any rate , I see clearly , " say Lady Grosville , after another pause , 
 " that you be very sorry for Kitty . of course , it be very nice of you , and 
 I find it be what most people feel . " 

 " hang it ! dear Lady Grosville , why should not they ? " say Ashe , turn 
 round on his chair . " if ever there be a forlorn little person on earth , 
 I think Lady Kitty be that person at lunch to - day . " 

 " and after that absurd exhibition last night ! " say Lady Grosville , with 
 a shrug . " you never know where to have she . you think she look ill ? " 

 " I be sure she have get a splitting headache , " say Ashe , boldly . " and 
 why you and Grosville should not be as sorry for she as for Lady Alice I 
 can not imagine . _ she be _ do nothing . " 

 " no , that be true , " say Lady Grosville , as she rise . then she add : 
 " I will go and see if she have a headache . you must consult with we , 
 William ; you know the mother so well . " 

 " oh , I be no good ! " say Ashe , with energy . " but I be sure that kindness 
 would pay with Lady Kitty . " 

 he smile at she , wish to Heaven she would go . 

 Lady Grosville star . 

 " I hope we be always kind to she , " she say , with a touch of 
 haughtiness . and then the library door close behind she . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " Kindness " be indeed , that afternoon , the order of the day , as from the 
 Grosvilles to Lady Kitty . Ashe wonder how she like it . the girl 
 follow she about with shawl . Lady Grosville instal she on a sofa 
 in the back drawing - room . a bottle of sal - volatile appear , and 
 Caroline Grosville , instead of go twice to Sunday - school , devote 
 herself to fan Kitty , though the weather -- which be sunny , with a 
 sharp east wind -- suggest , to Ashe 's thinking , fire rather than fan . 

 he be himself carry off for the customary Sunday walk , Mr. Kershaw 
 be now determined to claim the sacred right of the press . the 
 walker leave the house by a garden door , to reach which they have to pass 
 through the farther drawing - room . Kitty , a picturesque figure on the 
 sofa , nod farewell to Ashe , and then , unseen by Caroline Grosville , 
 who sit behind she , shoot he a last look which drive he to a 
 precipitate exit lest the inward laugh should out . 

 the walk through the flat Cambridgeshire country be long and strenuous . 
 though for at least half of it the active journalist who be Ashe 's 
 companion conceive the poor opinion of the new minister . Ashe know 
 nothing ; have no opinion ; care for nothing , except now and then for the 
 stalking of an unfamiliar bird , or the antic of the dog , or tale of 
 horse - racing , of which he talk with a fervor entirely deny to those 
 high political topic of which Kershaw 's ardent soul be full . 

 again and again do the journalist put they under his nose in their most 
 attractive guise . in vain ; Ashe would have none of they . till suddenly a 
 chance word start an indian frontier question , vastly important , and 
 totally unknown to the english public . Ashe casually begin to talk ; the 
 trickle become a stream , and presently he be hold forth with an 
 impetuosity , a knowledge , a matured and careful judgment that fairly 
 amaze the man beside he . 

 the long road , border by the flat fen meadow , the wide silver sky , 
 the gently lengthen day , all pass unnoticed . the journalist find 
 himself in the grip of a _ mind_--strong , active , rich . he give himself 
 up with docility , yet with a grow astonishment , and when they stand 
 once more on the step of the house he say to his companion : 

 " you must have follow these matter for year . why have you never 
 speak in the House , or write anything ? " 

 Ashe 's aspect change at once . 

 " what would have be the good ? " he say , with his easy smile . " the 
 fellow who do not know would not have believe I ; and the fellow who 
 know do not want telling . " 

 a shade of impatience show in Kershaw 's aspect . 

 " I think , " he say , " ours be government by discussion . " 

 Ashe laugh , and , turn on the step , he point to the splendid 
 garden and finely woode park . 

 " or government by country - house -- which ? if you support we in this -- as I 
 gather you will -- this walk will have be worth a debate -- now will not it ? " 

 the flattered journalist smile , and they enter the house . from the 
 inner hall Lord Grosville perceive they . 

 " Geoffrey Cliffe 's arrive , " he say to Ashe , as they reach he . 

 " have he ? " say Ashe , and turn to go up - stair . 

 but Kershaw show a lively interest . " you mean the traveller ? " he ask 
 of his host . 

 " I do . as mad as usual , " say the old man . " he and my niece Kitty make a 
 pair . " 




 VI 


 when Ashe return to the drawing - room he find it fill with the sound 
 of talk and laughter . but it be a talk and laughter in which the 
 Grosville family seem to have itself but little part . Lady Grosville 
 sit stiffly on an early victorian sofa , her spectacle on her nose , 
 read the _ Times _ of the precede day , or appear to read it . Amy 
 Grosville , the eld girl , be busy in a corner , put the finishing 
 touch to a piece of illumination ; while Caroline , seat on the floor , 
 be show the small child of a neighbor how to put a picture - puzzle 
 together . Lord Grosville be professedly in a farth room , talk with 
 the austrian count ; but every other minute he stroll restlessly into 
 the big drawing - room , and stand at the edge of the talk and laughter , 
 only to turn on his heel again and go back to the count -- who meanwhile 
 appear in the opening between the two room , his hand on his hip , 
 eagerly watch Kitty Bristol and her companion , while wait , as 
 courtesy bid he , for the return of his host . 

 Ashe at once divine that the Grosville family be in revolt . nor have 
 he to look far to discover the cause . 

 be that astonishing young lady in truth identical with the pensive 
 figure of the morning ? Kitty have doff her black , and she wear a 
 " demi - toilette " gown of the utmost elegance , of which the expensiveness 
 have , no doubt , already sink deep into Lady Grosville 's soul . at 
 Grosville Park the new fashion of " tea - gown " be not favorably 
 regard . it be think to be a mere device of silly and extravagant 
 woman , and an " afternoon dress , " though of great pretension than a 
 morning gown , be still a sober affair , not in any way to be confound 
 with those decorative effect that nature and sound sense reserve for 
 the evening . 

 but Kitty 's dress be of some white silky material ; and it display she 
 slender throat and some portion of her thin white arm . the Dean 's wife , 
 Mrs. Winston , as she secretly study it , feel an inward satisfaction ; 
 for here at last be one of those gown she have once or twice gaze on 
 with a covetous awe in the shop - window of the Rue de la Paix , bring 
 down to earth , and clothe a simple mortal . they be then real , and 
 they could be wear by real woman ; which till now the Dean 's wife have 
 scarcely believe . 

 Alack ! how become be these concoction to minx with fair hair and 
 sylphlike frame ! Kitty be radiant , triumphant ; and Ashe be certain 
 that Lady Grosville know it , however she might barricade herself behind 
 the _ Times _ . the girl 's slim finger gesticulate in aid of her tongue ; 
 one tiny foot swing lightly over the other ; the glistening fold of the 
 silk wrap she in a shimmering whiteness , above which the fair 
 head -- negligently throw back -- shine out on a red background , make by 
 the velvet chair in which she sit . 

 the Dean be place close beside she , and be clearly enjoy himself 
 enormously . and in front of she , absorb in she , engage , indeed , in 
 hot and furious debate with she , stand the great man who have just 
 arrive . 

 " how do you do , Cliffe ? " say Ashe , as he approach . 

 Geoffrey Cliffe turn sharply , and a perfunctory greeting pass 
 between the two man . 

 " when do you arrive ? " say Ashe , as he throw himself into an arm - chair . 

 " last Tuesday . but that do not matter , " say Cliffe , 
 impatiently--"nothing matter -- except that I must somehow defeat Lady 
 Kitty ! " 

 and he stand , look down upon the girl in front of he , his hand on 
 his side , his queer countenance twitching with suppress laughter . an 
 odd figure , tall , spare , loosely joint , surmount by a pale parchment 
 face , which show a somewhat protrude chin , a long and delicate nose , 
 and fine brow under a strange overhanging mass of fair hair . he have the 
 dissipate , batter look of certain Vandyck cavalier , and certainly no 
 handsomeness of any accepted kind . but as Ashe well know , the aspect and 
 personality of Geoffrey Cliffe possess for innumerable man and woman , 
 in English " society " and out of it , a fascination it be easy to laugh 
 at than to explain . 

 Lady Kitty have eye certainly for no one else . when he speak of 
 " defeat " she , she laugh her defiance , and a glance of battle pass 
 between she and Cliffe . Cliffe , still hold she with his look , 
 consider what new ground to break . 

 " what be the subject ? " say Ashe . 

 " that man be vain than woman , " say Kitty . " it be so true , it be hardly 
 worth say -- isn't it ? Mr. Cliffe talk nonsense about our love of 
 clothe -- and of be admire . as if that be vanity ! of course it be 
 only our sense of duty . " 

 " duty ? " cry Cliffe , twist his mustache . " to whom ? " 

 " to the man , of course ! if we do not like clothe , if we do not like 
 be admire -- where would you be ? " 

 " personally , I could get on , " say Cliffe . " you expect we to be too much 
 on our knee . " 

 " as if we should ever get you there if it do not amuse you ! " say Kitty . 
 " hypocrite ! if we do not dress , paint , chatter , and tell lie for you , 
 you will not look at we -- and if we do-- " 

 " of course , it all depend on how well it be do , " throw in Cliffe . 

 Kitty laugh . 

 " that be judge by result . I look to the motive . I repeat , if I powder 
 and paint , it be not because I be vain , but because it be my painful duty 
 to give you pleasure . " 

 " and if it do not give I pleasure ? " 

 she shrug her shoulder . 

 " call I stupid then -- not vain . I ought to have do it well . " 

 " in any case , " say Ashe , " it be your duty to please we ? " 

 " Yes-- " sigh Kitty . " bad luck ! " 

 and she sink softly back in her chair , her eye shin under the 
 stimulus of the laugh that run through her circle . the Dean join in it 
 uneasily , conscious , no doubt , of the sharp , crackle movement by 
 which in the distance Lady Grosville be dumbly express 
 herself -- through the _ Times _ . Cliffe look at the small figure a 
 moment , then seize a chair and sit down in front of she , astride . 

 " I wonder why you want to please we ? " he say , abruptly , his magnificent 
 blue eye upon she . 

 " ah ! " say Kitty , throw up her hand , " if we only know ! " 

 " you find it in the tragedy of your sex ? " 

 " or comedy , " say the Dean , rise . " I take you at your word , Lady 
 Kitty . to - night it will be your duty to please _ I _ . remember , you 
 promise to say we some more french . " he lift an admonitory finger . 

 " I do not know any ' Athalie , ' " say Kitty , demurely , cross her hand 
 upon her knee . 

 the Dean smile to himself as he cross the room to Lady Grosville , and 
 endeavor by an impartial criticism of the new curate 's manner and 
 voice , as they have reveal themselves in church that morning , to 
 distract her attention from her niece . 

 a hopeless task -- for Kitty 's personality be of the kind which absorb , 
 engulfs attention , do what the by - stander will . eye and ear be draw 
 perforce into the little whirlpool that she make , their owner yield 
 they , now with delight , now with repulsion . 

 Mary Lyster , for instance , come in presently , fresh from a walk with 
 Lady Edith Manley . she , too , have change her dress . but it be a 
 discreet and reasonable change , and Lady Grosville look at her soft 
 gray gown with its muslin collar and cuff -- delicately embroider , yet 
 of a nunlike cut and air notwithstanding -- with a hot energy of approval , 
 provoke entirely by Kitty 's audacity . Mary meanwhile raise she 
 eyebrow gently at the sight of Kitty . she sweep past the group , give 
 a cool greeting to Geoffrey Cliffe , and presently settle herself in the 
 farther room , attend by Louis Harman and Darrell , who have just arrive 
 by the afternoon train . clearly she observe Kitty and observe she with 
 dislike . the attitude of her companion be not so simple . 

 " what an amazing young woman ! " say Harman , presently , under his breath , 
 yet open - mouthed . " I suppose she and Cliffe be old friend . " 

 " I believe they never meet before , " say Mary . 

 Darrell laugh . 

 " Lady Kitty make short work of the preliminary , " he say ; " she tell 
 I the other night life be not long enough to begin with talk about the 
 weather . " 

 " the weather ? " say Harman . " at the present moment she and Cliffe seem 
 to be discuss the ' Dame aux Camélias . ' since when do they take young 
 girl to see that kind of thing in Paris ? " 

 Miss Lyster give a little cough , and bend forward say to Harman : 
 " Lady Tranmore have show I your picture . it be a dear , delicious thing ! 
 I never see anything more heavenly than the angel . " 

 Harman smile a flattered smile . Mary Lyster refer to a copy of a 
 " Filippo Lippi Annunciation " which he have just execute in water - color 
 for Lady Tranmore , to whom he be devoted . he be , however , devote to a 
 good many peeress , with whom he take tea , and for whom he undertake 
 many harmless and elegant service . he paint their portrait , in small 
 size , after pre - raphaelite model , and he occasionally present they 
 with copy -- a little weak , but charming -- of their favorite italian 
 picture . he and Mary begin now to talk of Florence with much enthusiasm 
 and many caressing adjective . for Harman most thing be " sweet " ; for 
 Mary , " interesting " or " suggestive . " she talk fast and fluently ; a 
 subtle observer might have guess she wish it to be see that for her 
 Lady Kitty Bristol 's flirtation , be they in or out of taste , be 
 simply non - existent . 

 Darrell listen intermittently , watch Cliffe and Lady Kitty , and 
 think a good deal . that extraordinary girl be certainly " carry on " 
 with Cliffe , as she have " carry on " with Ashe on the night of her first 
 acquaintance with he in St. James 's Place . Ashe apparently take it with 
 equanimity , for he be still sit beside the pair , twist a 
 paper - knife and smiling , sometimes put in a word , but more often 
 silent , and apparently of no account at all to either Kitty or Cliffe . 

 Darrell know that the new minister dislike and despise Geoffrey 
 Cliffe ; he be aware , too , that Cliffe return these sentiment , and 
 be not unlikely to be find attack Ashe in public before long on 
 certain point of foreign policy , where Cliffe conceive himself to be a 
 master . the meeting of the two man under the Grosvilles ' roof strike 
 Darrell as curious . why have Cliffe be invite by these very 
 respectable and straitlace people the grosville ? darrell could only 
 reflect that Lady Eleanor Cliffe , the traveller 's mother , be probably 
 connect with they by some of those innumerable and ever - ramify 
 link that hold together a certain large group of english family ; and 
 that , moreover , Lady Grosville , in spite of philanthropy and 
 Evangelicalism , have always show a rather pronounce taste in 
 " lions"--of the masculine sort . of the woman to be meet with at Grosville 
 Park , one could be certain . Lady Grosville make no excuse for her own 
 sex . but she be a sufficiently ambitious hostess to know that agreeable 
 party be not construct out of the saint alone . the man , therefore , 
 must provide the sinner ; and of some of the person then most in vogue 
 she be careful not to know too much . for , socially , one must live ; and 
 that be so , the strictness of to - day may have at any moment to be 
 purchase by the laxity of to - morrow . such , at any rate , be Darrell 's 
 analysis of the situation . 

 he be still astonish , however , when all be say . for Cliffe during 
 the precede winter , on his return from some remarkable travel in 
 Persia , have pause on the Riviera , and an affair at Cannes with a french 
 vicomtesse have get into the english paper . no one know the exact truth 
 of it ; and a small volume of verse by Cliffe , publish immediately 
 afterwards -- verse very distinguished , passionate , and obscure -- have 
 offer many clew , but no solution whatever . nobody suppose , however , 
 that the story be anything but a bad one . moreover , the last book of 
 travel -- which have have an enormous success -- contain one of the most 
 malicious attack on foreign mission that Darrell remember . and if 
 the missionary have a supporter in England , it be Lady Grosville . have 
 she design -- material design -- on behalf of Miss Amy or Miss Caroline ? 
 Darrell smile at the notion . Cliffe must certainly marry money , and be 
 not to be capture by any Miss Amys -- or Lady Kittys either , for the 
 matter of that . 

 But?--Darrell glance at the lady beside he , and his busy thought take 
 a new turn . he have see the greeting between Miss Lyster and Cliffe . it 
 be cold ; but all the same the world know that they have once be 
 friend . be it some five year before that Miss Lyster , then in the 
 height of a brilliant season under the wing of Lady Tranmore , have be 
 much see in public with Geoffrey Cliffe ? then he have depart eastward , 
 to explore the upper water of the Mékong , and the gossip excited have 
 die away . of late her name have be rather couple with that of William 
 Ashe . 

 well , so far as the world be concern , she might mate with 
 either -- with the mad notoriety of Cliffe or the young distinction of 
 Ashe . Darrell 's bitter heart contract as he reflect that only for 
 he and the like of he , man of the people , with average ability , and a 
 scarcely average income , be maiden of Mary Lyster 's dower and 
 pedigree out of reach . meanwhile he revenge himself by be her very 
 good friend , and allow himself at time much caustic plainness of 
 speech in his talk with she . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " what be you three gossip about ? " say Ashe , stroll in presently 
 from the other room to join they . 

 " as usual , " say Darrell . " I be listen to perfection . Miss Lyster and 
 Harman be discuss picture . " 

 Ashe stifle a little yawn . he throw himself down by Mary , vow that 
 there be no more pleasure to be get out of picture now that people 
 would try to know so much about they . Mary meanwhile raise herself 
 involuntarily to look into the farth room , where the noise make by 
 Cliffe and Lady Kitty have increase . 

 " they be go to sing , " say Ashe , lazily--"and it will not be hymn . " 

 in fact , Lady Kitty have open the piano , and have begin the first bar 
 of something french and operatic . at the first sound of Kitty 's music , 
 however , Lady Grosville draw herself up ; she close the volume of 
 evangelical sermon for which she have exchange the _ Times _ ; she 
 deposit her spectacle sharply on the table beside she . 

 " Amy!--Caroline ! " 

 those young lady rise . so do Lady Grosville . Kitty meanwhile sit with 
 suspend finger and laugh eye , wait on her aunt 's movement . 

 " Kitty , pray do not let I interfere with your playing , " say Lady 
 Grosville , with severe politeness--"but perhaps you would kindly put it 
 off for half an hour . I be now go to read to the servants-- " 

 " gracious ! " say Kitty , spring up . " I be go to play Mr. Cliffe 
 some Offenbach . " 

 " ah , but the piano can be hear in the library , and your cousin Amy 
 play the harmonium-- " 

 " _ Mon Dieu _ ! " say Kitty . " we will be as quiet as mouse . Or"--she make a 
 quick step in pursuit of she aunt--"shall I come and sing , Aunt Lina ? " 

 Ashe , in his shelter behind Mary Lyster , fall into a silent convulsion 
 of laughter . 

 " no , thank you ! " say Lady Grosville , hastily . and she rustle away 
 follow by her daughter . 

 Kitty come fly into the inner room follow by Cliffe . 

 " what have I do ? " she say , breathlessly , address Harman , who rise 
 to greet she . " may not one play the piano here on Sundays ? " 

 " that depend , " say Harman , " on what you play . " 

 " who make your English Sunday ? " say Kitty , impetuously . " Je vous 
 demande--_who _ ? " 

 she throw her challenge to all the wind of heaven -- stand tiptoe , her 
 hand poise on the back of a chair , the small and most delicate of 
 fury . 

 " a breath unmake it , as a breath have make , " say Cliffe . " come and play 
 billiard , Lady Kitty . you say just now you play . " 

 " Billiards ! " say Harman , throw up his hand . " on sunday--_here _ ? " 

 " can they hear the ball ? " say Kitty , eagerly , with a gesture towards 
 the library . 

 Mary Lyster , who have be perfunctorily look at a book , lay it down . 

 " it would certainly greatly distress Lady Grosville , " she say , in a 
 voice studiously soft , but on that account perhaps all the more 
 significant . 

 Kitty glance at Mary , and Ashe see the sudden red in her cheek . she 
 turn provokingly to Cliffe . " there be quite half an hour , be not there , 
 before one need dress-- " 

 " More , " say Cliffe . " come along . " 

 and he make for the door , which he hold open for she . it be now Mary 
 Lyster 's turn to flush -- the rebuff have be so naked and unadorned . Ashe 
 rise as Kitty pass he . 

 " why do not you come , too ? " she say , pause . there be a flash from 
 eye deep and dark beneath a pair of wilful brow . " Aunt Lina would 
 never be cross with _ you _ ! " 

 " thank you ! I should be delighted to play buffer , but unfortunately I 
 have some work I must do before dinner . " 

 " must you ? " she look at he uncertainly , then at Cliffe . in the dusk 
 of the large , heavily furnish room , the pale yet brilliant gold of her 
 hair , her white dress , her slim energy and elegance draw all their 
 eye -- even Mary Lyster 's . 

 " I must , " Ashe repeat , smile . " I be glad your headache be so much 
 well . " 

 " it be not in the least well ! " 

 " then you disguise it like a heroine . " 

 he stand beside she , look down upon she , his height and strength 
 measure against her smallness . apparently his amused detachment , the 
 slight dryness of his tone annoy she . she make a tart reply and 
 vanish through the door that Cliffe hold open for she . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Ashe retire to his own room , deal with some Foreign Office work , and 
 then allow himself a meditative smoke . the click of the billiard - ball 
 have cease abruptly about ten minute after he have begin upon his 
 paper ; there have be voice in the hall , Lord Grosville 's he think 
 among they ; and now all be silence . 

 he think of the event of the afternoon with mingle amusement and 
 annoyance . Cliffe be an unscrupulous fellow , and the child 's head might 
 be turn . she should be protect from he in future -- he vow she 
 should . Lady Tranmore should take it in hand . she have be a match for 
 Cliffe in various other direction before this . 

 what bring the man , with his notorious character and antecedent , to 
 Grosville Park -- one of the dwindle number of country - house in England 
 where the old Puritan restriction still hold ? it be say he be on the 
 look - out for a post -- Ashe , indeed , happen to know it officially ; and 
 Lord Grosville have a good deal of influence . moreover , fail an 
 appointment , he be understand to be aim at Parliament and office ; 
 and there be two safe county - seat within the Grosville sphere . 

 " yet even when he want a thing he can not behave himself in order to get 
 it , " think Ashe . " anybody else would have turn Sabbatarian for once , 
 and refrain from flirt with the Grosvilles ' niece . but that be 
 Cliffe all over -- and perhaps the good thing about he . " 

 he might have add that as Cliffe be suppose to desire an appointment 
 under either the Foreign Office or the Colonial Office , it might have 
 be think to his interest to show himself more urbane than he have in 
 fact show himself that afternoon to the new Under - Secretary for Foreign 
 Affairs . but Ashe rarely or never indulge himself in reflection of 
 that kind . besides , he and Cliffe know each other too well for pose . 
 there be a time when they have be on very friendly term , and when 
 Cliffe have be constantly in his mother 's drawing - room . Lady Tranmore 
 have a weakness for " influence " young man of family and ability ; and 
 Cliffe , in fact , owe she a good deal . then she have see cause to think 
 ill of he ; and , moreover , his travel have take he to the other side 
 of the world . Ashe be now well aware that Cliffe reckon on he as a 
 hostile influence and would not try either to deceive or to propitiate 
 he . 

 he think Cliffe have be disagreeably surprised to see he that 
 afternoon . perhaps it be the sudden sense of antagonism act on the 
 man 's excitable nature that have make he fle himself into the wild 
 nonsense he have talk with Lady Kitty . 

 and thenceforward Ashe 's thought be possess by Kitty only -- Kitty in 
 her two aspect , of the morning and the afternoon . he dress in a 
 reverie , and go down - stair still dream . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 at dinner he find himself responsible for Mary Lyster . Kitty be on the 
 other side of the table , widely separate both from himself and Cliffe . 
 she be in a little Empire dress of blue and silver , as extravagantly 
 simple as her gown of the afternoon have be extravagantly elaborate . 

 Ashe observe the furtive study that the Grosville girl could not help 
 bestow upon she -- upon her shoulder - strap and long , bare arm , upon 
 her high waist and the blue and silver band in her hair . Kitty herself 
 sit in a pensive or proud silence . the Dean be beside she , but she 
 scarcely speak to he , and as to the young man from the neighborhood who 
 have take she in , he be to she as though he be not . 

 " have there be a row ? " Ashe inquire , in a low voice , of his companion . 

 Mary look at he quietly . 

 " Lord Grosville ask they not to play -- because of the servant . " 

 " good ! " say Ashe . " the servant be , of course , play card in the 
 house - keeper 's room . " 

 " not at all . they be sing hymn with Lady Grosville . " 

 Ashe look incredulous . 

 " only the slavey and scullery maid that could not help themselves . 
 never mind . be Lady Kitty amenable ? " 

 " she seem to have make Lord Grosville very angry . Lady Grosville and I 
 smooth he down . " 

 " do you ? " say Ashe . " that be nice of you . " 

 Mary color a little , and do not reply . presently Ashe resume . 

 " be not you as sorry for she as I be ? " 

 " for Lady Kitty ? I should think she manage to amuse herself pretty 
 well . " 

 " she seem to I the most deplorable tragic little person , " say Ashe , 
 slowly . 

 Miss Lyster laugh . 

 " I really do not see it , " she say . 

 " oh yes , you do , " he persisted--"if you think a moment . be kind to 
 she -- won't you ? " 

 she draw herself up with a cold dignity . 

 " I confess that she have never attract I in the least . " 

 Ashe return to his dinner , dimly conscious that he have speak like a 
 fool . 

 when the lady have withdraw , the conversation fall on some important 
 news from the Far East contain in the Sunday paper that Geoffrey 
 Cliffe have bring down , and presume to form part of the despatch 
 which the two minister stay in the house have receive that afternoon 
 by Foreign Office messenger . the government of Teheran be in one of its 
 periodical fit of ill - temper with England ; have be meddle with 
 Afghanistan , flirt badly with Russia , and bring ridiculous charge 
 against the british minister . an expedition to Bushire be talk of , 
 and the Radical press be on the war - path . the cabinet minister say 
 little . a Lord Privy Seal , reverentially credit with advise royalty 
 in its private affair , need have no view on the Persian Gulf . but Ashe 
 be appeal to and talk well . the minister at Teheran be an old 
 friend of his , and he describe the personal attack make on he for 
 political reason by the Shah and his minister with a humor which keep 
 the table entertain . 

 suddenly Cliffe interpose . he have be listen with restlessness , 
 though Ashe , with pointed courtesy , have once or twice include he in 
 the conversation . and presently , at a somewhat dramatic moment , he meet a 
 statement of Ashe be with a direct and violent contradiction . Ashe 
 flushed , and a duel begin between the two man of which the company be 
 soon silent spectator . Ashe have the resource of official knowledge ; 
 Cliffe have be recently on the spot , and push home the advantage of 
 the eye - witness with a covert insolence which Ashe bear with surprising 
 carelessness and good - temper . in the end Cliffe say some outrageous 
 thing , at which Ashe laugh ; and Lord Grosville abruptly dissolve the 
 party . 

 Ashe go smile out of the dining - room , caress a fine white 
 spaniel , as though nothing have happen . in cross the hall Harman 
 find himself alone with the Dean , who look serious and preoccupied . 

 " that be a curious spectacle , " say Harman . " Ashe 's equanimity be 
 amazing . " 

 " I have rather have see he angry , " say the Dean , slowly . 

 " he be always a very tolerant , easy - go fellow . " 

 the Dean shake his head . 

 " a touch of _ soeva indignatio _ now and then would complete he . " 

 " have he get it in he ? " 

 " perhaps not , " say the little Dean , with a flash of expression that 
 dignify all his frail person . " but without it he will hardly make a 
 great man . " 

 meanwhile Geoffrey Cliffe , his strange , twisted face still vindictively 
 aglow , make his way to Kitty Bristol 's corner in the drawing - room . Mary 
 Lyster be conscious of it , conscious also of a certain look that Kitty 
 bestow upon the entrance of Ashe , while Cliffe be open a battery 
 of mingled chaff and compliment that do not at first have much effect 
 upon she . but William Ashe throw himself into conversation with Lady 
 Edith Manley , and be presently , to all appearance , happily plunge in 
 gossip , his tall person wholly at ease in a deep arm - chair , while Lady 
 Edith bend over he with smile . meanwhile there be a certain desertion 
 of Kitty on the part of the lady . Lady Grosville hardly speak to she , 
 and the girl markedly avoid she . there be a moment when Kitty , 
 look round she , suddenly shake her small shoulder , and like a colt 
 escape from harness give herself to riot . she and Cliffe amuse 
 themselves so well and so noisily that the whole drawing - room be 
 presently uneasily aware of they . Lady Grosville shoot glance of wrath , 
 rise suddenly at one moment and sit down again ; her girl talk more 
 disjointedly than ever to the gentleman who be civilly attend they ; 
 while , on the other hand , Miss Lyster 's flow of conversation with Louis 
 Harman be more softly copious than usual . at last the Dean 's wife 
 look at the Dean , a signal of kind distress , and the Dean advance . 

 " Lady Kitty , " he say , take a seat beside the pair , " have you 
 forget you promise I some French ? " 

 Kitty turn on he a hot and mutinous face . 

 " do I ? what shall I say ? some Alfred de Musset ? " 

 " no , " say the Dean , " I think not . " 

 " some -- some"--she cudgel her memory--"some Théophile Gautier ? " 

 " no , certainly not ! " say the Dean , hastily . 

 " well , as I do not know a word of him-- " laugh Kitty . 

 " that be mischievous , " say the Dean , raise a finger . " let I suggest 
 Lamartine . " 

 Kitty shake her head obstinately . " I never learn one line . " 

 " then some of the old fellow , " say the Dean , persuasively . " I long to 
 hear you in Corneille or Racine . that we should _ all _ enjoy . " 

 and suddenly his wrinkle hand fall kindly on the girl 's small , chilly 
 ringer and pat they . their eye meet , Kitty 's wild and challenging , 
 the Dean 's full of that ethereal benevolence which blend so agreeably 
 with his character as courtier and man of the world . there be a bright 
 sweetness in they which seem to say : " poor child ! I understand . but be 
 a _ little _ good -- as well as clever -- and all will be well . " 

 suddenly Kitty 's look waver and fall . all the harshness dissolve from 
 her thin young beauty . she turn from Cliffe , and the Dean see she 
 quiver with submission . 

 " I think I could say some ' polyeucte , ' " she say , gently . 

 the Dean clap his hand and rise . 

 " Lady Grosville , " he say , raise his voice--"ladie and gentleman , 
 Lady Kitty have promise to say we some more french poetry . you remember 
 how admirably she recite last night . but this be Sunday , and she will 
 give we something in a different vein . " 

 Lady Grosville , who have rise impatiently , sit down again . there be a 
 general movement ; chair be turn or draw forward till a circle 
 form . meanwhile the Dean consult with Kitty and resume : 

 " Lady Kitty will recite a scene from Corneille 's beautiful tragedy of 
 ' polyeucte'--the scene in which Pauline , after witness the martyrdom 
 of her husband , who have be behead for refuse to sacrifice to the 
 god , return from the place of execution so melt by the love and 
 sacrifice she have behold that she open her heart then and there to the 
 same august faith and plead for the same death . " 

 the Dean seat himself , and Kitty step into the centre of the 
 circle . she think a moment , her lip move , as though she recall 
 the line . then she look down at her bare arm , and dress , frowned , 
 and suddenly approach Lady Edith Manley . 

 " may I have that ? " she say , point to a lace cloak that lie on Lady 
 Edith 's knee . " I be rather cold . " 

 Lady Edith hand it to she , and she throw it round she . 

 " Actress ! " say Cliffe , under his breath , with a grin of amusement . 

 at any rate , her impulse serve she well . her form and dress disappear 
 under a cloud of white . she become in a flash , so to speak , 
 evangelized -- a most innocent and spiritual apparition . her beautiful 
 head , she kindle and transfigure face , her little hand on the white 
 fold , these alone remain to mingle their impression with the austere 
 and move tragedy which her lip recite . her audience look on at 
 first with the embarrassed or hostile air which be the Englishman 's 
 natural protection against the great thing of art ; then for those who 
 understand French the high passion and the noble verse begin to tell ; 
 while those who could not follow be gradually enthral by the 
 gesture and tone with which the slight , vibrate creature , whom but 
 ten minute before most of they have regard as a mere noisy flirt , 
 suggest and convey the fine and most compelling shade of love , 
 faith , and sacrifice . 

 when she cease , there be a moment 's profound silence . then Lady Edith , 
 draw a long breath , express the welcome commonplace which restore 
 the atmosphere of daily life . 

 " how _ could _ you remember it all ? " 

 Kitty sit down , her lip tremble scornfully . 

 " I have to say it every week at the convent . " 

 " I understand , " say Cliffe in Darrell 's ear--"that last night she be 
 Doña Sol . an accommodate young woman . " 

 Meanwhile Kitty look up to find Ashe beside she . he say , 
 " magnificent!"--but it do not matter to she what he say . his face tell 
 she that she have move he , and that he be incapable of any foolish 
 chatter about it . a smile of extraordinary sweetness spring into her 
 eye ; and when Lady Grosville come up to thank she , the girl impetuously 
 rise , and , in the foreign way , kiss her hand , courtesye . Lord 
 Grosville say , heartily , " upon my word , Kitty , you ought to go on the 
 stage ! " and she smile upon he , too , in a flutter of feeling , 
 forget his scolding and her own impertinence , before dinner . the 
 revulsion , indeed , throughout the company -- with two exception -- be 
 complete . for the rest of the evening Kitty bask in sunshine and 
 flattery . she meet it with a joyous gentleness , and the little figure , 
 still bedrape in white , become the centre of the room 's kindness . 

 the Dean be triumphant . 

 " my dear Miss Lyster , " he say , presently , find himself near that 
 lady , " do you ever hear anything well do ? a most remarkable 
 talent ! " 

 Mary smile . 

 " I be wonder , " she say , " what they teach you in french convent -- and 
 why ! it be all so singular,--isn't it ? " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 late that night Ashe enter his room -- before his usual time , however . 
 he have tired even of Lord Grosville 's chat , and have leave the 
 smoking - room still talk . indeed , he wish to be alone , and there be 
 that in his vein which tell he that a new motive have take possession 
 of his life . 

 he sit beside the open window review the scene and feeling of the 
 day -- his interview with Kitty in the morning -- the teasing coquette of 
 the afternoon -- the inspire poetic child of the evening . rapidly , but 
 none the less strongly and steadfastly , he make up his mind . he would 
 ask Kitty Bristol to marry he , and he would ask she immediately . 

 why ? he scarcely know she . his mother , his family would think it 
 madness . no doubt it be madness . yet , as far as he could explain his 
 impulse himself , it depend on certain fundamental fact in his own 
 nature -- it be in keep with his deep character . he have an inbreed 
 love of the difficult , the unconventional in life , of all that pique 
 and stimulate his own superabundant consciousness of resource and 
 power . and he have a tenderness of feeling , a gift of chivalrous pity , 
 only know to the few , which be in truth always hungrily on the watch , 
 like some starve faculty that can not find its outlet . the thought of 
 this beautiful child , in the hand of such a mother as Madame d'Estrées , 
 and rush upon risk illustrate by the half - mock attention of 
 Geoffrey Cliffe , do in truth wring his heart . with a strange 
 imaginative clearness he foresee her future , he behold she the prey at 
 once of some bad fellow and of her own temperament . she would come to 
 grief ; he see the prescience of it in she already ; and what a waste 
 would be there ! 

 No!--he would step in -- capture she before these way and whim , now 
 merely bizarre or foolish , stiffen into what might in truth destroy 
 she . his pulse quicken as he think of the development of this 
 beauty , the ripening of this intelligence . never yet have he see a girl 
 whom he much wish to marry . he be easily repel by stupidity , still 
 more by mere amiability . some touch of acid , of roughness in the 
 fruit -- that draw he , in politic , thought , love . and if she marry he 
 he vow to himself , proudly , that she would find he no tyrant . many a 
 man might marry she who would then fight she and try to break she . all 
 that be most fastidious and characteristic in Ashe revolt from such a 
 notion . with he she should have _ freedom_--whatever it might cost . he 
 ask himself deliberately , whether after marriage he could see she 
 flirt with other man , as she have flirt that day with Cliffe , and 
 still refrain from coerce she . and his question be answer , or 
 rather put aside , first by the confidence of nascent love -- he would love 
 she so well and so loyally that she would naturally turn to he for 
 counsel ; and then by the clear perception that she be a creature of 
 mind rather than sense , govern mainly by the caprice and curiosity 
 of the _ intelligence _ , combine with a rather cold , indifferent 
 temperament . one moment throw herself wildly into a dangerous or 
 exciting intimacy , the next , part with a laugh , and without a 
 regret -- it be thus he see she in the future , even as a wife . " she may 
 scandalize half the world , " he say to himself , stubbornly--"I shall 
 understand she ! " 

 but his mother?--his friends?--his colleague ? he know well his mother 's 
 ambition for he , and the place that he hold in her heart . could he 
 without cruelty impose upon her such a daughter as Kitty Bristol ? 
 well!--his mother have a very large experience of life , and much natural 
 independence of mind . he trust she to see the promise in this untamed 
 and gifted creature ; he count on the sense of power that Lady Tranmore 
 possess , and which would but find new scope in the taming of Kitty . 

 but Kitty 's mother ? Kitty must , of course , be rescue from Madame 
 d'Estrées -- must find a new and truer mother in Lady Tranmore . but money 
 would do it ; and money must be lavish . 

 then , almost for the first time , Ashe feel a conscious delight in wealth 
 and birth . _ Panache _ ? he could give it she -- the little , wild , lovely 
 thing ! luxury , society , adoration -- all should be her . she should be so 
 love and cherish , she must need love in turn . 

 his dream be delicious ; and the sudden fear into which he fall at the 
 end lest after all Kitty should mock and turn from he , be only in 
 truth another pleasure . no delay ! circumstance might develop at any 
 moment and sweep she from he . now or never must he snatch she from 
 difficulty and disgrace -- let hostile tongue wag as they please -- and 
 make she his . 

 his political future ? he know well the influence which , in these day of 
 universal publicity , a man 's private affair may have on his public 
 career . and in truth his heart be in that career , and the thought of 
 endanger it hurt he . certainly it would recommend he to nobody that 
 he should marry Madame d'Estrées ' daughter . on the other hand , what 
 favor do he want of anybody ? save what work and " know more than the 
 other fellow " might compel ? the cynic in he be well aware that he have 
 already what other man fight for -- family , money , and position . society 
 must accept his wife ; and Kitty , once mellow by happiness and praise , 
 might live , laugh , and rattle as she please . 

 as to strangeness and caprice , the modern world delight in they ; " the 
 violent take it by force . " there be , indeed , a dividing - line ; but it be 
 a love - marriage that should keep Kitty on the safe side of it . 

 he stand lose in a very ecstasy of resolve , when suddenly there be a 
 sharp movement outside , and a flash of white among the yew hedge 
 border the formal garden on which his window look . the night 
 outside be still and veil , but of the flash of white he be 
 certain -- and of a step on the gravel . 

 something fall beside he , throw from outside . he pick it up , and 
 find a flower weight by a stone , tie into a fold of ribbon . 

 " Madcap ! " he say to himself , his heart beat to suffocation . 

 then he steal out of his room , and down a small , winding staircase which 
 lead directly to the garden and a door beside the orangery . he have to 
 unbolt the door , and as he do so a dog in one of the basement room 
 begin to bark . but there could be no flinching , though the whole thing 
 be of an imprudence which prick his conscience . to slip along the 
 shadow side of the orangery , to cross the space of clouded light 
 beyond , and gain the darkness of the ilex avenue beyond be soon do . 
 then he hear a soft laugh , and a little figure flee before he . he 
 follow and overtake . 

 Kitty Bristol turn upon he . 

 " do not I throw straight ? " she say , triumphantly . " and they say girl 
 can not throw . " 

 " but why do you throw at all ? " he say , capture her hand . 

 " because I want to talk to you . and I be restless and could not sleep . 
 why do you never come and talk to I this afternoon ? and why"--she beat 
 her foot angrily--"did you let I go and play billiard alone with Mr. 
 Cliffe ? " 

 " let you ! " cry Ashe . " as if anybody could have prevent you ! " 

 " one see , of course , that you det Mr. Cliffe , " say the whiteness 
 beside he . 

 " I do not come here to talk about Geoffrey Cliffe . I _ will not _ talk about 
 he ! though , of course , you must know-- " 

 " that I flirt with he abominably all the afternoon ? _ C'est 
 vrai -- c'est ab - sol - ument vrai ! _ and I shall always want to flirt with 
 he , wherever I be -- and whatever I may be do . " 

 " do as you please , " say Ashe , dryly , " but I think you will get tired . " 

 " no , no -- he excite I ! he be bad , false , selfish , but he excite I . he 
 talk to very few woman -- one can see that . and all the woman want to 
 talk to he . he use to admire Miss Lyster , and now he dislike she . but 
 she do not dislike he . no ! she would marry he to - morrow if he ask 
 she . " 

 " you be very positive , " say Ashe . " allow I to say that I entirely 
 disagree with you . " 

 " you do not know anything about she , " say the teasing voice . 

 " she be my cousin , mademoiselle . " 

 " what do that matter ? I know much more than you do , though I have only 
 see she two day . I know that -- well , I be afraid of she ! " 

 " Afraid of she ? do you come out -- may I ask -- determined to talk 
 nonsense ? " 

 " I come out -- never mind ! I _ be _ afraid of she . she hat I . I 
 think"--he feel a shiver in the air -- will do I harm if she can . " 

 " no one shall do you harm , " say Ashe , his tone change , " if you will 
 only trust yourself-- " 

 she laugh merrily . 

 " to you ? oh ! you would soon throw it up . " 

 " try I ! " he say , approach she . " Lady Kitty , I have something to say 
 to you . " 

 suddenly she shrink away from he . he could not see her face , and have 
 nothing to guide he . 

 " I have not yet know you three week , " he say , over - master by 
 something passionate and profound . " I do not know what you will 
 say -- whether you can put up with I . but I know my own mind -- I shall not 
 change . I -- I love you . I ask you to marry I . " 

 a silence . the night seem to have grow dark . then a small hand 
 seize his , and two soft lip press themselves upon it . he try to 
 capture she , but she evade he . 

 " you -- you really and actually -- want to marry I ? " 

 " I do , Kitty , with all my heart . " 

 " you remember about my mother -- about Alice ? " 

 " I remember everything . we would face it together . " 

 " and -- you know what I tell you about my bad temper ? " 

 " some nonsense , be not it ? but I should be bore by the domestic dove . I 
 want the hawk , Kitty , with its quick wing and its daring bright eye . " 

 she break from he with a cry . 

 " you must listen . I _ have_--a wicked , odious , ungovernable temper . I 
 should make you miserable . " 

 " not at all , " say Ashe . " I should take it very calmly . I be make that 
 way . " 

 " and then -- I do not know how to put it -- but I have fancy -- overpower 
 fancy -- and I must follow they . I have one now for Geoffrey Cliffe . " 

 Ashe laugh . 

 " oh , that will not last . " 

 " then some other will come after it . and I can not help it . it be my 
 head"--she tap her forehead lightly--"that seem on fire . " 

 Ashe at last slip his arm round she . 

 " but it be your heart -- you will give I . " 

 she push he away from she and hold he at arm' - length . 

 " you be very rich , be not you ? " she say , in a muffled voice . 

 " I be well off . I can give you all the pretty thing you want . " 

 " and some day you will be Lord Tranmore ? " 

 " yes , when my poor father die , " he say , sigh . he feel her finger 
 caress his hand again . it be a spirit touch , light and tender . 

 " and every one say you be so clever -- you have such prospect . perhaps 
 you will be Prime Minister . " 

 " well , there be no saying , " he throw out , laughing--"if you will come and 
 help . " 

 he hear a sob . 

 " Help ! I should be the ruin of you . I should spoil everything . you do not 
 know the mischief I can do . and I can not help it , it be in my blood . " 

 " you would like the game of politic too much to spoil it , Kitty . " his 
 voice break and linger on the name . " you would want to be a great lady 
 and lead the party . " 

 " should I ? could you ever teach I how to behave ? " 

 " you would learn by nature . do you know , Kitty , how clever you be ? " 

 " yes , " she sigh . " I be clever . but there be always something that 
 hinder -- that bring failure . " 

 " how old be you ? " he say , laugh . " Eighteen -- or eighty ? " 

 suddenly he put out his arm , enfold she . and she , still sob , 
 raise her hand , clasp they round his neck , and clung to he like a 
 child . 

 " oh ! I know -- I know -- when I first see your face . I have be so miserable 
 all day -- and then you look at I -- and I want to tell you all . oh , I 
 adore you -- I adore you ! " their face meet . Ashe taste a moment of 
 rapture ; and know himself free at last of the great company of poet and 
 of lover . 

 they slip back to the house , and Ashe see she disappear by a door on 
 the farth side of the orangery -- noiselessly , without a sound . except 
 that just at the last she draw he to she and breathe a sacred whisper 
 in his ear . 

 " oh ! what -- what will Lady Tranmore say ? " 

 then she flee . but she leave her question behind she , and when the dawn 
 come Ashe find that he have spend half the night in try anew to frame 
 some sort of an answer to it . 




 PART II 

 three year after 

 " the world an ancient murderer be . " 




 VII 


 " her ladyship will be in before six , my lady . I be to be sure and ask 
 you to wait , if you come before , and to tell you that her ladyship have 
 go to Madame Fanchette about her dress for the ball . " 

 so say Lady Kitty 's maid . Lady Tranmore hesitate , then say she would 
 wait , and ask that Master Henry might be bring down . 

 the maid go for the child , and Lady Tranmore enter the drawing - room . 
 the Ashes have be settle since their marriage in a house in Hill 
 Street -- a house to which Kitty have lose her heart at first sight . it be 
 old and distinguish , cover here and there with eighteenth - century 
 decoration , once , no doubt , a little florid and coarse beside the fine 
 work of the period , but now agreeably blunt and mellow by time . 
 Kitty have have her impetuous and decide way with the furnishing of it ; 
 and , though Lady Tranmore profess to admire it , the result be , in 
 truth , too french and too pagan for her taste . her own room reflect 
 the rise worship of Morris and Burse - Jones , of which , indeed , she have 
 be an adept from the beginning . her wall be cover by the 
 well - know pomegranate or jasmine or sunflower pattern ; her hanging 
 be of a mystic greenish - blue ; her picture be draw either from the 
 italian primitive or their modern follower . celtic romance , Christian 
 symbolism , all that be touching , other - worldly , and obscure -- our late 
 english form , in fact , of the great romantic reaction -- it be amid 
 influence of this kind that Lady Tranmore live and feed her own 
 imagination . the dim , suggestive , and pathetic ; twilight rather than 
 dawn , autumn rather than spring ; yearn rather than fulfilment ; " the 
 gleam " rather than noon - day : it be in this half - light , richly color 
 sphere that she and most of her friend see the tent of Beauty pitch . 

 but Kitty would have none of it . she quote french sceptical remark 
 about the leg and joint of the Burne - Jones knight ; she declare that 
 so much pattern make she dizzy ; and that the French be the only nation 
 in the world who understand a _ salon _ , whether as upholstery or 
 conversation . accordingly , in day when these thing be rare , the girl 
 of eighteen make her new husband provide she with white - panel wall , 
 lightly gild , and with a persian carpet of which the mass be of a 
 plain , blackish gray , and only the border be allow to flower . a few 
 Louis - Quinze girandole on the wall , a Vernis - Martin screen , an old 
 french clock , two or three inlay cabinet , and a collection of lightly 
 build chair and settee in the french mode -- this be all she would 
 allow ; and while Lady Tranmore 's room be always crowd , Kitty 's , which 
 be much small , have always an air of space . french book be 
 scatter here and there ; and only one picture be admit . that be a 
 Watteau sketch of a group from " L'Embarquement pour Cythère . " Kitty 
 adore it ; Lady Tranmore think it absurd and disagreeable . 

 as she enter the room now , on this May afternoon , she look round it 
 with her usual distaste . on several of the chair large illustrated 
 book be lie . they contain picture of seventeenth and eighteenth 
 century costume -- one of they display a colored engraving of a 
 brilliant Madame de Pompadour , by Boucher . 

 the maid who follow she into the room begin to remove the book . 

 " her ladyship have be choose her costume , my lady , " she explain , as 
 she close some of the volume . 

 " be it settle ? " say Lady Tranmore . 

 the maid reply that she believe so , and , bring a volume which have 
 be lay aside with a mark in it , she open on a fantastic plate of 
 Madame de Longueville , as Diana , in a gorgeous hunting - dress . 

 Lady Tranmore look at it in silence ; she think it unseemly , with its 
 bare ankle and sandalled foot , and likely to be extremely expensive . 
 for this Diana of the Fronde sparkle with jewel from top to toe , and 
 Lady Tranmore feel certain that Kitty have already make William promise 
 she the counterpart of the magnificent diamond crescent that shine in 
 the coiffure of the goddess . 

 " it really seem to be the only one that suit her ladyship , " say the 
 maid , in a deprecating voice . 

 " I dare say it will look very well , " say Lady Tranmore . " and Fanchette 
 be to make it ? " 

 " if her ladyship be not too late , " say the maid , smile . " but she have 
 take such a long time to make up her mind-- " 

 " and Fanchette , of course , be drive to death . all the world seem to 
 have go mad about this ball . " 

 Lady Tranmore shrug her shoulder in a slight disgust . she be not 
 go . since her eld son 's death she have have no taste for spectacle 
 of the kind . but she know very well that fashionable London be talk 
 and think of nothing else ; she hear that the print - room of the 
 British Museum be every day besiege by an eager crowd of fair lady , 
 claim the service of the museum official from dewy morn till eve ; 
 that historic costume and famous jewel be to be lavish on the 
 affair ; that those who be not invite have not even the resource of 
 contempt , so unquestioned and indubitable be the prospect of a really 
 magnificent spectacle ; and that the dress - maker of Paris and London , if 
 they survive the effort , would reap a marvellous harvest . 

 " and Mr. Ashe -- do you know if he be go , after all ? " she ask of the 
 maid as the latter be retreat . 

 " Mr. Ashe say he will , if he may wear just court - dress , " say the maid , 
 smile . " not unless . and her ladyship be afraid it will not be allow . " 

 " she will make he go in costume , " think Lady Tranmore . " and he will do 
 it , or anything , to avoid a scene . " 

 the maid retire , and Lady Tranmore be leave alone . as she sit wait , 
 a thought occur to she . she ring for the butler . 

 " where be the _ Times _ ? " she ask , when he appear . the man reply 
 that it be no doubt in Mr. Ashe 's room , and he would bring it . 

 " Kitty have probably not look at it , " think the visitor . when the 
 paper arrive she turn at once to the parliamentary report . it 
 contain an important speech by Ashe in the House the night before . 
 Lady Tranmore have be disturb in the reading of it that morning , and 
 have still a few sentence to finish . she read they with pride , then 
 glance again at the lead article on the debate , and at the 
 flattering reference it contain to the knowledge , courtesy , and 
 debate power of the Under - Secretary for Foreign Affairs . 

 " Mr. Ashe , " say the _ Times _ , " have well earn the promotion he be now 
 sure to receive before long . in those important rearrangement of some 
 of the high office which can not be long delay , Mr. Ashe be clearly 
 mark out for a place in the cabinet . he be young , but he have already 
 do admirable service ; and there can be no question that he have a great 
 future before he . " 

 Lady Tranmore put down the paper and fall into a reverie . a great 
 future ? yes -- if Kitty permit -- if Kitty could be manage . at present 
 it appear to William 's mother that the caprice of his wife be 
 endanger the whole development of his career . there be wheel 
 within wheel , and the newspaper know very little about they . 

 three year , be it , since the marriage ? she look back to her dismay 
 when William bring she the news , though it seem to she that in some 
 sort she have foresee it from the moment of his first mention of Kitty 
 Bristol -- with its eager appeal to her kindness , and that new and 
 indefinable something in voice and manner which put she at once on the 
 alert . 

 ought she to have oppose it more strongly ? she have , indeed , oppose it ; 
 and for a whole wretched week she who have never yet gainsay he in 
 anything have argue and plead with her son , attempt at the same 
 time to bring in his uncle to wrestle with he , see that his poor 
 paralyzed father be of no account , and so to make a stubborn family 
 fight of it . but she have be simply disarm and beat down by 
 William 's sweetness , patience , and good - humor . never have he be so 
 determine , and never so lovable . 

 it have be make abundantly plain to she that no wife , however exact 
 and adorable , should ever rob she , his mother , of one tittle of his old 
 affection -- nay , that , would she only accept Kitty , only take the little 
 forlorn creature into the shelter of her motherly arm , even a more 
 tender and devoted attention than before , on the part of her son , would 
 be surely her . he speak , moreover , the language of sound sense about 
 his propose bride . that he be in love , passionately in love , be 
 evident ; but there be moment when he could discuss Kitty , her family , 
 her bringing - up , her gift and defect , with the same cool acuman , the 
 same detachment , apparently , he might have give , say , to the Egyptian 
 or the balkan problem . Lady Tranmore be not invite to bow before a 
 divinity ; she be ask to accept a very gifted and lovely child , often 
 troublesome and provoking , but full of a glorious promise which only 
 person of discernment , like herself and Ashe , could fully realize . he 
 tell she , with a laugh , that she could never have behave even tolerably 
 to a stupid daughter - in - law . whereas , let London and society and a few 
 year of love and living do their work , and Kitty would make one of the 
 lead woman of her time , as Lady Tranmore have be before she . " you will 
 help she , you will train she , you will put she in the way , " he have say , 
 kiss his mother 's hand . " and you will see that in the end we shall both 
 of we be so conceited to have have the making of she there will be no 
 hold we . " 

 well , she have yield -- of course she have yield . she have explain the 
 matter , so far as she could , to the daze wit of her paralyzed husband . 
 she have propitiate the family on both side ; she have bring Kitty to 
 stay with she , and have advise on the negotiation which banish Madame 
 d'Estrées from London and the British Isles , in return for a handsome 
 allowance and the payment of her debt ; and , finally , she have with 
 difficulty allow the grosville to provide the trousseau and arrange 
 the marriage from Grosville Park , so eager have she grow in her accepted 
 task . 

 and there have be many hour of high reward . Kitty have throw herself 
 at first upon William 's mother with all the effusion possible . she have 
 be docile , caressing , brilliant . Lady Tranmore have become almost as 
 proud of her gift , her social effect , and her fast advance beauty as 
 Ashe himself . Kitty 's whim and humor ; her passion for this person , and 
 her hatred of that ; her love of splendor and indifference to debt ; her 
 contempt of opinion and restraint , seem to she , as to Ashe , the mere 
 crude growth of youth . when she look at Ashe , so handsome , agreeable , 
 and devote , at his place and prestige in the world , his high 
 intelligence and his personal attraction , Ashe 's mother must need think 
 that Kitty 's mere cleverness would soon reveal to her her extraordinary 
 good - fortune ; and that whereas he be now at her foot , she before long 
 would be at his . 

 three year ! Lady Tranmore look back upon they with feeling that 
 waver like smoke before a wind . a year of excitement , a year of 
 illness , a year of extravagance , shake moreover by many strange gust 
 of temper and caprice , it be so she might have summarize they . first , 
 a most promising début in London . Kitty welcome on all hand with 
 enthusiasm as Ashe 's wife and her own daughter - in - law , fête to the top 
 of her bent , smile on at Court , flatter by the country - house , always 
 exquisitely dress , smile and eager , apparently full of ambition for 
 Ashe no less than for herself , a happy , notorious , busy little person , 
 with a touch of wildness that do but give edge to her charm and keep 
 the world talk . 

 then , the birth of the boy , and Kitty 's passionate , ungovernable recoil 
 from the deformity that show itself almost immediately after his 
 birth -- a form of infantile paralysis involve a slight but incurable 
 lameness . Lady Tranmore could recall week of remorseful fondling , 
 alternate with week of neglect ; continue illness and depression on 
 Kitty 's part , settle after a while into a petulant melancholy for 
 which the baby 's defect seem but an inadequate cause ; Ashe 's tender 
 anxiety , his willingness to throw up Parliament , office , everything , 
 that Kitty might travel and recover ; and those huge effort by which she 
 and his good friend in the House have hold he back -- when Kitty , it 
 seem , care little or nothing whether he sacrifice his future or not . 
 finally , she herself , with the assistance of a new friend of Kitty 's , 
 have become Kitty 's nurse , have take she abroad when Ashe could not be 
 spar , have watch over she , and humor she , and at last bring she 
 back -- so the doctor say -- restore . 

 be it really recovery ? at any rate , Lady Tranmore be often incline to 
 think that since the return to London -- now about a twelvemonth 
 since -- both she and William have have to do with a different kitty . Young 
 as she still be , the first exquisite softness of the expand life be 
 go ; thing hard , strange , more inexplicable than any which those 
 who know she well have yet perceive , seem now and then to come to the 
 surface , like wreckage in a summer sea . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the opening door disturb these pondering . the nurse appear , 
 carry the little boy . Lady Tranmore take he on her knee and caress 
 he . he be a piteous , engage child , generally very docile , but liable 
 at time to storm of temper out of all proportion to the fragility of 
 his small person . his grandmother be inclined to look upon his passion 
 as something external and inflicted -- the enter - in of the Blackwater 
 devil to plague a tiny creature that , normally , be of a divine and 
 cling sweetness . she would have teach he religion , as his only 
 shield against himself ; but neither his father nor his mother be 
 religious ; and Harry be likely to grow up a pagan . 

 he lean now against her breast , and she , whose inmost nature be 
 maternity , delight in the pressure of the tiny body , croon song to 
 he when they be leave alone , and pause now and then to pity and kiss 
 the little shrunken foot that hang beside the other . 

 she be interrupt by a soft entrance and the rustle of a dress . 

 " ah , Margaret ! " she say , look round and smile . 

 the girl who have come in approach she , shake hand , and look down at 
 the baby . she be fair - haired and wear spectacle ; her face be round 
 and childish , her eye round and blue , with certain line about they , 
 however , which show that she be no long in her first youth . 

 " I come to see if I could do anything to - day for Kitty . I know she be 
 very busy about the ball-- " 

 " head over ear apparently , " say Lady Tranmore . " everybody have lose 
 their wit . I see Kitty have choose her dress . " 

 " yes , if Fanchette can make it all right . poor Kitty ! she have be in 
 such a state of mind . I think I will go on with these invitation . " 

 and , take off her glove and hat , Margaret French go to the 
 writing - table like one intimately acquaint with the room and its 
 affair , take up a pile of card and envelope which lie upon it , and , 
 bring they to Lady Tranmore 's side , begin to work upon they . 

 " I do about half yesterday , " she explain ; " but I see Kitty have not 
 be able to touch they , and it be really time they be out . " 

 " for their party next week ? " 

 " yes . I hope Kitty will not tire herself out . it have be a rush lately . " 

 " do she ever rest ? " 

 " never -- as far as I can see . and I be afraid she have be very much 
 worried . " 

 " about that silly affair with Prince Stephan ? " say Lady Tranmore . 

 Margaret French nod . " she vow that she mean no harm , and do no 
 harm , and that it have be all malice and exaggeration . but one can see 
 she have be hurt . " 

 " well , if you ask I , " say Lady Tranmore , in a low voice , " I think she 
 deserve to be . " 

 their eye meet , the girl 's full of a half - smile , half - soft 
 consideration . Lady Tranmore , on the other hand , have flush proudly , as 
 though the mere mention of the matter to which she have refer have be 
 gall to she . Kitty , in fact , have just be guilty of an escapade 
 which have set the town talk , and even find its way here and there in 
 the newspaper . the heir to a european monarchy have be recently 
 visit London . a romantic interest surround he ; for a lady , not of 
 a rank sufficiently high to mate with his , have lately drown herself 
 for love of he , and the young man 's melancholy good look , together 
 with the magnificent apathy of his manner , draw after he a chain of 
 gossip . Kitty fail to meet he in society ; certain invitation that 
 for once she covet do not arrive ; and in a fit of pique she declare 
 that she would make acquaintance with he in her own way . on a certain 
 occasion , when the princeling be at the play , his attention be draw 
 to a small and dazzling creature in a box opposite his own . presently , 
 however , there be a commotion in this box . the dazzle creature have 
 faint ; and rumor send round the name of Lady Kitty Ashe . the Prince 
 despatch an equerry to make inquiry , and the inquiry be repeat 
 that evening in Hill Street . Recovery be prompt , and the Prince let it 
 be know that he wish to meet the lady . invitation from high quarter 
 descend upon Kitty ; she bear herself with an engaging carelessness , 
 and the melancholy youth be soon spend far more pain upon she than 
 he have yet be know to spend upon any other english beauty present 
 to he . Ashe and Kitty 's friend laugh ; the old general in charge of 
 the princeling take alarm . and presently Kitty 's audacity , alack , 
 carry away her discretion ; she begin , moreover , to boast of her ruse . 
 whisper creep round ; and the general 's ear be open . in a few day 
 Kitty 's triumph go the way of all earthly thing . at a Court ball , to 
 which her vanity have look forward , unwarned , the Prince pass she 
 with glassy eye , return the bare bow to her smile courtesy . she 
 betray nothing ; but somehow the thing get out , and set in motion a 
 perfect hurricane of talk . it be rumor that the old Prime Minister , 
 Lord Parham , have himself say a caustic word to Lady Kitty , that Royalty 
 be annoy , and that William Ashe have for once scold his wife 
 seriously . 

 Lady Tranmore be well aware that there be , at any rate , no truth in 
 the last report ; but she also know that there be a tone of sharpness in 
 the London chatter that be new with regard to Kitty . it be as though a 
 certain indulgence be wear out , and what have be amusement be 
 pass into criticism . 

 she and Margaret French discuss the matter a little , _ sotto voce _ , 
 while Margaret go on with the invitation and Lady Tranmore make a 
 french toy dance and spin for the babe 's amusement . their tone be one 
 of close and friendly intimacy , an intimacy base clearly upon one 
 common interest -- their relation to Kitty . Margaret French be one of 
 those being in whom , for our salvation , this halting , hurried world of 
 our be still on the whole rich . she be unmarried , thirty - five , and 
 poor . she live with her brother , a struggle doctor , and she have come 
 across Kitty in the first month of Kitty 's married life , on some 
 fashionable soldier ' Aid Committee , where Margaret have do the work 
 and Kitty with the other great lady have reap the fame . Kitty have 
 develop a fancy for she , and presently could not live without she . but 
 Margaret , though it soon become evident that she have take Kitty and , in 
 due time , the child -- Ashe , too , for the matter of that -- deep into her 
 generous heart , preserve a charming measure in the friendship offer 
 she . she would owe Kitty nothing , either socially or financially . when 
 Kitty 's smart friend appear , she vanish . nobody in her own world 
 ever hear she mention the name of Lady Kitty Ashe , largely as that name 
 be begin to figure in the gossip of the day . but there be few 
 thing concern the Hill Street ménage that Lady Tranmore could not 
 safely and rightly discuss with she ; and even Ashe himself go to she 
 for counsel . 

 " I be afraid this have make thing bad than ever with the Parhams , " 
 say Lady Tranmore , presently . 

 Margaret shake her head anxiously . 

 " I hope Kitty will not throw over their dinner next week . " 

 " she be talk of it ! " 

 " yesterday she have almost make up her mind , " say Margaret , reluctantly . 
 " perhaps you will persuade she . but she have be terribly angry with 
 Lord Parham -- and with Lady P. , too . " 

 " and it be to be a reconciliation dinner , after the old nonsense 
 between she and Lady Parham , " sigh Lady Tranmore . " it be plan for 
 Kitty entirely . and she be to act something , be not she , with that young 
 De La Rivière from the embassy ? I believe the Princess be 
 come -- expressly to meet she . I have be hear of it on all side . 
 she _ can not _ throw it over ! " 

 Margaret shrug her shoulder . " I believe she will . " 

 the old lady 's face show a sudden cloud of indignation . 

 " William must really put his foot down , " she say , in a low , decide 
 voice . " it be , of course , most important -- just now-- " 

 she say no more , but Margaret French look up , and they exchange 
 glance . 

 " let us hope , " say Margaret , " that Mr. Ashe will be able to pacify she . 
 ah , there she be . " 

 for the front door close heavily , and instantly the house be aware 
 from top to toe of a flutter of talk and a frou - frou of skirt . Kitty 
 run up the stair and into the drawing - room , still talk , apparently , 
 to the footman behind she , and stop short at the sight of Lady 
 Tranmore and Margaret . a momentary shadow pass across her face ; then 
 she come forward all smile . 

 " why , they never tell I down - stair ! " she say , take a hand of each 
 caressingly , and slip into a seat between they . " have I lose much of 
 you ? " 

 " well , I must soon be off , " say Lady Tranmore . " Harry have be 
 entertain I . " 

 " oh , Harry ; be he there ? " say Kitty , in another voice , perceive the 
 child behind his grandmother 's dress as he sit on the floor , where Lady 
 Tranmore have just deposit he . 

 the baby turn towards his beautiful mother , and , as he see she , a 
 little wandering smile begin to spread from his uncertain lip to his 
 deep - brown eye , till his whole face shine , hold to hers as to a magnet , 
 in a still enchantment . 

 " come ! " say Kitty , hold out her hand . 

 with difficulty the child pull himself towards she , move in sideway 
 fashion along the floor , and drag the helpless foot after he . again 
 the shadow cross Kitty 's face . she catch he up , kiss he , and 
 move to ring the bell . 

 " shall I take he up - stair ? " say Margaret . 

 " why , he seem to have only just come down ! " say Lady Tranmore . " must 
 he go ? " 

 " he can come down again afterwards , " say Kitty . " I want to talk to you . 
 take he , Margaret . " 

 the babe go without a whimper , still follow his mother with his 
 eye . 

 " he look rather frail , " say Lady Tranmore . " I hope you will soon be 
 send he to the country , Kitty . " 

 " he be very well , " say Kitty . then she take off her hat and look at 
 the invitation Margaret have be write . 

 " Heavens , I have forget all about they ! what an angel be Margaret ! I 
 really can not remember these thing . they ought to do themselves by 
 clock - work . and now Fanchette and this ball be enough to drive one 
 wild . " 

 she lift her hand to her face and press back the mass of fair 
 hair that be tumble round it , with a gesture of weariness . 

 " Fanchette can make your dress ? " 

 " she say she will , but I could not make she understand anything I 
 want . she be off her head ! they all be . by - the - way , do you hear of 
 Madeleine Alcot 's . telegram to Worth ? " 

 " no . " 

 Kitty laugh -- a laugh musical but malicious . Mrs. Alcot , marry in the 
 same month as herself , have be her companion and rival from the 
 beginning . they call each other " Kitty " and " Madeleine , " and see each 
 other frequently ; why , Lady Tranmore could never discover , unless on the 
 principle that it be good to keep your enemy under observation . 

 " she telegraph to Worth as soon as her invitation arrive , ' Envoyez 
 tout de suite costume Vénus . réponse . ' the answer come at dinner -- she 
 have a dinner - party -- and she read it aloud : ' remercîment . Il n'y en a 
 pas . ' be not it delightful ? " 

 " very neat , " say Lady Tranmore , smile . " when do you invent that ? 
 you , I hear , be to be Diana ? " 

 Kitty make a gesture of despair . 

 " ask Fanchette -- it depend on she . there be no one but she in London who 
 can do it . oh , by - the - way , what be Mary go to be ? I suppose a Madonna 
 of sort . " 

 " not at all , " say Lady Tranmore , dryly ; " she have choose a Sir Joshua 
 costume I find for she . " 

 " a vocation miss , " say Kitty , shake her head . " she ought to have 
 be a ' Vestal Virgin ' at least .... do you know that you look _ such _ a 
 duck this afternoon ! " the speaker put up two small hand and pull and 
 pat at the black lace string of Lady Tranmore 's hat , which be tie 
 under the delicately wrinkle white of her very distinguished chin . 

 " this hat suit you so -- you be such a _ grande dame _ in it . ah ! Je 
 t'adore ! " 

 and Kitty softly take the chin aforesaid into her hand , and drop a 
 kiss on Lady Tranmore 's cheek , which redden a little under the sudden 
 caress . 

 " do not be a goose , Kitty . " but Elizabeth Tranmore stoop forward all 
 the same and return the kiss heartily . " now tell I what you be go 
 to wear at the Parhams ' . " 

 Kitty rise deliberately , go to the bell and ring it . 

 " it must be quite time for tea . " 

 " you have not answer my question , Kitty . " 

 " have not I ? " the butler enter . " Tea , please , Wilson , at once . " 

 " Kitty!-- " 

 Lady Kitty seat herself defiantly a short distance from her 
 mother - in - law and cross her hand on her lap . 

 " I be not go to the Parhams ' . " 

 " kitty!--what do you mean ? " 

 " I be not go to the Parhams ' , " repeat Kitty , slowly . " they should 
 behave a little more considerately to I if they want to get I to amuse 
 their guest for they . " 

 at this moment Margaret French re - enter the room . Lady Tranmore turn 
 to she with a gesture of distress . 

 " oh , Margaret know , " say Kitty . " I tell she yesterday . " 

 " the Parhams ? " say Margaret . 

 Kitty nod . Margaret pause , with her hand on the back of Lady 
 Tranmore 's chair , and there be a short silence . then Lady Tranmore 
 begin , in a tone that endeavor not to be too serious : 

 " I do not know how you be go to get out of it , my dear . Lady Parham 
 have ask the Princess , first because she wish to come , secondly as an 
 olive - branch to you . she have take the great pain about the dinner ; 
 and afterwards there be to be an evening party to hear you , just the 
 right size , and just the right people . " 

 " Cela m'est égal , " say Kitty , " par - faite - ment égal ! I be not go . " 

 " what possible excuse can you invent ? " 

 " I shall have a cold , the most atrocious cold imaginable . I take to my 
 bed just two hour before it be time to dress . my letter reach Lady 
 Parham on the stroke of eight . " 

 " Kitty , you would be do a thing perfectly unheard of -- most rude -- most 
 unkind ! " 

 the stiff , slight figure , like a strained wand , do not waver for a 
 moment before the grave indignation of the old woman . 

 " I should for once be pay off a score that have run on too long . " 

 " you and Lady Parham have agree to make friend , and let bygone be 
 bygone . " 

 " that be before last week . " 

 " before Lord Parham say -- what annoy you ? " 

 Kitty 's eye flame . 

 " before Lord Parham humiliate I in public -- or try to . " 

 " Dear Kitty , he be annoy , and say a sharp thing ; but he be an old 
 man , and for William 's sake , surely , you can forgive it . and Lady Parham 
 have nothing to do with it . " 

 " she have not write to I to apologize , " say Kitty , with a most 
 venomous calm . " do not talk about it , mother . it will hurt you , and I be 
 determine . Lady Parham have patronize or snub I ever since I 
 marry -- when she have not be set my good friend against I . she be 
 false , false , _ false _ ! " Kitty strike her hand together with an emphatic 
 gesture . " and Lord Parham say a thing to I last week I shall never 
 forgive . Voilà ! now I mean to have do with it ! " 

 " and you choose to forget altogether that Lord Parham be William 's 
 political chief -- that William 's affair be in a critical state , and 
 everything depend on Lord Parham -- that it be not seemly , not possible , 
 that William 's wife should publicly slight Lady Parham , and through she 
 the Prime Minister -- at this moment of all moment . " 

 Lady Tranmore breathe fast . 

 " William will not expect I to put up with insult , " say Kitty , also 
 begin to show emotion . 

 " but can not you see that -- just now especially -- you ought to think of 
 nothing--_nothing_--but William 's future and William 's career ? " 

 " William will never purchase his career at my expense . " 

 " Kitty , dear , listen , " cry Lady Tranmore , in despair , and she throw 
 herself into argument and appeal to which Kitty listen quite unmoved 
 for some twenty minute . Margaret French , feel herself an 
 uncomfortable third , try several time to steal away . in vain . Kitty 's 
 peremptory hand retain she . she could not escape , much as she wish 
 it , from the wrestle between the two woman -- on the one side the mother , 
 noble , already touch with age , full of dignity and protest 
 affection ; on the other the wife , still little more than a child in 
 year , vibrate through all her slender frame with passion and 
 insolence , more beautiful than usual by virtue of the very fire which 
 possess she -- a mænad at bay . 

 Lady Tranmore have just begin to waver in a final despair when the door 
 open and William Ashe enter . 

 he look in astonishment at his mother and wife . then in a flash he 
 understand , and , with an involuntary gesture of fatigue , he turn to 
 go . 

 " William ! " cry his mother , hurry after he , " do not go . Kitty and I 
 be dispute ; but it be nothing , dear ! do not go , you look so tired . 
 can you stay for dinner ? " 

 " well , that be my intention , " say Ashe , with a smile , as he allow 
 himself to be bring back . " but Kitty seem in the cloud . " 

 for Kitty have not move an inch to greet he . she sit in a high - back 
 chair , one foot cross over the other , one hand support her cheek , 
 look straight before she with shin eye . 

 Lady Tranmore lay a hand on her shoulder . 

 " we will not talk any more about it now , Kitty , will we ? " 

 Kitty 's pinched lip open enough to emit the word : 

 " perhaps William have well understand-- " 

 " Goodness ! " cry Ashe . " be it the Parhams ? send they , Kitty , if you 
 please , to ten thousand _ diable _ ! you will not go to their dinner ? well , 
 do not go ! please yourself -- and hang the expense ! come and give I some 
 dinner -- there be a dear . " 

 he bend over she and kiss her hair . 

 Lady Tranmore begin to speak ; then , with a mighty effort , restrain 
 herself and begin to look for her parasol . Kitty do not move . Lady 
 Tranmore say a muffled good - bye and go . and this time Margaret French 
 insist on go with she . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 when Ashe return to the drawing - room , he find his wife still in the 
 same position , very pale and very wild . 

 " I have tell your mother , William , what I intend to do about the 
 Parhams . " 

 " very well , dear . now she know . " 

 " she say it will ruin your career . " 

 " do she ? we will talk about that presently . we have have a nasty scene in 
 the House with the Irishmen , and I be famish . go and change , there be a 
 dear . Dinner 's just come in . " 

 Kitty go reluctantly . she come down in a white , flow garment , with 
 a small green wreath in her hair , which , together with the air of a 
 storm which still enwrap she , make she more mænad - like than ever . 
 Ashe take no notice , give she a laugh account of what have pass in 
 the House , and eat his dinner . 

 afterwards , when they be alone , and he be just about to return to the 
 House , she make a swift rush across the dining - room , and catch his coat 
 with both hand . 

 " William , I can not go to that dinner -- it would kill I ! " 

 " how you repeat yourself , darling ! " he say , with a smile . " I suppose 
 you will give Lady Parham decent notice . what will you do ? get a doctor 's 
 certificate and go away ? " 

 Kitty pant . " not at all . I shall not tell she till an hour before . " 

 Ashe whistle . 

 " War ? I see . open war . very well . then we shall get to Venice for 
 Easter . " 

 Kitty fall back . 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 " very plain , be not it ? but what do it matter ? Venice will be 
 delightful , and there be plenty of good man to take my place . " 

 " Lord Parham would pass you over ? " 

 " not at all . but I can not work in public with a man whom I must cut in 
 private . it would not amuse I . so if you be decide , Kitty , write to 
 Danieli 's for room . " 

 he light his cigarette , and go out with a perfect nonchalance and 
 good - temper . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Kitty be to have go to a ball . she countermand her maid 's 
 preparation , and send the maid to bed . in due time all the servant 
 go to bed , the front door be leave on the latch as usual for Ashe 's 
 late return . about midnight a little figure slip into the child 's 
 nursery . the nurse be fast asleep . Kitty sit beside the child , 
 motionless , for an hour , and when Ashe let himself into the house about 
 two o'clock he hear a little rustle in the hall , and there stand Kitty , 
 wait for he . 

 " Kitty , what be you about ? " he say , in pretend amazement . but in 
 reality he be not astonish at all . his life for month past have be 
 pitch in a key of extravagance and tumult . he have be practically 
 certain that he should find Kitty in the hall . 

 with great tenderness he half lead , half carry she up - stair . she clung 
 to he as passionately as , before dinner , she have repulse he . when 
 they reach their room , the tired man , drop with sleep , after a 
 parliamentary wrestle in which every faculty have be tax to the 
 utmost , take his wife in his arm ; and there Kitty sob and talk 
 herself into a peace of complete exhaustion . in this state she be one 
 of the most exquisite of human being , with word , tone , and gesture of 
 a heavenly softness and languor . the evil spirit go out of she , and 
 she be all ethereal tenderness , sadness , and remorse . for more than two 
 year , scene like this have , in Ashe 's case , melt into final delight 
 and intoxication which more than efface the memory of what have go 
 before . now for several month he have dread the issue of the crisis , 
 no less than the crisis itself . it leave he unnerved as though some 
 morbid sirocco have pass over he . 

 when Kitty at last have fall asleep , Ashe stand for some time beside 
 his dressing - room window , look absently into the cloudy night , too 
 tired even to undress . a gusty northw wind tear down the street and 
 beat against the window . the unrest without increase the tension of 
 his mind and body . like Lady Tranmore , he have , as it be , step back 
 from his life , and be look at it -- the last three year of it in 
 particular -- as a whole . what be the net result of those year ? where 
 be he ? Whither be he and Kitty go ? a strange pang shoot through 
 he . the mere asking of the question have be as the lifting of the lamp 
 of Psyche . 

 the scene that night in the House of Commons have be for he a scene of 
 conflict ; in the main , also , of victory . his virile power , capacity , 
 and ambition have be at their height . he have feel the full spell of 
 the english political life , with all its hard fighting joy , the 
 exhilaration which flow from the vastness of the interest on which it 
 turn , and the intricate appeal it make , in the case of a man like 
 himself , to a hundred inherit aptitude , taste , and tradition . 

 and here he stand in the darkness , wonder whether indeed the good of 
 his life be not over -- the prey of foreboding as strong and vagrant as 
 the gust outside . 

 bird of the night ! he force himself to bed , and sleep heavily . when he 
 wake up , the May sun be shin into his room . Kitty , in the fresh 
 of morning dress , be sit on his bed like a perch bird , wait 
 impatiently till his eye should open and she could ask he his opinion 
 on her dress for the ball . the savor and joy of life return upon he 
 in a flood . Kitty be the prettiest thing ever see ; he have score off 
 those Tory fellow the night before ; the Parhams ' dinner be all right ; 
 and life be once more kind , manageable , and full of the most agreeable 
 possibility . a certain indolent impatience in he recoil from the 
 mere recollection of the night before . the worry be over ; why think of 
 it again ? 




 viii 


 Meanwhile Lady Tranmore have reach home , and after one of those 
 pathetic hour in her husband 's room which make the secret and sacred 
 foundation of her daily life , she expect Mary Lyster , who be to dine 
 at Tranmore House before the two lady present themselves at a 
 musical party give by the French Ambassadress . before her guest 's 
 arrival , Lady Tranmore wander about her room , unable to rest , unable 
 even to read the evening paper on Ashe 's speech , so possessed be she 
 still by her altercation with Kitty , and by the foreboding sense of what 
 it mean . William 's future be threaten ; and the mother whose whole 
 proud heart have be throw for year into every successful effort and 
 every upward step of her son , be up in arm . 

 Mary Lyster arrive to the minute . she come in , a tall gliding woman , 
 her hair fall in ripple wave on either side of her face , which in 
 its ample comeliness and placidity remind the Italianate Lady Tranmore 
 of many face well know to she in early siennese or florentine art . 
 Mary 's dress to - night be of a noble red , and the glossy brown of her 
 hair make a harmony both with her dress and with the whiteness of she 
 neck that content the fastidious eye of her companion . " polly " be now 
 thirty , in the prime of her good look . Lady Tranmore 's affection for 
 she , which have at one time even include the notion that she might 
 possibly become William Ashe 's wife , do not at all interfere with a 
 shrewd understanding of her limitation . but she be daughterless 
 herself ; her family feeling be strong ; and Mary 's society be an old 
 and pleasant habit one could ill have part with . in her company , 
 moreover , Mary be at her good . 

 Elizabeth Tranmore never discuss her daughter - in - law with her cousin . 
 Loyalty to William forbid it , no less than a strong sense of family 
 dignity . for Mary have speak once -- immediately after the 
 engagement -- with energy -- nay , with passion ; prophesy woe and 
 calamity . thenceforward it be tacitly agree between they that all 
 root - and - branch criticism of Kitty and her way be taboo . Mary be , 
 indeed , on apparently good term with her cousin 's wife . she din 
 occasionally at the Ashes ' , and she and Kitty meet frequently under the 
 wing of Lady Tranmore . there be no cordiality between they , and Kitty 
 be often sharply or sulkily certain that Mary be to be count among 
 those hostile force with which , in some of her mood , the world seem 
 to she to bristle . but if Mary keep , in truth , a very sharp tongue for 
 many of her intimate on the subject of Kitty , Lady Tranmore at least 
 be determined to know nothing about it . 

 on this particular evening , however , Lady Tranmore 's self - control fail 
 she , for the first time in three year . she have not talk five minute 
 with her guest before she perceive that Mary 's mind be , in truth , 
 brimful of gossip -- the gossip of many drawing - room -- as to Kitty 's 
 escapade with the Prince , Kitty 's relation to Lady Partham , Kitty 's 
 party , and Kitty 's whim . the temptation be too great ; her own guard 
 break down . 

 " I hear Kitty be furious with the Parhams , " say Mary , as the two lady 
 sit together after their rapid dinner . it be a rainy night , and the 
 fire to which they have draw up be welcome . 

 Lady Tranmore shake her head sadly . 

 " I do not know where it be to end , " she say , slowly . 

 " Lady Parham tell I yesterday -- you do not mind my repeat it?"--mary 
 look up with a smile--"she be still dreadfully afraid that Kitty 
 would play she some trick about next Friday . she know that Kitty 
 detest she . " 

 " oh no , " say Lady Tranmore , in a vague voice , " Kitty 
 couldn't -- impossible ! " 

 Mary turn an observant eye upon her companion 's conscious and troubled 
 air , and draw conclusion not far from the truth . 

 " and it be all so awkward , be not it ? " she say , with sympathy , " when 
 apparently Lady Parham be as much Prime Minister as he be . " 

 for in those day certain great house and political lady , though not 
 at the zenith of their power , be still , in their comparative decline , 
 very much to be reckon with . when Lady Parham talk long than usual 
 with the french Ambassador , his austrian and german colleague write 
 anxious despatch to their government ; when a special mission to the 
 East of great importance have to be arrange , nobody imagine that Lord 
 Parham have very much to do with the appointment of the commissioner , who 
 happen to have just engage himself to Lady Parham 's second girl . no 
 young member on the government side , if he want office , neglect 
 Lady Parham 's invitation , and admission to her more intimate dinner 
 be still almost as much coveted as similar favor have be a generation 
 before in the case of Lady Jersey , or still early , in that of Lady 
 Holland . she be a small old woman , with a shrewish face , a waxen 
 complexion , and a brown wig . in spite of short sight , she see thing 
 that escape most other people ; her tongue be rarely at a loss ; she 
 be , on the whole , a good friend , though never an unreflecting one ; and 
 what she forgave might be safely reckon as not worth resent . 

 Elizabeth Tranmore receive Mary 's remark with reluctant consent . Lady 
 Parham -- from the english aristocratic stand - point -- be not well - bear . 
 she have be the daughter of a fashionable music - master , whose blood be 
 certainly not Christian . and there be many people beside Lady Tranmore 
 who resent her domination . 

 " it will be so perfectly easy when the moment come to invent some 
 excuse or other for shelve William 's claim , " sigh Ashe 's mother . 
 " nobody be indispensable , and if that old woman be provoke , she will be 
 capable of any mischief . " 

 " what do you want for William ? " say Mary , smile . 

 " he ought , of course , to have the Home Office ! " reply Lady Tranmore , 
 with fire . 

 Mary vow that he would certainly have it . " Kitty be so clever , she 
 will understand how important discretion be , before thing go too far . " 

 Lady Tranmore make no answer . she gaze into the fire , and Miss Lyster 
 think she depressed . 

 " Has William ever interfere ? " she ask , cautiously . 

 Lady Tranmore hesitate . 

 " not that I know of , " she say , at last . " nor will he ever -- in the sense 
 in which any ordinary husband would interfere . " 

 " I know ! it be as though he have a kind of superstition about it . be not 
 there a fairy story , in which an elf marry a mortal on condition that 
 if he ever ill - treat she , her people will fetch she back to fairyland ? 
 one day the husband lose his temper and speak crossly ; instantly there 
 be a crash of thunder and the elf - wife vanish . " 

 " I do not remember the story . but it be like that -- exactly . he say to I 
 once that he would never have ask she to marry he if he have not be 
 able to make up his mind to let she have her own way -- never to coerce 
 she . " 

 but have say this , Lady Tranmore repent . it seem to she she have 
 be betray William 's affair . she draw her chair back from the fire , 
 and ring to ask if the carriage have arrive . Mary take the hint . she 
 array herself in her cloak , and chat agreeably about other thing 
 till the moment for their departure come . 

 as they drive through the street , Lady Tranmore steal a glance at her 
 companion . 

 " she be really very handsome , " she thought--"much well - look than 
 she be at twenty . what be the man about , not to marry she ? " 

 it be indeed a puzzle . for Mary be increasingly agreeable as the year 
 go on , and have now quite a position of her own in London , as a 
 charming woman without angle or apparent egotism ; one of the 
 initiate besides , whom any dinner - party might be glad to capture . her 
 relation , near and distant , hold so many of the point of vantage in 
 english public life that her word inevitably carry weight . she talk 
 politic , as woman of her class must talk they to hold their own ; she 
 support the Church ; and she be elegantly charitable , in that popular 
 sense which mean that you subscribe to your friend ' charity without 
 set up any of your own . she be rich also -- already in possession of 
 a considerable fortune , inherit from her mother , and prospective 
 heiress of at least as much again from her father , old Sir Richard 
 Lyster , whose house in Somersetshire she manage to perfection . in the 
 season she stay with various friend , or with Lady Tranmore , Sir 
 Richard be now infirm , and prefer the country . there be a 
 young sister , who be know to have marry imprudently , and against 
 her father 's wish , some five or six year before this . Catharine be 
 poor , the wife of a clergyman with young child . Lady Tranmore 
 sometimes wonder whether Mary be quite as good to she as she might 
 be . she herself send Catharine various present in the course of the 
 year for the child . 

 --yes , it be certainly surprising that Mary have not marry . Lady 
 Tranmore 's thought be run on this tack when of a sudden her eye 
 be catch by the placard of one of the evening paper . 

 " interview with Mr. Cliffe . Peace assure . " so run one of the line . 

 " Geoffrey Cliffe home again ! " Lady Tranmore 's tone betray a shade of 
 contemptuous amusement . 

 " we shall have to get on without our daily telegram . poor London ! " 

 if at that moment it have occur to she to look at her companion , she 
 would have see a quick reddening of Mary 's cheek . 

 " he have have a great success , though , with his telegram ! " reply Miss 
 Lyster . " I should have think one could not deny that . " 

 " success ! only with the people who do not matter , " say Lady Tranmore , 
 with a shrug . " of what importance be it to anybody that Geoffrey Cliffe 
 should telegraph his doing and his opinion every morning to the 
 english public ? " 

 we be in the midst of a disagreement with America . a whirlwind be 
 unloosed , and as it happen Geoffrey Cliffe be rid it . for that 
 gentleman have not succeed in the design which be occupy his mind 
 when he have first make Kitty 's acquaintance in the Grosvilles ' 
 country - house . he have desire an appointment in Egypt ; but it have not 
 be give he , and after some angry restlessness at home , he have once 
 more take up a pilgrim 's staff and depart on fresh travel , bind 
 this time for the Pamirs and Thibet . after nearly three year , during 
 which he have never cease , through the newspaper and periodical , to 
 keep his opinion and his personality before the public , he have be 
 hear of in China , and as return home by America . he arrive at San 
 Francisco just as the dispute have break out , be at once capture by an 
 english paper , and send to New York , with _ carte blanche _ . he have rise 
 with alacrity to the situation . thenceforward for some three week , 
 England find a marvellous series of large - print telegram , sign 
 " Geoffrey Cliffe , " await she each morning on her breakfast - table . 

 " ' the President and I meet this morning'--'The President consider , and I 
 agree with him'--'I tell the president'--etc.--'the President this 
 morning sign and seal a memorable despatch . he say to I 
 afterwards'"--etc . 

 two diverse effect seem to have be produce by these proceeding . a 
 certain section of radical opinion , which like to see affair manage 
 _ sans cérémonie _ , and do not understand what the world want with 
 diplomatist when journalist be to be have , applaud ; the 
 old - fashioned laugh . 

 it be say that Cliffe be go into the House immediately ; the young 
 blood of the party in power enjoy the prospect , and have already 
 store up the _ ego et Rex meus _ detail of his correspondence for future 
 use . 

 " how could a man make such a fool of himself ! " continue Lady Tranmore , 
 the malice in her voice express not only the old aristocratic dislike 
 of the press , but also the jealousy natural to the mother of an official 
 son . 

 " well , we shall see , " say Mary , after a pause . " I do not quite agree 
 with you , Cousin Elizabeth -- indeed , I know there be many people who 
 think that he have certainly do good . " 

 Lady Tranmore turn in astonishment . she have expect Mary 's assent to 
 her original remark as a matter of course . Mary 's old flirtation with 
 Geoffrey Cliffe , and the long breach between they which have follow it , 
 be thing well know to she . they have coincide , moreover , with she 
 own dropping of the man whom for various reason she have come to regard 
 as unscrupulous and unsafe . 

 " good ! " she echoed--"_good_?--with that boasting , and that 
 _ fanfaronnade _ . polly ! " 

 but Miss Lyster hold her ground . 

 " we must allow everybody their own way of do thing , must not we ? I 
 be quite sure he have mean well -- all through . " 

 Lady Tranmore shrug her shoulder . " Lord Parham tell I he have have 
 the most grotesque letter from him!--and mean henceforward to put they 
 in the fire . " 

 " very foolish of Lord Parham , " say Mary , promptly . " I should have 
 think that a Prime Minister would welcome information -- from all side . 
 and of course Mr. Cliffe think that the government have be _ very _ 
 badly serve . " 

 Lady Tranmore 's wonder break out . " you do not mean -- that -- you hear from 
 he ? " 

 she turn and look full at her companion . Mary 's color be still 
 raise , but otherwise she betray no embarrassment . 

 " yes , dear Cousin Elizabeth . I have hear from he regularly for the 
 last six month . I have often wish to tell you , but I be afraid you 
 might misunderstand I , and -- my courage fail I ! " the speaker , 
 smile , lay her hand on Lady Tranmore 's . " the fact be , he write to I 
 last autumn from Japan . you remember that poor cousin of mine who die 
 at Tokio ? Mr. Cliffe have see something of he , and he very kindly write 
 both to his mother and I afterwards . Then-- " 

 " you do not forgive he ! " cry Lady Tranmore . 

 Mary laugh . 

 " be there anything to forgive ? we be both young and foolish . anyway , 
 he interest I -- and his letter be splendid . " 

 " do you ever tell William you be correspond with he ? " 

 " no , indeed ! but I want very much to make they understand each other 
 well . why should not the government make use of he ? he do not wish at 
 all to be throw into the arm of the other side . but they treat he so 
 badly-- " 

 " my dear Mary ! be we govern by the proper people , or be we not ? " 

 " it be no good ignore the press , " say Mary , hold herself 
 gracefully erect . " and the Bishop quite agree with I . " 

 Lady Tranmore sink back in her seat . 

 " you discuss it with the Bishop ? " it be now some time since Mary have 
 last bring the family Bishop -- her cousin , and Lady Tranmore's -- to bear 
 upon an argument between they . but Elizabeth know that his appearance in 
 the conversation invariably mean a _ fait accompli _ of some sort . 

 " I read he some of Mr. Cliffe 's letter , " say Mary , modestly . " he 
 think they most remarkable . " 

 " even when he mock at missionary ? " 

 " oh ! but he do not mock at they any more . he have learn wisdom -- I 
 assure you he have ! " 

 Lady Tranmore 's patience almost depart , Mary 's look be so penetrated 
 with indulgence for the prejudice of a dear but unreasonable relation . 
 but she manage to preserve it . 

 " and you know he be come home ? " 

 " oh yes ! " say Mary . " I mean to have tell you at dinner . but something 
 put it out of my head -- Kitty , of course ! I should not wonder if he be 
 at the embassy to - night . " 

 " polly ! tell me--"--Lady Tranmore grip Miss Lyster 's hand with some 
 force--"are you go to marry he ? " 

 " not that I know of , " be the smile reply . " do not you think I be old 
 enough by now to have a man friend ? " 

 " and you expect I to be civil to he ! " 

 " well , dear Cousin Elizabeth -- you know -- you never do break with he , 
 quite . " 

 Lady Tranmore , in her bewilderment , reflect that she have certainly 
 mean to complete the process whenever she and Mr. Cliffe should meet 
 again . aloud she could only say , rather stiffly : 

 " I can not forget that William disapprove of he strongly . " 

 " oh no -- excuse I -- I do not think he do ! " say Mary , quickly . " he say 
 to I , the other day , that he should be very glad to pick his brain 
 when he come home . and then he laugh and say he be a ' deuced clever 
 fellow'--excuse the adjective -- and it be a great thing to be ' as free 
 as that chap was'--'without all sort of boring colleague and 
 responsibility . ' be not it like William ? " 

 Lady Tranmore sigh . 

 " William should not say those thing . " 

 " of course , dear , he be only in fun . but I will lay you a small wager , 
 Cousin Elizabeth , that Kitty will ask Mr. Cliffe to lunch as soon as she 
 know he be in town . " 

 Lady Tranmore turn away . 

 " I dare say . no one can answer for what Kitty will do . but Geoffrey 
 Cliffe have say scandalous thing of William . " 

 " he will not say they again , " say Mary , soothingly . " besides , William 
 never mind be abuse a bit -- do he ? " 

 " he should mind , " say Lady Tranmore , draw herself up . " in my young 
 day , our enemy be our enemy and our friend our friend . nowadays 
 nothing seem to matter . you may call a man a scoundrel one day and ask 
 he to dinner the next . we seem to use word in a new sense -- and I 
 confess I do not like the change . well , Mary , I sha'n't , of course , be 
 rude to any friend of your . but do not expect I to be effusive . and 
 please remember that my acquaintance with Geoffrey Cliffe be old than 
 your . " 

 Mary make a caressing reply , and give her mind for the rest of the drive 
 to the smoothing of Lady Tranmore 's ruffle plume . but it be not easy . 
 as that lady make her way up the crowded staircase of the French 
 Embassy , her fine face be still absent and a little stern . 

 Mary could only reflect that she have at least get through a first 
 explanation which be bind to be make . then for a few minute her mind 
 surrender itself wholly to the question , " will he be here ? " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the room of the French Embassy be already crowd . an ambassador , 
 short , stout , and somewhat morose , his plain feature and snub nose 
 emerge with difficulty from his thick , fair hair , superabundant beard , 
 and mustache -- with an elegant and smile ambassadress , personify 
 amid the English crowd that Paris from which through every fibre she 
 feel herself a pin exile -- receive the guest . the scene be ablaze 
 with uniform , for the Speaker have be give a dinner , and Royalty be 
 expect . but , as Lady Tranmore perceive at once , very few member of 
 the House of Commons be present . a hot debate on some detail of the 
 naval estimate have be spring on minister , and the whip on each side 
 have be peremptorily keep their force in hand . 

 " I do not see either William or Kitty , " say Mary , after a careful 
 scrutiny not , in truth , direct to the discovery of the Ashes . 

 " no . I suppose William be keep , and Kitty do not care to come alone . " 

 Mary say nothing . but she be well aware that Kitty be never 
 restrain from go into society by the mere absence of her husband . 
 meanwhile Lady Tranmore be lose in secret anxiety as to what might 
 have happen in Hill Street . have there be a quarrel ? something 
 certainly have go wrong , or Kitty would be here . 

 " Lady Kitty not arrive ? " say a voice , like a macaw 's , beside she . 

 Elizabeth turn and shake hand with Lady Parham . that extraordinary 
 woman , follow everywhere by the attentive observation of the crowd , 
 have never assert herself more sharply in dress , manner , and coiffure 
 than on this particular evening -- so it seem , at least , to Lady 
 Tranmore . her ample figure be rob in the white satin of a bride , she 
 wrinkle neck disappear under a weight of jewel , and her bright 
 chestnut wig , to which the diamond tiara be fasten , positively 
 attack the spectator , so patent be it and unashamed . Unashamed , too , 
 be the bold , tyrannous eye , the rouge - spot on either cheek , the 
 strength of the jaw , the close - shut ability of the mouth . Elizabeth 
 Tranmore look at she with a secret passion of dislike . her english 
 pride of race , no less than the prejudice of her taste and training , 
 could hardly endure the fact that , for William 's sake , she must make 
 herself agreeable to Lady Parham . 

 agreeable , however , she try to be . Kitty have seem to her tired in 
 the afternoon , and have , no doubt , go to bed -- so she aver . 

 Lady Parham laugh . 

 " well , she must not be tired the night of my party next week -- or the 
 sky will fall . I never take so much trouble before about anything in 
 my life . " 

 " no , she must take care , " say Lady Tranmore . " unfortunately , she be not 
 strong , and she do too much . " 

 Lady Parham throw she a sharp look . 

 " not strong ? I should have think Lady Kitty be make on wire . well , 
 if she fail I , I shall go to bed -- with small - pox . there will be 
 nothing else to be do . the Princess have actually put off another 
 engagement to come -- she have hear so much of Lady Kitty 's reciting . but 
 you will help I through , will not you ? " 

 and the wrinkle face and harsh lip fall into a contortion mean for a 
 confidential smile ; while through it all the eye , wholly independent , 
 study the face beside she -- closely , suspiciously -- until the owner of 
 it in her discomfort could almost have repeat aloud the word that 
 be ring in her mind--"i shall _ not _ go to Lady Parham 's ! my note 
 will reach she on the stroke of eight . " 

 " certainly -- I will keep an eye on she ! " she say , lightly . " but you 
 know -- since her illness-- " 

 " oh no ! " say Lady Parham , impatiently , " she be very well -- very well 
 indeed . I never see she look so radiant . by - the - way , do you hear your 
 son 's speech the other night ? I do not see you in the gallery . a great 
 pity if you miss it . it be admirable . " 

 Lady Tranmore reply regretfully that she have not be there , and that 
 she have not be able to have a word with he about it since . 

 " oh , he know he do well , " say Lady Parham , carelessly . " they all do . 
 Lord Parham be delighted . he could do nothing but talk about it at 
 dinner . he say they be in a very tight place , and Mr. Ashe get they 
 out . " 

 Lady Tranmore express her gratification with all the dignity she could 
 command , conscious meanwhile that her companion be not listen to a 
 word , absorb as she be in a hawklike examination of the room through 
 a pair of gold - rim eye - glass . 

 suddenly the eye - glass fall with a rattle . 

 " Good Heavens ! " cry Lady Parham . " do you see who that be talk to 
 Mr. Loraine ? " 

 Lady Tranmore look , and at once perceive Geoffrey Cliffe in close 
 conversation with the leader of the Opposition . the lady beside she give 
 an angry laugh . 

 " if Mr. Cliffe think he have do himself any good by these ridiculous 
 telegram of his , he will find himself mistaken ! People be perfectly 
 furious about they . " 

 " naturally , " say Lady Tranmore . " only that it be a pity to take he 
 seriously . " 

 " oh , I do not know . he have his follow ; unfortunately , some of our own 
 man be inclined to think that Parham should conciliate he . ignore he , 
 I say . Behave as though he do not exist . ah ! by - the - way"--the speaker 
 raise herself on tiptoe , and say , in an audacious undertone--"is it 
 true that he may possibly marry your cousin , Miss Lyster ? " 

 Lady Tranmore keep a smile composure . " be it true that Lord Parham may 
 possibly give he an appointment ? " 

 Lady Parham turn away in annoyance . " be that one of the invention 
 go about ? " 

 " there be so many , " say Lady Tranmore . 

 at that moment , however , to her infinite relief , her companion abruptly 
 desert she . she be free to observe the two distant figure in 
 conversation -- Geoffrey Cliffe and Mr. Loraine , the latter a man now 
 verge on old age , white - haired and wrinkle , but breathe still 
 through every feature and every movement the scarcely diminished energy 
 of his magnificent prime . he stand with bent head , listen 
 attentively , but , as Lady Tranmore think , coldly , to the argument 
 that Cliffe be pour out upon he . once he look up in a sudden 
 recoil , and there be a flash from an eye famous for its power of 
 majestic or passionate rebuke . Cliffe , however , take no notice , and 
 talk on , Loraine still listen . 

 " look at they ! " say Lady Parham , venomously , in the ear of one of her 
 intimate . " we shall have all this out in the House to - morrow . the 
 Opposition mean to play that man for all he be worth . Mr. Loraine , 
 too -- with his puritanical way ! I know what he think of Cliffe . he 
 would not _ touch _ he in private . but in public -- you'll see -- he'll 
 swallow he whole -- just to annoy Parham . there be your politician . " 

 and stiff with the angry virtue of the " in , " denounce the faction of 
 the " out , " Lady Parham pass on . 

 Elizabeth Tranmore meanwhile turn to look for Mary Lyster . she find 
 her close behind , engage in a perfunctory conversation , which evidently 
 leave she quite free to follow thing more exciting . she , too , be 
 watch ; and presently it seem to Lady Tranmore that her eye meet 
 with those of Cliffe . Cliffe pause ; abruptly lose the thread of his 
 conversation with Mr. Loraine , and begin to make his way through the 
 crowded room . Lady Tranmore watch his progress with some attention . it 
 be the progress , clearly , of a man much in the eye and mouth of the 
 public . whether the atmosphere surround he in these room be more 
 hostile or more favorable , Lady Tranmore could not be quite sure . 
 certainly the woman smile upon he ; and his strange face , thin , 
 browner , more weather - beat and life - beat than ever , under its crest 
 of grizzle hair , have the old arrogant and picturesque power , but , as 
 it seem to she , with something add -- something subtler , be it , more 
 romantic than of yore ? which arrest the spectator . have he really be 
 in love with that french woman ? Lady Tranmore have hear it rumor that 
 she be dead . 

 it be not towards Mary Lyster , primarily , that he be move , Elizabeth 
 soon discover ; it be towards herself . she brace herself for the 
 encounter . 

 the greeting be soon over . after she herself have say the appropriate 
 thing , Lady Tranmore have time to notice that Mary Lyster , whose turn 
 come next , do not attempt to say they . she look , indeed , unusually 
 handsome and animate ; Lady Tranmore be certain that Cliffe have notice 
 as much , at his first sight of she . but the remark she omit show 
 how minute and recent be their knowledge of each other 's movement . 
 Cliffe himself give a first impression of high spirit . he declare that 
 London be more agreeable than he have ever know it , and that after his 
 three year ' absence nobody look a day old . then he inquire after 
 Ashe . 

 Lady Tranmore reply that William be well , but hard - worked ; she hop 
 to persuade he to get a few day abroad at Whitsuntide . her manner be 
 quiet , without a trace of either discourtesy or effusion . Cliffe begin 
 to twist his mustache , a sign she know well . it mean that he be in 
 truth both irritable and nervous . 

 " you think they will last till whitsuntide ? " 

 " the government ? " she say , smile . " certainly -- and beyond . " 

 " I give they three week , " say Cliffe , twist anew , with a vigor that 
 give she a positive physical sympathy with the tortured mustache . " there 
 will be some paper out to - morrow that will be a bomb - shell . " 

 " about America ? oh , they have be blow up so often ! you , for instance , 
 have be do your good -- for month . " 

 his perfunctory laugh answer the mockery of her charming eye . 

 " well -- I wish I could make William hear reason . " 

 Lady Tranmore hold herself stiffly . the christian name seem to she an 
 offence . it be true that in old day he and Cliffe have be on those 
 term . now -- it be a piece of bad taste . 

 " probably what be reason to you be folly to he , " she say , dryly . 

 " no , no!--he _ know _ , " say Cliffe , with impatience . " the other do not . 
 Parham be more impossible -- more crassly , grossly ignorant ! " he lift 
 hand and eye in protest . " but Ashe , of course , be another matter 
 altogether . " 

 " well , go and see he -- go and talk to he ! " say Lady Tranmore , still 
 mocking . " there be no lion in the way . " 

 " none , " say Cliffe . " as a matter of fact , Lady Kitty have ask I to 
 luncheon . but do one find Ashe himself in the middle of the day ? " 

 at the mention of her daughter - in - law Elizabeth make an involuntary 
 movement . Mary , stand beside she , turn towards she and smile . 

 " not often . " the tone be cold . " but you could always find he at the 
 House . " and Lady Tranmore move away . 

 " be there a quiet corner anywhere ? " say Cliffe to Mary . " I have such 
 heap to tell you . " 

 so while some polish gentleman in the main drawing - room , whose name 
 end in _ ski _ , challenge his violin to the impossible , Cliffe and Mary 
 retire from observation into a small room throw open with the rest of 
 the suite , which be in truth the morning - room of the ambassadress . 

 as soon as they find themselves alone , there be a pause in their 
 conversation ; each involuntarily look at the other . Mary certainly 
 recognize that these year of absence have work a noticeable change 
 in the man before she . he have age . hard living and hard travelling have 
 leave their mark . but , like Lady Tranmore , she also perceive another 
 difference . the eye bent upon she be indeed , as before , the eye of a 
 man self - centre , self - absorb . there be no chivalrous softness in 
 they , no consideration . the man who own they use they entirely for 
 his own purpose ; they betray none of that change instinctive 
 relation towards the human being -- any human being -- within their range , 
 which make the charm of so many face . but they be sad , more 
 sombre , more restless ; they thrill she more than they have already 
 thrill she once , in the first moment of her youth . 

 what be he go to say ? from the moment of his first letter to she 
 from Japan , Mary have perfectly understand that he have some fresh purpose 
 in his mind . she be not anxious , however , to precipitate the moment of 
 explanation . she be no long the young girl whose equilibrium be upset 
 by the mere approach of the man who interest she . moreover , there be a 
 past between herself and Cliffe , the memory of which might indeed point 
 she to caution . do he now , after all , want to marry she -- because she 
 be rich , and he be comparatively poor , and could only secure an 
 english career at the cost of a well - store wife ? well , all that should 
 be think over ; by herself no less than by he . meanwhile her vanity 
 glow within she , as she thus hold he there , alone , to the 
 discomfiture of other woman more beautiful and more highly place than 
 herself ; as she remember his letter in her desk at home ; and the 
 secret she imagine he to have tell she . then again she feel a rush of 
 sudden disquiet , cause by this new aspect -- wavering and remote -- as 
 though some hide grief emerge and vanish . he have the haggard air of 
 a man who scarcely sleep . all that she have ever hear of the French 
 affair rush through her mind , stir there an angry curiosity . 

 these impression take , however , but a few minute , while they exchange 
 some conventionality . then Cliffe say , scrutinize the face and form 
 beside he with that intentness which , from he , be more generally 
 take as compliment than offence : 

 " will you excuse the remark ? there be no woman who keep their first 
 freshness like Englishwomen . " 

 " thank you . if we feel fresh , I suppose we look it . as for you , you 
 clearly want a rest . " 

 " no time to think of it , then ; I have come home to fight -- all I know ; to 
 make myself as odious as possible . " 

 Mary laugh . 

 " you have be do that so long . why not try the opposite ? " 

 Cliffe look at she sharply . 

 " you think I have make a failure of it ? " 

 " not at all . you have make everybody furiously uncomfortable , and you 
 see how civil even the radical paper be to you . " 

 " yes . what fool ! " say Cliffe , shortly . " they will soon leave that off . 
 just now I be a stick to beat the government with . but you do not believe 
 I shall carry my point ? " 

 the point concern a particular detail in a pende negotiation with 
 the United States . Cliffe have be denounce the government for what he 
 conceive to be their come retreat before american demand . America , 
 accord to he , have be play the bully ; and english interest be 
 be betray . 

 Mary consider . 

 " I think you will have to change your tactic . " 

 " dictate they , then . " 

 he bend forward , with that sudden change of manner , that courteous 
 sweetness of tone and gesture , which few woman could resist . Mary 's 
 heart , season though it be , feel a charming flutter . she talk , and 
 she talk well . she have no independence of mind , and very little real 
 knowledge ; but she have an excellent reporter 's ability ; she know what to 
 remember , and how to tell it . Cliffe listen to she attentively , 
 acknowledge to himself the while that she have certainly gain . she 
 be a far more definite personality than she have be when he last know 
 she ; and her self - possession , her train manner , rest he . thank 
 Heaven , she be not a clever woman -- how he detest the breed ! but she 
 be a useful one . and the smile commonplace into which she fall so 
 often be positively welcome to he . he have know what it be to court a 
 woman who be more than his equal both in mind and passion ; and it have 
 leave he bitter and break . 

 " well , all this be most illuminating , " he say at last . " I owe you 
 immense thank . " and he put out a pair of hand , thin , brown , and 
 weather - stain as his face , and press one of her . " we be very old 
 friend , be not we ? " 

 " be we ? " say Mary , draw back . 

 " so far as any one can be the friend of a chap like I , " he say , 
 hastily . " tell I , be you with Lady Tranmore ? " 

 " no . I go to she in a few day -- till I leave London . " 

 " do not go away , " he say , suddenly and insistently . " do not go away . " 

 Mary could not help a slight wavering in the eye that perforce meet his . 
 then he say , abruptly , as she rise : 

 " by - the - way , they tell I Ashe be a great man . " 

 she catch the note of incredulous contempt in his voice and laugh . 

 " they say he will be in the cabinet directly . " 

 " and Lady Kitty , I understand , be a scandal to god and man , and the 
 most fashionable person in town ? " 

 " oh , not now , " say Mary . " that be last year . " 

 " you mean people be tired of she ? " 

 " well , after a time , you know , a naughty child-- " 

 " become a bore . be she a bore ? I doubt ; I very much doubt . " 

 " go and see , " say Mary . " when do you lunch there ? " 

 " I think to - morrow . shall I find you ? " 

 " oh no . I be not at all intimate with Lady Kitty . " 

 Cliffe 's slight smile , as he follow she into the large drawing - room , 
 die under his mustache . he divine at once the relation between the 
 two , or think he do . 

 as for Mary , she catch her last sight of Cliffe , stand bareheade on 
 the step of the embassy , his lean distinction , his ugly good look 
 mark he out from the man around he . then , as they drive away she 
 be glad that the darkness hide she from Lady Tranmore . for suddenly she 
 could not smile . she be fill with the perception that if Geoffrey 
 Cliffe do not now ask she to marry he , life would utterly lose its 
 savor , its carefully cherish and augmented savor , and youth would 
 abandon she . at the same time she realize that she would have to make a 
 fight of it , with every weapon she could muster . 




 IX 


 " be not I expect ? " say Darrell , with a chilly smile . 

 " oh yes , sir -- yes , sir ! " say the Ashes ' butler , as he look 
 distractedly round the drawing - room . " I believe her ladyship will be in 
 directly . will you kindly take a seat ? " 

 the man 's air of resignation convince Darrell that Lady Kitty have 
 probably go out without any order to her servant , and have now 
 forget all about her luncheon - party -- a state of thing to which the 
 Hill Street household be , no doubt , well accustom . 

 " I shall claim some lunch , " he think to himself , " whatever happen . 
 these young people want keep in their place . ah ! " 

 for he have observe , place on a small easel , the print of Madame de 
 Longueville in costume , and he put up his eye - glass to look at it . he 
 guess at once that its appearance there be connect with the fancy 
 ball which be now fill London with its fame , and he examine it with 
 some closeness . " Lady Kitty will make a stir in it -- no doubt of that ! " 
 he say to himself , as he turn away . " she have the keen _ flair _ of 
 they all for what produce an effect . none of the other can touch 
 she -- Mrs. Alcot -- none of they ! " 

 he be think of the other member of a certain group , at that time 
 well know in London society -- a group characterize chiefly by the 
 beauty , extravagance , and audacity of the woman belong to it . it be 
 by no mean a group of mere fashionable . it contain a large amount of 
 ability and accomplishment ; some man of aristocratic family , who be 
 also man of high character , with great future before they ; some person 
 from the literary or artistic world , who possess , besides their 
 literary or artistic gift , a certain art of agreeable living , and some 
 few other -- especially young girl -- admit generally for some peculiar 
 quality of beauty or manner outside the ordinary canon . money be 
 really presuppose by the group as a group . the life they belong to 
 be a life of the rich , the house they meet in be rich house . but 
 money as such have no power whatever to buy admission to their rank ; and 
 the member of the group be at least as impatient of the claim of 
 mere wealth as they be of those of mere virtue . 

 on the whole the group be an element of ferment and growth in the 
 society that have produce it . its impatience of convention and 
 restraint , the exaltation of intellectual or artistic power which 
 prevail in it , and even the angry opposition excite by its 
 pretension and its exclusiveness , be all , perhaps , rather profitable 
 than harmful at that moment of our social history . old custom be much 
 shake ; the new be shape themselves , and this daring coterie of 
 young and brilliant people , live in one another 's house , call one 
 another by their christian name , set a number of social rule at 
 defiance , discuss book , make the fame of artist , and , now and 
 then , influence politic , be certainly help to bring the new 
 world to birth . their foe call they " the Archangels , " and they 
 themselves have accept the name with complacency . 

 Kitty , of course , be an Archangel , so be Mrs. Alcot . Cliffe have 
 belong to they before his travel begin . Louis Harman be more or less 
 of their tribe , and Lady Tranmore , though not herself an Archangel , 
 entertain the set in London and in the country . like various old 
 woman connect with the group , she be not of they , but she " harbor " 
 they . 

 Darrell be well aware that he do not belong to they , though personally 
 he be acquaint with almost all the member of the group . he be not 
 completely indifferent to his exclusion ; and this fact annoy he more 
 than the exclusion itself . 

 he have scarcely finish his inspection of the print when the door again 
 open and Geoffrey Cliffe enter . Darrell have not yet see he since 
 his return and since his attack on the government have make he the hero 
 of the hour . of the newspaper success Darrell be no less jealous and 
 contemptuous than Lady Tranmore , though for quite other reason . but he 
 know well than she the intellectual quality of the man , and his 
 disdain for the journalist be temper by his considerable though 
 reluctant respect for the man of letter . 

 they greet each other coolly , while Cliffe , not see his hostess , 
 look round he with annoyance . 

 " well , we shall probably entertain each other , " say Darrell , as they 
 sit down . " Lady Kitty often forget her engagement . " 

 " do she ? " say Cliffe , coldly , pretend to glance through a book 
 beside he . it touch his vanity that his hostess be not present , and 
 still more that Darrell should suppose he a person to be forget . 
 Darrell , however , who have no mind for any discomfort that might be 
 avoid , make a few dexterous advance , Cliffe 's brow relax , and they 
 be soon in conversation . 

 the position of the ministry naturally present itself as a topic . two 
 or three retirement be impend , the whole position be precarious . 
 would the cabinet be reconstruct without a dissolution , or must there 
 be an appeal to the country ? 

 Cliffe be passionately in favor of the latter course . the party 
 fortune could not possibly be retrieve without a general shuffling of 
 the card , and an opportunity for some wholly fresh combination 
 involve new blood . 

 " in any case , " say Cliffe , " I suppose our friend here be sure of one or 
 other of the big post ? " 

 " William Ashe ? oh , I suppose so , unless some intrigue get in the way . " 
 Darrell drop his voice . " Parham do not , in truth , hit it off with 
 he very well . Ashe be too clever , and Parham do not understand his 
 paradox . " 

 " also I gather , " say Cliffe , with a smile , " that Lady Parham have she 
 say ? " 

 Darrell shrug his shoulder . 

 " it sound incredible that one should still have to reckon with that 
 kind of thing at this time of day . but I dare say it be true . " 

 " however , I imagine Lady Kitty -- by - the - way , how much long shall we 
 give her?"--Cliffe look at his watch with a frown--"may be trust to 
 take care of that . " 

 Darrell merely raise his eyebrow , without reply . " what , not a 
 match for one Lady Parham ? " say Cliffe , with a laugh . " I should have 
 think -- from my old recollection of she -- she would have be a match 
 for twenty ? " 

 " oh , if she care to try . " 

 " she be not ambitious ? " 

 " certainly ; but not always for the same thing . " 

 " she be try to run too many horse abreast ? " 

 " oh , I be not a great friend , " say Darrell , smile . " I should never 
 dream of analyze Lady Kitty . Ah!"--he turn his head--"are we not 
 forget , or just remember -- which ? " 

 for a rapid step approach , the door open , and a lady appear on the 
 threshold . it be not Kitty , however . the new - comer advanced , put up 
 a pair of fashionable eye - glass , and look at the two man in a kind 
 of languid perplexity , intend , as Darrell immediately say to himself , 
 merely to prolong the moment and the effect of her entry . Mrs. Alcot be 
 very tall , and inordinately thin . her dark head on its slim throat , the 
 poetic line of the brow , her half - shut eye , the gleam of her white 
 tooth , and all the delicate detail of her dress , and , one might even 
 say , of her manner , give an impression of beauty , though she be not , in 
 truth , beautiful . but she have grace and she have dare -- the two 
 essential quality of an archangel ; she be also a remarkable artist , 
 and no small critic . 

 " Mr. Cliffe , " she say , with a start of what be evidently agreeable 
 surprise , " Kitty never tell I . when do you come ? " 

 " I arrive a few day ago . why be not you at the embassy last night ? " 

 " because I be much well employ . I have give up crush . but I 
 would have come -- to meet you . ah , Mr. Darrell ! " she add , in another 
 tone , hold out an indifferent hand . " where be Kitty ? " she look 
 round she . 

 " shall we order lunch ? " say Darrell , who have give she a greeting as 
 careless as her own . 

 " Kitty be really too bad ; she be never less than an hour late , " say 
 Mrs. Alcot , seat herself . " last time she din with we I ask she 
 for seven - thirty . she think something very special must be happen , 
 and arrive -- breathless -- at half - past eight . then she be furious with 
 I because she be not the last . but one can not do it twice . 
 well"--addresse herself to Cliffe--"are you come home to stay ? " 

 " that depend , " say Cliffe , " on whether England make itself agreeable 
 to I . " 

 " what be your desert ? why should England be agreeable to you ? " she 
 reply , with a smile sharpness . " you do nothing but croak about 
 England . " 

 thus challenge , Cliffe sit down beside she and they fall into a 
 banter conversation . darrell , though inwardly wound by the small 
 trouble they take to include he , let nothing appear , put in a word now 
 and then , or turn over the page of the illustrate book . 

 after five minute a fresh guest arrive . in walk the little Dean , Dr. 
 Winston , who have originally make acquaintance with Lady Kitty at 
 Grosville Park . he come in overflow with spirit and enthusiasm . he 
 have be spend the morning in Westminster Abbey with another Dean 
 more famous though not more charming than himself , and with yet another 
 congenial spirit , one of the young historian , all of they passionate 
 lover of the rich human detail of the past , the actual man and woman , 
 king , queen , bishop , executioner , and all the shred and tatter 
 that remain of they . together they have open a royal tomb , and the 
 Dean 's eye be sparkle as though the ghost of the queen whose ash 
 he have be handle still walk and talk with he . 

 he pass in his light , disintereste way through most section of 
 english society , though the slave of none ; and he greet Darrell and 
 Mrs. Alcot as acquaintance . Mrs. Alcot introduce Cliffe to he , and 
 the small Dean bow rather stiffly . he be a supporter of the 
 government , and he think Cliffe 's campaign against they vulgar and 
 unfair . 

 " be there no hope of Lady Kitty ? " he say to Mrs. Alcot . 

 " not much . shall we go down to lunch ? " 

 " without our hostess ? " the Dean open his eye . 

 " oh , Kitty expect it , " say Mrs. Alcot , with affected resignation , " and 
 the servant be quite prepared . Kitty ask everybody to lunch -- then 
 somebody ask she -- and she forget . it be quite simple . " 

 " quite , " say Cliffe , button up his coat , " but I think I shall go to 
 the club . " 

 he be look for his hat , when again there be a commotion on the 
 stair -- a high voice give order -- and in burst Kitty . she stand still 
 as soon as she see her guest , talk so fast and pour out such a 
 flood of excuse that no one could get in a word . then she fly to each 
 guest in turn , take they by both hand -- Darrell only except -- and 
 show herself so penitent , amusing , and charming that everybody be 
 propitiate . it be Fanchette , of course -- Fanchette the criminal , the 
 incomparable . her dress for the ball . Kitty raise eye and hand to 
 heaven -- it would be a marvel , a miracle . unless , indeed , she be lie 
 cold and quiet in her little grave before the time come to wear it . but 
 Fanchette 's temper -- Fanchette 's caprice -- no ! Kitty begin to mimic the 
 great dressmaker tear to piece by the crowd of fashionable lady , 
 stop abruptly in the middle to say to Cliffe : 

 " you be go away ? I see you take up your hat . " 

 " I despair of my hostess , " say Cliffe , with a smile . then as he 
 perceive that Mrs. Alcot have take up the theme and be hold the 
 other in play , he add in a low voice , " and I be in no mood for 
 second - good . " 

 Kitty 's eye twinkle a moment as she turn they on Madeleine Alcot . 

 " ah , _ i _ remember -- at Grosville Park -- what a bad temper you have . you 
 would have go away furious . " 

 " with disappointment -- yes , " say Cliffe , as he look at she with an 
 admiration he scarcely endeavor to conceal . Kitty be in black , but a 
 large hat of white tulle , in the most extravagant fashion of the day , 
 make a frame for her hair and eye , and increase the general lightness 
 and fantasy of her appearance . Cliffe try to recall she as he have 
 first see she at Grosville Park , but his recollection of the young girl 
 could not hold its own against the brilliant and emphatic reality before 
 he . 

 at luncheon it chafe he that he must divide she with the Dean . yet she 
 be charming with the old man , who chat history , art , and Paris to 
 she , with a delightful innocence and ignorance of all that make Lady 
 Kitty Ashe the talk of the town , and an old - fashioned deference besides , 
 that insensibly curb her manner and her phrase as she answer he . 
 yet when the Dean leave she free she return to Cliffe , as though in 
 some sort they two have really be talk all the time , through all the 
 apparent conversation with other people . 

 " I have read all your telegram , " she say . " why do you attack William 
 so fiercely ? " 

 Cliffe be take by surprise , but he feel no embarrassment -- her tone be 
 not that of the wife in arm . 

 " I attack the official -- not the man . William know that . " 

 " he be come in to - day if possible . he want to see you . " 

 " good news ! William know that he would have hit just as hard in my 
 place . " 

 " I do not think he would , " say Kitty , calmly . " he be so generous . " 

 the color rush to Cliffe 's face . 

 " well score ! I wish I have a wife to play these stroke for I . I shall 
 argue that a keen politician have no right to be generous . he be at war . " 

 Kitty take no notice . she lean she little chin on her hand , and her 
 eye peruse the face of her companion . 

 " where have you be -- all the time -- before America ? " 

 " in the desert -- fight devil , " say Cliffe , after a moment . 

 " what do that mean ? " she ask , wonder . 

 " read my new book . that will tell you about the desert . " 

 " and the devil ? " 

 " ah , I keep they to myself . " 

 " do you ? " she say , softly . " I have just read your poem over again . " 

 Cliffe give a slight start , then look indifferent . 

 " have you ? but they be write three year ago . Dieu merci , one find 
 new devil like new acquaintance . " 

 she shake her head . 

 " what do you mean ? " he ask she , half amuse , half arrest . 

 " they be always the old , " she say , in a low voice . their eye meet . in 
 her be the same veil , restless melancholy as in his own . together 
 with the dazzle air of youth that surround she , the cherished , 
 flattered , luxurious existence that she and her house suggest , they 
 make a strange impression upon he . " do she mean I to understand that 
 she be not happy ? " he think to himself . but the next moment she be 
 engage in a merry chatter with the Dean , and all trace of the mood she 
 have thus momentarily show he have vanish . 

 half - way through the luncheon , Ashe come in . he appear , fresh and 
 smile , irreproachably dress , and show no trace whatever of the 
 hard morning of official work he have just pass through , nor of the 
 many embarrassment which , as every one know , be weigh on the 
 Foreign Office . the Dean , with his keen sense for the dramatic , watch 
 the meeting between he and Cliffe with some closeness , have in mind 
 the almost personal duel between the two man -- a duel of letter , 
 telegram , or speech , which have be lately carry on in the sight of 
 Europe and America . for Ashe now represent the Foreign Office in the 
 House of Commons , and have be much badger by the Tory extremist who 
 follow Cliffe . 

 naturally , be englishman , they meet as though nothing have happen and 
 they have part the day before in Pall Mall . a " Hullo , Ashe ! " and 
 " Hullo , Cliffe ! glad to see you back again , " complete the matter . the 
 Dean enjoy it as a speciman of English " phlegm , " recall with 
 amusement his last visit to the Paris of the Second Empire -- Paris tear 
 between government and opposition , the _ salon _ of the one divide from 
 the _ salon _ of the other by a sulphurous gulf , unless when some Lazarus 
 of the moment , some well - know novelist or poet , cradle in the 
 Abraham 's bosom of Liberalism , pass amid shriek of triumph or howl 
 of treason into the official inferno . 

 not that there be any avoiding of topic in this english case . Ashe have 
 no soon slip into his seat than he begin to banter Cliffe upon a 
 letter of a supporter which have appear in that morning 's _ Times _ . it 
 be write by Lord S. , who have play the part of public " fool " for 
 half a generation . to be praise by he be disaster , and Cliffe 's flush 
 show at once that the letter have cause he acute annoyance . he and 
 Ashe fall upon the writer , vie with each other in anecdote that leave 
 he presently close - plucked and bare . 

 " that be all very well , " say Kitty , amid the laughter which greet the 
 last tale , " but he never tell _ you _ how he propose to the second Lady 
 S. " 

 and lift a red strawberry , which she hold poise against her red , 
 laugh lip , she wait a moment -- look round she . " go on , Kitty , " 
 say Ashe , approvingly ; " go on . " 

 thus permit , Kitty give one of the little " scene , " arrange from 
 some experience of her own , which be very famous among her intimate . 
 Ashe call they her " parlor trick , " and be never tired of make she 
 exhibit they . and now , just as at Grosville Park , she hold her audience . 
 she speak without a halt , her small feature answer perfectly to 
 every impulse of her talent , each touch of character or dialogue as 
 tell as a malicious sense of comedy could make it ; arm , hand , 
 shoulder all aid in the final result -- a table sweep by a very storm 
 of laughter , in the midst of which Kitty quietly finish she 
 strawberry . 

 " well do , Kitty ! " Ashe , who sit opposite to she , stretch his hand 
 across , and pat her . 

 " do she love he ? " Cliffe ask himself , and could not make up his 
 mind , closely as he try to observe their relation . he be more and 
 more conscious of the exciting effect she produce on himself , doubly 
 so , indeed , because of that sudden stroke of melancholy wherewith -- like 
 a Rembrandt shadow , she have throw into relief the gayety and frivolity 
 of her ordinary mood . 

 the stimulus , whatever it be , play upon his vanity . he , too , seek 
 an opening and find it . soon it be he who be monopolize the 
 conversation with an account of two day spend with Bismarck in a 
 prussian country - house , during the triumphant day of the winter which 
 follow on Sadowa . the story be brilliantly tell , and of some 
 political importance . but it be disfigure by arrogance and 
 affectation , and Ashe 's eye begin to dance a little . Cliffe meanwhile 
 could not forget that he be in the presence of a rival and an official , 
 could not refrain after a while from a note of challenge here and there . 
 the conversation diverge from the tale into matter of current foreign 
 politic . Ashe , lounging and smoking , at first know nothing , have hear 
 of nothing , as usual . then a comment or correction drop out ; Cliffe 
 repeat himself vehemently -- only to provoke another . presently , no one 
 know how , the two man be measure against each other _ corps à 
 corps_--the wide knowledge and train experience of the minister 
 against the originality , the force , the fantastic imagination of the 
 writer . 

 the Dean watch it with delight . he be very fond of Ashe , and like to 
 see he get the well of " the newspaper fellow . " Kitty 's lovely 
 brown eye travel from one to the other . now it seem to the Dean 
 that she be proud of Ashe , now that she sympathize with Cliffe . soon , 
 however , like the god at Philippi , she sweep upon the poet and bear he 
 from the field . 

 " not a word more politic ! " she say , peremptorily , to Ashe , hold up 
 her hand . " _ I _ want to talk to Mr. Cliffe about the ball . " 

 Cliffe be not very ready to obey . he have an angry sense of have be 
 somehow show to disadvantage , and would like to have challenge his 
 host again . but Kitty pour balm into his wound . she draw he apart a 
 little , use the play of her beautiful eye for he only , and talk 
 to he in a new voice of deference . 

 " you be go , of course ? Lady M. tell I the other day she _ must _ have 
 you . " 

 Cliffe , still a little morose , reply that his invitation have be 
 wait for he at his London room . he give the information carelessly , 
 as though it do not matter to he a straw . in reality , as soon as , 
 while still in America , he have see the announcement of the ball in one 
 of the New York paper , he have write at once to the Marchioness who 
 be to give it -- an old acquaintance of his -- practically demand an 
 invitation . it have be send indeed with alacrity , and without wait 
 for its arrival Cliffe have order his dress in Paris . Kitty inquire 
 what it be to be . 

 " I tell my man to copy a portrait of Alva . " 

 " ah , that be right , " say Kitty , nodding--"that be right . only it would 
 have be well if it have be Torquemada . " 

 rather nettled , Cliffe ask what there might be about he that so 
 forcibly suggest the Grand Inquisitor . Kitty , cigarette in hand , with 
 half - shut eye , do not answer immediately . she seem to be peruse 
 his face with difficulty . 

 " Strength , I suppose , " she say at last , slowly . Cliffe wait , then 
 burst into a laugh . 

 " and cruelty ? " she nod . 

 " who be my victim ? " 

 she say nothing . 

 " whose tale have you be listen to , Lady Kitty ? " 

 she mention the name of a french lady . Cliffe change countenance . 

 " ah , well , if you have be talk to she , " he say , haughtily , " you 
 may well expect to see I appear as Diabolus in person . " 

 " no . but it be since then that I have read the poem again . you see , you 
 tell the public so much-- " 

 " that you think you have the right to guess the rest ? " he pause , then 
 add , with impatience , " do not guess , Lady Kitty . you have everything 
 that life can give you . let my secret alone . " 

 there be silence . Kitty look round her see that Madeleine Alcot be 
 entertain her other guest , and that she and Cliffe be unobserved . 
 suddenly Cliffe bend towards she , and say , with roughness , his face 
 struggle to conceal the feeling behind it : 

 " you hear -- and you believe -- that I torment she -- that I kill she ? " 

 the anguish in his eye seem to strike a certain answering fire from 
 Kitty 's . 

 " yes , but-- " 

 " but what ? " 

 " I do not think it very strange-- " 

 Cliffe watch she closely . 

 " --that a man should be -- an inhuman beast -- if he be jealous -- and 
 desperate . you can sympathize with these thing ? " 

 she draw a long breath , and throw away the cigarette she have be 
 hold suspend in her small finger . 

 " I do not know anything about they . " 

 " because , " he hesitate , " your own life have be so happy ? " 

 she evade he . " do not you think that jealousy will soon be as dead 
 as -- say your prayer and go to church ? I never meet anybody that 
 care enough -- to be jealous . " 

 she speak first with passionate force , then with contempt , glance 
 across the room at Madeleine Alcot . Cliffe see the look , and remember 
 that Mrs. Alcot 's husband , a distinguished treasury official , have be 
 for year the intimate friend of a very noble and beautiful woman , 
 herself unhappily marry . there be no scandal in the matter , though 
 much talk . Mrs. Alcot meanwhile have her own affair ; her husband and she 
 be apparently on friendly term ; only neither ever speak of the other ; 
 and their relation remain a mystery . 

 Cliffe bend over to Kitty . 

 " and yet you say you could understand?--such thing do not seem strange 
 to you . " 

 she give a little , reckless laugh . 

 " do I ? it be like the people who think they could act or sing , if they 
 only have the chance . I choose to think I could feel . and of course I 
 could not . we have lose the power . all the old , horrible , splendid thing 
 be dead and do with . " 

 " the old passion , you mean ? " 

 " and the old poem ! _ you will _ never write like that again . " 

 " God forbid ! " say Cliffe , under his breath . then as Kitty rise he 
 follow she with his eye . " Lady Kitty , you have throw I a challenge 
 that you hardly understand . some day I must answer it . " 

 " do not answer it , " say Kitty , hastily . 

 " yes , if I can drag the word out , " he say , sombrely . she meet his look 
 in a kind of fascination , excite by the memory of the story which have 
 be tell she , by her own audacity in speak of it , by the presence of 
 the dead passion she divine lie shroud and ghastly in the mind of 
 the man beside she . even the ugly thing of which he be accuse do but 
 add to the interest of his personality for a nature like her , greedy of 
 experience , and discontent with the real . 

 while he on his side be natter and astonish by her attitude towards 
 he , as Ashe 's wife , she would surely dislike and try to trample on he . 
 that be what he have expect . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " I hear you be an Archangel , Lady Kitty , " say the Dean , who , have 
 obstinately outstay all the other guest , have now settle his small 
 person and his thin leg into a chair beside his hostess with a view to 
 five agreeable minute . he be the most harmless of social epicure , be 
 the Dean , and he feel that Lady Kitty have defraud he at lunch in 
 favor of that great , ruffle , byronic fellow Cliffe , who ought to have 
 well taste than to come lunch with the Ashes . 

 " be I ? " say Kitty , who have throw herself into the corner of a sofa , 
 and sit curl up there in an attitude which the Dean think charming , 
 though it would not , he be aware , " have become Mrs. Winston . 

 " well , you know well , " say the Dean . " but , at any rate , be good and 
 explain to I what be an archangel . " 

 " somebody whom most man and all woman dislike , " say Kitty , promptly . 

 " yet they seem to be numerous , " remark the Dean . 

 " not at all ! " cry Kitty , with an air of offence ; " not at all ! if they 
 be numerous they would , of course , be popular . " 

 " and in fact they be rare -- and detest ? what other characteristic 
 have they ? " 

 " courage , " say Kitty , look up . 

 " courage to break rule ? I hear they all call one another by their 
 christian name , and live in one another 's room , and borrow one 
 another 's money , and despise conventionality . I be sorry you be an 
 Archangel , Lady Kitty . " 

 " I do not admit that I be , " say Kitty , " but if I be , why be you 
 sorry ? " 

 " because , " say the Dean , smile , " I think you be too clever to 
 despise conventionality . " 

 Kitty sit up with revive energy , and join battle . she fly into a 
 tirade as to the dulness and routine of english life , the stupidity of 
 good people , and the tyranny of English hypocrisy . the Dean listen 
 with amusement , then with a shade of something else . at last he get up 
 to go . 

 " well , you know , we have hear all that before . my point of view be so 
 much more interesting -- subtle -- romantic ! anybody can attack Mrs. Grundy , 
 but only a person of originality can adore she . try it , Lady Kitty . it 
 would be really worth your while . " 

 Kitty mock and exclaim . 

 " do you know what that phrase -- that name of abomination -- always recall 
 to I ? " pursue the old man . 

 " it bore I , even to guess , " be Kitty 's petulant reply . 

 " do it ? I think of some of the noble people I have ever know -- brave 
 man -- beautiful woman -- who fight Mrs. Grundy , and perish . " 

 the Dean stand look down upon she , with an eager , sensitive 
 expression . tale that he have heed very little when he have first 
 hear they run through his mind ; he have think Lady Kitty 's intimate 
 _ tête - à - tête _ with her husband 's assailant in the press disagreeable and 
 unseemly ; and as for Mrs. Alcot , he have dislike she particularly . 

 Kitty look up unquelle . 

      " '' tis well to have fight and lose 
      than never to have fight at all-- ' " 

 she quote , with one of her most radiant and provoking smile . 

 " incorrigible ! " cry the Dean , catch up his hat . " I see ! once an 
 Archangel -- always an archangel . " 

 " oh no ! " say Kitty . " there may be ' war in heaven . ' " 

 " well , do not take Mrs. Alcot for a leader , that be all , " say the Dean , 
 as he hold out a hand of farewell . 

 " and now I understand ! " cry Kitty , triumphantly . " you det my good 
 friend . " 

 the Dean laugh , protest , and go . Ashe , who have be write 
 letter while Kitty and the Dean be talk , escort the old man to 
 the door . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 when he return he find Kitty sit with her hand in her lap , lose 
 apparently in thought . 

 " darling , " he say , look at his watch , " I must be off directly , but I 
 should like to see the boy . " 

 Kitty start . she ring , and the child be bring down . he sit on 
 Kitty 's knee , and Ashe come to the sofa , throw an arm round they both . 

 " you be not a bad - look pair , " he say , kiss first Kitty and then 
 the baby . " but he be rather pale , Kitty . I think he want the country . " 

 Kitty say nothing , but she lift the little white embroider frock 
 and look at the twisted foot . then Ashe feel her shudder . 

 " dear , do not be morbid ! " he cry , resentfully . " he will have so much 
 brain that nobody will remember that . think of Byron . " 

 Kitty do not seem to have hear . 

 " I remember so well when I first see his foot -- after your mother tell 
 I -- and they bring he to I , " she say , slowly . " it seem to I it 
 be the end-- " 

 " the end of what ? " 

 " of my dream . " 

 " what _ do _ you mean , Kitty ! " 

 " do you remember the mask in the ' Tempest ' ? First Iris , with saffron 
 wing , and rich Ceres , and great Juno-- " 

 she half close her eye . 

 " then the nymph and the reaper -- dance together on ' the short - grass 
 green , ' the sweetest , gayest show-- " 

 she breathe the word out softly . " then , suddenly-- " 

 she sit up stiffly and strike her small hand together : 

 " prospero start and speak . and in a moment -- without warning -- with ' a 
 strange , hollow , and confuse noise'"--she drag the word 
 drearily--"_they heavily vanish _ . that"--she point , shudder , to the 
 child 's foot--"wa for I the sign of Prospero . " 

 Ashe look at she with anxiety , find it indeed impossible to laugh 
 at she . 

 she be very pale , her breath come with difficulty , and she tremble 
 from head to foot . he try to draw she into his arm , but she hold he 
 away . 

 " that first year I have be so happy , " she continue , in the same voice . 
 " everything be so perfect , so glorious . life be like a great pageant , 
 in a palace . all the old terror go . I often have fear as a 
 child -- fear I could not put into word , but that overshadow I . then 
 when I see Alice -- the shadow come nearer . but that be all go . I 
 think God be reconcile to I , and would always be kind to I now . 
 and then I see that foot , and I know that he hat I still . he have 
 burn his mark into my baby 's flesh . and I be never to be quite happy 
 again , but always in fear , fear of pain -- and death -- and grief-- " 

 she pause . her large eye gaze into vacancy , and her whole slight 
 frame show the working of some mysterious and pitiful distress . 

 a wave of poignant alarm sweep through Ashe 's mind , couple also with a 
 curious sense of something foresee . he have never witness precisely 
 this mood in she before ; but now that it be thus reveal , he be 
 suddenly aware " that something like it have be for long move 
 obscurely below the surface of her life . he take the child and lay he 
 on the floor , where he roll at ease , coo to himself . then he come 
 back to Kitty , and soothe she with extraordinary tenderness and skill . 
 presently she look at he , as though some obscure trouble of which she 
 have be the victim have release she , and she be herself again . 

 " do not go away just yet , " she say , in a voice which be still low and 
 shake . he come close to she , again put his arm round she , and hold she 
 on his breast in silence . 

 " that be heavenly ! " he hear she say to herself after a while , in a 
 whisper . 

 " Kitty ! " his eye grow dim and he stoop to kiss she . 

 " Heavenly-- " she go on , still as though follow out her own thought 
 rather than speak to he , " because one _ yields_--_yield _ ! life be 
 such tension -- always . " 

 she close her eye quickly , and he watch the beautiful lash lie 
 still upon her cheek . with an emotion he could not explain -- for it be 
 not an emotion of the sens , just as she yield have not be a 
 yielding of the sens but a yielding of the soul -- he continue to hold 
 she in his arm , her life , she will give to he wholly , sigh out upon 
 his heart . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 then gradually she recover her balance ; the normal Kitty come back . 
 she put out her hand and touch his face . 

 " you must go back to the House , William . " 

 " yes , if you be all right . " 

 she sit up , and begin to rearrange some of her hair that have slip 
 down . 

 " you have carry we both into such height and depth , darling ! " say 
 Ashe , after he have watch she a little in silence , " that I have 
 forget to tell you the gossip I bring back from mother this 
 morning . " 

 Kitty pause , interrogatively . she be still pale . 

 " do you know that mother be convince Mary Lyster have make up her mind 
 to marry Cliffe ? " 

 there be a pause , then Kitty say , with incredulous contempt : " he would 
 never _ dream _ of marry she ! " 

 " not so sure ! she have a great deal of money , and Cliffe want money 
 badly . " 

 Ashe begin to put his paper together . Kitty question he a little 
 more , intermittently , as to what his mother have say . when he have leave 
 she , she sit for long on the sofa , play with some flower she have 
 take from her dress , or sombrely watch the child , as it lie on the 
 floor beside she . 




 x 


 " my lady ! it be come ! " 

 the maid put her head in just to convey the good news . Kitty be in her 
 bedroom walk up and down in a fury which be now almost speechless . 

 the housemaid be wait on the stair . the butler be wait in the 
 hall . till that hurried knock be hear at the front door , and the 
 much - try Wilson have rush to open it , the house have be wrap in a 
 sort of storm silence . it be ten o'clock on the night of the ball . half 
 Kitty 's costume lie spread out upon her bed . the other half -- although 
 since seven o'clock all Kitty 's servant have be employ in rush to 
 Fanchette 's establishment in New Bond Street , at half - hour interval , in 
 the fast hansom to be find -- have not yet appear . 

 however , here at last be the end of despair . a pant boy drag the 
 box into the hall , the butler and footman carry it up - stair and into 
 their mistress 's room , where Kitty in a white peignoir stand wait , 
 with the brow of Medea . 

 " the boy that bring it look just fit to drop , my lady ! " say the 
 maid , as she undo the box . she be a zealous servant , but she be glad 
 sometimes to chasten these great one of the land by insist on the 
 seamy side of their pleasure . 

 Kitty pause in the eager task of superintendence , and turn to the 
 under - housemaid , who stand by , gaze open - mouthed at the splendor 
 emerge from the box . 

 " run down and tell Wilson to give he some wine and cake ! " she say , 
 peremptorily . " it be all Fanchette 's fault -- odious creature!--runne it 
 to the last like this -- after all her promise ! " 

 the housemaid go , and soon speed back . for no boy on earth would she 
 have be long defraud of the sight of her ladyship 's complete gown . 

 " do Wilson feed he ? " Kitty fling she the question as she bend , 
 alternately frown and jubilant , over the creation before she . 

 " yes , my lady . it be quite a little fellow . he say his leg be just 
 run off his foot , " say the girl , grow confuse as the moon - robe 
 unfold . 

 " poor wretch ! " say Kitty , carelessly . " I be glad I be not an 
 errand -- Blanche ! you know Fanchette may be an old demon , but she _ have _ 
 get taste ! just look at these fold , and the way she be put on the 
 pearl ! now then -- make haste ! " 

 Off fly the peignoir , and , with the help of the excited maid , Kitty 
 slip into her dress . ten time , over do she declare that it be 
 hopeless , that it do not fit in the least , that it be not one bit what 
 she have order , that she could not and would not go out in it , that it 
 be simply scandalous , and Fanchette should never be pay a penny . she 
 maid understand she , and simply go on pull , patting , fasten , as 
 quickly as their skilled finger could work , till the last fold fall 
 into its place , and the under - housemaid step back with clasped hand 
 and an " oh , my lady ! " couch in a note of irrepressible ecstasy . 

 " well ? " say Kitty , still frowning--"eh , Blanche ? " 

 the maid proper would have scorn to show emotion ; but she nod 
 approval . " if you ask I , my lady , I think you have never look so well 
 in anything . " 

 Kitty 's brow relax at last , as she stand gaze at the reflection in 
 the large glass before she . she see herself as Artemis -- á la Madame de 
 Longueville -- in a hunting - dress of white silk , descend to the ankle , 
 embroider from top to toe in crescent of seed pearl and silver , and 
 hold at the waist by a silver girdle . her throat be cover with 
 magnificent pearl , a Tranmore family possession , lend by Lady Tranmore 
 for the occasion . the slim ankle and foot be case in white silk , 
 cross - gartered with silver and shod with silver sandal . her belt hold 
 her quiver of white - wing arrow ; her bow of ivory inlay with silver 
 be sling at her shoulder , while across her breast , the only note of 
 color in the general harmony of white , fall a scarf of apple - green 
 hold the horn , also of ivory and silver , which , like the belt and 
 bow , have be design for she in Madame de Longueville 's Paris . 

 but neither she nor her model would have be finally content with an 
 adornment so delicately fanciful and minute . both Kitty and the goddess 
 of the Fronde know that they must hold their own in a crowd . for this 
 there must be diamond . the sleeve , therefore , on the white arm fall 
 back from diamond clasp ; the ivory spear in her right hand be top 
 by a small genius with glitter wing ; and in the mass of her fair 
 hair , bind with pearl fillet , shine the large diamond crescent that 
 Lady Tranmore have foresee , with one small attendant star at either 
 side . 

 [ illustration : the finishing TOUCHES ] 

 " well , upon my word , Kitty ! " say a voice from her husband 's 
 dressing - room . 

 Kitty turn impetuously . 

 " do you like it ? " she cry . Ashe approach . she lift her horn to her 
 mouth and stand tiptoe . the movement be enchanting ; it have in it the 
 youth and freshness of spring wood ; it suggest mountain distance and 
 the solitude of high valley . Intoxication speak in Ashe 's pulse ; he 
 wish the maid have be far away that he might have take the goddess 
 in his very human arm . instead of which he stand lazily smile . 

 " what endymion be you call ? " he ask she . " Kitty , you be a dream ! " 

 Kitty pirouette , then suddenly stop short and hold out a foot . 

 " look at those silk thing , sir . nobody but Fanchette could have make 
 they look anything but a botch . but they spoil the dress . and all to 
 please mother and Mrs. Grundy ! " 

 " I like they . I suppose -- the near you could get to buskin ? you would 
 have prefer ankle _ au naturel _ ? I do not think you would have be 
 admit , Kitty . " 

 " should not I ? and so few people have foot they can show ! " sigh Kitty , 
 regretfully . 

 Ashe 's eye meet those of the maid , who be try to hide her smile , 
 and he and she both laugh . 

 " what do you think about it , eh , Blanche ? " 

 " I think her ladyship be much well as she be , " say the maid , 
 decidedly . " she would have feel very strange when she get there . " 

 Kitty turn upon she like a whirlwind . " go to bed ! " she say , put 
 both hand on the shoulder of the maid . " go to bed at once ! Esther can 
 give I my cloak . do you know , William , she be awake all last night 
 thinking of her brother ? " 

 " the brother who have have an operation ? but I think there be good 
 news ? " say Ashe , kindly . 

 " he be much well , " put in Kitty . " she hear this afternoon . she will not 
 be such a goose as to lie awake , I should hope , to - night . do not let I 
 catch you here when I get back ! " she say , release the girl , whose 
 eye have fill with tear . " Mr. Ashe will help I , and if he pull the 
 string into knot , I shall just cut they -- so there ! go away , get your 
 supper , and go to bed . such a life as I have lead they all to - day ! " she 
 throw up her hand in a perfunctory penitence . 

 the maid be force to go , and the housemaid also return to the hall 
 with Kitty 's Opera - cloak and fan , till it should please her mistress to 
 descend . both of they be dead tired , but they take a genuine 
 disinterested pleasure in Kitty 's beauty and her fine frock . she be 
 not by any mean always considerate of they ; but still , with that 
 wonderful generosity that the poor show every day to the rich , they 
 like she ; and to Ashe every servant in the house be devote . 

 Kitty meanwhile have drive Ashe to his own toilette , and be walk 
 about the room , now study herself in the glass , and now chatter to 
 he through the open door . 

 " have you hear anything more about Tuesday ? " she ask he , presently . 

 " oh yes!--compliment by the dozen . Old Parham overtake I as I be 
 walk away from the House , and say all manner of civil thing . " 

 " and I meet Lady Parham in Marshall 's , " say Kitty . " she do thank so 
 badly ! I should like to show she how to do it . dear I ! " Kitty sigh . 
 " be I henceforth to live and die on Lady Parham 's ample breast ? " 

 she sit with one foot beat the floor , deep in meditation . 

 " and shall I tell you what mother say ? " shout Ashe through the door . 

 " yes . " 

 he repeat -- so far as dressing would let he a number of the charming 
 and consider phrase in which Lady Tranmore , full of relief , pleasure , 
 and a secret self - reproach , have express to he the effect produce 
 upon herself and a select public by Kitty 's performance at the Parhams ' . 
 Kitty have indeed behave like an angel -- an angel _ en toilette de bal _ , 
 recite a scene from Alfred de Musset . such politeness to Lady Parham , 
 such smile , sometimes a shade malicious , for the Prime Minister , who on 
 his side do his good to efface all memory of his speech of the week 
 before from the mind of his fascinating guest ; smile from the Princess , 
 applause from the audience ; an evening , in fact , all froth and 
 sweetstuff , from which Lady Parham emerge grimly content , conscious at 
 the same time that she be henceforward very decidedly , and rather 
 disagreeably , in the Ashes ' debt ; while Elizabeth Tranmore go home in 
 a tremor of delight , happily persuade that Ashe 's path be now clear . 

 Kitty listen , sometimes please , sometimes inclined to be critical or 
 scornful of her mother - in - law 's praise . but she do love Lady Tranmore , 
 and on the whole she smile . smile , indeed , have be Kitty 's portion 
 since that evening of strange emotion , when she have find herself 
 sob in William 's arm for reason quite beyond her own defining . it 
 be as if , like the prince in the fairy tale , some iron band round her 
 heart have give way . she seem to dance through the house ; she devour 
 her child with kiss ; and she be even willing sometimes to let William 
 tell she what his mother suspect of the progress of Mary 's affair with 
 Geoffrey Cliffe , though she carefully avoid speak directly to Lady 
 Tranmore about it . as to Cliffe himself , she seem to have drop he 
 out of her thought . she never mention he , and Ashe could only 
 suppose she have find he disenchant . 

 " well , darling ! I hope I have make a sufficient fool of myself to please 
 you ! " 

 Ashe have throw the door wide , and stand on the threshold , array in 
 the brocade and fur of a venetian noble . he be a somewhat magnificent 
 apparition , and Kitty , who have coax or drive he into the dress , give 
 a scream of delight . she see he before her own glass , and the crimson 
 senator make eye at the white goddess as they pose triumphantly 
 together . 

 " you be a very rococo sort of goddess , you know , Kitty ! " say Ashe . " not 
 much Greek about you ! " 

 " quite as much as I want , thank you , " say Kitty , courtesye to her own 
 reflection in the glass . " fanchette could have teach they a thing or 
 two ! now come along ! ah ! wait ! " 

 and , gather up her possession , she leave the room . ashe , follow 
 she , see that she be go to the nursery , a large room on the back 
 staircase . at the threshold she turn back and put her finger to her 
 lip . then she slip in , reappear a moment afterwards to say , in a 
 whisper , " Nurse be not in bed . you may come in . " Nurse , indeed , know 
 much well than to be in bed . she have be sit up to see she 
 ladyship 's splendor , and she rise smile as Ashe enter the room . 

 " a parcel of idiot , nurse , be not we ? " he say , as he , too , display 
 himself , and then he follow Kitty to the child 's bedside . she bend 
 over the baby , remove a corner of the cot - blanket that might tease his 
 cheek , touch the mottled hand softly , remove a light that seem to 
 she too near -- and still stand look . 

 " we must go , Kitty . " 

 " I wish he be a little old , " she say , discontentedly , under her 
 breath , " that he might wake up and see we both ! I should like he to 
 remember I like this . " 

 " queen and huntress , come away ! " say Ashe , draw she by the hand . 

 outside the landing be dimly light . the servant be all wait in 
 the hall below . 

 " Kitty , " say Ashe , passionately , " give I one kiss . you be so sweet 
 to - night -- so sweet ! " 

 she turn . 

 " take care of my dress ! " she smile , and then she hold out her face 
 under its sparkling crescent , hold it with a dainty deliberation , and 
 let her lip cling to his . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Ashe and Kitty be soon wedge into one of the interminable line of 
 carriage that block all the approach to St. James 's Square . the 
 ball have be long expect , and there be a crowd in the street , keep 
 back by the police . the brougham go at a foot 's pace , and there be 
 ample time either for reverie or conversation . Kitty look out 
 incessantly , exclaim when she catch sight of a costume or an 
 acquaintance . Ashe have time to think over the late phase of the 
 negotiation with America , and to go over in his mind the sentence of a 
 letter he have address to the _ Times _ in answer to one of great 
 violence from Geoffrey Cliffe . his own letter have appear that morning . 
 Ashe be proud of it . he make bold to think that it expose Cliffe 's 
 exaggeration and insincerity neatly , and perhaps decisively . at any 
 rate , he hum a cheerful tune as he think of it . 

 then suddenly and incongruously a recollection occur to he . 

 " Kitty , do you know that I have a letter from your mother , this morning ? " 

 " have you ? " say Kitty , turn to he with reluctance . " I suppose she 
 want some money . " 

 " she do . she say she be very hard up . if I care to use it , I have an 
 easy reply . " 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 " I might say , ' D --- n it , we be , too ! ' " 

 Kitty laugh uneasily . 

 " do not begin to talk money matter now , William , _ please _ . " 

 " no , dear , I will not . but we shall really have to draw in . " 

 " you _ will _ pay so many debt ! " say Kitty , frown . 

 Ashe go into a fit of laughter . 

 " that be my extravagance , be not it ? I assure you I go on the most 
 approve principle . I divide our available money among the great 
 number of hungry claimant it will stretch to . but , after all , it go a 
 beggarly short way . " 

 " I know mother will think my diamond crescent a horrible extravagance , " 
 say Kitty , pouting . " but you be the only son , William , and we must 
 behave like other people . " 

 " dear , do not trouble your little head , " he say ; " I will manage it , 
 somehow . " 

 indeed , he know very well that he could never bring his own indolent and 
 easy - go temper in such matter to face any real struggle with Kitty 
 over money . he must go to his mother , who now -- his father be a 
 hopeless invalid -- manage the estate with his own and the agent 's help . 
 it be , of course , right that she should preach to Kitty a little ; but 
 she would be sensible and help they out . after all , there be plenty of 
 money . why should not Kitty spend it ? 

 any one who know he well might have observe a curious contrast between 
 his private laxity in these matter and the strictness of his public 
 practice . he be scruple and delicacy itself in all financial matter 
 that touch his public life -- directorship , investment , and the like , 
 no less than in all that concerned interest and patronage . he would have 
 be a bold man who have dare to propose to William Ashe any expedient 
 whatever by which his public place might serve his private gain . his 
 proud and fastidious integrity , indeed , be one of the source of his 
 grow power . but as to private debt -- and the tradesman to whom they 
 be owe -- his standard be still essentially those of the Whigs from 
 whom he descend , of Fox , the all - indebte , or of Melbourne , who have 
 leave an amusing disquisition on the art of divide a few loaf and 
 fish in the shape of bank - note among a multitude of creditor . 

 not that affair be as yet very bad . far from it . but there be little 
 to spare for Madame d'Estrées , who ought , indeed , to want nothing ; and 
 Ashe be vaguely meditate his reply to that lady when a face in a 
 carriage near they , which be try to enter the line , catch his 
 attention . 

 " Mary ! " he say , " à la Sir Joshua -- and mother . they do not see we . query , 
 will Cliffe take the leap to - night ? Mother report a decide increase of 
 ardor on his part . sorry you do not approve of it , darling ! " 

 " it be just like light a lamp to put it out -- that be all ! " say Kitty , 
 with vivacity . " the man who marry Mary be do for . " 

 " not at all . Mary 's money will give he the pedestal he want , and trust 
 Cliffe to take care of his own individuality afterwards ! now , if you will 
 transfer your alarm to _ Mary _ , I be with you ! " 

 " oh ! of _ course _ he will be unkind to she . she may lay her account for 
 that . but it be the _ marry _ she ! " and Kitty 's upper - lip curl under a 
 slow disdain . 

 William laugh out . 

 " Kitty , really!--you remind I , please , of Miss Jane Taylor : 

      " ' I do not think there could be find -- a little heart so hard ! ' 

 Mary be thirty ; she would like to be marry . and why not ? she will give 
 quite as good as she get . " 

 " well , she will not get -- anything . Geoffrey Cliffe think of no one but 
 himself . " 

 Ashe 's eyebrow go up . 

 " oh , well , all man be selfish -- and the woman do not mind . " 

 " it depend on how it be do , " say Kitty . 

 Ashe declare that Cliffe be just an ordinary person , " l'homme sensuel 
 moyen"--with a touch of genius . except for that , no well and no bad 
 than other people . what then?--the world be not make up of person of 
 enormous virtue like Lord Althorp and Mr. Gladstone . if Mary want he 
 for a husband , and could capture he , both , in his opinion , would have 
 pretty nearly get their desert . 

 Kitty , however , fall into a reverie , after which she let he see a face 
 of the same startling sweetness as she have several time show he of 
 late . 

 " do you want I to be nice to she ? " she nestle up to he . 

 " bind she to your chariot wheel , madam ! you can ! " say Ashe , slip a 
 hand round her . 

 Kitty ponder . 

 " well , then , I will not tell she that I _ know _ he be still in love with the 
 Frenchwoman . but it be on the tip of my tongue . " 

 " Heavens ! " cry Ashe . " the Vicomtesse D--- , the lady of the poem ? but 
 she be dead ! I think that be over long ago . " 

 Kitty be silent for a moment , then say , with low - voice emphasis : 

 " that any one could write those poem , and then _ think _ of Mary ! " 

 " yes , the poem be fine , " say Ashe , " but make - believe ! " 

 Kitty protest indignantly . ashe banter she a little on be one of 
 the woman who be the making of Cliffe . 

 " say what you like ! " she say , draw a quick breath . " but , often and 
 often , he say divine thing -- divinely ! I feel they there ! " and she 
 lift both hand to her breast with an impulsive gesture . 

 " Goddess ! " say Ashe , kiss her hand because enthusiasm become her so 
 well . " and to think that I should have dare to roast the divine one in 
 a _ time _ letter this morning ! " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the hall and staircase of Yorkshire House be already fill with a 
 motley and magnificent crowd when Ashe and Kitty arrive . Kitty , still 
 shroud in her cloak , push her way through , exchange greeting with 
 friend , shriek a little now and then for the safety of her bow and 
 quiver , her face flush with pleasure and excitement . then she 
 disappear into the cloak - room , and Ashe be leave to wonder how he be 
 go to endure his robe through the heat of the evening , and to 
 exchange a laugh remark or two with the parliamentary Secretary to 
 the Admiralty , into whose company he have fall . 

 " what be we do it for ? " he ask the young man , whose thin person 
 be well set off by a Tudor dress . 

 " oh , do not be superior ! " say the other . " I be go to enjoy myself like 
 a school - boy ! " 

 and that , indeed , seem to be the attitude of most of the people 
 present . and not only of the young member of the dazzle company . 
 what strike Ashe particularly , as he mingle with the crowd , be the 
 alacrity of the eld man . here be a famous lawyer already near the 
 seventy , in the Lord Chancellor 's garb of a great ancestor ; here an 
 ex - Viceroy of Ireland with a son in the government , magnificent in an 
 Elizabethan dress , his fair bushy hair and reddish beard shin above a 
 doublet on which glitter a jewel give to the founder of his house by 
 Elizabeth 's own hand ; next to he , a white - haired judge in the robe of 
 Judge Gascoyne ; a peer , no young , at his side , in the red and blue of 
 Mazarin : and show each and all in their gay complacent look a clear 
 revival of that former masculine delight in splendid clothe which come 
 so strangely to an end with that old world on the ruin of which 
 Napoleon rise . so with the eld woman . for this night they be young 
 again . they have be free to choose from all the age a dress that 
 suit they ; and the result of this renewal of a long - relinquish 
 eagerness have be in many case to call back a bygone self , and the 
 tone and gesture of those year when beauty be its own chief care . 

 as for the young man , the young woman , and the girl , the z and 
 pleasure of the show shine in their eye and movement , and spread 
 through the hall and up the crowded staircase , like a warm , contagious 
 atmosphere . at all time , indeed , and in all country , an aristocracy 
 have be capable of this sheer delight in its own splendor , wealth , good 
 look , and accumulate treasure ; whether in the Venice that petrarch 
 visit ; or in the Rome of the Renaissance pope ; in the Versailles of 
 the Grand Monarque ; or in the Florence of to - day , which still at moment 
 of _ festa _ reproduce in its midst all the costume of the Cinque - cento . 

 in this english case there be less dignity than there would have be 
 in a latin country , and more personal beauty ; less grace , perhaps , and 
 yet a something rich and more romantic . 

 at the top of the stair stand a marquis in a dress of the italian 
 Renaissance , a Gonzaga who have sit for Titian ; beside he a fair - haired 
 wife in the white satin and pearl of Henrietta Maria ; while up the 
 marble stair , watch by a laugh multitude above , stream 
 Gainsborough girl and Reynolds woman , woman from the court of 
 Elizabeth , or Henri Quatre , of Maria Theresa , or Marie Antoinette , the 
 figure of Holbein and Vandyck , Florentines of the Renaissance , the 
 youth of Carpaccio , the beauty of Titian and Veronese . 

 " Kitty , make haste ! " cry a voice in front , as Kitty begin to mount the 
 stair . " your quadrille be just call . " 

 Kitty smile and nod , but do not hurry her pace by a second . the 
 staircase be not so full as it have be , and she know well as she 
 mount it , her slender figure draw to its full height , her eye 
 flash greeting and challenge to those in the gallery , the diamond 
 genius on her spear glitter above she , that she hold the stage , and 
 that the play would not begin without she . 

 and indeed her dress , her brilliance , and her beauty let loose a hum of 
 conversation -- not always friendly . 

 " what be she ? " " oh , something mythological ! she be in the next 
 quadrille . " " my dear , she be Diana ! look at her bow and quiver , and the 
 moon in her hair . " " very incorrect!--she ought to have the tower 
 crown ! " " Absurd , such a little thing to attempt Diana ! I would back Actæon ! " 

 the latter remark be speak in the ear of Louis Harman , who stand in 
 the gallery look down . but Harman shake his head . 

 " you do not understand . she be not greek , of course ; but she be fairyland . 
 a child of the Renaissance , dream in a wood , would have see Artemis 
 so -- dress up and glitter , and fantastic -- as the Florentines see 
 Venus . small , too , like the fairies!--slipping through the leaf ; small 
 hound , with jewelled collar , follow she ! " 

 he smile at his own fancy , still watch Kitty with his painter 's 
 eye . 

 " she have see a french print somewhere , " say Cliffe , who stand close 
 by . " More Versailles in it than fairyland , I think ! " 

 " it be _ she _ that be fairyland , " say Harman , still fascinated . 

 Cliffe 's expression show the sarcasm of his thought . Fairy , 
 perhaps!--with the touch of malice and inhuman mischief that all 
 tradition attribute to the little people . why , after that first 
 meeting , when the conversation of a few minute have almost sweep they 
 into the deep water of intimacy , have she slight he so , in other 
 drawing - room and on other occasion ? she have actually neglect and 
 avoid he -- after have dare to speak to he of his secret ! and now 
 Ashe 's letter of the morning have kindle afresh his sense of rancor 
 against a pair of people , too prosperous and too arrogant . the stroke 
 in the _ Times _ have , he know , go home ; his vanity writhe under it , and 
 the wish to strike back torment he , as he watch Ashe mount 
 behind his wife , so handsome , careless , and urbane , his jewelled cap 
 dangle in his hand . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the quadrille of god and goddess be over . Kitty have be dance 
 with a fine clumsy Mars , in ordinary life an honest soldier and 
 deer - stalker , the heir to a Scotch dukedom ; have as she _ vis - à - vis _ 
 Madeleine Alcot -- as the Flora of Botticelli 's " Spring"--and slim as 
 Mercury in fantastic Renaissance armor . all the divinity of the 
 Pantheon , indeed , be there , but in Gallicized or italianate form ; 
 scarcely a touch of the true antique , save in the case of one beautiful 
 girl who wear a Juno dress of white whereof the cling fold have be 
 arrange for she by a young Netherlands painter , Mr. Alma Tadema , then 
 newly settle in this country . Kitty at first envy she ; then decide 
 that she herself could have make no effect in such a gown , and throw she 
 the praise of indifference . 

 when , to Kitty 's sharp regret , the music stop and the glitter crew 
 of immortal melt into the crowd , she find behind she a row of 
 dancer wait for the quadrille which be to follow . this be to 
 consist entirely of english picture revive -- Reynolds , Gainsborough , 
 and Romney -- and to be dance by those for whose family they have be 
 originally paint . as she draw back , look eagerly to right and leave , 
 she come across Mary Lyster . Mary wear her hair high and powdered -- a 
 black silk scarf over white satin , and a blue sash . 

 " awfully become ! " say Kitty , nod to she . " who be you ? " 

 " my great - great aunt ! " say Mary , courtesying . " you , I see , go even 
 far back . " 

 " be not it fun ? " say Kitty , pause beside she . " have you see William ? 
 poor dear ! he be so hot . how do you do ? " this last careless greeting be 
 address to Cliffe , whom she now perceive stand behind Mary . 

 Cliffe bow stiffly . 

 " excuse I . I do not see you . I be absorb in your dress . you be 
 Artemis , I see -- with addition . " 

 " oh ! I be an ' article de Paris , ' " say Kitty . " but it seem odd that 
 some people should take I for Joan of Arc . " then she turn to Mary . " I 
 think your dress be quite lovely ! " she say , in that warm , shy voice she 
 rarely use except for a few intimate , and have never yet be know to 
 waste on Mary . " do not you admire it enormously , Mr. Cliffe ? " 

 " enormously , " say Cliffe , pull at his mustache . " but by now my 
 compliment be stale . " 

 " be he cross about William 's letter ? " think Kitty . " well , let us leave 
 they to themselves . " 

 then , as she pass he , something in the silent personality of the man 
 arrest she . she could not forbear a look at he over her shoulder . 
 " be you -- oh ! of course , I remember-- " for she have recognize the dress 
 and cap of the spanish grandee . 

 Cliffe do not reply for a moment , but the harsh significance of his 
 face revive in she the excitable interest she have feel in he on the 
 day of his luncheon in Hill Street ; an interest since effaced and 
 disperse , under the influence of that serenity and home peace which 
 have shine upon she since that very day . 

 " I should apologize , no doubt , for not take your advice , " he say , 
 look she in the eye . their expression , half bitter , half insolent , 
 remind she . 

 " do I give you any advice ? " Kitty wrinkle up her white brow . " I do not 
 recollect . " 

 Mary look at she sharply , suspiciously . Kitty , quite conscious of the 
 look , be straightway prick by an elfish curiosity . could she carry 
 he off -- trouble Mary 's possession there and then ? she believe she 
 could . she be well aware of a certain relation between herself and 
 Cliffe , if , at least , she choose to develop it . should she ? her vanity 
 insist that Mary could not prevent it . 

 however , she restrain herself and move on . presently look back , 
 she see they still together , Cliffe lean against the pedestal of a 
 bust , Mary beside he . there be an animation in her eye , a rose of 
 pleasure on her cheek which stir in Kitty a queer , sudden sympathy . 
 " I _ be _ a little beast ! " she say to herself . " why should not she be 
 happy ? " 

 then , perceive Lady Tranmore at the end of the ballroom , she make she 
 way thither surround by a motley crowd of friend . she walk as 
 though on air , " rain influence . " and as Lady Tranmore catch the 
 glitter of the diamond crescent , and behold the small divinity beneath 
 it , she , too , smile with pleasure , like the other spectator on Kitty 's 
 march . the dress be monstrously costly . she know that . but she forget 
 the inroad on William 's pocket , and remember only to be proud of 
 William 's wife . since the Parhams ' party , indeed , the unlooked - for 
 submission of Kitty , and the clearing of William 's prospect , Lady 
 Tranmore have be sweetness itself to her daughter - in - law . 

 but her fine face and brow be none the less inclined to frown . she 
 herself as Katharine of Aragon would have shed a dignity on any scene , 
 but she be in no sympathy with what she behold . 

 " we shall soon all of we be ashamed of this kind of thing , " she declare 
 to Kitty . " just as people now be begin to be ashamed of enormous 
 house and troop of servant . " 

 " no , please ! only bored with they ! " say Kitty . " there be so many other 
 way now of amuse yourself -- that be all . " 

 " well , this way will die out , " say Lady Tranmore . " the cost of it be 
 too scandalous -- people 's conscience prick they . " 

 Kitty vow she do not believe there be a conscience in the room ; and 
 then , as the music strike up , she carry off her companion to some 
 step overlook the great marble gallery , where they have a well view 
 of the two line of dancer . 

 it be say that as a nation the English have no gift for pageant . yet 
 every now and then -- as no doubt in the Elizabethan mask -- they show a 
 strange felicity in the art . certainly the dance that follow would 
 have be difficult to surpass even in the ripe day and motherland of 
 pageantry . to the left , a long line , consist mainly of young girl in 
 their first bloom , dress as Gainsborough and his great contemporary 
 delight to paint these flower of England -- the fold of plain white 
 muslin cross over the young breast , a black velvet at the throat , a 
 rise in the hair , the simple skirt show the small pointed foot , and 
 sometimes a broad sash define the slender waist . here be Stanleys , 
 howard , Percys , Villierses , Butlers , Osbornes -- soft slip of girl 
 bear the name of England 's rough and turbulent youth , bear 
 themselves to - night with a shy or laugh dignity , as though the touch 
 of history and romance be on they . and face they , the youth of the 
 same family , no less handsome than their sister and bride -- in 
 Romney 's blue coat , or the splendid red of Reynolds and Gainsborough . 

 to and fro sway the dancer , under the innumerable candle that fill 
 the arched roof and upper wall of the ballroom ; and each time the line 
 part they disclose at the farther end another pageant , to which that 
 of the dance be in truth subordinate -- a dais hang with blue and silver , 
 and upon it a royal lady whose beauty , then in its first bloom , have be 
 a national possession , since as , the " sea - king 's daughter " she bring 
 it in dowry to her adopt country . to - night she blaze in jewel as a 
 Valois queen , with her court around she , and as the dancer recede , 
 each youth and maiden seem instinctively to turn towards she as rose 
 to the sun . 

 " oh , beautiful , beautiful world ! " say Kitty to herself , in an ecstasy , 
 press her small hand together ; " how I love you!--_love _ you ! " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 meanwhile Darrell and Harman stand side by side near the doorway of the 
 ballroom , look in when the crowd allow . 

 " a strange sight , " say Harman . " perhaps they take it too seriously . " 

 " ah ! that be our english upper class , " say Darrell , with a sneer . " be 
 there anything they take lightly?--_par exemple ! _ it seem to I they 
 carry off this amusement well than most . they may be stupid , but they 
 be good - look . I say , Ashe"--he turn towards the new - comer who have 
 just saunter up to them--"on this exceptional occasion , be it allow 
 to congratulate you on Lady Kitty 's gown ? " 

 for Kitty , raise upon her step , be at the moment in full view . 

 Ashe make some slight reply , the slight of which indeed annoy the 
 thin - skinned and morbid Darrell , always on the lookout for affront . but 
 Louis Harman , who happen to observe the Under - Secretary 's glance at 
 his wife , say to himself , " by George ! that queer marriage be turn 
 out well , after all . " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the Tudor and Marie Antoinette quadrille have be dance . there be a 
 rumor of supper in the air . 

 " William ! " say Kitty , in his ear , as she come across he in one of the 
 drawing - room , " Lord Hubert take I in to supper . poor I ! " she make an 
 extravagant face of self - pity and sweep on . Lord Hubert be one of the 
 son of the house , a stupid and inarticulate guardsman , Kitty 's butt and 
 detestation . Ashe smile to himself over her fate , and go back to the 
 ballroom in search of his own lady . 

 meanwhile Kitty pause in the next drawing - room , and dismiss she 
 follow . 

 " I promise to wait here for Lord Hubert , " she say . " you go on , or 
 you will get no table . " 

 and she wave they peremptorily away . the drawing - room , one of a suite 
 which look on the garden , thin temporarily . in a happy fatigue , 
 Kitty lean dreamily over the ledge of one of the open window , look 
 at the illuminate space below she . amid the colored light , figure of 
 dream and fantasy walk up and down . in the midst flash a 
 flame - color fountain . the sound of a Strauss waltz float in the 
 air . and beyond the garden and its tree rise the dull roar of London . 

 a silk curtain float out into the room under the westerly breeze , 
 then , return , sheathe Kitty in its fold . she stand there hide , 
 amuse herself like a child with the thought of startle that great 
 heavy goose , Lord Hubert . 

 suddenly a pair of voice that she know catch her ear . two person , 
 pass through , linger , without perceive she . Kitty , after a first 
 movement of self - disclosure , catch her own name and stand motionless . 

 " well , of course you have hear that we get through , " say Lady Parham . 
 " for once Lady Kitty behave herself ! " 

 " you be lucky ! " say Mary Lyster . " Lady Tranmore be dreadfully 
 anxious-- " 

 " lest she should cut we at the last ? " cry Lady Parham . " well , of 
 course , Lady Kitty be ' capable de tout . ' " she laugh . " but perhaps as 
 you be a cousin I ought not to say these thing . " 

 " oh , say what you like , " say Mary . " I be no friend of Kitty 's , and 
 never pretend to be . " 

 Lady Parham come close , apparently , and say , confidentially : " what on 
 earth make that man marry she ? he might have marry anybody . she have 
 no money , and bad than no position . " 

 " she work upon his pity , of course , a good deal . I see they in the 
 early day at Grosville Park . she play her card very cleverly . and 
 then , it be just the right moment . Lady Tranmore have be urge he to 
 marry . " 

 " well , of course , " say Lady Parham , " there be no deny the beauty . " 

 " you think so ? " say Mary , as though in wonder . " well , I never could see 
 it . and now she have so much go off . " 

 " I do not agree with you . many people think she the star to - night . Mr. 
 Cliffe , I be tell , admire she . " 

 Kitty could not see how the eye of the speaker , under a Sir Joshua 
 turban , study the countenance of Miss Lyster , as she throw out the 
 word . 

 Mary laugh . 

 " poor Kitty ! she try to flirt with he long ago -- just after she 
 arrive in London , fresh out of the convent . it be so funny ! he tell I 
 afterwards he never be so embarrassed in his life -- this baby make 
 eye at he ! and now -- oh no ! " 

 " why not now ? Lady Kitty 's very much the rage , and Mr. Cliffe like 
 notoriety . " 

 " but a notoriety with -- well , with some style , some distinction ! Kitty 's 
 sort be so cheap and silly . " 

 " ah , well , she be not to be despise , " say Lady Parham . " she be as clever 
 as she can be . but her husband will have to keep she in order . " 

 " can he ? " say Mary . " will not she always be in his way ? " 

 " always , I should think . but he must have know what he be about . why 
 do not his mother interfere ? such a family!--such a history ! " 

 " she do interfere , " say Mary . " we all do our best"--she drop she 
 voice--"i know I do . but it be no use . if man like spoiled child 
 they must have they , I suppose . let us hope he will learn how to manage 
 she . shall we go on ? I promise to meet my supper - partner in the 
 library . " 

 they move away . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 for some minute Kitty stand look out , motionless , but the beating of 
 her heart choke she . strange ancestral thing -- thing of evil -- thing 
 of passion -- have suddenly awake , as it be , from sleep in the depth of 
 her being , and rush upon the citadel of her life . a change have pass 
 over she from head to foot . her vein run fire . 

 at that moment , turn round , she see Geoffrey Cliffe enter the room in 
 which she stand . with an impetuous movement she approach he . 

 " take I down to supper , Mr. Cliffe . I can not wait for Lord Hubert any 
 more , I be _ so _ hungry ! " 

 " enchant ! " say Cliffe , the color leap into his tanned face as he 
 look down upon the goddess . " but I come to find-- " 

 " Miss Lyster ? oh , she be go in with Mr. Darrell . come with I . I have 
 a ticket for the reserved tent . we shall have a delicious corner to 
 ourselves . " 

 and she take from her glove the little coveted paste - board , 
 which -- hand about in secret to a few intimate of the house -- give 
 access to the sanctum sanctorum of the evening . 

 Cliffe waver . then his vanity succumb . a few minute later the 
 supper guest in the tent of the _ élite _ see the entrance of a darkly 
 splendid Duke of Alva , with a little sandalled goddess . all compact , it 
 seem , of ivory and fire , on his arm . 




 XI 


 the spring freshness of London , have long since depart . a crowded 
 season ; much animation in Parliament , where the government , to its own 
 amazement , have rather gain than lose ground ; industrial trouble at 
 home , and foreign complication abroad ; and in London the steady growth 
 of a new plutocracy , the result , so far , of american wealth and american 
 bride . in the first week of July , the outward thing of the moment 
 might have be thus sum up by any careful observer . 

 on a certain Tuesday night , the debate on a private member 's bill 
 unexpectedly collapse , and the House rise early . Ashe leave the House 
 with his secretary , but part from he at the corner of Birdcage Walk , 
 and cross the park alone . he mean to join Kitty at a party in 
 Piccadilly ; there be just time to go home and dress ; and he walk at a 
 quick pace . 

 two member sit on the same side of the House with himself be also 
 go home . one of they notice the Under - Secretary . 

 " a very ineffective statement Ashe make to - night -- don't you think so ? " 
 he say to his companion . 

 " very ! really , if the government can not take up a strong line , the 
 general public will begin to think there be something in it . " 

 " oh , if you only shriek long enough and sharp enough in England 
 something be sure to come of it . Cliffe and his group have be play a 
 very shrewd game . the government will get their agreement approve all 
 right , but Cliffe have certainly make some people on our side uneasy . 
 however-- " 

 " however , what ? " say the other , after a moment . 

 " I wish I think that be the only reason for Ashe 's change of tone , " 
 say the first speaker , slowly . 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 the two be intimate personal friend , belong , moreover , to a group 
 of evangelical family well know in english life ; but even so , the 
 answer come with reluctance : 

 " well , you see , it be not very easy to grapple in public with the man 
 whose name all smart London happen to be couple with that of your 
 wife ! " 

 " I say"--the other stand still , in genuine consternation and 
 distress--"you do not mean to say that there be that in it ! " 

 " you notice that the difference be not in _ what _ Ashe say , but in _ how _ 
 he say it . he avoid all personal collision with Cliffe . the government 
 stick to their case , but Ashe mention everybody but Cliffe , and 
 confute all argument but his . and meanwhile , of course , the truth be 
 that Cliffe be the head and front of the campaign , and if he throw up 
 to - morrow , everything would quiet down . " 

 " and Lady Kitty be flirt with he at this particular moment ? damned 
 bad taste and bad feeling , to say the least of it ! " 

 " you will not find one of the Bristol lot consider that kind of thing when 
 their blood be up ! " say the other . " you remember the tale of old Lord 
 Blackwater ? " 

 " but be there really any truth in it ? or be it mere gossip ? " 

 " well , I hear that the behavior of both of they at Grosville Park last 
 week be such that Lady Grosville vow she will never ask either of they 
 again . and at Ascot , at Lord 's , the opera , Lady Kitty sit with he , 
 talk with he , walk with he , the whole time , and will not look at any 
 one else . they must be ask together or neither will come -- and 
 ' society , ' as far as I can make out , think it a good joke and be always 
 make plan to throw they together . " 

 " can not Lady Tranmore do anything ? " 

 " I do not know . they say she be very unhappy about it . certainly she 
 look ill and depressed . " 

 " and ashe ? " 

 his companion hesitate . " I do not like to say it , but , of course , you 
 know there be many people who will tell you that Ashe do not care 
 twopence what his wife do so long as she be nice to he , and he can 
 read his book and carry on his politic as he please ! " 

 " ashe always strike I as the soul of honor , " say the other , 
 indignantly . 

 " of course -- for himself . but a more fatalist believer in liberty than 
 Ashe do not exist -- liberty especially to damn yourself -- if you must and 
 will . " 

 " it would be hard to extend that doctrine to a wife , " say the other , 
 with a grave , uncomfortable laugh . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 meanwhile the man whose affair they have be discuss walk home , 
 wrap in solitary and disagreeable thought . as he near the 
 Marlborough House corner a carriage pass he . it be delay a moment 
 by other carriage , and as it halt beside he Ashe recognize Lady 
 M---- , the hostess of the fancy ball , and a very old friend of his 
 parent . he take off his hat . the lady within recognize he and 
 incline slightly -- very slightly and stiffly . Ashe start a little and 
 walk on . 

 the meeting vividly recall the ball , the _ terminus a quo _ indeed from 
 which the meditation in which he have be plunge since enter the 
 park have start . between six and seven week ago , be it ? it might have 
 be a century . he think of Kitty as she be that night -- Kitty 
 pirouetting in her glitter dress , or bend over the boy , or hold 
 her face to his as he kiss she on the stair . never since have she 
 show he the small glimpse of such a mood . what be wrong with she 
 and with himself ? something , since May , have turn their life 
 topsy - turvy , and it seem to Ashe that in the general unprofitable rush 
 of futile engagement he have never yet have time to stop and ask himself 
 what it might be . 

 why , at any rate , be _ he _ in this chafing irritation and discomfort ? 
 why could he not deal with that fellow Cliffe as he deserve ? and what 
 in Heaven 's name be the reason why old friend like Lady M---- be 
 begin to look at he coldly , and avoid his conversation ? 

 his mother , too ! he gather that quite lately there have be some 
 disagreeable scene between she and Kitty . Kitty have resent some 
 remonstrance of her , and for some day now they have not meet . nor have 
 Ashe see his mother alone . do she also avoid he , shrink from speak 
 out her real mind to he ? 

 well , it be all monstrously absurd!--a great coil about nothing , as far 
 as the main fact be concern , although the annoyance and worry of 
 the thing be indeed become serious . Kitty have no doubt take a wild 
 like to Geoffrey cliffe-- 

 " and , by George ! " say Ashe , pause in his walk , " she warn I . " 

 and there rise in his memory the formal garden at Grosville Park , the 
 little figure at his side , and Kitty 's franknesses--"i shall take mad 
 fancy for people . I sha'n't be able to help it . I have one now , for 
 Geoffrey Cliffe . " 

 he smile . there be the difficulty ! if only the people whose envious 
 tongue be now wag could see Kitty as she be , could understand 
 what a gulf lie between she and the ordinary " fast " woman , there would 
 be an end of this silly , ill - natured talk . other woman might be of the 
 earth earthy . Kitty be a sprite , with all the irresponsibility of such 
 incalculable creature . the man and woman -- woman especially -- who 
 gossip and lie about she , who send abominable paragraph to 
 scurrilous paper -- he have one now in his pocket which have reach he at 
 the House from an anonymous correspondent -- speak out of their own vile 
 experience , judge she by their own standard . his mother , at any 
 rate -- he proudly think -- ought to know well than to be mislead by they 
 for a moment . 

 at the same time , something must be do . it could not be deny that 
 Kitty have be behave like a romantic , excitable child with this 
 unscrupulous man , whose record with regard to woman be probably wholly 
 unknown to she , however foolishly she might idealize the _ liaison _ 
 commemorate in his poem . what have Kitty , indeed , be do with 
 herself this six week ? Ashe try to recall they in detail . Ascot , 
 Lord 's , innumerable party in London and in the country , to some of 
 which he have not be able to accompany she , owe to the stress of 
 parliamentary and official work . Grosville Park , for instance -- he have 
 be stop at the last moment from go down there by the arrival of 
 some important foreign news , and Kitty have go alone . she have 
 reappear on the Monday , pale and furious , say that she and her aunt 
 have quarrel , and that she would never go near the Grosvilles either 
 in town or country again . she have not volunteer any further 
 explanation , and Ashe have refrain from inquiry . there be in he 
 certain disgust and disdain , belong to his general epicurean 
 conception of existence , which not even his love for Kitty could 
 overcome . one be a disdain for the quarrel of woman . he suppose they 
 be inevitable ; he see , by - the - way , that Kitty and Lady Parham be 
 once more at dagger draw ; and Kitty seem to enjoy it . well , it be 
 her own affair ; but while there be a greek play , or a Shakespeare 
 sonnet , or even a Blue Book to read , who could expect he to listen ? 

 what have old Lady Grosville be about ? he understand that Cliffe have 
 be of the party . and Kitty must have do something to bring down upon 
 she the wrath of the puritanical mistress of the house . 

 well , what be he to do ? it be now July . the session would last 
 certainly till the middle of August , and though the american business 
 would be dispose of directly , there be fresh trouble in the Balkan 
 Peninsula , and an anxious situation in Egypt . impossible that he should 
 think of leave his post . and as for the chance of a dissolution , the 
 government be now a good deal strong than it have be before 
 Easter -- bad luck ! 

 of course he ought to take Kitty away . but short of resignation how be 
 it to be do ? and what , even , would resignation do -- supposing , _ per 
 impossibile _ , it could be think of -- but give to gnaw gossip a 
 big bone , and probably irritate Kitty to the point of rebellion ? yet 
 how induce she to go with any one else ? Lady Tranmore be out of the 
 question . Margaret French , perhaps ? 

 then , suddenly , Ashe be assail by an inner laughter , hollow and 
 discomfortable . thing be come to a pretty pass when he must even 
 dream of resign because a man whom he despise would haunt his house , 
 and absorb the company of his wife ; when , moreover , he could not even 
 think of a remedy for such a state of thing without fall back 
 dismay from the certainty of Kitty 's temper -- Kitty 's wild and furious 
 temper . 

 for during the last fortnight , as it seem to Ashe , all the wind of 
 tempest have be blow through his house . himself , the servant , even 
 Margaret , even the child , have all suffer . he also have lose his temper 
 several time -- such a thing have scarcely happen to he since his 
 childhood . he think of it as of a kind of physical stain or weakness . 
 to keep an even and stoical mind , to laugh where one could not 
 conquer -- this have always seem to he the first condition of decent 
 existence . and now to be wrangle over an expenditure , an engagement , a 
 letter , the mere nothing -- whether it be a fine day or it 
 wasn't -- could anything be more petty , degrading , intolerable ? 

 he vow that this should stop . whatever happen , he and Kitty should 
 not degenerate into a pair of scold -- besmirch their life with quarrel 
 as ugly as they be silly . he would wrestle with she , his beloved , 
 unreasonable , foolish Kitty ; he ought , of course , to have do so 
 before . but it be only within the last week or so that the horizon have 
 suddenly darken -- the thing grow serious . and now this beastly 
 paragraph ! but , after all , what do such garbage matter ? it would of 
 course be a comfort to thrash the editor . but our modern life breed 
 such creature , and they have to be bear . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 he let himself into a silent house . his letter lie on the hall - table . 
 among they be a handwriting which arrest he . he remember , yet 
 could not put a name to it . then he turn the envelope . " H'm . Lady 
 Grosville ! " he read it , stand there , then thrust it into his pocket , 
 think angrily that there seem to be a good many fool in this world 
 who occupy themselves with other people 's business . exaggeration , of 
 course , damnable _ parti pris _ ! when do she ever see Kitty except with a 
 jaundice eye ? " I wonder Kitty condescend to go to the woman 's house ! 
 she must know that everything she do be see there _ en noir _ . 
 pharisaical , narrow - minded Philistines ! " 

 the letter act as a tonic . Ashe be positively grateful to the " old 
 gorgon " who write it . he run up - stair , his pulse tingle in defence 
 of Kitty . he would show Lady Grosville that she could not write to he , 
 at any rate , in that strain , with impunity . 

 he take a candle from the landing , and open his wife 's door in order 
 to pass through her room to his own . as he do so , he run against 
 Kitty 's maid , Blanche , who be come out . she shrink back as she see 
 he , but not before the light of his candle have shine full upon she . she 
 face be disfigure with tear , which be , indeed , still run down 
 her cheek . 

 " why , Blanche ! " he say , stand still -- then in the kind voice which 
 endear he to the servants--"i be afraid your brother be bad ? " 

 for the poor brother in hospital have pass through many vicissitude 
 since his operation , and the little maid 's spirit have fluctuate 
 accordingly . 

 " oh no , sir -- no , sir ! " say Blanche , dry her eye and retreat into 
 the shadow of the room , where only a faint flame of gas be burn . 
 " it be not that , sir , thank you . I be just put away her ladyship 's 
 thing , " she say , inconsequently , look round the room . 

 " that be hardly what cause the tear , be it ? " say Ashe , smile . " be 
 there anything in which Lady Kitty or I could help you ? " 

 the girl , who have always seem to he on excellent term with Kitty , 
 give a sudden sob . 

 " thank you , sir ; I have just give her ladyship warning . " 

 " indeed ! " say Ashe , gravely . " I be sorry for that . I think you get on 
 here very well . " 

 " I use to , sir , but this last few week there be nothing please her 
 ladyship ; you can not do anything right . I be sure I have work my hand 
 off . but I can not do any more . perhaps her ladyship will find some one 
 else to suit she well . " 

 " do not her ladyship try to persuade you to stay ? " 

 " yes -- but -- I give warning once before , and then I stay . and it be no 
 good . it seem as if you must do wrong . and I do not sleep , sir . it get 
 on your nerve so . but I do not mean to complain . good - night , sir . " 

 " good - night . do not sit up for your mistress . you look tired out . I will 
 help she . " 

 " thank you , sir , " say the maid , in a depressed voice , and go . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 half an hour later , Ashe mount the staircase of a well - know house in 
 Piccadilly . the evening party be begin to thin , but in a side 
 drawing - room a fine austrian band be play Strauss , and some of the 
 intimate of the house be dance . 

 Ashe at once perceive his wife . she be dance with a clever Cambridge 
 lad , a cousin of Madeleine Alcot 's , who have long be one of her 
 adorer . and so charming be the spectacle , so exhilarating be the 
 youth and beauty of the pair , that Ashe presently suspect what be 
 indeed the truth , that most of the person gathering in the room be 
 there to watch Kitty dance , rather than to dance themselves . he himself 
 watch she , though he profess to be talk to his hostess , a woman 
 of middle age , with honest eye and a brow of command . 

 " it be a delight to see Lady Kitty dance , " she say to he , smile . 
 " but she be tired . I be sure she want the country . " 

 " like my boy , " say Ashe . " I wish to goodness they would both go . " 

 " oh , I know it be hard to leave the husband toil in town ! " say his 
 companion , who , as the daughter , wife , and mother of politician , have 
 have a long experience of official life . 

 Ashe glance at she -- at her face mould by kind and scrupulous 
 living -- with a sudden relief from tension . clearly no gossip have reach 
 she . he linger beside she , for the sheer pleasure of talk to she . 
 but their _ tête - à - tête _ be soon interrupt by the approach of Lady 
 Parham , with a daughter -- a slim and silent girl , to whom , it be 
 whisper , her mother be give " a last chance " this season , before 
 send she into the country as a failure , and bring out her young 
 sister . 

 Lady Parham greet the hostess with effusion . it be a rich house , and 
 these small , informal dance be say to be more helpful to matrimonial 
 development than large affair . then she perceive Ashe , and her whole 
 manner change . there be a very evident bristling , and she give he a 
 greeting deliberately careless . 

 " confound the woman ! " think Ashe , and his own pride rise . 

 " work as hard as usual , Lady Parham ? " he ask she , with a smile . 

 " if you like to put it so , " be the stiff reply . " there be , of course , a 
 good deal of go out . " 

 " I hope , if I may say so , you do not allow Lord Parham to do too much of 
 it . " 

 " Lord Parham never be well in his life , " say Lord Parham 's spouse , 
 with the air of put down an impertinence . 

 " that be good news . I must say when I see he this afternoon I think he 
 seem to be feel his work a good deal . " 

 " oh , he be worried , " say Lady Parham , sharply . " worry about a good 
 many thing . " she turn suddenly , and look at her companion -- an 
 insolent and deliberate look . 

 " ah , that be where the wife come in ! " reply Ashe , unperturbed . " look 
 at Mrs. Loraine . she have the art to perfection -- hasn't she ? the way she 
 cushion Loraine be something wonderful to see . " 

 Lady Parham flush angrily . the suggest comparison between herself , 
 and that incessant rattle and blare of social event through which she 
 drag her husband -- conduct thereby a vulgar campaign of her own , as 
 arduous as his and far more ambitious -- and the way and character of 
 gentle Mrs. Loraine , absorb in the man she adore , scatter - brain and 
 absent - minded towards the rest of the world , but for he all eye and 
 ear , an angel of shelter and protection -- this do not now reach the 
 Prime Minister 's wife for the first time . but she have no opportunity to 
 launch a retort , even suppose she have one ready , for the music cease , 
 and the tide of dancer surge towards the door . it bring Kitty 
 abruptly face to face with Lady Parham . 

 " oh ! how d'you do ? " say Kitty , in a tone that be already an offence , 
 and she hold out a small hand with an indescribably regal air . 

 Lady Parham just touch it , glance at the owner from top to toe , and 
 walk away . Kitty slip in beside Ashe for a moment , with she back to 
 the wall , laughing and breathless . 

 " I say , Kitty , " say Ashe , bend over she and speak in her small 
 ear , " I think Lady Parham be eternally oblige to we . what be wrong 
 with she ? " 

 " only that I can not stand she , " say Kitty . " what be the good of try ? " 
 she look up , a flame of mutiny in her cheek . 

 " what , indeed ? " say Ashe , feel as reckless as she . " her manner be 
 beyond the bound . but look here , Kitty , do not you think you will come 
 home ? you know you do look uncommonly tired . " 

 Kitty frown . 

 " Home ? why , I be only just begin to enjoy myself ! take I into the 
 cool , please , " she say to the boy who have be dance with she , and 
 who still hover near , in case his divinity might allow he yet a few 
 more minute . but as she put out her hand to take his arm , Ashe see she 
 waver and look suddenly across the room . 

 a group part that have be cluster round a farth door , and Ashe 
 perceive Cliffe , lean against the doorway with his arm cross . he 
 be surround by pretty woman , with whom he seem to be carry on a 
 bantering warfare . involuntarily Ashe watch for the recognition 
 between he and Kitty . do Kitty 's lip move ? be there a signal ? if so , 
 it pass like a flash ; Kitty hurry away , and Ashe be leave , haughtily 
 furious with himself that , for the first time in his life , he have play 
 the spy . 

 he turn in his discomfort to leave the dancing - room . he himself 
 enjoy society frankly enough . especially since his marriage have he 
 find the companionship of agreeable woman delightful . he go 
 instinctively to seek it , and drive out this nonsense from his mind . 
 just inside the large drawing - room , however , he come across Mary 
 Lyster , sit in a corner apparently alone . Mary greet he , but 
 with an evident coldness . her manner bring back all the preoccupation 
 of his walk from the House . in spite of her small cordiality , he sit 
 down beside she , wonder with a vicarious compunction at what point 
 her fortune might be , and how Kitty 's proceeding might have already 
 affect they . but he have not yet succeed in thaw she when a voice 
 behind he say : 

 " this be my dance , I think , Miss Lyster . where shall we sit it out ? " 

 Ashe move at once . Mary look up , hesitate visibly , then rise and 
 take Geoffrey Cliffe 's arm . 

 " just read your remark this evening , " say Cliffe to Ashe . " well , now , 
 I suppose to - morrow will see your ship in port ? " 

 for it be reasonably expect that the morrow would see the american 
 agreement ratify by a substantial ministerial majority . 

 " certainly . but you may at least reflect that you have lose we a deal of 
 time . " 

 " and now you slay we , " say Cliffe . " ah , well--'_dulce et decorum est _ , ' 
 etcetera . " 

 " do not imagine that you will get many of the honor of martyrdom , " laugh 
 Ashe -- in Cliffe 's eye an offensive and triumphant figure , as he lean 
 carelessly upon a marble pedestal that carry a bust of Horace Walpole . 

 " why ? " Cliffe 's hand have go instinctively to his mustache . Mary have 
 drop his arm , and now stand quietly beside he , pale and somewhat 
 jade , her fine eye travel between the speaker . 

 " why ? because the heresy have no martyr . the halo be for the true 
 Church ! " 

 " H'm ! " say Cliffe , with a reflective sneer . " I suppose you mean for the 
 successful ? " 

 " do I ? " say Ashe , with nonchalance . " be not the true Church the people 
 who be justify by the event ? " 

 " the orthodox like to think so , " say Cliffe . " but the heretic have a 
 way of come out top . " 

 " do that mean you chap be go to win at the next election ? I 
 devoutly hope you may--_we_'re all as stale as ditch - water -- and as for 
 place , anybody 's welcome to mine ! " and so say , Ashe lounge away , 
 attract by the bow and smile of a pretty Frenchwoman , with whom it be 
 always agreeable to chat . 

 " ashe trifle it as usual , " say Cliffe , as he and Mary force a passage 
 into one of the small room . " be there anything in the world that he 
 really care about ? " 

 Mary look at he with a start . it be almost on her lip to say , " yes ! 
 his wife . " she only just succeed in drive the word back . 

 " his not care be a pretence , " she say . " at least , Lady Tranmore 
 think so . she believe that he be become absorb in politic -- much 
 more ambitious than she ever think he would be . " 

 " that be the way of mother , " say Cliffe , with a sarcastic lip . " they 
 have get to make the good of their son . tell I what you be go to 
 do this summer . " 

 he have throw one arm round the back of a chair , and sit look down 
 upon she , his colorless fair hair fall thick upon his brow , and 
 give by contrast a strange inhuman force to the dark and singular eye 
 beneath . he have a way of command a woman 's attention by flash of 
 brusquerie , melt when he choose into a homage that have in it the note 
 of an old world , a world that have still leisure for , passion and its 
 refinement , a world still within sight of that other which have produce 
 the _ Carte du tendre _ . perhaps it be this , combine with the 
 virility , not to be question , of his aspect , the sign of hard 
 physical endurance in the face burn by desert sun , and the 
 suggestion of a frame too lean and gaunt for drawing - room , that give 
 he his spell and preserve it . 

 Mary 's conversation with he consist at first of much cool fencing on 
 her part , which gradually slip back , as he intend it should , into 
 some of the tone of intimacy . each meanwhile be conscious of a secret 
 range of thought -- her concern with the effort and struggle , the 
 bitter disappointment and disillusion of the past six week ; and his 
 with the scheme he have cherish in the East and on the way home , of 
 marry Mary Lyster , or more correctly , Mary Lyster 's money , and so 
 resign himself to the inevitable boredom of an english existence . 
 for she the mental horizon be full of Kitty -- Kitty insolent , 
 Kitty triumphant . for he , too , Kitty make the background of 
 thought -- environ , however , with cloud of indecision and resistance 
 that would have raise happiness in Mary could she have divine they . 

 for he be now not easy to capture . there have be enough and more than 
 enough of woman in his life . the game of politic must somehow replace 
 they henceforth , if , indeed , anything be still worth while , except the 
 long day in the saddle and the dawn of new morning in untrodden land . 

 Mingled , all these , with hot dislike of Ashe , with the fascination of 
 Kitty , and a kind of venomous pleasure in the commotion produce by his 
 pursuit of she ; inter penetrated , moreover , through and through with the 
 memory of his one true feeling , and of the woman who have die , alienate 
 from and despise he . he and Mary pass a profitless half - hour . he 
 would have like to propitiate she , but he have no notion what he should 
 do with the propitiation , if it be reach . he want her money , but 
 he be begin to feel with restlessness that he could not pay the 
 cost . the poet in he be still strong , cross though it be by the 
 adventurer . 

 he take she back to the dancing - room . Mary walk beside he with a 
 dull , fierce sense of wrong . it be Kitty , of course , who have do 
 it -- Kitty who have take he away from she . 

 " that be finish , " say Cliffe to himself , with a long breath of relief , 
 as he deliver she into the hand of her partner . " now for the other ! " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Thenceforward , no one see Kitty and no one dance with she . she spend 
 her time in beflowere corner , or remote drawing - room , with Geoffrey 
 Cliffe . Ashe hear her voice in the distance once or twice , answer a 
 voice he detest ; he look into the supper - room with a lady on his 
 arm , and across it he see Kitty , with her white elbow on the table and 
 her hand prop a face that be turn -- half mocking and yet wholly 
 absorb -- to Cliffe . he see she flit across vista or disappear 
 through far doorway , but always with that sinister figure in 
 attendance . 

 his mind be divide between a secret fury -- rouse in he by the pride 
 of a man of high birth and position , who have always have the world at 
 command , and now see an impertinence offer he which he do not know 
 how to punish -- and a mood of irony . Cliffe 's persecution of Kitty be a 
 piece of confound bad manner . but to look at it with the round , 
 hypocritical eye some of these people be bring to bear on it be 
 really too much ! let they look to their own affair -- they need it . 

 at last the party break up . Kitty touch he on the shoulder as he be 
 stand on the stair , apparently absorb in a teasing skirmish with a 
 charming child in her first season , who think he the most delightful 
 of man . 

 " I be ready , William . " 

 he turn sharply , and see that she be alone . 

 " come along , then ! in five minute more I should have be asleep on the 
 stair . " 

 they descend . Kitty go for her cloak . Ashe send for the carriage . as 
 he be stand on the step Cliffe push past he and call for a 
 hansom . it come in the rear of two or three carriage already under the 
 portico . he run along the pavement and jump in . the door be just 
 be shut by the linkman when a little figure in a white cloak fly 
 down the step of the house and hold up a hand to the driver of the 
 hansom . 

 " do you see that ? " say Lady Parham , in a voice of suppress but 
 contemptuous amazement , as she turn to Mary Lyster , who be drive 
 home with she . " call my carriage , please ! " she say , imperiously , to one 
 of the footman at the door . her carriage , as it happen , be 
 immediately behind the hansom ; but the hansom could not move because of 
 the small lady who have jump upon the step and be lean eagerly 
 forward . 

 there be a clamor of shout voice : " move on , cabby ! move on ! " " stand 
 clear , ma'am , please , " say the driver , while Cliffe open the door of 
 the cab , and seem about to jump down again . 

 " who be it ? " say an impatient judge behind Lady Parham . " what be the 
 matter ? " 

 Lady Parham shrug her shoulder . 

 " it be Lady Kitty Ashe , " whisper the _ débutante _ , who be the judge 's 
 daughter , " talk to Mr. Cliffe . be not she pretty ? " 

 a sudden silence fall upon the group in the porch . Kitty 's high , clear 
 laugh seem to ring back into the house . then Ashe run down the step . 

 " Kitty , do not stop the way . " he peremptorily draw she back . 

 Cliffe raise his hat , fall back into the hansom , and the man whip up 
 his horse . 

 Kitty come back to the outer hall with Ashe . her cheek have a rose 
 flush , her wild eye laugh at the crowd on the step , without really 
 see they . 

 " be you go with Lady Parham ? " she say , absently , to Mary Lyster . 

 " yes . " 

 Kitty look up and Ashe see the two face as she and Mary confront 
 each other -- the contempt in Mary 's , the startled wrath in Kitty 's . 

 " come , Miss Lyster ! " say Lady Parham , and push past the Ashes 
 without a good - night , she hurry to her carriage , draw up the glass 
 with a hasty hand , though the night be balmy . 

 for a few moment none of those leave on the step speak , except to fret 
 in undertone for an absent carriage . then Ashe see his own groom , and 
 storm at he for delay . in another minute he and Kitty be in the 
 carriage , and the figure under the porch drop out of sight . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " well not do that again , Kitty , I think , " say Ashe . 

 Kitty glance at he . but both voice and manner be as usual . " why 
 should not I ? " she say , haughtily ; he see that she have grow very white . 
 " I be tell Geoffrey where to find I at Lord 's . " 

 Ashe wince at the " Archangelism " of the christian name . 

 " you keep Lady Parham wait . " 

 " what do that matter ? " say Kitty , with an angry laugh . 

 " and you do Cliffe too much honor , " say Ashe . " it be the man who should 
 stand on the step -- not the woman ! " 

 Kitty sit erect . " what do you mean ? " she say , in a low , menacing voice . 

 " just what I say , " be the laugh reply . 

 Kitty throw herself back in her corner , and could not be induce to open 
 her lip or look at her companion till they reach home . 

 on the landing , however , outside her bedroom , she turn and say : 
 " do not , please , say impertinent thing to I again ! " and draw up to she 
 full height , the most childish and obstinate of tragedy queen , she 
 sweep into her room . 

 Ashe go into his dressing - room . and almost immediately afterwards he 
 hear the key turn in the lock which separate his room from Kitty 's . 

 for the first time since their marriage ! he throw himself on his bed , 
 and pass some sleepless hour . then fatigue have its way . when he 
 awake , there be a gray dawn in the room , and he be conscious of 
 something press against his bed . half asleep , he raise himself and 
 see Kitty , in a long white dressing - gown , sit curl up on the 
 floor , or rather on a pillow , her head rest on the edge of the bed . 
 in a glass opposite he see the languid grace of her slight form and the 
 cloud of her hair . 

 " Kitty"--he try to shake himself into full consciousness--"do go to 
 bed ! " 

 " lie down , " say Kitty , lift her arm and press he down , " and 
 do not say anything . I shall go to sleep . " 

 he lie down obediently . presently he feel that her cheek be rest on 
 one of his hand , and in his semi - consciousness he lay the other on her 
 hair . then they both fall asleep . 

 his dream be a medley of the fancy ball and of some pageant scene in 
 which Iris and Ceres appear , and there be a rustic dance of maiden 
 and shepherd . then a murmur as of thunder run through the scene , 
 follow by darkness . he half wake , in a hot distress , but the soft 
 cheek be still there , his hand still feel the silky curl , and sleep 
 recapture he . 




 XII 


 when Ashe wake up in earnest he be alone . he spring up in bed and 
 look round the darken room , ashamed of his long sleep ; but there be 
 no sign of Kitty . 

 after dress , he knock , as usual , at Kitty 's door . 

 " oh , come in , " cry Kitty 's light voice . " Margaret be here ; but if 
 you do not mind she , she will not mind you . " 

 Ashe enter . Kitty , as be she will not four day out of the seven , be 
 breakfast in bed . Margaret French be beside she with a batch of 
 note , mostly bill and unanswered invitation , with which she be 
 try to make Kitty cope . 

 " excuse I , Mr. Ashe , " Margaret lift a smile face . " I have to be out 
 on business for my brother all day , so I think I would come early and 
 remind Kitty of some of these tiresome thing while there be still a 
 chance of find she . " 

 " I do not know why guardian angel excuse themselves , " say Ashe , as they 
 shake hand . 

 " oh , dear , what a lot of they there be ! " say Kitty , toss over the 
 note with a bored air . " refuse they all , Margaret ; I be tired to death 
 of din out . " 

 " not all , I think , " plead Margaret . " here be that nice woman -- you 
 remember -- who want to thank Mr. Ashe for what he have do for her son . 
 you promise to dine with she . " 

 " do I ? " Kitty wriggle with annoyance . " well , then , I suppose we must . 
 what do William do for she ? when I ask he to do something for the 
 nice boy in the world , he will not lift a finger . " 

 " I give he some introduction in Berlin , " laugh Ashe . " what you 
 generally want I to do , Kitty , be to stuff the public service with 
 good - look idiot . and there I really can not oblige you . " 

 " every one know that corruption get the good man , " say Kitty . " Hullo , 
 what be that ? " and she lift a dinner - card , and look at it strangely . 

 " my dear Kitty ! when do it come ? " exclaim Margaret French , in dismay . 

 it be a dinner - card , whereby Lord and Lady Parham request the honor 
 of Mr. and Lady Kitty Ashe 's company at dinner , on a date somewhere 
 within the first week of July . 

 Ashe bent over to look at it . 

 " I think that come ten day ago , " he say , quietly . " I imagine Kitty 
 accept it . " 

 " I never think of it from that day to this , " say Kitty , who have 
 clasp her hand behind her head and be star at the ceiling . " say , 
 please , that"--she space out the word deliberately--"mr . and Lady 
 Kitty Ashe -- be unable to accept -- Lord and Lady Parham 's 
 invitation -- etc.-- " 

 " Kitty ! " say Margaret , firmly , " there must be a ' regret ' and a ' kind . ' 
 think ! ten day ! the party be next week ! " 

 " no ' regret , ' and no ' kind ' ! " say Kitty , still star overhead . " it be 
 my affair , please , Margaret , altogether . and I will see the note before it 
 go , or you will be put in civility . " 

 Margaret , in despair , look entreatingly at Ashe . he and she have often 
 conspire before this to soften down Kitty 's enormity . but he say 
 nothing -- make not the small sign . 

 with difficulty Margaret get a few more direction out of Kitty , over 
 whom a shade of sombre taciturnity have now fall . then , say she 
 would write the note down - stair and come back , she gather up her 
 basketful of letter and depart . 

 as soon as she be alone with Ashe , Kitty take up a novel beside she , 
 and pretend to be absorb in it . 

 he hesitate a moment , then he stoop over she and take her hand . 

 " why do you come in to visit I , Kitty ? " he say , in a low voice . 

 " I do not know , " be her indifferent reply , and her hand pull itself 
 away , though not with violence . 

 " I wish I could understand you , Kitty . " his tone be not quite steady . 

 " well , I do not understand myself ! " say Kitty , shortly , reach out for 
 a bunch of rose that Margaret have just bring she , and bury she 
 face among they . 

 " perhaps , if you submit the problem to I , " say Ashe , laughing , " we 
 might be able to thresh it out together ! " 

 he fold his arm and lean against the foot of the bed , delight 
 his eye with the vision of she amid the fold of muslin and lace , and 
 all the costly refinement of pillow and coverlet with which she like 
 to surround herself at that hour of the morning . she might have be a 
 french princess of the old regime , receive her court . 

 Kitty shake her head . the rose fall idly from her hand , and make 
 bright patch of blush pink about she . Ashe go on : 

 " anyway , dear , do not give silly tongue _ too _ good a handle ! " 

 he throw she a gay comrade 's look , as though to say that they both know 
 the folly of the world , but he perhaps the well , as he be the elder . 

 " you mean , " say Kitty , calmly , " that I be not to talk so much to 
 Geoffrey Cliffe ? " 

 " be he worth it ? " say Ashe . " that be what I want to know -- worth the fuss 
 that some people make ? " 

 " it be the fuss and the people that drive one on , " say Kitty , under her 
 breath . 

 " you flatter they too much , darling ! do you think you be quite kind to 
 I last night?--let be put it that way . I look a precious fool , you 
 know , stand on those step , while you be keep old Mother Parham 
 and the whole show wait ! " 

 she look at he a moment in silence , at his heighten color and 
 insistent eye . 

 " I can not think what make you marry I , " she say , slowly . 

 Ashe laugh , and come nearer . 

 " and I can not think , " he say , in a low voice , " what make you come -- if 
 you be not a little bit sorry -- and lean your dear head against I like 
 that , last night . " 

 " I be not sorry -- I could not sleep , " be her quick reply , while her eye 
 strove to keep up their war with his . 

 a knock be hear at the door . Ashe move hastily away . Kitty 's maid 
 enter . 

 " I be to tell you , sir , that your breakfast be ready . and Lady 
 Tranmore 's servant have bring this note . " 

 Ashe take it and thrust it into his pocket . 

 " get my thing ready , please , " say Kitty to her maid . Ashe feel himself 
 dismiss and go . 

 as soon as he be go , Kitty spring out of bed , throw on a 
 dressing - gown , and run across to Blanche , who be bend over a chest 
 of drawer . " why do you say those foolish thing to I yesterday ? " she 
 demand , take the girl impetuously by the arm , and so startle she 
 that she nearly drop the clothe she hold . 

 " they be not foolish , my lady , " say Blanche , sullenly , with avert 
 eye . 

 " they be ! " cry Kitty . " of course , I be a vixen -- I always be . but you 
 know , Blanche , I be not always as bad as I have be lately . very soon I 
 shall be quite charming again -- you'll see ! " 

 " I dare say , my lady . " Blanche go on sort and arrange the 
 _ lingerie _ she have take out of the drawer . 

 Kitty sit down beside she , nurse a bare foot which be cross over 
 the other . 

 " you know how I abuse you about my hair , Blanche ? well , Mrs. Alcot 
 say , that very night , she never see it so well do . she think it 
 must be Pierrefitte 's good man . be not it hellish of I ? I know quite 
 well you would do it beautifully . " 

 the maid say nothing , but a tear fall on one of Kitty 's night - dress . 

 " and you remember the green garibaldi -- last week ? I just loathe 
 it -- because you would forget that little black rosette . " 

 " no ! " say Blanche , look up ; " your ladyship have never order it . " 

 " I do -- I do ! but never mind . two of my friend have want to copy it , 
 Blanche . they would not believe it be do by a maid . they say it have 
 such style . one of they would engage you to - morrow if you really want to 
 go-- " 

 a silence . 

 " but you will not go , Blanchie , will you ? " say Kitty 's silver voice . " I be 
 a horrid fiend , but I do get Mr. Ashe to help your young man -- and I do 
 care about your poor brother -- and -- and-- " she stroke the girl 's arm--"i 
 do look rather nice when I be dress , do not I ? you would not like a great 
 gawk to dress , would you ? " 

 " I be sure I do not want to leave your ladyship , " say the girl , choke . 
 " but I can not have no more-- " 

 " no more ruction ? " say Kitty , meditating . " H'm , of course that be 
 serious , because I be make so . well , now , look here , Blanchie , you will not 
 give I warn again for a fortnight , whatever I do , mind . and if by 
 then I be past pray for , you may . and I will import a Russian -- or a 
 Choctaw -- who will not understand when I call her name . be that a bargain , 
 Blanchie ? " 

 the maid hesitate . 

 " just a fortnight ! " say Kitty , in her most seductive tone . 

 " very well , my lady . " 

 Kitty jump up , waltz round the room , the white silk skirt of she 
 dressing - gown float far and wide , then thrust her foot into her 
 slipper , and begin to dress as though nothing have happen . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 but when her toilette be accomplish , Kitty have dismiss she maid , 
 sit for some time in front of her mirror in a brown study . 

 " what _ be _ the matter with I ? " she think . " William be an angel , and I 
 love he . and I can not do what he want -- I _ can not _ ! " she draw a long , 
 troubled breath . the lip of the face reflect in the glass be dry 
 and colorless , the eye have a strange , shrink expression . " People 
 _ be _ possessed -- I know they be . they can not help themselves . I begin 
 this to punish Mary -- and now -- when I do not see Geoffrey , everything be 
 odious and dreary . I can not care for anything . of course , I ought to care 
 for William 's politic . I expect I have do he harm -- I know I have . 
 what be wrong with I ? " 

 but suddenly , in the very midst of her self - examination , the emotion and 
 excitement that she have feel of late in her long conversation with 
 Cliffe return upon she , fill she at once with poignant memory and a 
 keen expectation to which she yield herself as a wild sea - bird to the 
 rocking of the sea . they have start -- those conversation -- from she 
 attempt to penetrate the secret history of the man whose poem have 
 fill she with a thrilling sense of feeling and passion beyond her 
 ken -- untrodden region , full , no doubt , of shadow and of poison , but 
 infinitely alluring to one whose nature be well sum up in the two 
 word , curiosity and daring . she have not find it quite easy . Cliffe , as 
 we know , have resent the levity of her first attempt . but when she 
 renew it , more seriously and sweetly , combine with it a number of 
 subtle flattery , the flattery of her beauty and her position , of the 
 private interest she could not help show in the man who be her 
 husband 's public antagonist , and of an admiration for his poem which 
 be not so much mere praise as an actual covetous sharing in they , a 
 make their idea and their music her own -- Cliffe could not in the end 
 resist she . after all , so far , she only ask he to talk of himself , 
 and for a man of his type the process be the very breath of his being , 
 the stimulus and liberation of all his power . 

 so that before they know they be in the midst of the most burn 
 subject of human discussion -- at first in a manner comparatively veil 
 and general , then with the sharp personal reference to Cliffe 's own 
 story , as the intimacy between they grow . Jealousy , suffering , the " hard 
 case " of passion -- why man be selfish and exact , why woman mislead 
 and torment -- the ugly waste and crudity of death -- it be among these 
 great theme they find themselves . death above all -- it be to a thought 
 of death that Cliffe 's harsh face owe its chief spell perhaps in 
 Kitty 's eye . a woman have die for love of he , crush by his jealousy 
 and her own self - scorn . so Kitty have be tell ; and Cliffe 's torture 
 vanity would not deny it . how could she have care so much ? that be the 
 puzzle . 

 but this vicarious relation have now pass into a relation of her own . 
 Cliffe be to Kitty a problem -- and a problem which , beyond a certain 
 point , defy she . the element of sex , of course , enter in , but only 
 as intensify the contrast and mystery of imagination . and he make 
 she feel these contrast and mystery as she have never yet feel they ; 
 and so he enlarge the world for she , he plunge she , if only by 
 contact with his own bitter and irritable genius , into new region of 
 sentiment and feeling . for in spite of the vulgar element in he there 
 be also element of genius . the man be a poet and a thinker , though 
 he be at the same time , in some sense , an adventurer . his mind be 
 store with eloquent and beautiful imagery , the poetry of other , and 
 poetry of his own . he could pursue the mean personal object in an 
 unscrupulous way ; but he have none the less pass through a wealth of 
 tragic circumstance ; he have be face to face with his own soul in the 
 wild of the earth ; he have meet every sort of physical danger with 
 contempt ; and his arrogant , imperious temper be of the kind which 
 attract many woman , especially , perhaps , woman physically small and 
 intellectually fearless , like Kitty , who feel in it a challenge to their 
 power and their charm . 

 his society , then , have in these six week become , for Kitty , a 
 passion -- a passion of the imagination . for the man himself , she would 
 probably have say that she feel more repulsion than anything else . but 
 it be a repulsion that hold she , because of the constant sense of 
 reaction , of on - rush life , which it excite in herself . 

 add to these the element of mischief and defiance in the situation , the 
 snatch he from Mary , her enemy and slanderer , the defiance of Lady 
 Grosville and all other hypocritical tyrant , the pride of drag at 
 her chariot wheel a man whom most people court even when they loathe 
 he , who enjoy , moreover , an astonishing reputation abroad , especially 
 in that France which Kitty adore , as a kind of modern Byron , the only 
 Englishman who could still display in public the " pageant of a bleed 
 heart , " without make himself ridiculous , and perhaps enough have be 
 heap together to explain the infatuation that now , like a wild spring 
 gust on a shin lake , be threaten to bring Kitty 's light bark into 
 dangerous water . 

 " I do not care for he , " she say to herself , as she sit think alone , 
 " but I must see he -- I _ will _ ! and I will talk to he as I please , and 
 where I please ! " 

 her small frame stiffen under the obstinacy of her resolution . Kitty 's 
 will at a moment of this kind be a fatality -- so strong be it , and so 
 irrational . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 meanwhile , down - stair , Ashe himself be wrestle with another phase of 
 the same situation . Lady Tranmore 's note have say : " I shall be with you 
 almost immediately after you receive this , as I want to catch you before 
 you go to the Foreign Office . " 

 accordingly , they be in the library , Ashe on the defensive , Lady 
 Tranmore nervous , embarrassed , and start at a sound . both of they 
 watch the door . both look for and dread the advent of Kitty . 

 " Dear William , " say his mother at last , stretch her hand across a 
 small table which stand between they and lay it on her son 's , " you will 
 forgive I , will not you?--even if I do seem to you prudish and absurd . but 
 I be afraid you _ ought _ to tell Kitty some of the unkind thing people 
 be say ! you know I have try , and she would not listen to I . and you 
 ought to beg she -- yes , William , indeed you ought!--not to give any 
 further occasion for they . " 

 she look at he anxiously , full of that timidity which haunt the 
 deep and tenderest affection . she have just give he to read a 
 letter from Lady Grosville to herself . Ashe run through it , then lay it 
 down with a gesture of scorn . 

 " Kitty apparently enjoy a moonlight walk with Cliffe . why should not 
 she ? Lady Grosville think the moon be make to sleep by -- other people 
 do not . " 

 " but , William!--at night -- when everybody have go to bed -- escape from 
 the house -- they two alone ! " 

 Lady Tranmore look at he entreatingly , as though drive to protest , 
 and yet hat the sound of her own word . 

 Ashe laugh . he be smoke with an air so nonchalant that his mother 's 
 heart sink . for she divine that criticism in the society around she 
 which she be never allow to hear . be it true , indeed , that his 
 natural indolence could not rouse itself even to the defence of a young 
 wife 's reputation ? 

 " all the fault of the grosville , " say Ashe , after a moment , light 
 another cigarette , " in shut up their great heavy house , and draw 
 their great heavy curtain on a May night , when all reasonable people 
 want to be out - of - door . my dear mother , what be the good of pay any 
 attention to what people like Lady Grosville say of people like Kitty ? 
 you might as well expect Deborah to hit it off with Ariel ! " 

 " William , do not laugh ! " say his mother , in distress . " Geoffrey Cliffe 
 be not a man to be trust . you and I know that of old . he be a boaster , 
 and-- " 

 " and a liar ! " say Ashe , quietly . " oh ! I know that . " 

 " and yet he have this power over woman -- one ought to look it in the 
 face . William , dearest William ! " she lean over and clasp his hand 
 close in both her , " do persuade Kitty to go away from London now -- at 
 once ! " 

 " Kitty will not go , " say Ashe , quietly , " I be sorry , dear mother . I hate 
 that you should be worry . but there be the fact . Kitty will not go ! " 

 " then use your authority , " say Lady Tranmore . 

 " I have none . " 

 " William ! " Ashe rise from his seat , and begin to walk up and down . his 
 aspect of competence and dignity , as of a man already accustomed to 
 command and destine to a high experience , have never be more marked 
 than at the very moment of this helpless utterance . his mother look at 
 he with mingle admiration and amazement . 

 presently he pause beside she . 

 " I should like you to understand I , mother . I can not fight with Kitty . 
 before I ask she to marry I , I make up my mind to that . I know then 
 and I know now that nothing but disaster could come of it . she must be 
 free , and I shall not attempt to coerce she . " 

 " or to protect she ! " cry his mother . 

 " as to that , I shall do what I can . but I clearly foresaw when we 
 marry that we should scandalize a good many of the weak brother . " 

 he smile , but , as it seem to his mother , with some effort . 

 " William ! as a public man-- " 

 he interrupt she . 

 " if I can be both Kitty 's husband and a public man , well and good . if 
 not , then I shall be-- " 

 " Kitty 's husband ? " cry Lady Tranmore , with an accent of bitterness , 
 almost of sarcasm , of which she instantly repent she . she change she 
 tone . 

 " it be , of course , Kitty , first and foremost , who be concern in your 
 public position , " she say , more gently . " Dearest William -- she be so 
 young still -- she probably do not quite understand , in spite of she 
 great cleverness . but she _ do _ care -- she _ must _ care -- and she ought to 
 know what slight thing may sometimes affect a man 's prospect and 
 future in this country . " 

 Ashe say nothing . he turn on his heel and resume his pacing . Lady 
 Tranmore look at he in perplexity . 

 " William , I hear a rumor last night-- " 

 he hold his cigarette suspend . 

 " Lord Crashaw tell I that the resignation would certainly be in the 
 paper this week , and that the ministry would go on -- after a 
 rearrangement of post . be it true ? " 

 Ashe resume his cigarette . 

 " true -- as to the fact -- so far as I know . as to the date , Lord Crashaw 
 know , I think , no more than I do . it may be this week , it may be next 
 month . " 

 " then I hear -- thank goodness I never see she , " Elizabeth go on , 
 reluctantly--"that that dreadful woman , Lady Parham , be more infuriate 
 than ever-- " 

 " with Kitty ? let she be ! it really do not matter an old shoe , either to 
 Kitty or I . " 

 " she can be a most bitter enemy , William . and she certainly influence 
 Lord Parham . " 

 Ashe smoke and smile . Lady Tranmore see that his pride , too , have be 
 arouse , and that here he be likely to prove as obstinate as Kitty . 

 " I wish I could get she out of my mind ! " she sigh . 

 Ashe glance at she kindly . 

 " I daresay we shall hold our own . Xanthippe be not beloved , and I do not 
 believe Parham will let she interfere with what he think well for the 
 party . will it pay to put I in the cabinet or not?--that be what he will 
 ask . I shall be strongly back , too , by most of our paper . " 

 a number of thought run through Lady Tranmore 's brain . with her long 
 experience of London , she know well what the sudden lowering of a man 's 
 " consideration"--to use a french word -- at a critical moment may mean . a 
 cooling of the general regard -- a breath of detraction come no one 
 know whence -- and how soon new claim emerge , and the indispensable of 
 yesterday become the negligible of to - day ! 

 but even if she could have bring herself to put any of these anxiety 
 into word , she have no opportunity . Kitty 's voice be in the hall ; the 
 handle turn , and she run in . 

 " William ! Ah!--I do not know mother be here . " 

 she go up to Elizabeth , and lightly kiss that lady 's cheek . 

 " good - morning . William , I just come to tell you that I may be late for 
 dinner , so perhaps you have well dine at the House . I be go on the 
 river . " 

 " be you ? " say Ashe , gather up his paper . " wish I be . " 

 " be you go with the Crashaw 's party ? " ask Elizabeth . " I know they 
 have one . " 

 " oh , dear , no ! " say Kitty . " I hate a crowd on the river . I be go 
 with Geoffrey Cliffe . " 

 Ashe bent over his desk . Lady Tranmore 's eyebrow go up , and she could 
 not restrain the word : 

 " alone ? " 

 " _ Naturellement _ ! " laugh Kitty . " he read I french poetry , and we 
 talk French . we let Madeleine Alcot come once , but her accent be so 
 shocking that Geoffrey would not have she again ! " 

 Lady Tranmore flush deeply . the " Geoffrey " seem to her intolerable . 
 Kitty , array in the fresh of white gown , walk away to the 
 farther end of the library to consult a _ Bradshaw _ . Elizabeth , look 
 up , catch her son 's eye -- and the mingled humor and vexation in they , 
 wherewith he appeal to she , as it be , to see the whole silly 
 business as he himself do . Lady Tranmore feel a moment 's strong 
 reaction . have she indeed be make a foolish fuss about nothing ? 

 yet the impression leave by the miserable meditation of her night be 
 still deep enough to make she say -- with just a signal from eye and lip , 
 so that Kitty neither see nor heard--"don't let she go ! " 

 Ashe shake his head . he move towards the door , and stand there 
 despatch - box in hand , throw a last look at his wife . 

 " do not be late , Kitty -- or I shall be nervous . I do not trust Cliffe on 
 the river . and please make it a rule that , in lock , he stop quote 
 french poetry . " 

 Kitty turn round , startle and apparently annoy by his tone . 

 " he be an excellent oar , " she say , shortly . 

 " be he ? at Oxford we try he for the Torpids-- " Ashe 's shrug complete 
 his remark . then , still disregard another imploring look from Lady 
 Tranmore , he leave the room . 

 Kitty have flush angrily . the belittling , malicious note in Ashe 's 
 manner have be clear enough . she brace herself against it , and Lady 
 Tranmore 's chance be lose . for when , summon all her courage , and 
 quite uncertain whether her son would approve or blame she , Elizabeth 
 approach her daughter - in - law affectionately , try in timid and 
 apologetic word to unburden her own heart and reach Kitty 's , Kitty meet 
 she with one of those outburst of temper that woman like Elizabeth 
 Tranmore can not cope with . their moral recoil be too great . it be the 
 recoil of the spiritual aristocrat ; and between they and the child of 
 passion the link be few , the antagonism eternal . 

 she leave the house , pale , dignified , the tear in her eye . Kitty run 
 up - stair , hum an air from " Faust , " as though she would tear it to 
 piece , put on a flame - colored hat that give a still further note of 
 extravagance to her costume , order a hansom , and drive away . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 whether Kitty get much joy out of the three week which follow must 
 remain uncertain . she have certainly rout Mary Lyster , if there be 
 any final satisfaction in that . Mary have leave town early , and be now in 
 Somersetshire help her father to entertain , in order , say the 
 malicious , to put the good face possible on a defeat which this time have 
 be serious . and instead of devote himself to the wooing of a 
 northern constituency where he have be adopt as the candidate of a 
 new Tory group , Cliffe linger obstinately in town , endanger his 
 chance and anger his supporter . Kitty 's influence over his action 
 be , indeed , patent and undenied , whatever might be the general opinion 
 as to her effect upon his heart . some of Kitty 's intimate at any rate 
 be convince that his absorption in the matter be by now , to say the 
 least , no less eager and persistent than her . at this point it be by 
 no mean still a relation of flattery on Kitty 's side and a pleased 
 self - love on his . it have become a duel of two personality , or rather 
 two imagination . in fact , as Kitty , learn the way of his character , 
 become more proudly mistress of herself and he , his interest in she 
 visibly increase . it might almost be say that she be begin to 
 hold back , and he for the first time pursue . 

 once or twice he have the grace to ask himself where it be all to end . 
 be he in love with she ? an absurd question ! he have pay his heavy 
 tribute to passion if any man ever have , and have already hang up his 
 votive tablet and his garment wet from shipwreck in the temple of the 
 god . but it seem that , after all say and do , the society of a 
 woman , young , beautiful , and capricious , be still the good thing which 
 the day -- the London day , at all event -- have to bring . at Kitty 's 
 suggestion he be collect and revise a new volume of his poem . he 
 and she quarrel over they perpetually . sometimes there be not a line 
 which please she ; and then , again , she would delight he with the 
 homage of sudden tear in her brown eye , and a praise so ardent and so 
 refine that it almost compare -- as Kitty mean it should -- with that of 
 the dead . in the shaded drawing - room , where every detail please his 
 taste , Cliffe 's harsh voice thunder or murmur verse which be 
 beyond dispute the verse of a poet , and thereby sensuous and 
 passionate . ostensibly the verse concern another woman ; in truth , the 
 slight and lovely figure sit on the farth side of the flower 
 hearth , the delicate head bent , the finger - tip lightly join , enter 
 day by day more directly into the consciousness of the poet . what harm ? 
 all he ask be intelligence and response . as to her heart , he make no 
 claim upon it whatever . Ashe , by - the - way , be clearly not jealous -- a 
 sensible attitude , consider Lady Kitty 's strength of will . 

 into Cliffe 's feeling towards Ashe there enter , indeed , a number of 
 evil thing , determine by quite other relation between the two 
 man -- the relation of the man who want to the man who have , of the man 
 beat by the restlessness of ambition to the man who possess all that 
 the other desire , and affect to care nothing about it -- of the 
 combatant who fight with rage to the combatant who fight with a smile . 
 Cliffe could often lash himself into fury by the mere thought of Ashe 's 
 opportunity and Ashe 's future , combine with the belief that Ashe 's 
 mood towards himself be either contemptuous or condescend . and it 
 be at such moment that he would fling himself with most resource into 
 the establishing of his ascendency over Kitty . 

 the two man meet when they do meet -- which be but seldom -- on perfectly 
 civil term . if Ashe arrive unexpectedly from the House in the late 
 afternoon to find Cliffe in the drawing - room read aloud to Kitty , the 
 politic of the moment provide talk enough till Cliffe could decently 
 take his departure . he never din with they alone , Kitty have no mind 
 whatever for the discomfort of such a party ; and in the evening when 
 he and Kitty meet at a small number of house , where the flirtation be 
 watch nightly with a grow excitement , Ashe 's duty keep he at 
 Westminster , and there be nothing to hinder that flow of small and yet 
 significant incident by which situation of this kind be develop . 

 Ashe set his tooth . he have make up his mind finally that it be a plague 
 and a tyranny which would pass , and could only be magnify by 
 opposition . but his temper suffer . there be many small quarrel 
 during these week between himself and Kitty , quarrel which betray 
 the tension produce in he by what be -- in essential -- an iron 
 self - control . but they make daily life a sordid , unlovely thing , and 
 they give Kitty an excuse for say that William be as violent as 
 herself , and for seek refuge in the exaltation of feeling or of 
 fancy provide by Cliffe 's companionship . 

 perhaps of all the person in the drama , Lady Tranmore be the most to 
 be pity . she sit at home , have no heart to go to Hill Street , and 
 more tie indeed than usual by the helpless illness of her husband . 
 never , in all these day , do Ashe miss his daily visit to his father . 
 he would come in , apparently his handsome , good - humor self , ready to 
 read aloud for twenty minute , or merely to sit in silence by the sick 
 man , his eye make affectionate answer every now and then to the dumb 
 look of Lord Tranmore . only his mother seek and find that slight 
 habitual contraction of the brow which bear witness to some equally 
 persistent disquiet of the mind . but he keep she at arm' - length on the 
 subject of Kitty . she dare not tell he any of the gossip which 
 reach she . 

 meanwhile these week mean for she not only the dread of disgrace , but 
 the disappointment of a just ambition , the humiliation of her mother 's 
 pride . the political crisis approach rapidly , and Ashe 's name be less 
 and less to the front . Lady Parham be say to be take an active part 
 in the consultation and intrigue that surround her husband , and it 
 be well know by now to the inner circle that her hostility to the 
 Ashes , and her insistence on the fact that cabinet minister must be 
 beyond reproach , and their wife person to whose house the party can 
 go without demean themselves , be likely to be of importance . 
 moreover , Ashe 's success in the House of Commons be no long what it 
 have be early in the session . the party paper have cool . Elizabeth 
 Tranmore feel a blight in the air . yet William , with his position in the 
 country , his high ability , and the social weight belong to the heir 
 of the tranmore peerage and estate , be surely not a person to be 
 lightly ignore ! would Lord Parham venture it ? 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 at last the resignation of the two minister be in the _ Times _ ; there 
 be communication between the Queen and the Premier , and London 
 plunge with such ardor as be possible in late July into the throe of 
 cabinet - making . Kitty insist petulantly that of course all would be 
 well ; William 's service be far too great to be ignore ; though Lord 
 Parham would no doubt slight he if he dare . but the party and the 
 public would see to that . the day be go by when vulgar old woman 
 like Lady Parham could have any real influence on political 
 appointment . otherwise , who would condescend to politic ? 

 Ashe bring her amusing report from the House or the club of the 
 various intrigue go on , and , as to his own chance , refuse to 
 discuss they seriously . once or twice when Kitty , in his presence , 
 insist on speak of they to some political intimate , only to provoke 
 an evident embarrassment , Ashe suffer the torture which proud man 
 know . but he never lose his tone of light detachment , and the conclusion 
 of his friend be that , as usual , " Ashe do not care a button . " 

 the hour pass , however , and no sign come from the Prime Minister . 
 everything be still uncertain ; but Ashe have realize that at least he 
 be not to be take into the inner counsel of the party . the hope and 
 fear , the heartburning and rivalry of such a state of thing be 
 proverbial . Ashe wonder impatiently when the beastly business would be 
 over , and he could get off to Scotland for the air and sport of which he 
 be badly in need . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 it be a Friday , in the first week of August . Ashe be leave the 
 Athenæum with another member of the House when a newspaper boy rush 
 along with a fresh bundle of paper pass they with the cry , " New 
 cabinet complete ! official list ! " they catch he up , snatch a paper , 
 and read . two man of middle age , conspicuous in Parliament , but not 
 hitherto in office , one of they of great importance as a lawyer , the 
 other as a military critic , be appoint , the one to the Home Office , 
 the other to the Ministry of War ; there have be some shuffle in the 
 minor office , and a new Privy Seal have dawn upon the world . for the 
 rest , all be as before , and in the formal list the name of the 
 Honorable William Travers Ashe still remain attach to the 
 Under - secretaryship for Foreign Affairs . 

 Ashe 's friend shrug his shoulder , and avoid look at his 
 companion . " a bomb - shell , to begin with , " he say ; " otherwise the 
 flat thing out . " 

 " on the contrary , " laugh Ashe . " Parham have show a wonderful amount of 
 originality . if you and I be take by surprise , what will the public 
 be ? and they will like he all the well -- you'll see . he have show 
 courage and go for new man -- that be what they will say . _ Vive _ Parham ! 
 well , good - bye . now , please the Lord , we shall get off -- and I may be 
 among the grouse this day week . " 

 he stop on his way out of the club to discuss the list with the man 
 come in . he be conscious that some would have avoid he . but he have 
 no mind to be avoid , and his caustic , good - humor talk carry off 
 the situation . presently he be walk homeward , swing his stick 
 with the gayety of a school - boy expect the holiday . 

 as he mount St. James 's Street a carriage descend . Ashe mechanically 
 take off his hat to the half - recognize face within , and as he do so 
 perceive the icy bow and triumphant eye of Lady Parham . 

 he hurry along , fight a curious sensation , as of a physical 
 bruising and beat . the street be full of the news , and he be 
 stop many time by mere acquaintance to talk of it . in Savile Row he 
 turn into a small literary club of which he be a member , and write a 
 letter to his mother . in very affectionate and amusing term it beg 
 she not to take the disappointment too seriously . " I think I will not come 
 round to - night . but expect I first thing to - morrow . " 

 he send the note by messenger and walk home . when he reach Hill 
 Street it be close on eight . outside the house he suddenly ask 
 himself what line he be go to take with Kitty . 

 Kitty , however , be not at home . as far as he could remember she have 
 go coach with the Alcots into Surrey , Geoffrey Cliffe , of course , 
 be of the party . presently , indeed , he discover a hasty line from 
 she on his study table , to say that they be to dine at Richmond , and 
 " Madeleine " suppose they would get home between ten and eleven . not a 
 word more . like all strong man , Ashe despise the meditation of 
 self - pity . but the involuntary reflection that on this evening of 
 humiliation Kitty be not with he -- do not apparently care enough about 
 his affair and his ambition to be with he -- bring with it a soreness 
 which have to be endure . 

 the next moment , he be inclined to be glad of her absence . such thing , 
 especially in the first shock of they , be well face alone . if , indeed , 
 there be any shock in the matter . he have for some time have his own 
 shrewd prevision , and he be aware of a strong inner belief that his 
 defeat be but temporary . 

 probably , when she have time to remember such trifle , Kitty would feel 
 the shock more than he do . Lady Parham have certainly win this round of 
 the rubber ! 

 he settle to his solitary dinner , but in the middle of it put down 
 Kitty 's Aberdeen terrier , which , for want of other company , he be 
 stuff atrociously , and run up to the nursery . the nurse be at her 
 supper , and Harry lie fast asleep , a pretty little fellow , flush into 
 a semblance of health , and with a strong look of Kitty . 

 Ashe bend down and put his whiskered cheek to the boy 's . " never mind , 
 old man ! " he murmur , " well luck next time ! " 

 then raise himself with a smile , he look affectionately at the 
 child , notice with satisfaction his bright color and even breathe , 
 and steal away . 

 he run through the comment of the evening paper on the new cabinet 
 list , find in only two or three any reference to himself , then throw 
 they aside , and seize upon a pile of book and review that be lie 
 on his table . he carry they up to the drawing - room , hesitate between 
 a theological review and a new edition of Horace , and finally plunge 
 with avidity into the theological review . 

 for some two hour he sit enthral by an able summary of the chief 
 Tübingen position ; then suddenly throw himself back with a stretch and 
 a laugh . 

 " wonder what the chap 's do that be get my post ! not read theology , 
 I will be bind . " 

 the reflection follow that be he at that moment Home Secretary and 
 in the cabinet , he would not probably be read it either -- nor leave to 
 a solitary evening . friend would be drop in to congratulate -- the 
 modern equivalent of the old " turba clientium . " 

 as his thought wander , the drawing - room clock strike eleven . he rise , 
 astonished and impatient . where be Kitty ? 

 by midnight she have not arrive . Ashe hear the butler move in the 
 hall and summon he . 

 " there may have be some mishap to the coach , Wilson . perhaps they have 
 stay at Richmond . anyway , go to bed . I will wait for her ladyship . " 

 he return to his arm - chair and his book , but soon draw Kitty 's 
 _ couvre - pie _ over he and go to sleep . 

 when he awake , daylight be in the room . " what have happen to they ? " he 
 ask himself , in a sudden anxiety . 

 and amid the silence of the dawn he pace up and down , a prey for the 
 first time to black depression . he be besiege by memory of the last 
 two month , their anxiety and quarrel -- the waste of time and 
 opportunity -- the stab to feel and self - respect . once he find 
 himself groan aloud , " Kitty ! Kitty ! " 

 when this huge , distract London be leave behind , when he have she to 
 himself amid the Scotch heather and birch , should he find she 
 again -- conquer she again -- as in the exquisite day after their marriage ? 
 he think of Cliffe with a kind of proud torment , disdain to be 
 jealous or afraid . Kitty have amuse herself -- have test her freedom , his 
 patience , to the utmost . might she now be content , and reward he a 
 little for a self - control , a philosophy , which have not be easy ! 

 a french novel on Kitty 's little table draw his attention . he think 
 not without a discomfortable humor of what a french husband would have 
 make of a similar situation -- recall the remark of a french 
 acquaintance on some case illustrate the freedom of english wife . " Il 
 y a un élément turc dans le mari français , qui nous rendrait ce 
 moeur - là impossible ! " 

 _ à la bonne heure _ ! let the Frenchman keep up his seraglio 
 standard as he please . an Englishman trust both his wife and his 
 daughter -- scorn , indeed , to consider whether he trust they or no ! and 
 who come worst off ? not the Englishman -- if , at least , we be to believe 
 the french novel on the French _ ménage ! _ 

 he pace thus up and down for an hour , defy his unseen critic -- his 
 mother -- his own heart . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 then he go to bed and sleep a little . but with the post next morning 
 there be no letter from Kitty . there might be a hundred explanation of 
 that . yet he feel a sudden need of caution . 

 " her ladyship come up this morning by train , " he say to Wilson , as 
 though read from a note . " there seem to have be a mishap . " 

 then he take a hansom and drive to the Alcots . 

 " be Mrs. Alcot at home ? " he ask the butler . " can I have an answer to 
 this note ? " 

 " Mrs. Alcot have be in her room since yesterday morning , sir . she be 
 take ill just before the coach be come round , and the horse have to 
 be send back . but the doctor last night hop it would be nothing 
 serious . " 

 Ashe turn and go home . then Kitty be not with Madeleine Alcot -- not 
 on the coach ! where be she , and with whom ? 

 he shut himself into his library and fall to wonder , in bewilderment , 
 what he have well do . a tide of rage and agony be mount within he . 
 how to master it -- and keep his brain clear ! 

 he be sit in front of his writing - table star at the floor , his 
 hand hang before he , when the door open and shut . he turn . 
 there , with she back to the door , stand Kitty . her aspect startle he 
 to his foot . she look at he , tremble -- her little face haggard and 
 white , with a touch of something in it which have blur its youth . 

 " William ! " she put both her hand to her breast , as though to support 
 herself . then she fly forward . " William ! I have do nothing 
 wrong -- nothing -- nothing ! William -- look at I ! " 

 he sternly put out his hand , protect himself . 

 " where have you be ? " he say , in a low voice--"and with whom ? " 

 Kitty fall into a chair and burst into wild tear . 




 xiii 


 there be silence for a few moment except for Kitty 's crying . Ashe 
 still stand beside his writing - table , his hand rest upon it , his eye 
 on Kitty . once or twice he begin to speak , and stop . at last he say , 
 with obvious difficulty : 

 " it be cruel to keep I wait , Kitty . " 

 " I send you a telegram first thing this morning . " the voice be choke 
 and passionate . 

 " I never get it . " 

 " horrid little fiend ! " cry Kitty , sit up and dash back her hair 
 from her tear - stain cheek . " I give a boy half a crown this morning to 
 be at the station with it by eight o'clock . and I could not possibly 
 either write or telegraph last night -- it be too late . " 

 " where be you ? " say Ashe , slowly . " I go to the Alcots ' this 
 morning , and-- " 

 " --the butler tell you Madeleine be in bed ? so she be . she be ill 
 yesterday morning . there be no coach and no party . I go with 
 Geoffrey . " 

 Kitty hold herself erect ; her eye , from which the tear be 
 involuntarily drop , be fix on her husband . 

 " of course I guess that , " say Ashe . 

 " it be Geoffrey bring I the news -- here , just as I be start to go 
 to the Alcots ' . then he say he have something to read I -- and it would 
 be delicious to go to Pangbourne -- spend the day on the river -- and come 
 back from Windsor -- at night -- by train . and I have a horrid headache -- and 
 it be so hot -- and you be at the office"--her lip quivered--"and I 
 want to hear Geoffrey 's poem -- and so-- " 

 she interrupt herself , and once more break down -- hide her face 
 against the chair . but the next moment she feel herself roughly draw 
 forward , as Ashe kneel beside she . 

 " Kitty!--look at I ! that man behave to you like a villain ? " 

 she look up -- she see the handsome , good - humor face transform -- and 
 wrench herself away . 

 " he do , " she say , bitterly--"like a villain . " she begin to twist and 
 torment her handkerchief as Ashe have see she do once before , the small 
 white tooth press upon the low lip -- then suddenly she turn upon 
 him-- 

 " I suppose you want I to tell you the story ? " 

 all Kitty in the word ! her frankness , her daring , and the impatient , 
 realistic tone she be apt to impose upon emotion -- they be all there . 

 Ashe rise and begin to walk up and down . 

 " tell I your part in it , " he say , at last--"and as little of that 
 fellow as may be . " 

 Kitty be silent . Ashe , look at she , see a curious shade of reverie , 
 a kind of dreamy excitement steal over her face . 

 " go on , Kitty ! " he say , sharply . then , restrain himself , he add , 
 with all his natural courtesy--"i beg your pardon , Kitty , but the soon 
 we get through with this the well . " 

 the mist in which her expression have be for a moment wrap fall 
 away . she flush deeply . 

 " I tell you I have do nothing vile ! " she say , passionately . " do you 
 believe I ? " 

 their eye meet in a shock of challenge and reply . 

 " those thing be not to be ask between you and I , " he say , with 
 vehemence , and he hold out his hand . she just touch it -- proudly . then 
 she draw a long breath . 

 " the day be -- just like other day . he read I his poem -- in a cool 
 place we find under the bank . I think he be rather absurd now and 
 then -- and different from what he have be . he talk of our go 
 away -- and his not see I -- and how lonely he be . and of course I be 
 awfully sorry for he . but it be all right till-- " 

 she pause and look at Ashe . 

 " you remember the inn near Hamel Weir -- a few mile from Windsor -- that 
 lonely little place . " 

 Ashe nod . 

 " we din there . afterwards we be to row to Windsor and come home by a 
 train about ten . we finish dinner early . by - the - way , there be two 
 other people there -- Lady Edith Manley and her boy . they have row down 
 from somewhere-- " 

 " do Lady Edith-- " 

 " yes -- she speak to I . she be go back to town -- to the Holland House 
 party-- " 

 " where she probably meet mother ? " 

 " she do meet she ! " cry Kitty . she point to a letter which she have 
 throw down as she enter . " your mother send round this note to I this 
 morning -- to ask when I should be at home . and Wilson send word -- there ! 
 of course I know she think I be capable of anything . " 

 she look at he , defiant , but very miserable and pale . 

 " go on , please , " say Ashe . 

 " we finish dinner early . there be a field behind the inn , and then a 
 wood . we stroll into the wood , and then Geoffrey -- well , he go mad ! 
 He-- " 

 she bite her lip fiercely , struggle for composure -- and word . 

 " he propose to you to throw I over ? " say Ashe , as white as she . 

 with a sudden gesture she hold out her arm -- like a piteous child . 

 " oh ! do not stand there -- and look at I like that -- I can not bear it . " 

 Ashe come -- unwillingly . she perceive the reluctance , and with a flame 
 face she motion he back , while she control herself enough to pour 
 out her story . presently Ashe be able to reconstruct with tolerable 
 clearness what have occur . Cliffe , intoxicate by the long day of 
 intimacy and of solitude , by Kitty 's beauty and Kitty 's folly , aware 
 that parting be near at hand , and trust to the wildness of Kitty 's 
 temperament , have suddenly assume the language of the lover -- and a lover 
 by no mean uncertain of his ultimate answer . so long as they understand 
 each other -- that , indeed , for the present , be all he ask . but she 
 must know that she have break off his marriage with Mary Lyster , and 
 reopen in his nature all the old fount of passion and of storm . it 
 have be her sovereign will that he should love she ; it have be 
 achieve . for her sake -- know himself for the seared and criminal 
 be that he be -- for Ashe 's sake -- he have try to resist her spell . in 
 vain . a fatal fusion of their two nature -- imagination -- sympathy -- have 
 come about . each be interpenetrate by the other ; and retreat be 
 impossible . 

 a kind of sombre power , indeed -- the power of the poet and the 
 dreamer -- seem to have speak from Cliffe 's strange wooing . he have 
 take no particular pain to flatter she , or to conceal his original 
 hesitation . he put her own action in a hard , almost a brutal light . it 
 be plain that he think she have treat her husband badly ; that he 
 warn she of a future of treachery and remorse . at the same time he let 
 she see that he could not doubt but that she would face it . they still 
 have the last justifying card in their hand -- passion , and the courage 
 to go where passion lead . when those be play , they might look each 
 other and the world in the face . till then they be but trifler -- mean 
 soul -- fit neither for heaven nor for hell . 

 Ashe 's whole being be soon in a tumult of rage under the sting of this 
 report , as he be able to piece it out from Kitty . but he keep his 
 self - command , and by dint of it he presently arrive at some notion of 
 her own share in the scene . horror , recoil , disavowal -- a wild resentment 
 of the charge heap upon she , of the pitiless interpretation of her 
 behavior which break from those harsh lip , of the incredulity pass 
 into something like contempt with which Cliffe have endure her wrath and 
 receive her protestation -- then a blind flight through the field to 
 the little wayside station , where she hop to catch the last train ; 
 the arrival and departure of the train while she be still half a mile 
 from the line , and her shelter at a cottage for the night ; these thing 
 stand out plainly , whatever else remain in obscurity . how far she have 
 provoke her own fate , and how far even now she be deliver from the 
 morbid spell of Cliffe 's personality , Ashe would not allow himself to 
 ask . as she near the end of her story , it be as though the great 
 tempest wave in which she have be struggle die down , and with a 
 merciful rush bear he to a shore of deliverance . she be there beside 
 he ; and she be still his own . 

 he have be lean over the side of a chair , his chin on his hand , his 
 eye fix upon she , while she tell her tale . it end in a burst of 
 self - pity , as she remember her collapse in the cottage , the 
 impossibility of find any carriage in the small hamlet of which it 
 make part , the faint weariness of the night-- 

 " I never sleep , " she say , piteously . " I get up at eight for the first 
 train , and now I feel"--she fall back in her chair , and whisper 
 desolately with shut eyes--"a if I should like to die ! " 

 Ashe kneel down beside she . 

 " it be my fault , too , Kitty . I ought to have hold you with a strong 
 hand . I hat quarrel with you . but -- oh , my dear , my dear-- " 

 she meet the cry in silence , the tear run over her cheek . roughly , 
 impetuously , he gather she in his arm and kiss she , as though he 
 would once more re - knit and reconsecrate the bond between they . she lay 
 passively against he , the tangle of her fair hair spread over his 
 shoulder -- too frail and too exhausted for response . 

 " this will not do , " he say , presently , disengage himself ; " you must have 
 some food and rest . then we will think what shall be do . " 

 she rouse herself suddenly as he go to the door . 

 " why be not you at the Foreign Office ? " 

 " I send a message early . Lawson came"--lawson be his private 
 secretary--"but I must go down in an hour . " 

 " William ! " 

 Kitty have raise herself , and her eye shine large and startle in the 
 small , tear - stain face . 

 " yes . " he pause a moment . 

 " William , be the list out ? " 

 " yes . " 

 Kitty totter to her foot . 

 " be it all right ? " 

 " I suppose so , " he say , slowly . " it do not affect I . " 

 and then , without wait , he go into the hall and close the door 
 behind he . he write a note to the Foreign Office to say that he should 
 not be at the office till the afternoon , and that important paper be 
 to be send up to he . then he tell Wilson to bring wine and sandwich 
 into the library for Lady Kitty , who have be detain by an accident on 
 the river the night before , and be much exhausted . no visitor be to 
 be admit , except , of course , Lady Tranmore or Miss French . 

 when he return to the library he find Kitty with crimson cheek , her 
 hand lock behind she , walk up and down . as soon as she see he she 
 motion to he imperiously . 

 [ illustration : " he gather she in his ARMS " ] 

 " shut the door , William . I have something very important to say to you . " 

 he obey she , and she walk up to he deliberately . he see the 
 fluttering of her heart beneath her white dress -- the crush , bedraggle 
 dress , which still in its soft elegance , its small originality , speak 
 Kitty from head to foot . but her manner be quite calm and collect . 

 " William , we must separate ! you must send I away . " 

 he start . 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 " what I say . it be -- it be intolerable -- that I should ruin your life like 
 this . " 

 " do not , please , exaggerate , Kitty ! there be no question of ruin . I shall 
 make my way when the time come , and Lady Parham will have nothing to 
 say to it ! " 

 " no ! nothing will ever go well -- while I be there -- like a millstone round 
 your neck . William"--she come close to him--"take my advice -- do it ! I 
 warn you when you marry I . and now you see -- it be true . " 

 " you foolish child , " he answer , slowly , " do you think I could forget 
 you for an hour , wherever you be ? " 

 " oh yes , " she say , steadily , " I know you would forget me--- if I be not 
 here . I be sure of it . you be very ambitious , William -- more than you 
 know . you will soon care-- " 

 " More for politic than for you ? another of your delusion , Kitty . 
 nothing of the sort . moreover , if you will only let I advise you -- trust 
 your husband a little -- think both for he and yourself . I see nothing 
 either in politic or in our life together that can not be retrieve . " 

 he speak with manly kindness and reasonableness . not a trace of his 
 habitual indolence or indifference . Kitty , listening , be conscious of 
 the most tempestuous medley of feeling -- love , remorse , shame , and a 
 strange gnawing desolation . what else , what well _ could _ she have 
 ask of he ? and yet , as she look at he , she think suddenly of the 
 moonlit garden at Grosville Park , and of that young , headlong chivalry 
 with which he have throw himself at her foot . this man before she , so 
 much old and mature , count the cost of his marriage with she in 
 the light of experience , and magnanimously , resolutely pay it -- Kitty , 
 in a flash , realize his personality as she have never yet do , his 
 moral independence of she , his separateness as a human being . her 
 passionate self - love instinctively , unconsciously , have make of his life 
 the appendage of her . and now-- ? his devotion have never be so plain , 
 so attest ; and all the while bitter , terrifying voice ring upon the 
 inner ear , voice of fate , vague and irrevocable . 

 she drop into a chair beside his table , trembling and white . 

 " no , no , " she say , draw her handkerchief across her eye , with a 
 gesture of childish misery , " it be all be a -- a horrid mistake . your 
 mother be quite right . of course she hat your marry I -- and 
 now -- now she will see what I have do . I guess perfectly what she be 
 think about I to - day ! and I can not help it -- I shall go on -- if you let 
 I stay with you . there be a twist -- a black drop in I . I be not like 
 other people . " 

 her voice , which be very quiet , give Ashe intolerable pain . 

 " you poor , tired , starve child , " he say , kneel down beside she . 
 " put your arm round my neck . let I carry you up - stair . " 

 with a sob she do as she be tell . Ashe 's library a comparatively late 
 addition to the rambling , old - fashioned house , communicate by a small 
 staircase at the back with his dressing - room above . he lift the small 
 figure with ease , and half - way up - stair he impetuously kiss the 
 delicate cheek . 

 " I be glad you be not Polly Lyster , darling ! " 

 Kitty laugh through her tear . presently he deposit she on the large 
 sofa in her own room , and stand beside she , pant a little . 

 " it be all very well , " say Kitty , as she nestle down among the pillow , 
 " but we be _ none _ of us feather ! " 

 her eye be begin to recover a little of their sparkle . she look 
 at he with attention . 

 " you look horribly tired . what -- what do you do -- last night ? " she turn 
 away from he . 

 " I sit up read -- then go to sleep down - stair . I think the coach 
 have come to grief , and you be somewhere with the Alcots . " 

 " if I have know that , " she murmur , " _ i _ might have go to sleep . oh , 
 it be so horrible -- the little stuffy room , and the dirty blanket . " she 
 give a shiver of disgust . " there be a poor baby , too , with 
 whooping - cough . lucky I have some money . I give the woman a sovereign . 
 but she be not at all nice -- she never smile once . I know she think I 
 be a bad lot . " 

 then she spring up . 

 " sit there ! " she point to the foot of the sofa . Ashe obey she . 

 " when do you know ? " 

 " about the ministry ? between six and seven . I see Lady Parham afterwards 
 drive in St. James 's Street . she never enjoy anything so much in her 
 life as the bow she give I . ' " 

 Kitty groan , and subside again , a little crumpled form among her 
 cushion . 

 " tell I the name . " 

 Ashe give she the list of the ministry . she make one or two shrewd or 
 bitter comment upon it . he fully understand that in her inmost mind she 
 be register a vow of vengeance against the Parhams ; but she make no 
 speak threat . meanwhile , in the background of each mind there lie that 
 dark and more humiliating fact , to which both shrink from return , 
 while yet both know that it must be face . 

 there be a knock at the door , and Blanche appear with the tray which 
 have be order down - stair . she glance in astonishment at her 
 mistress . 

 " we have an accident on the river last night , Blanche , " say Kitty . " come 
 back in half an hour . I be too tired to change just yet . " 

 she keep her face hide from the maid , but when Blanche have depart , 
 Ashe see that her cheek be flame . 

 " I hate lie ! " she say , with a kind of physical disgust--"and now I 
 suppose it will be my chief occupation for week . " 

 it be true that she hat lie , and Ashe be well aware of it . of such 
 a battle - stroke , indeed , as she have play at the ball , when her prompt 
 falsehood snatch Cliffe from Mary Lyster , she be always capable . but 
 in general her pride , her very egotism and quick temper keep she true . 

 perhaps the fact represent one of those deep source whence the well 
 of Ashe 's tenderness be feed . at any rate , consciously or not , it be at 
 this moment one of his chief motif for not find the past 
 intolerable or the future without hope . he take some wine and a sandwich 
 from the tray , and begin to feed she . in the middle , she push his 
 hand away , and her eye brim again with tear . 

 " put it down , " she command . and when he have do so , she raise his 
 hand deliberately , one after the other , and kiss they , cry : 

 " William!--I have be a horrible wife to you ! " 

 " do not be a goose , Kitty . you know very well that -- till this last 
 business -- and do not imagine that I feel myself a model , either ! " 

 " no , " she say , with a long sigh . " of course , you ought to have beat 
 I . " 

 he smile , with an unsteady lip . 

 " perhaps I might still try it . " 

 she shake her head . 

 " too late . I be not a child any more . " 

 then throw her soft arm round his neck , she cling to he , say the 
 most adorable and poignant thing , dissolve , indeed , in a murmuring 
 anguish of remorse ; until , with the same unexpectedness as before , she 
 again disengage herself -- urge , insist that he should send she 
 away . 

 " let I go and live at Haggart , baby and I. " ( Haggart be one of the 
 Tranmore " place , " recently hand over to the young people . ) " you can 
 come and see I sometimes . I will garden -- and write book . half the smart 
 woman I know write story -- or play . why should not I ? " 

 " why , indeed ? meanwhile , madam , I take you to Scotland -- next week . " 

 " Scotland ? " she press her hand over her eye . 
 " ' anywhere -- anywhere -- out of the world ! ' " 

 " Kitty ! " startle by the abandonment of her word , Ashe catch her hand 
 and hold they . " Kitty!--- you regret-- " 

 " that man ? do I ? " she open her eye , frown . " I loathe he ! when I 
 think of yesterday , I could drown myself . if I could pile the whole 
 world between he and I -- I would . but"--she shivered--"but yet -- if he 
 be sit there-- " 

 " you would be once more under the spell ? " say Ashe , bitterly . 

 " Spell ! " she repeat , with scorn . then snatch her hand from his , 
 she throw back the hair from her temple with a wild gesture . " I warn 
 you , " she said--"i warn you . " 

 " a man do not pay much attention to those warning , Kitty . " 

 " then it be not my fault . I do not know what be wrong with I , " she say , 
 sombrely ; " but I remember say to you that sometimes my brain be on 
 fire . I seem to be always in a hurry -- in a desperate , desperate 
 hurry!--to know or to feel something -- while there be still time -- before 
 one die . there be always a passion -- always an effort . More life--_more 
 life_!--even if it lead to pain -- and agony -- and tear . " 

 she raise her strange , beautiful eye , which have at the moment almost a 
 look of delirium , and fix they on his face . but Ashe 's impression be 
 that she do not see he . 

 he be conscious of the same pang , the same sudden terror that he have 
 feel on that never - to - be - forget evening when she have talk to he of 
 the mask in the " Tempest . " he think of the Blackwater story he have 
 hear from Lord Grosville . " _ mad , my dear fellow , mad!_"--the old man 's 
 frequent comment run through his memory . be there , indeed , some unsound 
 spot in Kitty ? 

 he sit dumb and paralyze for a moment ; then , recover himself , he 
 say , as he recapture the cold little hand : 

 " ' More _ light _ , ' Kitty , be what Goethe say , in die . a well prayer , 
 do not you think ? " 

 there be a strong , even a stern insistence in his manner which quiet 
 Kitty . her face as it come back to full consciousness be exquisitely 
 sweet and mournful . 

 " that be the prayer of the _ calm _ , " she say , in a whisper , " and my 
 nature be hunger and storm . and Geoffrey Cliffe be the same . that be why 
 I could not help being-- " 

 she spring up . 

 " William , do not let us talk nonsense . I can not ever see that man again . 
 how be it to be do ? " 

 she move up and down -- all practical energy and impatience -- her mood 
 wholly alter . his own adapt itself to her . 

 " for the present , fear nothing , " he say , dryly . " for his own sake 
 Cliffe will hold his tongue and leave London . and as to the future -- I 
 can get some message convey to he -- by a man he will not disregard . leave 
 it to I . " 

 " you can not write to he , William ! " cry Kitty , passionately . 

 " leave it to I , " he repeat . " then suppose you take the boy -- and 
 Margaret French -- to Haggart till I can join you ? " 

 " and your mother ? " she say , timidly , come to stand beside he and 
 lay a hand on each shoulder . 

 " leave that also to I . " 

 " how she will hate the sight of I , " she say , under her breath . then , 
 with another tone of voice--"How long , William , do you give the 
 government ? " 

 " six month , perhaps -- perhaps less . I do not see how they can last beyond 
 February . " 

 " and then -- we'll _ fight _ ! " say Kitty , with a long breath , smooth 
 back the hair from his brow . 

 " allow I , please , to command the force ! well , now then , I must be 
 off ! " he try to rise , but she still hold he . 

 " do you have any breakfast , William ? " 

 " I do not remember . " 

 " sit still and eat one of my sandwich . " she divide one into strip , 
 and stand over he begin to feed he . a knock at the door arrest 
 she . 

 " do not move ! " she say , peremptorily , before she run to open the door . 

 " please , my lady , " say Blanche , " Lady Tranmore would like to see you . " 

 Kitty start and flush . she look round uncertainly at Ashe . 

 " ask her ladyship to come up , " say Ashe , quietly . 

 the maid depart . 

 " feed I if you want to , Kitty , " say Ashe , still seat . 

 Kitty return , her breath hurry , her step waver . she look 
 doubtfully at Ashe -- then her eye sparkle -- as she understand . she 
 drop on her knee beside he , kiss the sleeve of his coat , against 
 which her cheek be press -- in a passion of repentance . 

 he bend towards she , touch her hair , murmur over she . his mind 
 meanwhile be tear with feeling which , so to speak , observe each 
 other . this thing which have happen be horribly serious -- important . it 
 might easily have wreck two life . have he deal with it as he 
 ought -- make Kitty feel the gravity of it ? 

 then the optimist in he ask impatiently what be " the good of 
 exaggerate the damned business " ? that fellow have get his lesson -- could 
 be drive headlong out of his life and Kitty 's henceforward . and how 
 could _ he _ doubt the love show in this clinging penitence , these soft 
 kiss ? how would the Turk theory of marriage , please , have do any 
 well ? Kitty have have her own wild way . no fiat from without have bind 
 she ; but love have bring she to his foot . there be something in he 
 which triumph alike in her revolt and her submission . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 meanwhile , in the cool drawing - room to which the green _ persienne _ give 
 a pleasant foreign look , Lady Tranmore have be wait for the maid 's 
 return . she shrink from every sound in the house ; from her own 
 reflection in Kitty 's french mirror ; from her own thought most of all . 

 Lady Edith Manley -- at Holland House -- have be the most innocent of 
 gossip . a little lady who do no wrong herself -- and think no wrong of 
 other ; as white - minded and unsuspicious as a convent child . " Poor Lady 
 Kitty ! something seem to have go wrong with the Alcots ' coach , and 
 they be somehow divide from all their party . I can not remember exactly 
 what it be they say , but Mr. Cliffe be confident they would catch 
 their train . though my boy -- you remember my boy ? they have just put he in 
 the eight!--thought they be run it _ rather _ fine . " 

 then , five minute later , in the supper - room , Lady Tranmore have run 
 across Madeleine Alcot 's husband , who have give she in pass the whole 
 story of the frustrated expedition -- Mrs. Alcot 's chill , and the despatch 
 of Cliffe to Hill Street . " Horrid bore to have to put it off ! hope he 
 get there in time to stop Lady Kitty get ready . oh , thank , 
 Madeleine 's all right . " 

 and then no more , as the rush of the crowd sweep they apart . 

 after that , sleep have wholly desert Lady Tranmore -- if , indeed , after 
 the publication of the cabinet list in the afternoon , and William 's 
 letter follow upon it , any have be still possible . and in the early 
 morning she have send her note to Kitty -- a _ ballon d'essai _ , despatch 
 in a horror of great fear . 

 " her ladyship have not yet return . " the message from Hill Street , 
 deliver by the footman 's indifferent mouth , strike Lady Tranmore with 
 trembling . 

 " where be William ? " she say to herself , in anguish . " I must find 
 he -- but -- what shall I say to he ? " then she go up - stair , and , 
 without call for her maid , put on her walk thing with shake 
 hand . 

 she slip out unobserved by her household , and take a hansom from the 
 corner of Grosvenor Street . in the hansom she carefully draw down her 
 veil , with the shrinking of one on whom disgrace -- the long pursuing , 
 long expect -- have seize at last . all the various fact , statement , 
 indication as to Kitty 's behavior , which through the most diverse 
 channel have be flow steadily towards she for week past , be now 
 surge through her mind and memory -- a grievous , damn host . and every 
 now and then , as she catch the placard in the street , her heart 
 contract anew . her son , her William , in what should have be the 
 heyday of his gift and power , baffle , trip up , defeated!--by his 
 own wife , the selfish , ungrateful , reckless child on whom he have 
 lavish the undeserved treasure of the most generous and untiring 
 love . and have she not only check or ruin his career -- be he to be 
 also dishonor , strike to the heart ? 

 she could scarcely stand as she ring the bell at Hill Street , and it be 
 only with a great effort that she could ask her question : 

 " be Mr. Ashe at home ? " 

 " Mr. Ashe , my lady , be , I believe , just go out , " say Wilson . " her 
 ladyship arrive just about an hour ago , and that detain he . " 

 Elizabeth betray nothing . the training of her class hold good . 

 " be they in the library ? " she asked--"or up - stair ? " 

 Wilson reply that he believe her ladyship be in her room , and Mr. 
 Ashe with she . 

 " please ask Mr. Ashe if I can see he for a few minute . " 

 Wilson disappear , and Lady Tranmore stand motionless , look round at 
 William 's book and table . she love everything that his hand have 
 touch , every sign of his character -- the prize book of his college 
 day , the picture on the wall , many of which have descend from his 
 Eton study , the photograph of his favorite hunter , the drawing she 
 herself have make for he of his first pony . 

 on his writing - table lie a despatch - box from the Foreign Office . Lady 
 Tranmore turn away from it . it remind she intolerably of the shock 
 and defeat of the day before . during the past six month she have become 
 more rejoicingly conscious than ever before of his secret , deepen 
 ambition , and her own heart burn with the smart of his disappointment . 
 no one else , however , should guess at it through she . no soon have she 
 receive his letter from the club than , after many week of withdrawal 
 from society , she have force herself to go to the Holland House party , 
 that no one might say she hide herself , that no one might for an instant 
 suppose that any hostile act of such a man as Lord Parham , or any malice 
 of that low - minded woman , could humiliate her son or herself . 

 suddenly she see Kitty 's glove -- Kitty 's torn and soiled glove -- lie 
 on the floor . she clasp her tremble hand , try to steady herself . 
 Husband and wife be together . what tragedy be pass between they ? 

 of course there _ might _ have be an accident ; her thought might be all 
 mistake and illusion . but Lady Tranmore hardly allow herself to 
 encourage the alternative of hope . it be like Kitty 's audacity to have 
 come back . Incredible!--unfathomable!--like all she do . 

 " her ladyship say , my lady , would you please go up to her room ? " 

 the message be give in Blanche 's timid voice . Lady Tranmore start , 
 look at the girl , long to question she , and have not the courage . she 
 follow mechanically , and in silence . could she , must she face it ? 
 yes -- for her son 's sake . she pray inwardly that she might meet the 
 ordeal before she with christian strength and courage . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the door open . she see two figure in the pretty , bright - colored room , 
 William sit astride upon a chair in front of Kitty , who , like some small 
 mother - bird , hover above he , hold what seem to be a tiny strip 
 of bread - and - butter , which she be drop with dainty deliberation 
 into his mouth . her face , in spite of the red and swollen eye , be 
 alive with fun , and Ashe 's laugh reflect her . the domesticity , the 
 intimate affection of the scene -- before these thing Elizabeth Tranmore 
 stand gasp . 

 " Dearest mother ! " cry Ashe , start up . 

 Kitty turn . at sight of Lady Tranmore she hang back ; her smile 
 depart ; her lip quiver . 

 " william!"--she pursue he and touch he on the shoulder . " I -- I 
 can't -- i'm afraid . if mother ever mean to speak to I again -- come and 
 tell I . " 

 and , hide her face , Kitty escape like a whirlwind . the dressing - room 
 door close behind she , and mother and son be leave alone . 

 " Mother ! " say Ashe , come up to her gayly , both hand out - stretch . 
 " ask I nothing , dear . Kitty have be a silly child -- but thing will go 
 well now . and as for the Parhams -- what do it matter?--come and help 
 I send they to the deuce ! " 

 Lady Tranmore recoil . for once the good - humor of that handsome 
 face -- pale as the face be -- seem to she an offence -- nay , a disgrace . 
 that what have happen have be no mere _ contretemp _ , no mere accident 
 of train and coach , be plain enough from Kitty 's eye -- from all that 
 William do _ not _ say , no less than from what he say . and still this 
 levity!--this inconceivable levity ! be it true , as she know be say , 
 that William have no high sense of honor , that he fail in delicacy and 
 dignity ? 

 in reality , it be the same cry as the dean's -- upon another and small 
 occasion . but in this case it be unspoken . Lady Tranmore drop into a 
 chair , one hand abandon to her son , the other hide her face . he 
 talk fast and tenderly , ask her help -- neither of they quite know 
 for what -- her advice as to the move to Haggart -- and so forth . Lady 
 Tranmore say little . but it be a bitter silence ; and if Ashe himself 
 fail in indignation , his mother 's protest heart supply it amply . 




 PART III 

 DEVELOPMENT 


 " Es bildet ein Talent sich in der Stille , Sich ein Character in dem 
 Strom , der Welt . " 




 XIV 


 " what do Lady Kitty do with herself here ? " say Darrell , look round 
 he . he have just arrive from town on a visit to the Ashes , to find the 
 Haggart house and garden completely deserted , save for Mrs. Alcot , who 
 be lounge in solitude , with a cigarette and a novel , on the wide lawn 
 which surround the house on three side . 

 as he speak he lift a chair and place it beside she , under one of the 
 cedar which make deep shade upon the grass . 

 " she play at Lady Bountiful , " say Mrs. Alcot . " she do not do it well , 
 but-- " 

 " --the wonder be , in Johnsonian phrase , that she should do it at all . 
 anything else ? " 

 " I understand -- she be write a book -- a novel . " 

 Darrell throw back his head and laugh long and silently . 

 " Il ne manquait que cela , " he said--"that Lady Kitty should take to 
 literature ! " 

 Mrs. Alcot look at he rather sharply . 

 " why not ? we frivolous people be a good deal cleverer than you think . " 

 the languid arrogance of the lady 's manner be not at all unbecoming . 
 Darrell make an inclination . 

 " no need to remind I , madam ! " a recent exhibition at an artistic club 
 of Mrs. Alcot 's sketch have make a considerable mark . " very soon you 
 will leave we poor professional no room to live . " 

 the slight disrespect of his smile annoy his companion , but the day 
 be hot and she have no repartee ready . she only murmur as she throw 
 away her cigarette : 

 " Kitty be much disappointed in the village . " 

 " they be great brute than she think ? " 

 " quite the contrary . there be no poacher -- and no murder . the girl 
 prefer to be marry , and the tranmore give so much away that no one 
 have the small excuse for starvation . Kitty get nothing out of they 
 whatever . " 

 " in the way of literary material ? " 

 Mrs. Alcot nod . 

 " last week she be so discouraged that she be inclined to give up 
 fiction and take to journalism . " 

 " Heavens ! political ? " 

 " oh , _ la haute politique _ , of course . " 

 " H'm . the wife of cabinet minister have often inspire article . I 
 do not remember an instance of their write they . " 

 " well , Kitty be inclined to try . " 

 " with Ashe 's sanction ? " 

 " Goodness , no ! but Kitty , as you be aware"--mrs . Alcot throw a prudent 
 glance to right and left--"goe her own way . she believe she can be of 
 great service to her husband 's policy . " 

 Darrell 's lip twitch . 

 " if you be in Ashe 's position , would you rather your wife neglect or 
 support your political interest ? " 

 Mrs. Alcot shrug her shoulder . 

 " Kitty make a considerable mess of they last year . " 

 " no doubt . she forget they exist . but I think if I be Ashe , I should 
 be more afraid of her remembering . by - the - way -- the glass here seem to 
 be at ' Set Fair ' ? " 

 his interrogative smile be not wholly good - natured . but mere 
 benevolence be not what the world ask of Philip Darrell -- even in the 
 case of his old friend . 

 " astonishing ! " say Mrs. Alcot , with lift brow . " Kitty be immensely 
 proud of he -- and immensely ambitious . that , of course , account for 
 Lord Parham 's visit . " 

 " Lord Parham ! " cry Darrell , bound on his seat . " Lord 
 parham!--come here ? " 

 " he arrive to - morrow . on his way from Scotland -- to Windsor . " 

 Mrs. Alcot enjoy the effect of her communication on her companion . he 
 sit open - mouthed , evidently startle out of all self - command . 

 " why , I think that Lady kitty-- " 

 " have vow vengeance ? so , in a sense , she have . it be understand that she 
 and Lady Parham do not meet , except-- " 

 " on formal occasion , and to take in the groundling , " say Darrell , too 
 impatient to let she finish her sentence . " yes , that I gather . but you 
 mean that _ Lord _ Parham be to be allow to make his peace ? " 

 Madeleine Alcot lie back and laugh . 

 " Kitty wish to try her hand at manage he . " 

 Darrell join she in mirth . the notion of the white - haired , 
 bullet - head , shrewd , and masterful man who at that moment hold the 
 Premiership of England manage by Kitty , or any other daughter of 
 Eve -- always except his wife -- must need strike those who have the 
 slight acquaintance with Lord Parham as a delicious absurdity . 

 suddenly Darrell check himself , and bend forward . 

 " where -- if I may ask -- be the poet ? " 

 " Geoffrey ? somewhere in the Balkans , be not he?--make a revolution . " 

 Darrell nod . 

 " I remember . they say he be with the revolutionary committee at 
 Marinitza . meanwhile there be a new volume of poem out -- to - day , " say 
 Darrell , glance at a newspaper throw down beside he . 

 " I have see it . the ' portrait ' at the end-- " 

 " be Lady Kitty . " they speak under their breath . 

 " unmistakable , I think , " say Kitty 's good friend . " as poetry , it seem 
 to I the good thing in the book , but the audacity of it ! " she raise 
 her eyebrow in a half - unwilling , half - contemptuous admiration . 

 " have she see it ? " 

 Mrs. Alcot reply that she have not notice any copy in the house , and 
 that Kitty have not speak of it , which , give the Kitty - nature , she 
 probably would have do , have it reach she . 

 then they both fall into reverie , from which Darrell emerge with the 
 remark : 

 " I gather that last year some very important person interfere ? " 

 this open another line of gossip , in which , however , Mrs. Alcot show 
 herself equally well informed . it be commonly report , at any rate , 
 that the old Duke of Morecambe , the head of Lady Eleanor Cliffe 's 
 family , the great Tory evangelical of the north , who be a sort of 
 patriarch in english political and aristocratic life , have be induce 
 by some undefined pressure to speak very plainly to his kinsman on the 
 subject of Lady Kitty Ashe . Cliffe have expectation from the duke which 
 be not to be trifle with . he have , accordingly , swallow the lecture , 
 and , after the loss of his election , have again leave England with an 
 important newspaper commission to watch event in the Balkans . 

 " may he stay there ! " say Darrell . " of course , the whole thing be 
 absurdly exaggerated . " 

 " be it ? " say Mrs. Alcot , coolly . " Kitty richly deserve most of what 
 be say . " then -- on his start--"don't misunderstand I , of course . if 
 twenty action for divorce be give against Kitty , I should believe 
 nothing--_nothing _ ! " the word be as emphatic as voice and gesture 
 could make they . " but as for the tale that people who hate her tell of 
 she , and will go on telling of her-- " 

 " they be merely the harvest of what she have sow ? " 

 " naturally . poor Kitty ! " 

 Madeleine Alcot rest her thin cheek on a still frailer hand and look 
 pensively out into the darkness of the cedar . her tone be neither 
 patronizing nor unkind ; rather , the shade of ironic tenderness which it 
 express suit the subject , and that curious intimacy which have of 
 late spring up between herself and Darrell . she have begin , as we have 
 see , by treat he _ de haut en bas _ . he have repay she with manner of 
 the same type ; in this respect he be a match for any Archangel . then 
 some accident -- perhaps the publication by the man of a volume of essay 
 which express to perfection his acid and embitter talent -- perhaps a 
 casual meeting at a northern country - house , where the lady have find the 
 man of letter her only resource amid a crowd of uncongenial 
 nonentity -- have show they their natural compatibility . both be in a 
 secret revolt against circumstance and their own life ; but whereas the 
 reason for the man 's attitude -- his jealousy , defeat , and 
 ambition -- be fairly well understand by the woman , he be almost as 
 much in the dark about she as when their friendship begin . 

 he know her husband slightly -- an eager , gifted fellow , of late year a 
 strong High Churchman , and well know in a certain group as the friend 
 of Mrs. Armagh , that muse -- fragile , austere , and beautiful -- of several 
 great man , and great Christians , among the old generation . Mrs. Alcot 
 have her own intimate , generally man ; but she tired of they and change 
 they often . Mr. Alcot spend part of every year within reach of the 
 Cornish home of Mrs. Armagh ; and during that time his wife make she 
 round of visit . 

 meanwhile her thin lip be seal as to her own affair . certainly she 
 make the impression of an unhappy woman , and Darrell be convince of 
 some tragic complication . but neither he nor any one of whom he have yet 
 inquire have any idea what it might be . 

 " by - the - way -- where be Lady Kitty?--and be there many people here ? " 

 Darrell turn , as he speak , to scrutinize the house and its approach . 
 Haggart Hall be a large and commonplace mansion , stand in the midst 
 of spread " ground " and dull plantation , beyond which could be 
 sometimes see the tall chimney of neighbor coal - mine . it wear an 
 air of middle - class Tory comfort which bring a smile to Darrell 's 
 countenance as he survey it . 

 " Kitty be at the Agricultural Show -- with a party . " 

 " play the great lady ? _ what _ a house ! " 

 " yes . Kitty abhor it . but it will do very well for the party 
 to - morrow . " 

 " half the county -- that kind of thing ? " 

 " _ all _ the county -- some royalty -- and Lord Parham . " 

 " Lord Parham be the end and aim ? I think I hear wheel . " 

 Mrs. Alcot rise , and they stroll back towards the house . 

 " and the party ? " resume Darrell . 

 " not particularly thrill . Lord grosville-- " 

 " also , I presume , _ en garçon _ . " 

 Mrs. Alcot smile . 

 " --the Manleys , Lady Tranmore , Miss French , the Dean of Milford and his 
 wife , Eddie helston-- " 

 " that , I understand , be Lady Kitty 's undergraduate adorer ? " 

 " it be no use talk to you -- you know all the gossip . and some county 
 big - wig , whose name I can not remember -- come to dinner to - night . " Mrs. 
 Alcot stifle a yawn . 

 " I be very curious to see how Ashe take his triumph , " say Darrell , as 
 they pause half - way . 

 " he be just the same . no ! " say Madeleine Alcot , correct 
 herself--"no -- not quite . he _ mean _ to triumph , and he _ know _ that he 
 have do so . " 

 " my dear lady ! " cry Darrell--"a quite _ enormous _ difference ! ashe 
 never take stock of himself or his prospect in his life before . " 

 " well , now -- you will find he take stock of a good many thing . " 

 " include Lady Kitty ? " 

 his companion smile . 

 " he will not let she interfere again . " 

 " _ l'homme propose _ , " say Darrell . " you mean he have grow ambitious ? " 

 Mrs. Alcot seem to find it difficult to cope with these high thing . 
 fan herself , she languidly suppose that the english political 
 passion , so strong and unspent still in the aristocratic family , have 
 lay serious hold at last on William Ashe . he have great scheme of 
 reform , and , do what he might to conceal it , his heart be in they . his 
 wife , therefore , be no long his occupation , but-- 

 Mrs. Alcot hesitate for a word . 

 " scarcely his repose ? " laugh Darrell . 

 " I really will not discuss Kitty any more , " say Mrs. Alcot , impatiently . 
 " here they be ! hullo ! what have Kitty get hold of now ? " 

 three carriage be drive up the long approach , one behind the other . 
 in the first sit Kitty , a figure beside she in the dress of a nurse , and 
 opposite to they both an indistinguishable bundle , which presently 
 reveal a head . the carriage draw up at the step . Kitty jump down , 
 and she and the nurse lift the bundle out . footman appear ; some 
 guest from the next carriage go to help ; there be a general movement 
 and agitation , in the midst of which Kitty and her companion 
 disappear into the house . 

 Lady Edith Manley and Lord Grosville begin to cross the lawn . 

 " what be the matter ? " ask Mrs. Alcot , as they converge . 

 " Kitty run over a boy , " say Lord Grosville , in evident annoyance . " the 
 rascal have not a scratch , but Kitty must need pick he up and drive he 
 home with a nurse . ' I be not hurt , mum , ' say the boy . ' oh ! but you must 
 be , ' say Kitty . I offer to take he to his mother and give he half a 
 crown . ' it be my duty to look after he , ' say Kitty . and she lift he 
 up herself -- dirty little vagabond!--and put he in the carriage . there 
 be some laborer and groom stand near , and one of they sing out , 
 ' three cheer for Lady Kitty Ashe ! ' such a ridiculous scene as you never 
 see ! " 

 the old man shrug his shoulder contemptuously . 

 " Lady Kitty be always so kind , " say the amicable Lady Edith . " but she 
 pretty dress -- I _ be _ sorry ! " 

 " oh no -- only an excuse for a new one , " say Mrs. Alcot . 

 the Dean and Lady Tranmore approach -- behind they again Ashe and Mrs. 
 Winston . 

 " well , old fellow ! " say Ashe , clap a hand on Darrell 's shoulder . 
 " uncommonly glad to see you . you look as though that damn London have 
 be squeeze the life out of you . come for a stroll before dinner ? " 

 the two man accordingly leave the talker on the lawn , and strike into 
 the park . Ashe , in a straw hat and light suit , make his usual impression 
 of strength and good - humor . he be gay , friendly , amusing as ever . but 
 Darrell be not long in discover or imagine sign of change . any 
 one else would have think Ashe 's talk frankness -- nay , 
 indiscretion -- itself . darrell at once divine or imagine in it shade 
 of official reserve , tract of reticence , such as an old friend have a 
 right to resent . 

 " one can see what a personage he feel himself ! " 

 yet Darrell would have be the first to own that Ashe have some right to 
 feel himself a personage . the sudden revelation of his full intellectual 
 power , and of his influence in the country , for which the general 
 election of the precede winter have provide the opportunity , be still 
 an exciting memory among journalist and politician . he have go into 
 the election a man slightly discredit , on whose future nobody take 
 much trouble to speculate . he have emerge from it -- after a series of 
 speech lay down the principle and vindicate the action of his 
 party -- one of the most important man in England , with whom Lord Parham 
 himself must henceforth treat on quasi - equal term . Ashe be now home 
 Secretary , and , if Lord Parham 's gout should take an evil turn , there 
 be no saying to what height fortune might not soon conduct he . 

 the will -- the iron purpose -- with which it have all be do -- that be 
 the amazing part of it . the complete independence , moreover . Darrell 
 imagine that Lord Parham must often have regret the small intrigue 
 by which Ashe 's promotion have be bar in the crisis of the summer . 
 it have rouse an indolent man to action , and free he from any 
 particular obligation towards the leader who have ill - treat he . Ashe 's 
 campaign have not be in all respect convenient ; but Lord Parham have 
 have to put up with it . 

 the summer evening broaden as the two man saunter on through the 
 park , beside a small stream fringe with yellow flag . even the dingy 
 Midland landscape , with its smoke - blacken wood and lifeless grass , 
 assume a glory of great light ; the soft , interlace cloud part 
 before the die sun ; the water receive the golden flood , and each coot 
 and water - hen shone jet and glossy in the blaze . a few cry of bird , 
 the distant shout of harvester , the rustling of the water - flag along 
 the stream , these be the only sound -- traditional sound of English 
 peace . 

 " jolly , be not it ? " say Ashe , look round him--"even this spoil 
 country ! why do we go and stifle in that beastly show ! " 

 the sensuous pleasure and relaxation of his mood communicate itself to 
 Darrell . they talk more intimately , more freely than they have do for 
 month . Darrell 's gnaw consciousness of his own meaner fortune , as 
 contrast with the brilliant and expand career of his school - friend , 
 soften and relaxed . he almost forgive Ashe the success of the 
 winter , and that subtly heighten tone of authority and self - confidence 
 which here and there bear witness to they in the manner or talk of the 
 minister . they scarcely touch on politic , however . both be tired , 
 and their talk drift into the characteristic male gossip--"What be ---- 
 do now ? " " do you ever see so - and - so ? " " you remember that fellow at 
 Univ.?"--and the like , to the agreeable accompaniment of Ashe 's good 
 cigar . 

 so pleasant be the half - hour , so strongly have the old college intimacy 
 reassert itself , that suddenly a thought strike upward in Darrell 's 
 mind . he have not come to Haggart bend merely on idle holiday -- far from 
 it . at the moment he be weary of literature as a profession , and 
 sharply conscious that the time for vague ambition have go by . a post 
 have present itself , a post of importance , in the gift of the Home 
 Office . it mean , no doubt , the abandonment of more brilliant thing ; 
 Darrell be content to abandon they . his determination to apply for it 
 seem , indeed , to himself an act of modesty -- almost of sacrifice . as to 
 the technical qualification require , he be well aware there might be 
 other man well equip than himself . but , after all , to what may not 
 general ability aspire -- general ability properly stiffen with 
 interest ? 

 and as to interest , when be it ever to serve he if not now -- through 
 his old friendship with Ashe ? chivalry towards a much - solicit mortal , 
 also your friend -- even the subtler self - love -- might have counsel 
 silence -- or at least approach more gradual . it have be far from his 
 purpose , indeed , to speak so promptly . but here be the hour and the 
 man ! and there , in a distant country town , a woman -- whereof the mere 
 existence be unsuspecte by Darrell 's country - house acquaintance -- sit 
 wait , in whose eye the post in question loom as a 
 condition -- perhaps indispensable . Darrell 's secret eagerness could not 
 withstand the temptation . 

 so , with a nervous beginning--"by - the - way , I wish to consult you about 
 a personal matter . of course , answer or not , as you like . naturally , I 
 understand the difficulties!"--the plunge be take , and the petitioner 
 soon in full career . 

 after a first start -- a lift brow of astonishment -- Ashe be 
 uncomfortably silent -- till suddenly , in a pause of Darrell 's eloquence , 
 his face change , and with a burst of his old , careless freedom and 
 affection , he fling an arm along Darrell 's shoulder , with an impetuous-- 

 " I say , old fellow -- don't -- don't be a damned fool ! " 

 an ashen white overspread the countenance of the man thus address . his 
 lip twitch . he walk on in silence . Ashe look at he -- stammer : 

 " why , my dear Philip , it would be the extinguishing of you ! " 

 Darrell say nothing . Ashe , still hold his friend captive , descanted 
 hurriedly on the disadvantage of the post " for a man of your gift , " 
 then -- more cautiously -- on its special requirement , not one of which do 
 Darrell possess -- hint at the man apply for it , at the scientific 
 and professional influence then play upon himself , at his strong 
 sense of responsibility--"Too bad , be not it , that a duffer like I 
 should have to decide these things"--and so on . 

 in vain . Darrell laugh , recover himself , change the subject ; but as 
 they walk quickly back to the house , Ashe know , perchance , that he have 
 lose a friend ; and Darrell 's smarting soul have score another reckoning 
 against a day to come . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 as they near the house they find a large group still linger on the 
 lawn , and Kitty just emerge from a garden door . she come out 
 accompany by the handsome Cambridge lad who have be her partner at 
 Lady Crashaw 's dance . he be evidently absorb in her society , and they 
 approach in high spirit , laugh and tease each other . 

 " well , Kitty , how be the bruised one ? " say Ashe , as he sink into a chair 
 beside Mrs. Alcot . 

 " do finely , " say Kitty . " I shall send he home to - night . " 

 " meanwhile , have you put he up in my dressing - room ? I only ask for 
 information . " 

 " there be not another corner , " say Kitty . 

 " there ! " Ashe appeal to god and man . " how do you expect I to dress 
 for dinner ? " 

 " oh , now , William , do not be tiresome ! " say Kitty , impatiently . " he be 
 bruise black and blue"--("serve he right for get in the way , " 
 grumble Lord Grosville)--"and nurse and I have do he up in arnica . " 

 she come to stand by Ashe , talk in an undertone and as fast as 
 possible . the little Dean , who never could help watch she , think 
 her more beautiful -- and wilder -- than ever . her eye -- it be hardly 
 enough to say they shine -- they glitter -- in her delicate face ; her 
 gesture be more extravagant than he remember they ; her movement 
 restlessness itself . 

 Ashe listen with patience -- then say : 

 " I can not help it , Kitty -- you really must have he remove . " 

 " impossible ! " she say , her cheek flame . 

 " I will go and talk to Wilson ; he will manage it , " say Ashe , get up . 

 Kitty pursue he , argue incessantly . 

 he lounge along , turn every now and then to look at she , smile and 
 demur , his hat on the back of his head . 

 " you see the difference , " say Mrs. Alcot , in Darrell 's ear . " last year 
 Kitty would have get her way . this year she will not . " 

 Darrell shrug his shoulder . 

 " these domesticity should be keep out of sight , do not you think ? " 

 Madeleine Alcot look at he curiously . 

 " do you have a pleasant walk ? " she say . 

 Darrell make a little face . 

 " the great man be condescend . " 

 Madeleine Alcot 's face be still interrogative . 

 " a touch of the _ folie des grandeur ? _ " 

 " well , who escape it ? " say Darrell , bitterly . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Most of the party have disperse . only Lady Tranmore and Margaret French 
 be on the lawn . Margaret be write some household note for Kitty ; 
 Lady Tranmore sit in meditation , with a book before she which she be 
 not read . Miss French glance at she from time to time . Ashe 's mother 
 be begin to show the weight of year far more plainly than she have 
 yet do . in these last three year the face have perceptibly alter ; so 
 have the hair . the long strain of nursing , and that pathetic change which 
 make of the husband who have be a woman 's pride and shelter her 
 half - conscious dependent , have , no doubt , leave deep mark upon a beauty 
 which have so long resist time . and yet Margaret French believe it be 
 rather with her son than with her husband that the constant and wear 
 anxiety of Lady Tranmore 's life should be connect . all the ambition , 
 the pride of race and history which have be disappoint in her husband 
 have pour themselves into her devotion to her son . she live now for 
 his happiness and success . and both be constantly threaten by the 
 personality and the presence of Kitty . 

 such , at least , as Margaret French well know , be the inmost 
 persuasion -- fast become a fanaticism -- of Ashe 's mother . William might , 
 indeed , for the moment have triumph over the consequence of Kitty 's 
 bygone behavior . but the reckless , untamed character be there still at 
 his side , prepare Heaven know what pitfall and catastrophe . Lady 
 Tranmore live in fear . and under the outward sweetness and dignity of 
 her manner be there not develop something bad than fear -- that 
 hatred which be one of the strange birth of love ? 

 if so , be it just ? there be many moment when Margaret would have 
 indignantly deny it . 

 it be true , indeed , that Kitty 's eccentricity seem to develop with 
 every month that pass . the precede winter have be mark , first by 
 a mad folly of table - turning -- involve the pursuit of a particular 
 medium whose proceeding have ultimately land he in the dock ; then by 
 a headlong passion for hunting , accompany by a series of new 
 flirtation , each more unseemly than its predecessor , as it seem to 
 Lady Tranmore . afterwards -- during the general election -- a political 
 phase ! Kitty have most unfortunately discover that she could speak in 
 public , and have fall in love with the sound of her own voice . in 
 Ashe 's own contest , her sally and indiscretion have already begin to 
 do mischief when Lady Tranmore have succeed in entice she to London 
 by the bait of a French _ clairvoyante _ , with whom Kitty nightly tempt 
 the god who keep watch over the secret of fate -- till William 's poll 
 have be declare . 

 all this be deplorably true . and yet no one could say that Kitty in 
 this checkered year have do her husband much harm . Ashe be no long 
 her blind slave ; and his career have carry he to height with which 
 even his mother might have be satisfy . sometimes Margaret be 
 inclined to think that Kitty have now less influence with he and his 
 mother more than be the just due of each . she -- the young woman -- feel 
 the tragedy of Ashe 's new and grow emancipation . secretly -- often -- she 
 side with Kitty ! 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " Margaret ! " 

 the voice be Kitty 's . she come run out , her pale - pink skirt fly 
 round she . " have you see the babe ? " 

 Margaret reply that he and his nurse be just in sight . 

 Kitty flee over the lawn to meet the child 's perambulator . she lift 
 he out , and carry he in her arm towards Margaret and Lady Tranmore . 

 " be not it piteous ? " say Margaret , under her breath , as the mother and 
 child approach . Lady Tranmore give she a sad , assent look . 

 for during the last six month the child have show sign of brain 
 mischief -- a curious apathy , break now and then by fit of temper . the 
 doctor be not encouraging . and Kitty vary between the most 
 passionate attempt to rouse the child 's fail intelligence and 
 day -- even week -- when she could hardly bring herself to see he at all . 

 she bring he now to a seat beside Lady Tranmore . she have be try 
 to make he take notice of a new toy . but the child look at she with 
 blank and glassy eye , and the toy fall from his hand . 

 " he hardly know I , " say Kitty , in a low voice of misery , as she 
 clasp her hand round the baby of three , and look into his face , as 
 though she would drag from it some sign of mind and recognition . 

 but the blue eye betray no glimmer of response , till suddenly , with a 
 gesture as of infinite fatigue , the child throw itself back against she , 
 lay its fair head upon her breast with a long sigh . 

 Kitty give a sob , and bend over he , kiss -- and kiss he . 

 " Dear Kitty ! " say Lady Tranmore , much move . " I think -- partly -- he be 
 tired with the heat . " 

 Kitty shake her head . 

 " take he ! " she say to the nurse--"take he ! I can not bear it . " 

 the nurse take he from she , and Kitty dry her tear with a kind of 
 fierceness . 

 " there be the post ! " she say , spring up , as though determine to 
 throw off her grief as quickly as possible , while the nurse carry the 
 child away . 

 the footman bring the letter across the lawn . there be some for 
 Lady Tranmore and for Margaret French . in the general opening and 
 reading that ensue , neither lady notice Kitty for a while . suddenly 
 Margaret French look up . she see Kitty sit motionless with a book 
 on her lap , a book of which the wrapper lie on the grass beside she . her 
 finger keep a page ; her eye , full of excitement , be fix on the 
 distant horizon of the park ; the hurried breathing be plainly 
 noticeable under the thin bodice . 

 " Kitty -- time to dress ! " say Margaret , touch she . 

 Kitty rise , without a word to either of they , and walk quickly away , 
 her hand , still hold the book , drop in front of she , her eye on 
 the ground . 

 " oh , Kitty ! " cry Margaret , in laugh protest , as she stoop to pick 
 up the litter of Kitty 's letter , some of they still unopened , which lay 
 scatter on the grass , as they have fall unheeded from her lap . 

 but the little figure in the trail skirt be already out of hearing . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 at dinner Kitty be in her wild spirit -- a sparkling vision of 
 diamond and lace , much beyond -- so it seem to Lord Grosville -- what the 
 occasion require . " dress out like a comedy queen at a fair ! " be his 
 inward comment , and he already roll the phrase in which he should 
 describe the whole party to his wife . like the expect Lord Parham , he 
 be there in sign of semi - reconciliation . nothing would have induce 
 Kitty to invite her aunt ; the memory of a certain Sunday be too strong . 
 on her side , Lady Grosville aver that nothing would have induce she 
 to sit at Kitty 's board . as to this , her husband cherish a certain 
 scepticism . however , her resolution be not try . it be Ashe , in fact , 
 who have invite Lord Grosville , and Lord Grosville , who be master in 
 his own house , and have no mind to break with William Ashe just as that 
 gentleman 's company become even well worth have than usual , have 
 accept the invitation . 

 but his patience be sorely try by Kitty . after dinner she insist on 
 table - turning , and Lord Grosville be drag breathless through the 
 drawing - room window , in pursuit of a table that break a chair and 
 finally dance upon a flower - bed . his theology be harass by these 
 proceeding and his digestion upset . the Dean take it with smile ; but 
 then the Dean be a Latitudinarian . 

 afterwards Kitty and the Cambridge boy -- Eddie Helston -- perform a 
 duologue in French for the amusement of the company . whatever could be 
 understand in it have well not have be understand -- such at least be 
 Lord Grosville 's impression . he wonder how Ashe -- who laugh 
 immoderately -- could allow his wife to do such thing ; and his only 
 consolation be that , for once , the Dean -- whose fancy for Kitty be 
 ridiculous!--seeme to be disturb . he have at any rate walk away to 
 the library in the middle of the piece . Kitty be , of course , make a 
 fool of the boy all through . any one could see that he be head over 
 ear in love with she . and she seem to have all sort of mysterious 
 understanding with he . Lord Grosville be certain they pass each 
 other note , and make assignation . and one night , on go up himself 
 to bed very late , he have actually come upon the pair pacing up and down 
 the long passage after midnight!--kitty in such a _ negligée _ as only an 
 actress should wear , with her hair about her ear -- and the boy out of 
 his wit and off his balance , as any one could see . Kitty , indeed , have 
 be quite unabashed -- try even to draw _ he _ into their unseemly talk 
 about some theatrical nonsense or other ; and such blush as there be 
 have be entirely leave to the boy . 

 he suppose there be no harm in it . the lad be not a Geoffrey Cliffe , 
 and it be no doubt Kitty 's mad love of excitement which impel she 
 to these defiance of convention . but Ashe should put his foot down ; 
 there be no knowing with a creature so wild and so lovely where these 
 thing might end . and after the scandal of last year-- 

 as to that scandal , Lord Grosville , as a man of the world , by no mean 
 endorse the lurid imagination of his wife . Kitty and Cliffe have 
 certainly behave badly at Grosville Park -- that be to say , judge by any 
 ordinary standard . and the gossip of the season have apparently gather 
 and culminate round some incident of a graver character than the 
 rest -- though nobody precisely know what it might be . but it seem that 
 Ashe have at last assert himself ; and if in Kitty 's abrupt departure to 
 the country , and the sudden dissolution of the intimacy between herself 
 and Cliffe , those who love she not have read what dark thing they 
 please , her uncle by marriage be quite content to see in it a mere 
 disciplinary act on the part of the husband . 

 Lord Grosville believe that some rumor as to Cliffe 's private 
 character have enter into the decisive defeat -- in a constituency 
 largely Nonconformist -- which have befall that gentleman at the poll . 
 Poor Lady Tranmore ! he see her anxiety in her face , and be truly 
 sorry for she . at the same time , inveterate gossip that he be , he 
 regard she with a kind of hunger . if she only _ would _ talk thing over 
 with he ! so far , however , she have give he very little opening . if she 
 ever do , he would certainly advise she to press something like a 
 temporary separation on her son . why should not Lady Kitty be leave at 
 Haggart when the next session begin ? Lord Grosville , who have be a 
 friend of Melbourne 's , recall the early history of that great man . 
 when Lady Caroline Lamb have become too troublesome to a political 
 husband , she have be send to Brocket . and then Mr. Lamb be only irish 
 Secretary -- without a seat in the cabinet . how be it possible to take an 
 important share in steer the ship of state , and to look after a giddy 
 wife at the same time ? 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Ashe and his guest linger late below - stair . when , somewhere about 
 one o'clock , he enter his dressing - room , he be suddenly alarm by a 
 smell of burning . it seem to come from Kitty 's room . he knock 
 hastily at her door . 

 " Kitty ! " 

 no answer . he open the door , and stand arrest . 

 the room be in complete darkness save for some weird object in the 
 centre of it , on which a fire be burn , send up a smoke which hung 
 about the room . Ashe recognize an old spanish brazier of beat copper , 
 stand on iron foot , which have be a purchase of his own in day when 
 he trifle with _ bric - à - brac _ . upon it , a heap of some light material , 
 which flutter and crackled as it burn , be blaze and smoke away , 
 while beside it -- her profile set and waxen amid the drift of smoke , her 
 fair hair blanch to whiteness by the strange illumination from below , 
 and all her slight form , checker with the light and shade of the fire , 
 draw into a curve of watchfulness , vindictive and intent -- stand Kitty . 

 " what in the name of fortune be you do , Kitty ? " cry Ashe . 

 she make no answer , and he approach . then he see that in the centre 
 of the pile , and prop up against some small piece of wood , a 
 photograph of Geoffrey Cliffe be consume slow and dismally . the fire 
 have just send a line across his cheek . the low limb be already 
 char , and the right hand be shrivel . 

 all around be letter , mostly consume ; while at the top of the pile 
 above the culprit 's head , stick in a cleft stick , and just begin to 
 be lick by the flame , be what seem to be a leaf tear out of a 
 book . the book from which it have apparently be wrench lie open on a 
 chair near . 

 Kitty draw a long breath as Ashe come near she . 

 " keep off ! " she said--"don't touch it ! " 

 " you little goose ! " cry Ashe--"what be you about ? " 

 " burn a coward in effigy , " say Kitty , between her tooth . 

 Ashe thrust his hand into his pocket . 

 " I wish to God you would forget the creature , instead of flatter he with 
 these attention ! " 

 Kitty make no reply , but as she draw the fire together Ashe capture she 
 hand . 

 " what be he be do now , Kitty ? " 

 " there be his poem , " say Kitty , point to the chair . " the last one 
 be about I . " 

 " may I be allow to see it ? " 

 " it be not there . " 

 " ah ! I see . you have top the pile with it . with your leave , I will delay 
 its doom . " he snatch the leaf from its stick , and bend down read it 
 by the light of the burn paper . Kitty watch he , frown , her hand 
 on her hip , the white wrap she wear over her night - dress twining round 
 she in close fold a slender , brood sorceress , some Canidia or 
 Simaetha , interrupt in her ritual of hate . 

 but Ashe be in no mood for literary reminiscence . his lip be 
 contemptuous , his brow angry as he replace the leaf in its cleft stick , 
 whither the flame immediately pursue it . 

 " wretched stuff , and damn impertinence!--that be all there be to say . 
 for Heaven 's sake , Kitty , do not let any one suppose you mind the 
 thing -- for an instant ! " 

 she look at he with strange eye . " but if I do mind it ? " 

 his face darken to the shade of her . " do that mean -- that you still 
 think of he -- still wish to see he ? " 

 " I do not know , " say Kitty , slowly . the fire have die away . nothing but 
 a few char remnant remain in the brazier . Ashe light the gas , and 
 disclose a tragic Kitty , flush by the audacity of her last remark . he 
 take she masterfully in his arm . 

 " that be bravado , " he say , kiss she . " you love _ I _ ! and I may be a 
 poor stick , but I be worth a good many Cliffes . Defy I -- and I will write 
 you a well poem , too ! " 

 the color leap afresh in Kitty 's cheek . she push he away , and , 
 hold he , peruse his handsome , scornful face , and all the manly 
 strength of form and attitude . her own lid waver . 

 " what a silly scene ! " she say , and fall -- a little , soft , yielding 
 form -- into his arm . 




 XV 


 the church clock of Haggart village have just strike half - past six . a 
 white , sunny mist enwrap the park and garden . voice and shout ring 
 through the mist ; little could yet be see , but the lawn and the park 
 seem to be pervade with bustle and preparation , and every now and 
 then as the mist drift group of workman could be distinguish , 
 marquee emerge , flag float , and cart lade with bench and 
 trestle - table rumble slowly over the road and track of the park . 

 the house itself be full of gardener , arrange bank of magnificent 
 flower in the hall and drawing - room , and superintend by the head 
 gardener , a person of much great dignity than Ashe himself , who swear 
 at any underling make a noise , as though the slumber of the " quality " 
 in the big house overhead and the danger of disturb they be the 
 dear interest of a burden life . 

 as to the mistress of the house , at any rate , there be no need for 
 caution . the clock of the house have barely follow the church clock in 
 strike the half - hour when the workman on the ground floor see Lady 
 Kitty come down - stair and go through the drawing - room window into the 
 garden . there she give her opinion on the preparation , push on 
 afterwards into the park , where she astound the various contractor 
 and their workman by her appearance at such an hour , and by the vigor 
 and decision of her order . finally she leave the park behind , just as 
 its broad , scorch surface begin everywhere to shake off the mist , and 
 enter one of the border wood . 

 she have a basket on her arm , and , when she have find for herself a mossy 
 seat amid the root of a great oak , she unpack it . it contain a mass 
 of write page , some fresh scribble - paper , ink and pen , and a small 
 portfolio . when they be all lie on the moss beside she , Kitty turn 
 over the sheet with a love hand , read here and there . 

 " it be good ! " she say to herself . " I vow it be ! " 

 dip her pen in the ink , she begin upon correction . the sun filter 
 through the thick leafage overhead , touch her white dress , her small 
 shoe , and the mass of her hair . she wear a Leghorn garden - hat , tie 
 with pink ribbon under her chin , and in her morning freshness and 
 daintiness she look about seventeen . the hour of sleep have calm the 
 restlessness of the wide , brown eye ; they be full now of gentleness 
 and mirth . 

 " I wonder if he will come ? " 

 she look up and listen . and as she do so , her eye and sense be 
 seize with the beauty of the wood . the mystery of early solitary hour 
 seem to be still upon it ; both in the sunlight and the shadow there 
 be a magic unknown to the later day . in a clearing before she spread a 
 lake of willow - herb , of a pure bright pink , hem in by a golden shore 
 of ragwort . the splash of color give Kitty a passionate delight . 

 " dear , dear world ! " she stretch out her hand to it in a childish 
 greeting . 

 then the joy die sharply from her eye . " how many year leave -- to enjoy 
 it in -- before one dy -- or one 's heart die ? " 

 invariably , now , her moment of sensuous pleasure end in this dread of 
 something beyond -- of a sudden drowning of beauty and delight -- of a 
 future unknown and cruel , come to meet she , like some armed assassin 
 in a narrow path . 

 William ! when it come could William save she ? " William be a _ darling _ ! " 
 she say to herself , her face full of yearning . 

 as for that other -- it give she an intense pleasure to think of the 
 flame creep up the form and face of the photograph . should she hear , 
 perhaps , in a week or two that he have be seize with some mysterious 
 illness , like the witch - victim of old ? a shiver run through she , a 
 thrill of repentance -- till the bitter line of the poem come back to 
 memory -- line describe a woman with neither the courage for sin nor 
 the strength for virtue , a " light woman " indeed , whom the great passion 
 pass eternally by , whom it be a humiliation to court and a mere 
 weakness to regret . then she laugh , and begin again with passionate 
 z upon the sheet before she . 

 a sound of approach footstep on the wood - path . she half rise , 
 smile . 

 the branch part , and Darrell appear . he pause to survey the oread 
 vision of Lady Kitty . 

 " be I not to the minute ? " he hold up his watch in front of she . 

 " so you get my note ? " 

 " certainly . I be immensely flatter . " he throw himself down on the 
 moss beside she , his sallow , long - chin face and dark eye tone to a 
 morning cheerfulness , his dress much fresh and more exact than usual . 
 " but he be one of the man who look so much well in their old clothe ! " 
 think Kitty . 

 " well , what can I do for you , Lady Kitty ? " he resume , smile . 

 " I want your advice , " say Kitty -- not altogether sure , now that he be 
 there beside she , that she do want it . 

 " about your literary work ? " 

 she throw he a quick glance . 

 " do you know ? how do you know ? I have be write a book ! " 

 " so I imagined-- " 

 " and -- and-- " she break now into eagerness , bend forward , " I want you 
 to help I get it publish . it be a deadly secret . nobody knows-- " 

 " not even William ? " 

 " no one , " she repeat . " and I can not tell you about it , or show you a 
 line of it , unless you vow and swear to me-- " 

 " oh ! I swear , " say Darrell , tranquilly--"i swear . " 

 Kitty look at he doubtfully a moment -- then resume : 

 " I have write it at all sort of time -- when William be away -- in the 
 middle of the night -- out in the wood . _ nobody _ know . you see"--her 
 little finger pluck at the moss--"i have a good many advantage . if 
 people want ' Society ' with a big S , I can give it they ! " 

 " naturally , " say Darrell . 

 " and it always amuse people -- doesn't it ? " 

 Kitty clasp her hand round her knee and look at he with candor . 

 " do it ? " say Darrell . " it have be do a good deal . " 

 " oh , of course , " say Kitty , impatiently , " mine be not the proper thing . 
 you do not imagine I should try and write like Thackeray , do you ? mine 's 
 _ real _ people--_real _ thing that happen -- with just the name 
 alter . " 

 " ah ! " say Darrell , sit up--"that sound exciting . be it libellous ? " 

 " well , that be just what I want to know , " say Kitty , slowly . " of course , 
 I have make a kind of story out of it . but you would have to be a great fool 
 not to guess . I have put myself in , and-- " 

 " and ashe ? " 

 Kitty nod . " all the novel that be write about politic 
 nowadays -- except Dizzy's -- be such nonsense , be not they ? I just want 
 to describe -- from the inside -- how a real statesman"--she throw up her 
 head proudly--"live , and what he do . " 

 " excellent subject , " say Darrell . " well -- anybody else ? " 

 Kitty flush . " you will see , " she say , uncertainly . 

 Darrell 's involuntary smile be hide by a bunch of honeysuckle at 
 which he be sniff . " may I look ? " he ask , stretch out a hand for 
 the sheet . 

 she push they towards he , half unwilling , half eager , and he begin to 
 turn they over . apparently it have a thread of story -- both slender and 
 extravagant . and on the thread -- hullo!--here be the fancy ball ; he 
 pounce upon it . a portrait of Lady Parham -- Ye power ! he chuckle as he 
 read . on the next page the Chancellor of the Exchequer -- snub - nosed 
 _ parvenu _ and Puritan -- admirably catch . far on a speech of Ashe be 
 in the House -- with caricature to right and caricature to left ... ah ! the 
 poet!--at last ! he bend over the page till Kitty cough and fidget , 
 and he think it well to hurry on . but it be war , he perceive -- open , 
 undignified , feminine war . on the next page , the Archbishop of 
 Canterbury -- with Lady Kitty 's view on the Athanasian Creed ! Heavens ! 
 what a book ! next , Royalty itself , not too respectfully handle . then 
 Ashe again -- Ashe glorify , Ashe explain , Ashe intrigue against , and 
 Ashe triumphant -- everywhere the centre of the stage , and everywhere , of 
 course , all unknown to the author , the fool of the piece . political 
 indiscretion also , of the most startling kind , as come from the wife 
 of a cabinet minister . allusion , besides , scatter broadcast , to the 
 scandal of the day -- material as far as he could see for a dozen libel 
 action . and with it all , much fantastic ability , flash of wit and 
 romance , enough to give the book wing beyond its first personal 
 audience -- enough , in fact , to secure to all its scandalous matter the 
 wide possible chance of fame . 

 " well ! " 

 he roll over on his elbow , and lie star at the sheet before 
 he -- dumb . what be he to say ? 

 a thought strike he . as far as he could perceive , there be an empty 
 niche . 

 " and Lord Parham ? " 

 a smile of mischief broaden on Kitty 's lip . 

 " that will come , " she say -- and check herself . Darrell bow his face on 
 his hand and laugh , unseen . to what sacrificial rite be the 
 unconscious victim hurrying -- at that very moment -- in the express train 
 which be to land he at Haggart Station that afternoon ? 

 " well ! " say Kitty , impatiently--"what do you think ? can you help I ? " 

 Darrell look up . 

 " you know , Lady Kitty , that book can not be publish like that . nobody 
 would risk it . " 

 " well , I suppose they will tell I what to cut out . " 

 " yes , " say Darrell , slowly , catch by many reflections--"no doubt some 
 clever fellow will know how near the wind it be possible to sail . but , 
 anyway , trim it as you like , the book will make a scandal . " 

 " will it ? " Kitty 's eye flash . she sit up radiant , her breath quick 
 and defiant . 

 " I do not see , " he resume , " how you can publish it without consult 
 Ashe . " 

 Kitty give a cry of protest . 

 " no , no , _ no _ ! of course he would disapprove . but then -- he soon forgive a 
 thing , if he think it clever . and it be clever , be not it?--some of it . 
 he would laugh -- and then it would be all right . _ he would _ never pay out his 
 enemy , but he could not help enjoy it if some one else do -- could 
 he ? " she plead like a child . 

 " ' no need to forgive they , ' " murmur Darrell , as he roll over on his 
 back and put his hat over his eyes--"for you would have ' shoot they 
 all . ' " 

 under the shelter of his hat he try to think himself clear . what 
 _ really _ be her motif ? partly , no doubt , a childish love of 
 excitement -- partly revenge ? the animus against the Parhams be clear in 
 every page . Cliffe , too , come badly out of it -- a fantastic byronic 
 mixture of libertine and cad . Lady Kitty have well beware ! as far as 
 he know , Cliffe have never yet be strike , with impunity to the striker . 

 if these precious sheet ever appear , Ashe 's position would certainly 
 be shake . poor wretch!--endeavoring to pursue a serious existence , 
 yoke to such an impish sprite as this ! his own fault , after all . that 
 first night , at Madame d'Estrées ' , be not her madness write in her 
 eye ? 

 " now tell I , Lady Kitty"--he rouse himself to look at she with some 
 attention--"what do you want I to do ? " 

 " to find I a publisher , and"--she stoop towards he with a laugh 
 shyness--"to get I some money . " 

 " money ! " 

 " I have be so awfully extravagant lately , " say Kitty , frankly . 
 " something really will have to be do . and the book 's worth some money , 
 be not it ? " 

 " a good deal , " say Darrell . then he add , with emphasis--"i really 
 can not be responsible for it in any way , Lady Kitty . " 

 " of course not . I will never , _ never _ say I tell you ! but , you see , I be 
 not literary -- I do not know in the least how to set about it . if you 
 would just put I in communication ? " 

 Darrell ponder . none of the well - know publisher , of course , would 
 look at it . but there be plenty of people who would -- and give Lady 
 Kitty a large sum of money for it , too . 

 what part , however , could he -- darrell -- play in such a transaction ? 

 " I be bind to warn you , " he say , at last , look up , " that your 
 husband will probably strongly disapprove this book , and that it may do 
 him harm . " 

 Kitty bite her lip . 

 " but if I tell nobody who write it -- and you tell nobody ? " 

 " Ashe would know at once . everybody would know . " 

 " William would know , " his companion admit , unwillingly . " but I do not 
 see why anybody else should . you see , I have put myself in -- I've say the 
 most shocking thing ! " 

 Darrell reply that she would not find that device of much service to 
 she . 

 " however -- I can no doubt get an opinion for you . " 

 Kitty , all delight , thank he profusely . 

 " you shall have the whole of it before you go -- Friday , be not it ? " she 
 say , eagerly gather it up . 

 Darrell be certainly conscious of no desire to burden himself with the 
 horrid thing . but he be rarely able to refuse the request of a pretty 
 and fashionable woman , and it flatter his conceit to be the sole 
 recipient of what might very well turn out to be a political secret of 
 some importance . not that he mean to lay himself open to any just 
 reproach whatever in the matter . he would show it to some fitting 
 person -- to pacify Lady Kitty -- write a letter of strong protest to she 
 afterwards -- and wash his hand of it . what might happen then be not his 
 business . 

 meanwhile his inner mind be full of an acrid debate which turn 
 entirely upon his interview with Ashe of the day before . no doubt , as an 
 old friend , aware of Lady Kitty 's excitable character , he might have 
 feel it his duty to go straight to Ashe , _ coûte que coûte _ , and warn 
 he of what be go on . but what encouragement have be give he to 
 play so quixotic a part ? why should he take any particular thought for 
 Ashe 's domestic peace , or Ashe 's public place ? what consideration have 
 Ashe show for _ he _ ? " Tu l'as voulu , Georges Dandin ! " 

 so it end in his promising to take the MS . to London with he , and let 
 Lady Kitty know the result of his inquiry . Kitty 's dancing step as 
 they return to the house betray the height of her spirit . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 a rumor fly round the house towards the middle of the day that Harry , 
 the little heir , be bad . Kitty do not appear at luncheon , and the 
 doctor be send for . before he come , it be know only to Margaret 
 French that Kitty have escape by herself from the house and could not be 
 find . Ashe and Lady Tranmore see the doctor , who prescribe , and would 
 not admit that there be any cause for alarm . the heat have try the 
 child , and Lady Kitty -- he look round the nursery for she in some 
 perplexity -- might be quite reassure . 

 Margaret find she , wander in the park -- very wild and pale -- tell she 
 the doctor 's verdict , and bring her home . Kitty say little or 
 nothing , and be presently persuade to change her dress for Lord 
 Parham 's arrival . by the time the operation be over she be full as 
 usual of smile and chatter , with no trace apparently of the mood which 
 have go before . 

 Lord Parham find the house - party assemble on the lawn , with Kitty in a 
 three - cornered hat , fantastically garnish at the side with a great 
 plume of white cock 's feather , preside at the tea - table . 

 " ah ! " think the Premier , as he approached--"now for the tare in Ashe 's 
 wheat ! " 

 nothing , however , could have be more gracious than Kitty 's reception 
 of he , or more effusive than his response . he take his seat beside she , 
 a solid and impressive figure , no less closely observe by such of the 
 habitual guest of the political country - house as happen to be 
 present , than by the sprinkling of local clergy and country neighbor to 
 whom Kitty be give tea . Lord Parham , though now in the fourth year of 
 his premiership , be still something of a mystery to his countryman ; 
 while for the inner circle it be an amusement and an event that he 
 should be see without his wife . 

 for some time all go well . Kitty 's manner and topic be alike 
 beyond reproach . when presently she inquire politely as to the success 
 of his scottish tour , Lord Parham hop he have not altogether disgrace 
 himself . but , thank Heaven , it be do . meanwhile Ashe , he suppose , 
 have be enjoy the pursuit of a scholar and a gentleman?--lucky 
 fellow ! 

 " he have be read the Bible , " say Kitty , carelessly , as she hand 
 cake . " just now he be in the act . that be why , I suppose , he do not hear 
 the carriage . John ! " she call a footman . " tell Mr. Ashe that Lord 
 Parham have arrive ! " 

 the Premier open astonished eye . 

 " do Ashe generally study the scripture of an afternoon ? " 

 Kitty nod -- with her most confiding smile . " when he can . he says"--she 
 drop her voice to a theatrical whisper--"the Bible be such a ' d----d 
 interesting ' book ! " 

 Lord Parham start in his seat . Ashe and some of his friend still 
 faintly recall , in their too familiar and public use of this 
 particular naughty word , the lurid vocabulary of the Peel and Melbourne 
 generation . but in a lady 's mouth the effect be prodigious . Lord 
 Grosville frown sternly and walk away ; Eddie Helston smother a 
 burst of laughter ; the Dean , startle , break off a conversation with a 
 group of archaeological clergyman and come to see what he could do to 
 keep Lady Kitty in order ; while Lady Tranmore flush deeply , and begin 
 a hasty conversation with Lady Edith Manley . meanwhile Kitty , 
 quite unconscious , " go on cutting"--or rather , dispense 
 " bread - and - butter " ; and Lord Parham change the subject . 

 " what a charming house ! " he say , unwarily , wave his hand towards the 
 Haggart mansion . he be short - sighted , and , in truth , see only that it 
 be big . 

 Kitty look at he in wonder -- a friendly and amiable wonder . she say 
 it be very kind of he to try and spare her feeling , but , really , 
 anybody might say what they like of Haggart . she and William be not 
 responsible . 

 Lord Parham , rather nettled , put on his eye - glass , and , be an 
 obstinate man , still maintain that he see no reason at all to be 
 dissatisfied with Haggart , from the æsthetic point of view . Kitty say 
 nothing , but for the first time a gleam of mockery show itself in her 
 change look . 

 Lady Tranmore , always nervously on the watch , move forward at this 
 point , and Lord Parham , with marked and pompous suavity , transfer his 
 conversation to she . 

 thus assure , as he think , of a good listener , and deliver from his 
 uncomfortable hostess , Lord Parham cross his leg and begin to talk at 
 his ease . the guest round the various tea - table converge , some 
 standing and some sit , and make a circle about the great man . about 
 Kitty , too , who sit , equally conspicuous , dip a biscuit in milk , and 
 tease her small dog with it . Lord Parham meanwhile describe to Lady 
 Tranmore -- at wearisome length -- the demonstration which have attend his 
 journey south , the railway - station crowd , address , and so forth . he 
 handle the topic in a tone of jocular humility , which but slightly 
 conceal the vast complacency beneath . Kitty 's lip twitch ; she feed 
 Ponto hastily with all possible cake . 

 " no one , of course , can keep any count of what he say on these 
 occasion , " resume Lord Parham , with a gracious smile . " I hope I talk 
 some sense-- " 

 " oh , but why ? " say Kitty , look up , her large fawn 's eye bent on the 
 speaker . 

 " why ? " repeat Lord Parham , suddenly stiffen . " I do not follow you , 
 Lady Kitty . " 

 " anybody can talk sense ! " say Kitty , throw a big bit of muffin at 
 Ponto 's nose . " it be the other thing that be hard -- isn't it ? " 

 " Lady Kitty , " say the Dean , lift a finger , " you be plagiarize 
 from Mr. Pitt . " 

 " be I ? " say Kitty . " I do not know . " 

 " I imagine that Mr. Pitt talk sense sometimes , " say Lord Parham , 
 shortly . 

 " ah , that be when he be drunk ! " say Kitty . " then he be not 
 responsible . " 

 Lord Parham and the circle laugh -- though the Premier 's laugh be a 
 little dry and perfunctory . 

 " so you worship nonsense , Lady Kitty ? " 

 Kitty nod sweetly . 

 " and so do William . ah , here he be ! " 

 for Ashe appear , hurry over the lawn , and Lord Parham rise to greet 
 his host . 

 " upon my word , Ashe , how well you look ! _ you _ have have some holiday ! " 

 " which be more than can be say of yourself , " say Ashe , with smile 
 sympathy . " well!--how have the speech go ? be there anything leave of 
 you ? Edinburgh be magnificent ! " 

 he wear his most radiant aspect as he sit down beside his guest ; and 
 Kitty watch he , and already conscious of a renewed and excitable 
 dislike for her guest , think William be overdo it absurdly , and 
 grow still more restive . 

 the Premier bring the tip of his finger lightly together , as he 
 resume his seat . 

 " oh ! my dear fellow , people be very kind -- too much so ! yes -- I think it 
 do good -- it do good . I should now rest and be thankful -- if it be not 
 for the bishop ! " 

 " the bishop ! " say the Rector of the parish stand near . " what have 
 the Bishops be do , my lord ? " 

 " dying , " say Kitty , as she fall into an attitude which command both 
 William and Lord Parham . " they do it on purpose . " 

 " another this morning ! " say Ashe , throw up his hand . 

 " oh ! they die to plague I , " say the Prime Minister , with the air of 
 one on whom the universe weigh heavy . " there never be such a 
 conspiracy ! " 

 " you should let William appoint they , " say Kitty , lean her chin upon 
 her hand and study Lord Parham with eye all the more brilliant for 
 the dark circle which fatigue , or something else , have draw round they . 

 " ah , to be sure ! " say Lord Parham , affably . " I have forget that Ashe 
 be our theologian . take I a walk before dinner ! " he add , address 
 his host . 

 " but you will not take his advice , " say Kitty , smile . 

 the Premier turn rather sharply . 

 " how do you know that , Lady Kitty ? " 

 Kitty hesitate -- then say , with the prettiest , slight laugh : 

 " Lady Parham have such strong view -- hasn't she?--on church question ! " 

 Lord Parham 's feeling be that a more insidiously impertinent question 
 have never be put to he . he draw himself up . 

 " if she have , Lady Kitty , I can only say I know very little about they ! 
 she very wisely keep they to herself . " 

 " ah ! " say Kitty , as her lovely eyebrow lift , " that show how little 
 people know . " 

 " I do not quite understand , " say Lord Parham . " to what do you allude , 
 Lady Kitty ? " 

 Kitty laugh . she raise her eye to the Rector , a spare High 
 Churchman , who have retreat uncomfortably behind Lady Tranmore . 

 " some one -- say to I last week -- that Lady Parham have save the 
 Church ! " 

 the Prime Minister rise . " I must have a little exercise before dinner . 
 your garden , Ashe -- be there time ? " 

 Ashe , scarlet with discomfort and annoyance , carry his visitor off . as 
 he do so , he pass his wife . Kitty turn her little head , look at 
 he half shyly , half defiantly . the Dean see the look ; see also that 
 Ashe deliberately avoid it . 

 the party presently begin to disperse . the Dean find himself beside his 
 hostess -- stroll over the lawn towards the house . he observe she 
 attentively -- vex with she , and vex for she ! surely she be thin 
 than he have ever see she . a little more , and her beauty would suffer 
 seriously . come he know not whence , there light upon he the sudden and 
 painful impression of something undermine , something consume from 
 within . 

 " Lady Kitty , do you ever rest ? " he ask she , unexpectedly . 

 " rest ! " she laugh . " why should I ? " 

 " because you be wear yourself out . " 

 she shrug her shoulder . 

 " do you ever lie down -- alone -- and read a book ? " persist the Dean . 

 " yes . I have just finish Renan 's _ Vie de Jésus _ ! " 

 her glance , even with he , keep its note of audacity , but much soften 
 by a kind of wistfulness . 

 " ah ! my dear Lady Kitty , let Renan alone , " cry the Dean -- then with a 
 change of tone--"but be you speak truth -- or naughtiness ? " 

 " truth , " say Kitty . " but -- of course -- I be in a temper . " 

 the Dean laugh . 

 " I see Lord Parham be not a favorite of your . " 

 Kitty compress her small lip . 

 " to think that William should have to take his order from that man ! " 
 she say , under her breath . 

 " bear it -- for William 's sake , " say the Dean , softly , " and , 
 meanwhile -- take my advice -- and do not read any more Renan ! " 

 Kitty look at he curiously . 

 " I prefer to see thing as they be . " 

 the Dean sigh . 

 " that none of we can do , my dear Lady Kitty . no one can satisfy his 
 _ intelligence _ . but religion speak to the _ will_--and it be the only 
 thing between we and the void . do not tamper with it ! it be soon go . " 

 a satirical expression pass over the face of his companion . 

 " mine be go before we have be a month marry . William kill it . " 

 the Dean exclaim : 

 " I hear always of his interest in religious matter ! " 

 " he care for nothing so much -- and he do not believe one single word of 
 anything ! I be bring up in a convent , you know -- but William laugh 
 it all out of I . " 

 " Dear Lady Kitty ! " 

 Kitty nod . " and now , of course , I know there be nothing in it . oh ! I 
 _ do _ beg your pardon ! " she say , eagerly . " I never mean to say anything 
 rude to _ you . _ and I must go ! " she look up at an open window on the 
 second floor of the house . the Dean suppose it be the nursery , and 
 begin to ask after the boy . but before he could frame his question she 
 be go , fly over the grass with a foot that scarcely seem to 
 touch it . 

 " poor child , poor child ! " murmur the Dean , in a most genuine distress . 
 but it be not the boy he be think of . 

 presently , however , he be overtake by Miss French , of whom he inquire 
 how the baby be . 

 Margaret hesitate . " he seem to lose strength , " she say , sadly . " the 
 doctor declare there be no danger , unless-- " 

 " unless what ? " 

 " oh ! but it be so unlikely ! " be her hasty reply . " do not let us think of 
 it . " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Kitty be just give a last look at herself in the large mirror which 
 line half one of the side of her room when Ashe invade she . she 
 glance at he askance a little , and when the maid have go Kitty 
 hurriedly gather up glove and fan and prepare to follow she . 

 " Kitty -- one word ! " 

 he catch she in his arm , and hold she while he look down upon she 
 sparkle dress and half - reluctant face . " Kitty , do be nice to that old 
 fellow to - night ! it be only for two night . take he in the right way , 
 and make a conquest of he -- for good . he be be very decent to I in our 
 walk -- though you do say such extraordinary thing to he this 
 afternoon . I believe he really want to make amend . " 

 " I do hate his white eyelash so , " say Kitty , slowly . 

 " what do it matter , " cry Ashe , angrily , " whether he be a 
 blue - faced baboon!--for two night ? just listen to he a little , 
 Kitty -- that be all he want . and -- don't be offended!--but hold your own 
 small tongue -- just a little ! " 

 Kitty pull herself away . 

 " I believe I shall do something dreadful , " she say , quietly . 

 a sternness to which Ashe be good - humor face be almost wholly strange 
 show itself in his expression . 

 " why should you do anything dreadful , please ? Lord Parham be your guest , 
 and my political chief . be there any woman in England who would not do 
 her good to be civil to he under the circumstance ? " 

 " I suppose not , " say Kitty , with deliberation . " no , I do not think there 
 can be . " 

 " Kitty ! " 

 for the first time Ashe be conscious of real exasperation . what be to 
 be do with a temperament and a disposition like this ? 

 " do you never think that you have it in your power to help I or to ruin 
 I ? " he say , with vehemence . 

 " oh yes -- often . I mean -- to help you -- in my own way . " 

 Ashe 's laugh be a sound of pure annoyance . 

 " but please understand , it would be _ infinitely _ well if you would 
 help I , in _ my _ way -- in the natural , accepted way -- the way that 
 everybody understand . " 

 " the way Lord Parham recommend ? " Kitty look at he quietly . " never 
 mind , William . I _ be _ try to help you . " 

 her eye shine with the strange glitter . Ashe be conscious of another 
 of those sudden stab of anxiety about she which he have feel at 
 interval through the precede year . his face soften . 

 " dear , do not let us talk nonsense ! just look at I sometimes at dinner , 
 and say to yourself , ' William ask I -- for his sake -- to be nice to Lord 
 Parham . ' " 

 he again draw she to he , but she repulse he almost with violence . 

 " why be he here ? why have we people din ? we ought to be alone -- in the 
 dark ! " 

 her face have become a white mask . her breast rise and fall , as though 
 she fight with sob . 

 " Kitty -- what do you mean ? " he recoil in dismay . 

 " harry!"--she just breathe the word between her closed lip . 

 " my darling ! " cry Ashe , " I see Dr. Rotherham myself this afternoon . he 
 give the most satisfactory account , and Margaret tell I she have 
 repeat everything to you . the child will soon be himself again . " 

 " he be _ die _ ! " say Kitty , in the same low , remote voice , her gaze 
 still fix on Ashe . 

 " Kitty ! do not say such thing -- don't think they ! " Ashe have himself grow 
 pale . " at any rate"--he turn on her reproachfully--"tell I _ why _ you 
 think they . Confide in I , Kitty . come and talk to I about the boy . but 
 three - fourth of the time you behave as though there be nothing the 
 matter with he -- you will not even see the doctor -- and then you say a thing 
 like this ! " 

 she be silent a moment ; then with a wild gesture of the head and 
 shoulder , as of one shake off a weight , she move away -- draw on her 
 long glove -- and go to the dressing - table , give a touch of rouge to 
 her cheek . 

 " Kitty , why do you say that ? " Ashe follow she entreatingly . 

 " I do not know . at least , I could not explain . now , shall we go down ? " 

 Ashe draw a long breath . his frail son hold the inmost depth of his 
 heart . 

 " you have make the party an abomination to I ! " he say , with energy . 

 " do not believe I , then -- believe the doctor , " say Kitty , her face 
 change . " and as for Lord Parham , I will try , William -- i'll try . " 

 she pass he -- the lovely of vision -- fling he a hand to kiss -- and 
 be go . 




 XVI 


 there could be no question that in all external matter Lord Parham be 
 that evening magnificently entertain by the Home Secretary and Lady 
 Kitty Ashe . the chef be extravagantly good ; the wine , flower , and 
 service lavish to a degree which make both Ashe and Lady Tranmore 
 secretly uncomfortable . Lady Tranmore in particular detest " show , " 
 influence as much by aristocratic instinct as by moral qualm ; and 
 there be to her mind a touch of vulgarity in the entertaining at 
 Haggart , which might be tolerate in the case of financier and 
 _ nouveaux rich _ , while , as connect with her William and his wife , 
 who have no need whatever to bribe society , it be unbecoming and 
 undignified . moreover , the winter have be mark by a financial crisis 
 cause entirely by Kitty 's extravagance . a large sum of money have have to 
 be raise from the tranmore estate ; time be not good for the landed 
 interest , and the head agent have begin to look grave . 

 if only William would control his wife ! but Haggart contain one of 
 those fine , slowly gather library which make the distinction of so 
 many english country - house ; and in the interval of his official work , 
 which even in holiday time be considerable , Ashe could not be beguile 
 from the beloved company of his book to help Kitty sign check , or 
 scold she about expenditure . 

 so Kitty sign and sign ; and the small be Ashe 's balance , the 
 more , it seem , do Kitty spend . then , of course , every few month , 
 there be deficit which have to be make good . and as to the debt which 
 accumulate , Lady Tranmore prefer not to think about they . it all 
 mean future trouble and clipping of wing for William ; and it all 
 enter into that deep and hidden resentment , half anxious love , half 
 alien temperament , which Elizabeth Tranmore feel towards Ashe 's wife . 

 however -- to repeat -- Lord Parham , as far as the fleshpot go , be 
 finely treat . Kitty be in full force , glitter in a spangled dress , 
 her dazzle face and neck , and the pile mass of her hair , throw out 
 in relief against the panel wall of the dining - room with a 
 brilliance which might have tempt a modern Rembrandt to paint an 
 English Saskia . Eddie Helston , on she left , could not take his eye from 
 she . and even Lord Parham , much as he dislike she , acknowledge , during 
 the early course , that she be handsome , and in her own way -- thank God ! 
 it be not the way of any womankind belong to he -- good company . 

 he see , too , or think he see , that she be anxious to make he amend 
 for her behavior of the afternoon . she restrain herself , and talk 
 politic . and within the line he always observe when talk to woman , 
 line dictate by a contempt innate and ineradicable , Lord Parham be 
 quite ready to talk politic too . then -- it suddenly strike he that she 
 be pump he , and with great adroitness . Ashe , he know , want an 
 early place in the session for a particular measure in which he be 
 interested . Lord Parham have no mind to give he the precedence that he 
 want ; be , in fact , determine on something quite different . but he 
 be well aware by now that Ashe be a person to be reckon with ; and he 
 have so far take refuge in vagueness -- an amiable vagueness , by which 
 Ashe , on their walk before dinner , have be much take in , mislead no 
 doubt by the strength of his own wish . 

 and now here be Lady Kitty -- whom , by - the - way , it be not at all easy to 
 take in -- try to " manage " he , to pin he to detail , to wheedle he 
 out of a pledge ! 

 Lord Parham , presently , look at she with cold , smile eye . 

 " ah ! you be interested in these thing , Lady Kitty ? well -- tell I your 
 view . you woman have such an instinct-- " 

 --whereby the moth be keep hover round the flame . till , in a flash , 
 Kitty awake to the fact that while she have be listen happily to her 
 own voice , take no notice whatever of the signal which William 
 endeavor to send she from the other end of the table -- while she have 
 be trip gayly through one indiscretion after another , betraying 
 innumerable thing as to William 's opinion and William 's plan that she 
 have infinitely well not have betray -- Lord Parham have say nothing , 
 betray nothing , promise nothing . a quiet smile -- a courteous nod -- and 
 presently a shade of mockery in the lip -- the meaning of they , all in a 
 moment , burst on Kitty . 

 her face flame . thenceforward it would be difficult to describe the 
 dinner . Conversationally , at Kitty 's end it become an uproar . she 
 start the wildest topic , and Lord Parham have afterwards a bruised 
 recollection as of one who have be drag or drive , caliban - like , 
 through brake and thicket , pinch and tease and pelt by elfish 
 finger , without one single uncivil speech or act of overt offence to 
 which an angry guest could point . with each later course , the Prime 
 Minister grow stiff and more silent . endurance be write in every 
 line of his fight head and round , ungraceful shoulder , in his veil 
 eye and stolid mouth . Lady Tranmore give a gasp of relief when at last 
 Kitty rise from her seat . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the evening go no well . Lord Parham be set down to card with 
 Kitty , Eddie Helston , and Lord Grosville . Lord Grosville , his partner , 
 play , to the Premier 's thinking , like an idiot , and Lady Kitty and the 
 young man chatter and spar , so that all reasonable play become 
 impossible . Lord Parham lose more than he at all like to lose , and at 
 half - past ten he plead fatigue , refuse to smoke , and go to his 
 room . 

 Ashe be perfectly aware of the failure of the evening , and the 
 discomfort of his guest . but he say nothing , and Kitty avoid his 
 neighborhood . meanwhile , between he and his mother a certain tacit 
 understanding begin to make itself feel . they talk quietly , in 
 corner , of the arrangement for the speech and fête of the morrow . so 
 far , they have be too much leave to Kitty . Ashe promise his mother to 
 look into they . he and she combine for the protection of Lord Parham . 

 when about one o'clock Ashe go to bed , Kitty either be or pretend 
 to be fast asleep . the room be in darkness save for the faint 
 illumination of a night - light , which just reveal to Ashe the delicate 
 figure of his wife , lie high on her pillow , her cheek and brow hide 
 in the confusion of her hair . 

 one window be wide open to the night , and once more Ashe stand lose in 
 " recollection " beside it , as on that night in Hill Street , more than a 
 year before . but the thought which on that former occasion have be 
 still as tragic and unfamiliar guest in a mind that repel they have 
 now , alack , lose their strangeness ; they enter habitually , 
 unannounced -- frequent , irritate , deplorable . 

 have the relation between himself and Kitty ever , in truth , recover the 
 shock of that incident on the river -- of his night of restlessness , his 
 morning of agonized alarm , and the story to which he listen on her 
 return ? it have be like some physical blow or wound , easily heal or 
 conquer for the moment , which then , as time go on , reveal a hide 
 series of consequence . 

 consequence , in this case , connect above all with Kitty 's own nature 
 and temperament . the excitement of Cliffe 's declaration , of her own 
 resistance and dramatic position , as between her husband and her lover , 
 have work ever since , as a poison in Kitty 's mind -- Ashe be become 
 dismally certain of it . the absurd incident of the night before with the 
 photograph have be enough to prove it . 

 well , the thing , he suppose , would right itself in time . meanwhile , 
 Cliffe have be dismiss , and this foolish young fellow Eddie Helston 
 must soon follow he . Ashe have view the affair so far with an amused 
 tolerance ; if Kitty like to flirt with babe it be her affair , not 
 his . but he perceive that his mother be once more become restless , 
 under the general _ inconvenance _ of it ; and he have notice distress and 
 disapproval in the little Dean , Kitty 's stanch friend . 

 luckily , no difficulty there ! the lad be almost as devoted to 
 he -- Ashe -- as he be to Kitty . he be absurd , affected , vain ; but there 
 be no vice in he , and a word of remonstrance would probably reduce he 
 to abject regret and self - reproach . Ashe intend that his mother should 
 speak it , and as he make up his mind to ask her help , he feel for the 
 second time the sharp humiliation of the husband who can not secure his 
 own domestic peace , but must depend on the aid of other . yet how could 
 he himself go to young Helston ? some man no doubt could have handle 
 such an incident with dignity . Ashe , with his critical sense for ever 
 play on himself and other ; with the touch of moral shirking that 
 belong to his inmost nature ; and , above all , with his half - humorous , 
 half - bitter consciousness that whoever else might be a hero , he be 
 none : ashe , at least , could and would do nothing of the sort . that he 
 should begin now to play the tyrannous or jealous husband would make he 
 ridiculous both in his own eye and other people 's . 

 and yet Kitty must somehow be protect from herself ! ... then -- as to 
 politic ? once , in talk with his mother , he have say to she that he 
 be Kitty 's husband first , and a public man afterwards . be he prepare 
 now to make the statement with the same simplicity , the same 
 whole - heartedness ? 

 involuntarily he move close to the bed and look down on Kitty . 
 little , delicate face!--alway with something mournful and fretful in 
 repose . 

 he love she surely as much as ever -- ah ! yes , he love she . his whole 
 nature yearn over she , as the wife of his youth , the mother of his 
 poor boy . yet , as he remember the mood in which he have propose to 
 she , that defiance of the world and life which have possess he when he 
 have make she marry he , he feel himself -- almost with bitterness -- another 
 and a mean man . No!--he be _ not _ prepared to lose the world for 
 she -- the world of high influence and ambition upon which he have now 
 enter as a conqueror . she _ must _ so control herself that she do not 
 ruin all his hope -- which , after all , be her -- and the work he might 
 do for his country . 

 what incredible perversity and caprice she have show towards Lord 
 Parham ! how be he to deal with it -- he , William Ashe , with his ironic 
 temper and his easy standard ? what could he say to she but " love I , 
 Kitty!--love yourself!--and do not be a little fool ! life might be so 
 amusing if you would only bridle your fancy and play the game ! " 

 as for loftier thing , " self - reverence , self - knowledge , 
 self - control"--duty -- and the passion of high ideal -- who be he to prate 
 about they ? the little Dean , perhaps!--most spiritual of worldling . 
 Ashe know himself to be neither spiritual nor a hypocrite . a certain 
 measure , a certain order and harmony in life -- laughter and good - humor 
 and affection -- and , for the fight that make and weld a man , those 
 great political and social interest in the midst of which he find 
 himself -- he ask no more , and with these he would have be abundantly 
 content . 

 he sigh and frown , his muscle stiffen unconsciously . yes , for 
 both their sake he must try and play the master with Kitty , ridiculous 
 as it seem . 

 ... he turn away , remember his sick child -- and go noiselessly to 
 the nursery . there , along the darken passage , he find a night - nurse , 
 sit work beside a shaded lamp . the child be sleep , and the 
 report be good . Ashe steal on tiptoe to look at he , hold his 
 breath , then return to his dressing - room . but a faint call from Kitty 
 pursue he . he open the door , and see she sit up in bed . 

 " how be he ? " 

 she be hardly awake , but her expression strike he as very wild and 
 piteous . he go to she and take she in his arm . 

 " sleep quietly , darling -- so must you ! " 

 she sink back on her pillow , his arm still round she . 

 " I be there an hour ago , " she murmur . " I shall soon wake up-- " 

 but for the moment she be asleep again , her fair head lie against his 
 shoulder . he sit down beside she , support she . suddenly , as he look 
 down upon she with mingled passion , tenderness , and pain , a sharp 
 perception assail he . how thin she be -- a mere feather 's weight ! the 
 face be small than ever -- the hand skin and bone ! Margaret French have 
 once or twice bid he notice this , have speak with anxiety . he bend 
 over his wife and observe she attentively . it be merely the effect of 
 a hot summer , surely , and of a constant nervous fatigue ? he would take 
 she abroad for a fortnight in September , if his official work would let 
 he , and perhaps leave she in north Italy , or Switzerland , with Margaret 
 French . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the great day be half - way through , and the throng in Haggart Park and 
 ground be at its height . a flower - show in the morning ; then a tenant ' 
 dinner with a speech from Ashe ; and now , in a marquee erect for the 
 occasion , Lord Parham be address his supporter in the county . 
 around he on the platform sit the Whig gentry , the Radical 
 manufacturer , the town wire - puller and local agent on whom a great 
 party depend ; in front of he stretch a crowded meeting draw in 
 almost equal part from the coal - mining district to the north of 
 Haggart and from the agricultural district to the south .... 

 the August air be stifle ; perspiration shine on the broad brow and 
 cheek of the farmer sit in the front half of the audience ; Lord 
 Parham 's gray face be almost white ; his harsh voice labor against the 
 acoustic difficulty of the tent ; effort and heat , discomfort and ennui 
 breathe from the pack bench , and from the short - neck , 
 large - headed figure of the Premier . 

 Ashe sit to the speaker 's right , outwardly attentive , inwardly ashame 
 of his party and his chief . he himself belong to a new generation , for 
 whom formulæ that have satisfy their father be empty and dead . but 
 with these formula Lord Parham be stuff . a man of average intriguing 
 ability , he have be raise , at a moment of transition , to the place he 
 hold , by a consummate command of all the mean art of compromise and 
 management , no less than by an invaluable power of play to the 
 gallery . he lead a party who despise he -- and he complacently imagine 
 that he be the party . his speech on this occasion bristle with 
 himself , and have , in truth , no other substance ; the I be swarm out upon 
 the audience like wasp . 

 Ashe groan in spirit , " we have the idea , " he think , " but they be 
 damn little good to we -- it be the Tories who have the man ! ye god ! 
 must we all talk like this at last ? " ... 

 suddenly , on the other side of the platform , behind Lord Parham , he 
 notice that Kitty and Eddie Helston be exchange sign . Kitty draw 
 out a tablet , write upon it , and , lean over some white - frocked 
 child of the Lord Lieutenant who sit behind she , hand the torn leaf 
 to Helston . but from some clumsiness he let it drop ; at the moment a 
 door open at the back of the platform , and the leaf , catch by the 
 draught , be blow back across the bench where Kitty and the house - party 
 be sit , and flutter down to a resting - place on the piece of red 
 baize wheron Lord Parham be stand -- close beside his left foot . 

 Ashe see Kitty 's start of dismay , her scarlet flush , her involuntary 
 movement . but Lord Parham have start on his peroration . the rustic 
 gap , the gentry sit expressionless , the reporter toil after the 
 great man . Kitty all the time keep her eye fix on the little white 
 paper ; Ashe no less . between he and Lord Parham there be first the 
 Lord Lieutenant , a portly man , very blind and extremely deaf -- then a 
 table with a liberal peer behind it for chairman . 

 Lord Parham have resume his seat . the tent be shake with cheer , and 
 the smile chairman have rise . 

 " can you ask Lord Parham to hand I on that paper on the floor , " say 
 Ashe , in the ear of the Lord Lieutenant , " it seem to have drop from 
 my portfolio . " 

 the Lord Lieutenant , bend backward behind the chairman as the next 
 speaker rise , try to attract Lord Parham 's attention . Eddie Helston 
 be , at the same time , endeavor to make his way forward through the 
 crowded seat behind the Prime Minister . 

 meanwhile Lord Parham have perceive the paper , raise it , and adjust 
 his spectacle . he think it be a communication from the audience -- a 
 question , perhaps , that he be expect to answer . 

 " Lord Parham ! " cry the Lord Lieutenant again , " would you-- " 

 " silence , please ! speak up!"--from the audience , who have so far fail 
 to catch a word of what the new speaker be say . 

 " what _ be _ the matter ? you really can not get through here ! " say a 
 gray - haired dowager crossly to Eddie Helston . 

 Lord Parham look at the paper in mystification . it contain these 
 word : 

 " hope you have be count the ' I be . ' I make it fifty - seven.--K. " 

 and in the corner of the paper a thumb - nail sketch of himself , 
 perorate , with a garland of capital I be round his neck . 

 the Premier 's face become brick - red , then gray again . he fold up the 
 paper and put it in his waistcoat - pocket . 

 the meeting have break up . for the common herd , it be to be follow by 
 sport in the park and refreshment in big tent . for the gentry , Lady 
 Kitty have a garden - party to which Royalty be come . and as her guest 
 stream out of the marquee , Lord Parham approach his hostess . 

 " I think this belong to you , Lady Kitty . " and take from his pocket a 
 fold slip of paper he offer it to she . 

 Kitty look at he . her color be high , her eye sparkle . 

 " nothing to do with I ! " she say , gayly , as she glance at it . " but 
 I will look for the owner . " 

 " sorry to give you the trouble , " say Lord Parham , with a ceremonious 
 inclination . then , turn to Ashe , he remark that he be extremely 
 tired -- wear out , in fact -- and would ask his host 's leave to desert the 
 garden - party while he attend to some most important letter . Ashe 
 offer to escort he to the house . " on the contrary , look after your 
 guest , " say the Premier , dryly , and , beckon to the liberal peer who 
 have be his chairman , he engage he in conversation , and the two 
 presently vanish through a window open to the terrace . 

 Kitty have be join meanwhile by Eddie Helston , and the two stand 
 talk together , a flushed , excited pair . Ashe overtake they . 

 " may I speak to you a moment , Kitty ? " 

 Eddie Helston glance at the fine form and stiffen bearing of his 
 host , understand that his presence count for something in the 
 annoyance of Ashe 's expression , and depart abash . 

 " I should like to see that paper , Kitty , if you do not mind . " 

 his frown and straighten lip bring fresh wildness into Kitty 's 
 expression . 

 " it be my property . " she keep one hand behind she . 

 " I hear you just disavow that . " 

 Kitty laugh angrily . 

 " yes -- that be the bad of Lord Parham -- one have to tell so many lie for 
 his _ beaux yeux _ ! " 

 " you must give it I , please , " say Ashe , quietly . " I ought to know 
 where I be with Lord Parham . he be clearly bitterly offend -- by 
 something , and I shall have to apologize . " 

 Kitty breathe fast . 

 " well , do not let us quarrel before the county ! " she say , as she turn 
 aside into a shrubbery walk edge by clipped yew and hide from the 
 big lawn . there she pause and confront he . " how do you know I write 
 it ? " 

 " I see you write it and throw it . " 

 he stretch out his hand . Kitty hesitate , then slowly unclose she 
 own , and hold out the small , white palm on which lie the crumpled slip . 

 Ashe read it and tear it up . 

 " that game , Kitty , be hardly worth the candle ! " 

 " it be a perfectly harmless remark -- and only mean for Eddie ! any one 
 else than Lord Parham would have laugh . _ then _ I might have beg his 
 pardon . " 

 " it be what you ought to do now , " say Ashe . " a little note from you , 
 Kitty -- you could write it to perfection-- " 

 " certainly not , " say Kitty , hastily , lock her hand behind she . 

 " you prefer to have fail in hospitality and manner , " he say , 
 bitterly . " well , I be afraid if you do not feel any disgrace in it I do . 
 Lord Parham in our _ guest _ ! " 

 and Ashe turn on his heel and would have leave she , when Kitty catch 
 he by the arm . 

 " William ! " 

 she have grow very pale . 

 " yes . " 

 " you have never speak to I like that before , William -- never ! but -- as I 
 tell you long ago , you can stop it all if you like -- in a moment . " 

 " I do not know what you mean , Kitty -- but we must not stay argue here any 
 longer-- " 

 " No!--but -- don't you remember ? I tell you , you can always send I away . 
 then I should not be put spoke in your wheel . " 

 " I do not deny , " say Ashe , slowly , " it might be wisest if , next spring , 
 you stay here , for part at least of the session -- or abroad . it be 
 certainly difficult carrying on politic under these condition . I 
 could , of course , come backward and forward-- " 

 Kitty 's brown eye that be fix upon his face waver a little , and 
 she grow even whiter . 

 " very well . that would be a kind of separation , would not it ? " 

 " there would be no need to call it by any such name . oh ! Kitty ! " cry 
 Ashe , " why can not you behave like a reasonable woman ? " 

 " separation , " she repeat , steadily . " I know that be what your mother 
 want . " 

 a wave of sound reach they amid the green shadow of the yews . the 
 cheer that herald Royalty have begin . 

 " come ! " say Kitty . 

 and she fly across the grass , reach her place by the central tent 
 just as the Royalties drive up . 

 the Prime Minister sulk in - door ; and Kitty , with the most engaging 
 smile , make his apology . the heat -- the fatigue of the speech -- a 
 crush headache , and a doctor 's order!--he beg their Royal 
 Highnesses to excuse he . the Royal Highnesses be at first astonish , 
 inclined , perhaps , to take offence . but the party be so agreeable , and 
 Lady Kitty so charming a hostess , that the Premier 's absence be soon 
 forget , and as the day cool to a delicious evening , and the most 
 costly band from town discourse a melting music , as garlanded boat 
 appear upon the river invite passenger , and , with the dusk , 
 firework begin to ascend from a little hill ; as the tree shine green 
 and silver and rose - color in the bengal light , and amid the sweeping 
 cloud of smoke the wide stretch of the park , the close - pack group 
 of human being , appear and vanish like the country and creature of 
 a dream -- the success of Lady Kitty 's fête , the fame of her gayety and 
 her beauty , fill the air . she flash hither and thither , in a dress 
 embroider with wild rose and a hat festoon with they -- attend 
 always by Eddie Helston , by various curate who cherish a hopeless 
 attachment to she , and by a fat german grand - duke , who have come in the 
 wake of the Royalties . 

 her cleverness , her resource , her organizing power be laud to the 
 sky , Royalty be gracious , and the grand - duke resentfully ask an 
 aide - de - camp on the way home why he have not be inform that such a 
 pretty person await he . 

 " I should den haf look beforehand -- as vel as tink behind , " say the 
 grand - duke , as he wrap himself sentimentally in his military cloak , 
 to meditate on Lady Kitty 's brown eye . 

 meanwhile Lord Parham remain closeted in his sitting - room with his 
 secretary . Ashe try to gain admittance , but in vain . Lord Parham 
 plead great fatigue and his letter ; and ask for a _ Bradshaw _ . 

 " his lordship have inquire if there be a train to - night , " say the 
 little secretary , evidently much flustered . 

 Ashe protest . and , indeed , as it turn out , there be no train worth 
 the taking . then Lord Parham send a message that he hop to appear at 
 dinner . 

 Kitty lock her door while she be dress , and Ashe , whose mind be a 
 confusion of many feeling -- anger , compunction , and that fascination 
 which in her brilliant mood she exercise over he no less than over 
 other -- could get no speech with she . 

 they meet on the threshold of the child 's room , she come out , he go 
 in . but she wrench herself from he and would say nothing . the report 
 of the little boy be good ; he smile at his father , and Ashe feel a 
 cool balm in the touch of his soft hand and lip . he descend -- in a 
 more philosophical mind ; inclined , at any rate , to " damn " Lord Parham . 
 what a fool the man must be ! why could not he have take it with a laugh , 
 and so turn the table on Kitty ? 

 be there any good to be get out of apologize ? Ashe suppose he must 
 attempt it some time that night . a precious awkward business ! but 
 relation have get to be restore somehow . 

 Lady Tranmore overtake he on the way down - stair . in the press of the 
 afternoon they have hardly see each other . 

 " what be really wrong with Lord Parham , William ? " she ask he , 
 anxiously . Ashe hesitate , then whisper a word or two in her ear , 
 beg she to keep the great man in play for the evening . he be to 
 take she in , while Kitty would fall to the Bishop of the diocese . 

 " she get on perfectly with the clergy , " say Lady Tranmore , with an 
 involuntary sigh . then , as the sense of humor be strong in both , they 
 laugh . but it be a chilly and perfunctory laughter . 

 they have no soon pass into the main hall than Kitty come run 
 down - stair , with a large packet in her hand . 

 " Mr. Darrell ! " 

 " at your service ! " say Darrell , emerge from the shadow of one of the 
 broad corridor of the ground - floor . 

 " take it , please ! " say Kitty , pant a little , as she give the packet 
 into his hand . " if I look at it any more , I _ might _ burn it ! " 

 " suppose you do ! " 

 " no , no ! " say Kitty , push the bundle away , as he laughingly tender 
 it . " I must see what happen ! " 

 " be the gap fill ? " 

 she lay her finger on her lip . her eye dance . then she hurry on to 
 the drawing - room . 

 whether it be the soothe presence of the clergy or no , certainly 
 Kitty be no less triumphant at dinner than she have be in the 
 afternoon . the chorus of fun and pleasure that surround she , while he 
 himself sit , tired and bored , between Lady Edith Manley and Lady 
 Tranmore , do but make her offence the great in the eye of Lord 
 Parham . he have so far bury it in a complete and magnificent silence . 
 the meeting between he and his hostess before dinner have be mark by 
 a strict conformity to all the rule . Kitty have inquire after his 
 headache ; Lord Parham express his regret that he have miss so 
 brilliant a party ; and Kitty , flirt her fan , invent message from 
 the Royalties which , as most of those present know , the Royalties have 
 be far too well amused to think of . then after this _ pas seul _ , in the 
 presence of the crowded drawing - room , have be duly execute , Kitty 
 retire to her Bishop , and Lord Parham lead forth Lady Tranmore . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " what a lovely moon ! " say Lady Edith Manley to the Dean . " it make even 
 this house look romantic . " 

 they be walk outside the drawing - room window , on a terrace which 
 be , indeed , the only feature of the Haggart façade which possess some 
 architectural interest . a low balustrade of terra - cotta , copy from a 
 famous italian villa , run round it , break by large terra - cotta pot now 
 fill with orange - tree . here and there between the orange - tree be 
 statue transport from Naples in the late eighteenth century by a 
 former Lord Tranmore . there be a Ceres and a Diana , a Vestal Virgin , an 
 athlete , and an Antinous , now bring into strange companionship under 
 the window of this ugly english house . chip and blacken as they 
 be , and , to begin with , of a mere decorative importance , they still 
 breathe into the english evening a note of Italy or Greece , of thing 
 lovely and immortal . the lamp in the sitting - room stream out through 
 the widely open window upon the terrace , checker the marble 
 figure , which now emerge sharply in the light , and now withdraw in the 
 gloom ; while at one point they shine plainly upon an empty pedestal 
 before which the Dean and his companion pause . 

 the Dean look at the inscription . " what a pity ! this once hold a 
 statue of Hebe hold a torch . it be strike by lightning fifty year 
 ago . " 

 " Lady Kitty might stand for she to - night , " say Edith Manley . 

 for Kitty , the capricious , have appear at dinner in a _ quasi_-greek 
 dress , white , soft , and flow , without an ornament . the Dean 
 acquiesce , but rather sadly . 

 " I wish she have the bloom of Hebe ! my dear Lady Edith , our hostess look 
 _ ill _ ! " 

 " do she ? I can not tell -- I admire she so ! " say the woman beside he , 
 upon whose charming eye some fairy have breathe kindness and optimism 
 from her cradle . 

 " _ Ouf ! _ " cry Kitty , as she spring across the sill of the window behind 
 they . " they be _ all _ go ! the Bishop wish I to become a 
 vice - president of the Women 's Diocesan Association . and I have promise 
 three curate to open bazaar . _ ah , mon Dieu ! _ " she raise her white 
 arm with a wild gesture , and then beckon to Eddie Helston , who be 
 close beside she . 

 " shall we try our dance ? " 

 the young man of the house , a group of young guardsman and diplomat , 
 gather round , laugh and clapping . Kitty 's dancing have become famous 
 during the winter as one of her many extravagance . she no long 
 recite ; literature bore she ; motion be the only poetry . so she have 
 be carefully instruct by a _ danseuse _ from the Opera , and in many 
 point , so the enthusiast declare , have better her instruction . she 
 be now in love with a tempestuous spanish dance , teach she by a gypsy 
 _ señorita _ who have be one of the sensation of the London season . it 
 require a partner , and she have be practise it with young Helston , 
 for several morning past , in the empty ballroom . Helston have spread its 
 praise abroad ; and all Haggart desire to see it . 

 " there ! " say Kitty , point her partner to a particular spot on the 
 terrace . " I think that will do . where be the castanet , I wonder ? " 

 " Kitty ! " say a voice behind she . Ashe emerge from the drawing - room . 

 " Kitty , please ! it be nearly midnight . everybody be tired -- and you 
 yourself must be wear out ! say good - night , and let we all go to bed . " 

 she turn . Willam 's voice be low , but peremptory . she shake back her 
 hair from her temple and neck , with the gesture he have learn to 
 dread . 

 " nobody 's tired -- and nobody want to go to bed . please stand out of the 
 way , William . I want plenty of room for my step . " 

 and she begin pirouette , as though to try the capacity of the space , 
 hum to herself . 

 " Helston -- this must be , please , for another night , " say Ashe , 
 resolutely , in the young man 's ear . " Lady Kitty be much too tired . " 
 then to Lady Edith , and the Dean--"Lady Edith , it would be very kind of 
 you to persuade my wife to go to bed . she never know when she be do ! " 

 Lady Edith warmly acquiesce , and , hurry up to Kitty , she try to 
 persuade she in soft , caressing phrase . 

 " I stand on my right ! " say the Dean , follow she . " if my hostess be 
 use up to - night , there will be no hostess for I to - morrow . " 

 Kitty look at they all , silent -- her head bend forward , a curious 
 _ méchant _ look in the eye that shine beneath the slightly frown 
 brow . meanwhile , by her previous order , a footman have bring out two 
 silver lamp and place they on a small table a little way behind she . 
 whether it be from some instinctive sense of the beauty of the small 
 figure in the slender , float dress under the deep blue of the night 
 sky and amid the romantic shadow and light of the terrace -- or from 
 some divination of thing significant and hidden -- it would be hard to 
 say ; but the group of spectator have fall back a little from Kitty , so 
 that she stand alone , a picture light from the left by the lamp just 
 bring in . 

 the Dean look at she -- trouble by her wild aspect and the evident 
 conflict between she and Ashe . then an idea flash into his mind , 
 fill always , like that of an innocent child , with the image of poetry 
 and romance . 

 " one moment ! " he say , raise his hand . " Lady Kitty , you spoil we ! 
 after amuse we all day , now you would dance for we all night . but your 
 guest will not let you ! we love you too well , and we want a bit of you 
 leave for to - morrow . never mind ! you offer we a dance -- you bring we a 
 vision -- and a poem!--friends ! " 

 he turn to those crowd round he , his white hair glisten in the 
 lamplight , his delicate face , so old and yet so eager , the smile on his 
 kind lip , and all the detail of his Dean 's dress -- apron and 
 knee - breech , slender leg and silver buckle -- throw out in sharp 
 relief upon the dark .... 

 " friend ! you see this pedestal . once Hebe , the cup - bearer of the god , 
 stand there . then -- ungrateful Zeus smite she , and she fall ! but the 
 hour and the Graces bear she safe away , into a golden land , and now 
 they bring she back again . behold her!--hebe reborn ! " 

 he bow , his courtly hand upon his breast , and a wave of laughter and 
 applause run through the young group round he as their eye turn from 
 the speaker to the exquisite figure of Kitty . Lady Edith smile kindly , 
 clap her soft hand . Mrs. Winston , the Dean 's wife , have eye only 
 for the Dean . in the background Lady Tranmore watch every phase of 
 Kitty 's look , and Lord Grosville walk back into the dining - room , 
 growl unutterable thing to Darrell as he pass . 

 Kitty raise her head to reply . but the Dean check she . advance a 
 step or two , he salute she again -- profoundly . 

 " Dear Lady kitty!--dear bringer of light and ambrosia!--rest , and 
 good - night ! your guest thank you by I , with all their heart . you have 
 be the life of their day , the spirit of their mirth . good - night to 
 hebe!--and three cheer for Lady Kitty ! " 

 Eddie Helston lead they , and they ring against the old house . Kitty with 
 a flutter smile kiss her hand for thank , and the Dean see she look 
 round -- dart a swift glance at Ashe . he stand against the window - frame , 
 in shadow , motionless , his arm fold . 

 then suddenly Kitty spring forward . 

 " give I that lamp ! " she say to the young footman behind she . 

 and in a second she have leap upon the low wall of the terrace and on 
 the vacant pedestal . the lad to whom she have speak lose his head and 
 obey she . he raise the lamp . she stoop and take it . Ashe , who be 
 now stand in the open window with his back to the terrace , turn 
 round , see , and rush forward . 

 " kitty!--put it down ! " 

 " Lady Kitty ! " cry the Dean , in dismay , while all behind he hold their 
 breath . 

 " stand back ! " say Kitty , " or I shall drop it ! " she hold up the lamp , 
 straight and steady . Ashe pause -- in an agony of doubt what to do , his 
 whole soul concentrate on the slender arm and on the brightly burning 
 lamp . 

 " if you make I speech , " say Kitty , " I must reply , must not I ? ( keep 
 back , William!--I'm all right . ) Hebe thank you , please--_mille fois _ ! 
 she herself have not be happy -- and she be afraid she have not be good ! 
 _ n'importe ! _ it be all do -- and finish . the play 's over!--and the 
 light go out ! " 

 she wave the lamp above her head . 

 " Kitty ! for God 's sake ! " cry Ashe , rush to she . 

 " she be mad ! " say Lord Parham , stand at the back . " I always know 
 it ! " 

 the other spectator pass through a second of anguish . the bright 
 figure on the pedestal waver ; one moment , and it seem as though the 
 lamp must descend crash upon the head and neck and the white dress 
 beneath it ; the next , it have fall from Kitty 's hand -- fall away from 
 she -- wide and safe -- into the depth of the garden below . a flash of wild 
 light rise from the burn oil and from the dry shrub amid which it 
 fall . Kitty , meanwhile , sway -- and drop -- heavily -- unconscious -- into 
 William Ashe 's arm . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Kitty barely recover life and sense during the night that follow . 
 and while she be still unconscious her boy pass away . the poor babe , 
 all ignorant of the strait in which his mother lie , be seize with 
 convulsion in the dawn , and give up his frail life gather to his 
 father 's breast . 

 some ten week later , towards the end of October , society know that the 
 Home Secretary and Lady Kitty have start for Italy -- bind first of all 
 for Venice . it be say that Lady Kitty be a wreck , and that it be 
 doubtful whether she would ever recover the sudden and tragic death of 
 her only child . 




 PART IV 

 STORM 

      " Myself , arch - traitor to myself ; 
      my hollow friend , my deadly foe , 
      my clog whatever road I go . " 




 XVII 


 " ' among the numerous daub with which Tintoret , to his everlasting 
 shame , have cover this church-- ' " 

 " good heavens!--what do the man mean?--or be he talk of another 
 church ? " say Ashe , raise his head and look in bewilderment , first 
 at the magnificent Tintoret in front of he , and then at the line he 
 have just be read . 

 " William ! " cry Kitty , " _ do _ put that fool down and come here ; one see 
 it splendidly ! " 

 she be stand in one of the choir - stall of San Giorgio Maggiore , 
 somewhat raise above the point where Ashe have be study his german 
 hand - book . 

 " my dear , if this man do not know , who do ! " cry Ashe , flourish 
 his volume in front of he as he obey she . 

 " ' Dans le royaume des aveugle , ' " say Kitty , contemptuously . " as if any 
 German could even begin to understand Tintoret ! but -- don't talk ! " 

 and clasp both hand round Ashe 's arm , she stand lean heavily upon 
 he , her whole soul gaze from the eye she turn upon the picture , 
 her lip quiver , as though , from some physical weakness , she could 
 only just hold back the tear with which , indeed , the face be charge . 

 she and Ashe be look at that " last supper " of Tintoret 's which 
 hang in the choir of San Giorgio Maggiore at Venice . 

 it be a picture dear to all lover of Tintoret , breathe in every line 
 and group the passionate and mystical fancy of the master . 

 the scene pass , it will be remember , in what seem to be the 
 spacious guest - chamber of an inn . the Lord and his disciple be 
 gather round the last sacred meal of the Old Covenant , the first of 
 the New . on the left , a long table stretch from the spectator into the 
 depth of the picture ; the disciple be range along one side of it ; 
 and on the other sit Judas , solitary and accurse . the young Christ have 
 rise ; he hold the bread in his lift hand and be about to give it to 
 the beloved disciple , while Peter beyond , rise from his seat in his 
 eagerness , press forward to claim his own part in the Lord 's body . 

 the action of the Christ have in it a very ecstasy of giving ; the bending 
 form , indeed , be love itself , yearning and triumphant . this be far 
 express in the light which stream from the head of the Lord , play 
 upon the long line of face , illuminate the vehement gesture of Peter , 
 the adore and radiant silence of St. John -- and strike even to the 
 farth corner of the room , upon a woman , a child , a play dog . 
 meanwhile , from the hang lamp above the supper - party there glow 
 another and more earthly light , mingle with fume of smoke which darken 
 the upper air . but such be the power of the divine figure that from this 
 very darkness break adoration . the smoke - wreath change under the 
 gazer 's eye into hover angel , who float round the head of the 
 Saviour , and look down with awe upon the first Eucharist ; while the 
 lamp - light , interpenetrate by the glory which issue from the Lord , 
 search every face and fold and surface , display the figure of the 
 serve man and woman in the background , shin on the household stuff , 
 the vas and plate , the black and white of the marble floor , the beam 
 of the old venetian ceiling . everywhere the double ray , the two - fold 
 magic ! steep in these " majesty of light , " the immortal scene live 
 upon the quiet wall . year after year the slender , think - wear Christ 
 raise his hand of blessing ; the disciple strain towards he ; the 
 angel issue from the darkness ; the friendly domestic life , happy , 
 natural , unconscious , frame the divine mystery . and among those who 
 come to look there be , from time to time , man and woman who draw from 
 it that restlessness of vague emotion which Kitty feel as she hang now , 
 gaze , on Ashe 's arm . 

 for there be in it an appeal which torment they -- like the winding of a 
 mystic horn , on purple height , by some approach and unseen 
 messenger . ineffable beauty , offer itself -- and in the human soul , the 
 eternal human discord : what else make the poignancy of art -- the passion 
 of poetry ? 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " that be enough ! " say Kitty , at last , turn abruptly away . 

 " you like it ? " say Ashe , softly , detain she , while he press the 
 little hand upon his arm . his heart be fill with a great pity for his 
 wife in these day . 

 " oh , I do not know ! " be Kitty 's impatient reply . 

 " it haunt I . there be still another to see -- in a chapel . the 
 sacristan 's make sign to we . " 

 " be there ? " Ashe stifle a yawn . he ask Margaret French , who have come 
 up with they , whether Kitty have not have quite enough sight - seeing . he 
 himself must go to the Piazza , and get the news before dinner . as an 
 english cabinet minister , he have be admit to the good club of the 
 Venice resident . telegram be to be see there ; and there be anxious 
 news from the Balkans . 

 Kitty merely insist that she could not and would not go without her 
 remain Tintoret , and the other yield to she at once , with that 
 indulgent tenderness one show to the wilfulness of a sick child . she 
 and Margaret follow the sacristan . Ashe linger behind in a passage 
 of the church , surreptitiously read an italian newspaper . he have the 
 ordinary cultivate pleasure in picture ; but this ardor which Kitty be 
 throw into her pursuit of Tintoret -- the Wagner of painting -- leave he 
 cold . he do not attempt to keep up with she . 

 two lady be already in the cloister chapel , with a gentleman . as 
 Kitty and her friend enter , these person have just finish their 
 inspection of the damaged but most beautiful " Pietà " which hang over 
 the altar , and their face be towards the entrance . 

 " Maman ! " cry Kitty , in amazement . 

 the lady address start , put up a gold - rim eye - glass , exclaim , 
 and hurry forward . 

 Kitty and she embrace , amid a torrent of laughter and interjection 
 from the eld lady , and then Kitty , whose pale cheek have put on 
 scarlet , turn to Margaret French . 

 " margaret!--my mother , Madame d'Estrées . " 

 Miss French , who find herself greet with effusion by the strange 
 lady , see before she a woman of fifty , marvellously preserve . Madame 
 d'Estrées have grow stout ; so much time have claim ; but the elegant 
 gray dress with its float chiffon and lace skilfully conceal the 
 fact ; and for the rest , complexion , eye , lip be still defiant of the 
 year . if it be art that have achieve it , nature still take the 
 credit ; it be so finely do , the spectator could only lend himself and 
 admire . under the pretty hat of gray tulle , whereof the string be 
 tie bonnet - fashion under the plump chin , there look out , indeed , a 
 face gay , happy , unconcerned , proof one might have think of an 
 innocent past and a good conscience . 

 Kitty , who have draw back a little , eye her mother oddly . 

 " I think you be in Paris . your letter say you would not be able to 
 move for weeks-- " 

 " _ Ma chère!_--_un miracle ! _ " cry Madame d'Estrées , blushing , however , 
 under her thin white veil . " when I write to you , I be at death 's 
 door -- wasn't I ? " she appeal to her companion , without wait for an 
 answer . " then some one tell I of a new doctor , and in ten day , _ me 
 voici _ ! they insist on my go away -- this dear woman -- Donna Laura 
 Vercelli -- my daughter , Lady Kitty ashe!--knew of an apartment here 
 belong to some relation of her . and here we be -- charmingly 
 _ installées_!--and really _ nothing _ to pay!"--Madame d'Estrées 
 whisper , smile , in Kitty 's ear--"nothing , compare to the hotel . 
 I be economize splendidly . Laura look after every sou . ah ! my dear 
 William ! " 

 for Ashe , puzzle by the voice within , have enter the chapel , and 
 stand in his turn , open - mouthed . 

 " why , we think you be an invalid . " 

 for , some three week before , a letter have reach he at Haggart , so 
 full of melancholy detail as to Madame d'Estrées ' health and 
 circumstance that even Kitty have be move . money have be send ; 
 inquiry have be make by telegraph ; and but for a hasty message of a 
 more cheerful character , receive just before they start , the Ashes , 
 instead of journeying by Brussels and Cologne , would have go by Paris 
 that Kitty might see her mother . they have intend to stop there on 
 their way back . Ashe be not minded that Kitty should see more of Madame 
 d'Estrées than necessity demand ; but on this occasion he would have 
 feel it positively brutal to make difficulty . 

 and now here be this moribund lady , this forsake of god and man , 
 disport herself at Venice , evidently in the pink of health and 
 attire in the fresh of Paris toilette ! as he coldly shake hand , 
 Ashe register an inner vow that Madame d'Estrées ' letter henceforward 
 should receive the attention they deserve . 

 and beside she be her somewhat mysterious friend of London day , the 
 Colonel Warington who have be so familiar a figure in the gathering of 
 St. James 's Place -- grow much old , almost white - haired , and as 
 gentlemanly as ever . who be the lady ? Ashe be introduce , be aware of 
 a somewhat dark and jewish cast of face , notice some fine jewel , and 
 could only suppose that his mother - in - law have pick up some one to 
 finance she , and provide she with creature comfort in return for the 
 social talent that Madame d'Estrées still possess in some abundance . 
 he have more than once notice her skill in similar device ; but , indeed , 
 they be indispensable , for while he allow Madame d'Estrées one 
 thousand a year , she be , it seem , firmly determined to spend a 
 minimum of three . 

 he and Warington look at each other with curiosity . the bronzed face 
 and honest eye of the soldier betray nothing . " be you go to marry 
 she at last ? " think Ashe . " poor devil ! " 

 meanwhile Madame d'Estrées chatter away as though nothing could be 
 more natural than their meeting , or more perfect than the relation 
 between herself and her daughter and son - in - law . 

 as they all stroll down the church she look keenly at Kitty . 

 " my dear child , how ill you look!--and your mourning ! ah , yes , of 
 course!"--she bit her lip--"i remember -- the poor , poor boy-- " 

 " thank you ! " say Kitty , hastily . " I get your letter -- thank you very 
 much . where be you stay ? we have get room on the Grand Canal . " 

 " oh , but , Kitty ! " cry Madame d'estrées--"i be so sorry for you ! " 

 " be you ? " say Kitty , under her breath . " then , please , never speak of 
 he to I again ! " 

 startle and offend , Madame d'Estrées look at her daughter . but what 
 she see disarm she . for once even she feel something like the pang of 
 a mother . " you be _ dreadfully _ thin , Kitty ! " 

 Kitty frown with annoyance . 

 " it be not my fault , " she say , pettishly . " I live on cream , and it be no 
 good . of course , I know I be an object and a scarecrow ; but I would rather 
 people do not tell I . " 

 " what nonsense , _ chére enfant ! _ you be much pretty than you ever 
 be . " 

 a wild and fugitive radiance sweep across the face beside she . 

 " be I ? " say Kitty , smile . " that be all right ! if I have die it 
 would not matter , of course . But-- " 

 " die ! what do you mean , Kitty ? " say Madame d'Estrées , in bewilderment . 
 " when William write to I I think he mean you have overtire 
 yourself . " 

 " oh , well , the doctor say it be touch and go , " say Kitty , 
 indifferently . " but , of course , it be not . I be much too tough . and then 
 they fuss about one 's heart . and that be all nonsense , too . I could not 
 die if I try . " 

 but Madame d'Estrées ponder -- the bright , intermittent color , the 
 emaciation , the hollowness of the eye . the effect , so far , be to add 
 to Kitty 's natural distinction , to give , rather , a touch of pathos to a 
 face which even in its wild mirth have in it something alien and 
 remote . but she , too , reflect that a little more , a very little more , 
 and -- in a night -- the face would have drop its beauty , as a rise its 
 petal . 

 the group stand talk awhile on the step outside the church . Kitty 
 and her mother exchange address , Donna Laura open her mouth once or 
 twice , and produce a few contorted smile for Kitty 's benefit , while 
 Colonel Warington tip the sacristan , find the gondoli , and study 
 the guide - book . 

 as Madame d'Estrées step into her gondola , assist by he , she 
 tap he on the arm . 

 " be you come , Markham ? " 

 the low voice be pitch in a very intimate note . Kitty turn with a 
 start . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " a casa ! " say Madame d'Estrées , and she and her friend make for one of 
 the canal that pierce the Zattere , while Colonel Warington go off for 
 a walk along the Giudecca . 

 Kitty and Ashe bid their gondolier take they to the Piazzetta , and 
 presently they be glide across water of flame and silver , where the 
 white front and red campanile of San Giorgio -- now blaze under the 
 sunset -- mirror themselves in the lagoon . the autumn evening be fresh 
 and gay . a light breeze be on the water ; light that only Venice know 
 shone on the tawny sail of fishing - boat make for the Lido , on the 
 white side of an english yacht , on the burnish prow of the gondola , 
 on the warm reddish - white of the Ducal Palace . the air blow from the 
 Adriatic breathe into their face the strength of the sea ; and in the 
 far distance , above that line of building where lie the heart of 
 Venice , the high ghost of the Friulian Alps glimmer amid the sweep 
 regiment and purple shadow of the land - hurry cloud . 

 " this do you good , darling ! " say Ashe , stoop down to look into his 
 wife 's face , as she nestle beside he on the soft cushion of the 
 gondola . 

 Kitty give he a slight smile , then say , with a furrowed brow : 

 " who could ever have think we should find maman here ! " 

 " do not have she on your mind ! " say Ashe , with some sharpness . " I can not 
 have anything worry you . " 

 she slip her hand into his . 

 " be that man go to marry she -- at last ? she call he ' Markham . ' 
 that be new . " 

 " look rather like it , " say Ashe . " then _ he will _ have to look after the 
 debt ! " 

 they begin to piece together what they know of Colonel Warington and his 
 relation to Madame d'Estrées . it be not much . but Ashe believe that 
 originally Warington have not be in love with she at all . there have 
 be a love - affair between she and Warington 's young brother , a smart 
 artillery officer , when she be the widow Lady Blackwater . she have 
 behave with more heart and scruple than she have generally be know to 
 do in these matter , and the young officer adore she -- hop , indeed , to 
 marry she . but he be call on -- in Paris -- to fight a duel on her 
 account , and be kill . before fight , he have commend Lady 
 Blackwater to the care of his much old brother , also a soldier , 
 between whom and himself there exist a rare and passionate devotion ; 
 and ever since the poor lad 's death , Markham Warington have be the 
 friend and quasi - guardian of the lady -- through her second marriage , 
 through the checker year of her existence in London , and now through 
 the later year of her residence on the Continent , a residence force 
 upon she by her agreement with the tranmore . again and again he have 
 save she from bankruptcy , or from some bad scandal which would have 
 wreck the last remnant of her fame . 

 but , all the time , he be himself bind by strong tie of gratitude and 
 affection to an eld sister who have bring he up , with whom he live 
 in Scotland during half the year . and this stout Puritan lady detest 
 the very name of Madame d'Estrées . 

 " but she be dead , " say Ashe . " I remember notice her death in the 
 _ time _ some three month ago . that , of course , explain it . now he be 
 free to marry . " 

 " and so maman will settle down , and be happy ever afterwards ! " say 
 Kitty , with a sarcastic lifting of the brow . " why should anybody be 
 good ? " 

 the bitterness of her look strike Ashe disagreeably . that any child 
 should speak so of a mother be a tragic and sinister thing . but he be 
 well aware of the cause . 

 " be you very unhappy when you be a child , Kitty ? " he press the 
 hand he hold . 

 " no , " say Kitty , shortly . " I be too like maman . I suppose , really , at 
 bottom , I like all the debt , and the excitement , and the shady 
 people ! " 

 " that be not the impression you give I , in the first day of our 
 acquaintance ! " say Ashe , laugh . 

 " oh , then I be grow up -- and there be drawback . but I be make of the 
 same stuff as maman , " she say , obstinately--"except that I can not tell 
 so many fib . that be really why we do not get on . " 

 her brown eye hold he with that strange , unspoken defiance it seem 
 so often beyond her power to hide . it be like the fluttering of some 
 cage thing hunger for it know not what . then , as they scan the 
 patient good - temper of his face , they melt ; and her little finger 
 squeeze his ; while Margaret French keep her eye fix on the two 
 column of the Piazzetta . 

 " how strange to find she here ! " say Kitty , under her breath . " now , if 
 it have be Alice -- my sister Alice ! " 

 William nod . it have be know to they for some time that Lady Alice 
 Wensleydale , to whom Italy have become a second country , have settle in a 
 villa near Treviso , where she occupy herself with a lace school for 
 woman and girl . 

 the mention of her sister throw Kitty into what seem to be a 
 disagreeable reverie . the flush bring by the sea - wind fade . Ashe 
 look at she with anxiety . 

 " you have do too much , Kitty -- as usual ! " 

 his voice be almost angry . 

 she shrug her shoulder . 

 " what do it matter ? you know very well it would be much well for you 
 if-- " 

 " if what ? " 

 " if I follow Harry . " the word be just breathe , and her eye shrink 
 from meet his . ashe , on the other hand , turn and look at she 
 steadily . 

 " be you quite determined I sha'n't get _ any _ joy out of my holiday ? " 

 she shake her head uncertainly . then , almost immediately , she begin to 
 chatter to Margaret French about the sight of the lagoon , with her 
 natural trenchancy and fun . but her hand , hide under the fold of her 
 black cloak , still clung to William 's . 

 " it be her illness , " he say to himself , " and the loss of the child . " 

 and at the remembrance of his little son , a wave of sore yearning fill 
 his own heart . deep under the occupation and interest of the mind lie 
 this passionate regret , and at any moment of pause or silence its 
 " bury life " arise and seize he . but he be a busy politician , 
 absorb even in these day of holiday by the question and problem of 
 the hour . and Kitty be a delicate woman -- with no defence against the 
 torture of grief . 

 he think of those first day after the child 's death , when in spite of 
 the urgency of the doctor it have be impossible to keep the news from 
 Kitty ; of the ghastly effect of it upon nerve and brain already 
 imperille by cause only half intelligible ; of those sudden flight 
 from her nurse , when the day of convalescence begin , to the child 's 
 room , and , later , to his grave . there be sting pain in these 
 recollection . nor be he , in truth , much reassure by his wife 's more 
 recent state . it be impossible , indeed , that he should give it the same 
 constant thought as a woman might -- or a man of another and more 
 emotional type . at this moment , perhaps , he have literally no _ time _ for 
 the subtlety of introspective feeling , even have his temperament 
 incline he to they , which be , in truth , not the case . he know that 
 Kitty have suddenly and resolutely cease to talk about the boy , have 
 throw herself with the old energy into new pursuit , and , since she 
 come to Venice in particular , have show a feverish desire to fill every 
 hour with movement and sight - seeing . 

 but be she , in truth , much well -- in body or soul?--poor child ! the 
 doctor have explain her illness as nervous collapse , point back to 
 a long precede period of overstrain and excitement . there have be 
 suspicion of tubercular mischief , but no precise test be then at 
 command ; and as Kitty have improve with rest and feed the idea have 
 be abandon . but Ashe be still haunt by it , though quite 
 ready -- be a natural optimist -- to escape from it , and all other 
 incurable anxiety , as soon as Kitty herself should give the signal . 

 as to the moral difficulty and worry of those month at Haggart , 
 Ashe remember they as little as might be . Kitty 's illness , indeed , have 
 show itself in more direction than one , as an amending and appease 
 fact . even Lord Parham have be move to compassion and kindness by the 
 immediate result of that horrible scene on the terrace . his 
 leave - taking from Ashe on the morning afterwards have be almost 
 cordial -- almost intimate . and as to Lady Tranmore , whenever she have be 
 able to leave her paralyzed husband she have be with Kitty , nurse she 
 with affectionate wisdom night and day . while on the other member of 
 the Haggart party the sheer pity of Kitty 's condition have work with 
 surprising force . Lord Grosville have actually make his wife offer 
 Grosville Park for Kitty 's convalescence -- Kitty get her first laugh out 
 of the proposal . the Dean have journey several time from his distant 
 cathedral town , to see and sit with Kitty ; Eddie Helston 's flower have 
 be almost a nuisance ; Mrs. Alcot have show herself quite soft and 
 human . 

 the effect , indeed , of this general sympathy on Lord Parham 's relation 
 to the chief member of his cabinet have be but small and pass . Ashe 
 dislike and distrust he more than ever ; and whatever might have 
 happen to the Premier 's resentment of a particular offence , there 
 could be no doubt that a visit from which Ashe have hop much have end 
 in complete failure , that Parham be disposed to cross his powerful 
 henchman where he could , and that intrigue be busy in the cabinet 
 itself against the reform party of which Ashe be the head Ashe , 
 indeed , feel his own official position , outwardly so strong , by no means 
 secure . but the game of politic be none the less exhilarating for 
 that . 

 as to Kitty 's relation to himself -- and life 's most intimate and tender 
 thing -- in these day , do he probe his own consciousness much 
 concern they ? probably not . be he aware that , when all be say and 
 do , in spite of her misdoing , in spite of his passion of anxiety 
 during her illness , in spite of the pity and affection of his daily 
 attitude , Kitty occupy , in truth , much less of his mind than she have 
 ever yet occupied?--that a certain magic -- primal , incommunicable -- have 
 cease to clothe her image in his thought ? 

 again -- probably not . for these slow change in a man 's inmost 
 personality be like the ebb and flow of summer tide over estuary 
 sand . Silent , the main creep in , or out ; and while we dream , the great 
 basin fill , and the fishing - boat come in -- or the gentle , pitiless 
 water draw back into the bosom of ocean , and the sea - bird run over the 
 wide , untenanted flat . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 they land at the Piazzetta as the lamp be be light . the soft 
 October darkness be fall fast , and on the ledge of St. Mark 's and 
 the Ducal Palace the pigeon have begin to roost . an animate crowd be 
 walk up and down in the Piazza where a band be play ; and on the 
 golden horse of St. Mark 's there shine a pale and mystical light , the 
 last reflection from the western sky . under the colonnade the jeweller 
 and glass - shop blaze and sparkle , and the warm sea - wind flutter 
 the italian flag on the great flag - staff that but so recently have 
 bear the austrian eagle . 

 Ashe walk with his head throw back , think absently , in this centre 
 of Venice , of english politic , and of a phrase of Metternich 's he have 
 come across in a volume of memoir he have be lately read on the 
 journey : 

 " Le jour qui court n'a aucune valeur pour moi , excepté comme la veille 
 du lendemain . C'est toujour avec le lendemain que mon esprit lutte . " 

 the phrase please he particularly . 

 he , too , be wrestle with the morrow , though in another sense than 
 Metternich 's . his mind be alive with project ; an exultant 
 consciousness both of capacity and opportunity possess he . 

 " why , you have pass the club , William ! " say Kitty . 

 Ashe awake with a start , smile at she , and with a wave of the hand 
 disappear in a stairway to the right . 

 Margaret French linger in a bead - shop to make some purchase . Kitty 
 walk home alone , and Margaret , whose watchful affection never fail , 
 know that she prefer it , and let she go her way . 

 the Ashes have room on the first bend of the Grand Canal look south . 
 to reach they by land from the Piazza , Kitty have to pass through a 
 series of narrow street , or _ call _ , break by _ campos _ , or small 
 square , in which stand church . as she pass one of these church 
 she be attract by the sound of gay music and by the crowd about the 
 entrance . push aside the leathern curtain over the door , she find 
 herself in a great rococo nave , which blaze with light and 
 decoration . line of huge wax candle be fix in temporary holder 
 along the floor . the pillar be swathe in rose - color damask , and 
 the choir be ablaze with flower , and even more brilliantly light , if 
 possible , than the rest of the church . 

 Kitty 's catholic training tell she that an exposition of the Blessed 
 Sacrament be go on . mechanically she dip her finger into the 
 holy water , she make her genuflection to the altar , and kneel down in 
 one of the back row . 

 how rich and sparkle it be -- the light , the bright color , the 
 dancing music ! " _ Dolce Sacramento ! Santo Sacramento ! _ " these word of an 
 italian hymn or litany recur again and again , with endless iteration . 
 Kitty 's sensuous , excitable nature be stir with delight . then , 
 suddenly , she remember her child , and the little face she have see for 
 the last time in the coffin . she begin to cry softly , hide her face in 
 her black veil . an unbearable longing possess she . " I shall never have 
 another child , " she think . " _ that be _ all over . " 

 then her thought wander back to the party at Haggart , to the scene on 
 the terrace , and to that rush of excitement which have master she , she 
 scarcely know how or why . she could still hear the Dean 's voice -- see the 
 lamp waver above her head . " what possess I ! I do not care a straw 
 whether the lamp set I on fire -- whether I live or die . I want to 
 die . " 

 be it because of that short conversation with William in the 
 afternoon?--because of the calmness with which he have take that word 
 " separation , " which she have throw at he merely as a child boast and 
 threaten , never expect for one moment to be take at its word ? she 
 have propose it to he before , after the night at Hamel Weir ; she have 
 be serious then , it have be an impulse of remorse , and he have laugh 
 at she . but at Haggart it have be an impulse of temper , and he have 
 take it seriously . how the wound have rankle , all the afternoon , while 
 she be chatter to the Royalties ! and as she jump on the pedestal , 
 and see his face of horror , there be the typical womanish triumph that 
 she have make he _ feel_--would make he feel yet more . 

 how good , how tender he have be to she in her illness ! and yet -- yet ? 

 " he care for politic , for his plan -- not for I . he will never trust 
 I again -- as he do once . he will never ask I to help he -- he'll find 
 way not to -- though he will be very sweet to I all the time . " 

 and the thought of her nullity with he in the future , her 
 insignificance in his life , torture she . 

 why have she treat Lord Parham so ? " I can be a lady when I choose , " she 
 say , mockingly , to herself . " I be not even a lady . " 

 then suddenly there flash on her memory a little picture of Lord 
 Parham , stand spectacle and bewilder , peer into her slip of 
 paper . she bend her head on her hand and laugh , a stifle , hysterical 
 laugh , which scandalize the woman kneel beside she . 

 but the laugh be soon quench again in restless pain . William 's 
 affection have be her only refuge in those week of moral and physical 
 misery she have just pass through . 

 " but it be only because he be so terribly sorry for I . it be all quite 
 different . and I can not ever make he love I again in the old way .... it 
 be not my fault . it be something bear in I -- that catch I by the 
 throat . " 

 and she have the actual physical sense of some one strangle by a 
 possessing force . 

 " _ Dolce Sacramento ! Santo Sacramento ! _ " ... the music sway and echo 
 through the church . Kitty uncover her eye and feel a sudden 
 exhilaration in the blaze of light . it remind she of the bend 
 Christ in the picture of San Giorgio . Awe and beauty flow in upon she , 
 in spite of the poor music and the tawdry church . what if she try 
 religion?--recalle what she have be teach in the convent?--gave 
 herself up to a director ? 

 she shiver and recoil . how would she ever maintain her faith against 
 William -- William , who know so much more than she ? 

 then , into the emptiness of her heart there steal the inevitable 
 temptation of memory . where be Geoffrey ? she know well that he be a 
 violent and selfish man ; but he understand much in she that William 
 would never understand . with a morbid eagerness she recall the play of 
 feeling between they , before that mad evening at Hamel Weir . what 
 perpetual excitement -- no time to think -- or regret ! 

 during her week of illness she have lose all count of his movement . have 
 he be still write during the summer for the newspaper which have send 
 he out ? have there not be rumor of his be wound -- or attack by 
 fever ? her memory , still vague and weak , struggle painfully with 
 memory it could not recapture . 

 the italian paper of that morning -- she have spell it out for herself at 
 breakfast -- have speak of a defeat of the insurrectionary force , and of 
 their withdrawal into the highland of Bosnia . there would be a lull in 
 the fighting . would he come home ? and all this time have he be the mere 
 spectator and reporter , or fight , himself ? her pulse leap as she 
 think of he lead down - trodden peasant against the Turk . 

 but she know nothing . surely during the last few month he have purposely 
 make a mystery of his doing and his whereabouts . the only sign of he 
 which seem to have reach England have be that volume of poem -- with 
 those hateful line ! her lip quiver . she be like a weak child -- unable 
 to bear the thought of anything hostile and unkind . 

 if he have already turn homeward ? perhaps he would come through Venice ! 
 anyway , he be not far off . the day before she and Margaret have make 
 their first visit to the Lido . and as Kitty stand front the adriatic 
 wave , she have dream that somewhere , beyond the farth coast , be 
 those bosnian mountain in which Geoffrey have pass the winter . 

 then she start at her own thought , rise -- loathe herself -- draw down 
 her veil , and move towards the door . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 as she reach the leathern curtain which hang over the doorway , a lady 
 in front who be pass through hold the curtain aside that Kitty might 
 follow . Kitty step into the street and look up to say a mechanical 
 " thank you . " 

 but the word die on her lip . she give a stifle cry , which be echo 
 by the woman before she . 

 both stand motionless , star at each other . 

 Kitty recover herself first . 

 " it be not my fault that we have meet , " she say , pant a little . " do not 
 look at I so -- so unkindly . I know you do not want to see I . why -- why 
 should we speak at all ? I be go away . " and she turn with a gesture 
 of farewell . 

 Alice Wensleydale lay a detaining hand on Kitty 's arm . 

 " no ! stay a moment . you be in black . you look ill . " 

 Kitty turn towards she . they have move on instinctively into the 
 shelter of one of the narrow street . 

 " my boy die -- two month ago , " she say , hold herself proudly aloof . 

 Lady Alice start . 

 " I have not hear . I be very sorry for you . how old be he ? " 

 " three year old . " 

 " poor baby ! " the word be very low and soft . " my boy -- be fourteen . 
 but you have other child ? " 

 " no -- and I do not want they . they might die , too . " 

 Lady Alice pause . she still hold her half - sister by the arm , tower 
 above she . she be quite as thin as Kitty , but much tall and more 
 largely build ; and , beside the elaborate elegance of Kitty 's mourning , 
 Alice 's black veil and dress have a severe , conventual air . they be 
 almost the dress of a religious . 

 " how be you ? " she say , gently . " I often think of you . be you happy in 
 your marriage ? " 

 Kitty laugh . 

 " we be such a happy lot , be not we ? we understand it so well . oh , do not 
 trouble about I . you know you say you could not have anything to do 
 with I . be you stay in Venice ? " 

 " I come in from Treviso for a day or two , to see a friend-- " 

 " you have well not stay , " say Kitty , hastily . " Maman be here . at 
 least , if you do not want to run across she . " 

 Lady Alice let go her hold . 

 " I shall go home to - morrow morning . " 

 they move on a few step in silence , then Alice pause . Kitty 's 
 delicate face and cloud of hair make a pale , luminous spot in the 
 darkness of the _ calle _ . Alice look at she with emotion . 

 " I want to say something to you . " 

 " yes ? " 

 " if you be ever in trouble -- if you ever want I , send for I . Address 
 Treviso , and it will always find I . " 

 Kitty make no reply . they have reach a bridge over a side canal , and 
 she stop , lean on the parapet . 

 " do you hear what I say ? " ask her companion . 

 " yes . I will remember . I suppose you think it your duty . what do you do 
 with yourself ? " 

 " I have two orphan child I bring up . and there be my lace - school . it 
 do not get on much ; but it occupy I . " 

 " be you a Catholic ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " Wish I be ! " say Kitty . she hang over the marble balustrade in 
 silence , look at the crescent moon that be just peer over the 
 eastern palace of the canal . " my husband be in politic , you know . he be 
 Home Secretary . " 

 " yes , I hear . do you help he ? " 

 " no -- just the other thing . " 

 Kitty lift up a pebble and let it drop into the water . 

 " I do not know what you mean by that , " say Alice Wensleydale , coldly . 
 " if you do not help he you will be sorry -- when it be too late to be sorry . " 

 " oh , I know ! " say Kitty . then she move restlessly . " I must go in . 
 good - night . " she hold out her hand . 

 Lady Alice take it . 

 " good - night . and remember ! " 

 " I sha'n't want anybody , " say Kitty . " _ addio ! _ " she wave her hand , and 
 Alice Wensleydale , whose way lie towards the Piazza , see she disappear , 
 a small trip shadow , between the high , close - pile house . 

 Kitty be in so much excitement after this conversation that when she 
 reach the Campo San Maurizio , where she should have turn abruptly to 
 the left , she wander awhile up and down the campo , look at the 
 gondola on the Traghetto between it and the Accademia , at the Church of 
 San Maurizio , at the rise moon , and the bright light in some of the 
 shop window of the small street to the north . the sea - wind be still 
 warm and gusty , and the wave in the Grand Canal beat against the marble 
 foot of its palace . 

 at last she find her way through narrow passage , past hide and 
 historic building , to the back of the palace on the Grand Canal in 
 which their room be . a door in a small court open to her ring . she 
 find herself in a dark ground - floor -- empty except for the _ felze _ or 
 black top of a gondola -- of which the farth door open on the canal . 
 a cheerful italian servant bring light , and on the marble stair be 
 she maid wait for she . in a few minute she be on her sofa by a 
 bright wood fire , while Blanche hover round she with many small 
 attention . 

 " have you see your letter , my lady ? " and Blanche hand she a pile . 
 upon a parcel lie uppermost Kitty pounce at once with avidity . she 
 tear it open -- pause once , with scarlet cheek , to look round she at 
 the door , as though she be afraid of be see . 

 a book -- fresh and new -- emerge . _ politic and the Country Houses _ ; so 
 run the title on the back . Kitty look at it frown . " he might have 
 find a well name ! " then she open it -- look at a page here and a 
 page there -- laugh , shiver -- and at last bethought she to read the 
 note from the publisher which accompany it . 

 " ' much pleasure -- the first print copy -- three more to follow -- sure to 
 make a sensation'--hateful wretch!--'if your ladyship will let we 
 know how many presentation copies-- ' goodness!--not _ one _ ! 
 oh -- well!--madeleine , perhaps -- and , of course , Mr. Darrell . " 

 she open a little despatch - box in which she keep her letter , and 
 slip the book in . 

 " I will not show it to William to - night -- not -- not till next week . " the book 
 be to be out on the 20th , a week ahead -- three month from the day when 
 she have give the MS . into Darrell 's hand . she have be spar all the 
 trouble of correct proof , which have be do for she by the 
 publisher 's reader , on the plea of her illness . she have receive and 
 destroy various letter from he -- almost without read they -- during 
 a short absence of William 's in the north . 

 suddenly a start of terror run through she . " no , no ! " she say , 
 wrestle with herself--"he'll scold I , perhaps -- at first ; of course I 
 know he will do that . and then , I will make he laugh ! he can't -- he can not 
 help laugh . I _ know _ it will amuse he . he will see how I mean it , too . 
 and nobody need ever find out . " 

 she hear his step outside , hastily lock her despatch - box , throw a 
 shawl over it , and lie back languidly on her pillow , await he . 




 xviii 


 the following morning , early , a note be bring to Kitty from Madame 
 d'Estrées : 

      " darling Kitty,--Will you join we to - night in an expedition ? you 
      know that Princess Margherita be stay on the Grand canal?--in 
      one of the Mocenigo palace . there be to be a serenata in her honor 
      to - night -- not one of those vulgar affair which the hotel get up , 
      but really good music and fine voice -- money to be give to some 
      hospital or other . do come with we . I suppose you have your own 
      gondola , as we have . the gondola who wish to follow meet at the 
      Piazzetta , weather permitting , eight o'clock . I know , of course , 
      that you be not go out . but this be _ only _ music!--and for a 
      charity . one just sit in one 's gondola , and follow the music up 
      the canal . send word by bearer . your fond mother , 

      " Marguerite d'Estrées . " 

 Kitty toss the note over to Ashe . " be not you din out somewhere 
 to - night ? " 

 her voice be listless . and as Ashe lift his head from the cabinet 
 paper which have just reach he by special messenger , his attention 
 be disagreeably recall from high matter of state to the very evident 
 delicacy of his wife . he reply that he have promise to dine with 
 Prince S---- at Danieli 's , in order to talk italian politic . " but I can 
 throw it over in a moment , if you want I . I come to Venice for _ you _ , 
 darling , " he say , as he rise and join she on the balcony which 
 command a fine stretch of the canal . 

 " no , no ! go and dine with your prince . I will go with maman -- Margaret and 
 i. at least , Margaret must , of course , please herself ! " 

 she shrug her shoulder , and then add , " Maman 's probably in the 
 pink of society here . Venice do not take its cue from people like Aunt 
 Lina ! " 

 Ashe smile uncomfortably . he be in truth by this time infinitely 
 well acquaint with the incident of Madame d'Estrées 's past career 
 than Kitty be . he have no mind whatever that Kitty should become less 
 ignorant , but his knowledge sometimes make conversation difficult . 

 Kitty be perfectly aware of his embarrassment . 

 " you never tell me-- " she say , abruptly . " do she really do such 
 dreadful thing ? " 

 " my dear Kitty!--why talk about it ? " 

 Kitty flush , then throw a flower into the water below with a defiant 
 gesture . 

 " what do it matter ? it be all so long ago . I have nothing to do with 
 what I do ten year ago -- nothing ! " 

 " a convenient doctrine ! " laugh Ashe . " but it cut both way . you get 
 neither the good of your good nor the bad of your bad . " 

 " I have no good , " say Kitty , bitterly . 

 " what be the matter with you , miladi ? " say Ashe , half scold , half 
 tender . " you growl over my remark as though you be your own small dog 
 with a bone . come here and let I tell you the news . " 

 and draw the sofa up to the open window which command the 
 marvellous waterway outside , with its row of palace on either hand , he 
 make her lie down while he read her extract from his letter . 

 Margaret French , who be write at the farth side of the room , 
 glance at they furtively from time to time . she see that Ashe be 
 try to charm away the languor of his companion by that talk of his , 
 shrewd , humorous , vehement , well inform , which make he so welcome to 
 the man of his own class and mode of life . and when he talk to a woman 
 as he be accustom to talk to man , that woman feel it a compliment . 
 under the stimulus of it , Kitty wake up , laugh , argue , tease , with 
 something of her natural animation . 

 presently , indeed , the voice have sink so much and the head have draw 
 so close together that Margaret French slip away , under the 
 impression that they be discuss matter to which she be not mean 
 to listen . 

 she have hardly close the door when Kitty draw herself away from Ashe , 
 and hold his arm with both hand look strangely into his eye . 

 " you be awfully good to I , William . but , you know -- you do not tell I 
 secret ! " 

 " what do you mean , darling ? " 

 " you do not tell I the real secret -- what Lord Palmerston use to tell 
 to Lady Palmerston ! " 

 " how do you know what he use to tell she ? " say Ashe , with a laugh . but 
 his forehead have redden . 

 " one hear -- and one guess -- from the letter that have be publish . 
 oh , I understand quite well ! you can not trust I ! " 

 Ashe turn aside and begin to gather up his paper . 

 " of course , " say Kitty , a little hoarsely , " I know it be my own fault , 
 because you use to tell I much more . I suppose it be the way I 
 behave to Lord Parham ? " 

 she look at he rather tremulously . it be the first time since she 
 illness begin that she have refer to the incident at Haggart . 

 " look here ! " say Ashe , in a tone of decision ; " I shall _ really _ give up 
 talk politic to you if it only remind you of disagreeable thing . " 

 she take no notice . 

 " be Lord Parham behave well to you -- now -- William ? " 

 ashe color hotly . as a matter of fact , in his own opinion , Lord Parham 
 be behave vilely . a measure of first - rate importance for which he be 
 responsible be already in danger of be practically shelved , simply , 
 as it seem to he , from a lack of elementary trustworthiness in Lord 
 Parham . but as to this he have naturally keep his own counsel with Kitty . 

 " he be not the most agreeable of customer , " he say , gayly . " but I 
 shall get through . peg away do it . " 

 " and then to see how our paper flatter he ! " cry Kitty . " how little 
 people know , who think they know ! it would be amusing to show the world 
 the real Lord Parham . " 

 she look at her husband with an expression that strike he 
 disagreeably . he throw away his cigarette , and his face change . 

 " what we have to do , my dear Kitty , be simply to hold our tongue . " 

 Kitty sit up in some excitement . 

 " that man never hear the truth ! " 

 Ashe shrug his shoulder . it seem to he incredible that she should 
 pursue this particular topic , after the incident at Haggart . 

 " that be not the purpose for which Prime Ministers exist . anyway , _ we _ 
 can not tell it he . " 

 Undaunted , however , by his tone , and with what seem to he 
 extraordinary excitability of manner , Kitty remind he of an incident 
 in the life of a bygone administration , when the near relative of an 
 english statesman , stay at the time in the statesman 's house , have 
 send a communication to one of the quarterly attack his policy and 
 belittle his character , by mean of information obtain in the 
 intimacy of a country - house party . 

 " one of the most treacherous thing ever do ! " say Ashe , indignantly . 
 " fair fight , if you like ! but if that kind of thing be to spread , I 
 for one should throw up politic to - morrow . " 

 " every one say it do a vast deal of good , " persist Kitty . 

 " a precious sort of good ! yes -- I believe Parham in particular profit 
 by it -- more shame to he ! if anybody ever try to help I in that sort 
 of way -- anybody , that be , for whom I feel the small responsibility -- I 
 know what I should do . " 

 " what ? " Kitty fall back on her cushion , but her eye still hold he . 

 " send in my resignation by the next post -- and damn the fellow that do 
 it ! look here , Kitty ! " he come to stand over she -- a fine formidable 
 figure , his hand in his pocket . " do not you ever try that kind of 
 thing -- there be a darling . " 

 " would you damn I ? " 

 she smile at he -- with a tremor of the lip . 

 he catch up her hand and kiss it . " blow out my own brain , more 
 like , " he say , laugh . then he turn away . " what on earth have we 
 get into this beastly conversation for ? let us get out of it . the Parhams 
 be there -- male and female -- aren't they?--and we have get to put up with 
 they . well , I be go to the Piazza . any commission ? oh , 
 by - the - way"--he look back at a letter in his hands--"mother say Polly 
 Lyster will probably be here before we go -- she seem to be tour 
 around with her father . " 

 " charming prospect ! " say Kitty . " do mother expect I to chaperon 
 she ? " 

 Ashe laugh and go . as soon as he be go , Kitty spring from the 
 sofa , and walk up and down the room in a passionate preoccupation . a 
 tremor of great fear be invade she ; an agony of unavaile regret . 

 " what can I do ? " she say to herself , as her upper lip twist and 
 torture the low one . 

 presently she catch up her purse , go to her room , where she put on 
 her walk thing without summon Blanche , and steal down the 
 stair , so as to be unheard by Margaret , she make her way to the back 
 gate of the Palazzo , and so to the street lead to the Piazza . 
 William have take the gondola to the Piazzetta , so she feel herself 
 safe . 

 she enter the telegraphic office at the western end of the Piazza , and 
 send a telegram to England that nearly empty her purse of franc . when 
 she come out she be as pale as she have be flush before -- a little , 
 terror - stricken figure , pass in a miserable abstraction through the 
 intricate backway which take her home . 

 " it will not be publish for ten day . there 's time . it be only a question 
 of money , " she say to herself , feverishly--"only a question of money ! " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 all the rest of the day , Kitty be at once so restless and so languid 
 that to amuse she be difficult . Ashe be quite grateful to his amazing 
 mother - in - law for the plan of the evening . 

 as night fall , Kitty start at every sound in the old Palazzo . once or 
 twice she go half - way to the door -- eagerly -- with hand 
 out - stretch -- as though she expect a letter . 

 " no other english post to - night , Kitty ! " say Ashe , at last , raise his 
 head from the finely print _ Poetæ Minores _ he have just purchase at 
 Ongania 's . " you do not mean to say you be not thankful ! " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the evening arrive -- clear and mild , but moonless . Ashe go off to dine 
 with his prince , in the ordinary gondola of commerce , hire at the 
 Traghetto ; while Margaret and Kitty follow a little later in one which 
 have already draw the attention of Venice , owe to the two handsome 
 gondolier , habit in black from head to foot , who be attach to it . 
 they turn towards the Piazzetta , where they be to meet with Madame 
 d'Estrées ' party . 

 Kitty , in her deep mourning , sink listlessly into the black cushion of 
 the gondola . yet almost as they start , as the first stroke carry 
 they past the famous palace which be now the Prefecture , the spell of 
 Venice begin to work . 

 City of rest!--as it seem to our modern sens -- how be it possible that 
 so busy , so pitiless , and covetous a life as history show we should 
 have go to the making and the fashioning of Venice ! the easy passage 
 of the gondola through the soft , imprison wave ; the silence of wheel 
 and hoof , of all that hurry and clatter ; the tide that come and 
 go , noiseless , indispensable , bring in the freshness of the sea , 
 carry away the defilement of the land ; the narrow winding way , now 
 firm earth , now shift sea , that bind the city into one social whole , 
 where the industrial and the noble alike be house in palace , equal 
 often in beauty as in decay ; the marvellous quiet of the night , save 
 when the northeast wind , Hadria 's stormy leader , drive the furious 
 wave against the palace front in the darkness , with the clamor of an 
 attack host ; the languor of the hot afternoon , when life be a dream 
 of light and green water , when the play of mirage drown the foundation 
 of the _ lidi _ in the lagoon , so that tree and building rise out of the 
 sea as though some strong amphion - music be but that moment call 
 they from the deep ; and when day depart , that magic of the swiftly 
 fall dusk , and that white foam and flower of St. Mark 's upon the 
 purple intensity of the sky!--through each phase of the hour and the 
 season , _ rest _ be still the message of Venice , rest enrich with 
 endless image , impression , sensation , that cost no trouble and breed 
 no pain . 

 it be this spell of rest that descend for a while on Kitty as they 
 glide downward to the Piazzetta . the terror of the day relax . her 
 telegram would be in time ; or , if not , she would throw herself into 
 William 's arm , and he _ must _ forgive her!--because she be so foolish 
 and weak , so tired and sad . she slip her hand into Margaret 's ; they 
 talk in low voice of the child , and Kitty be all appeal 
 melancholy and charm . 

 at the Piazzetta there be already a crowd of gondola , and at their 
 head the _ barca _ , which carry the musician . 

 " you be late , Kitty ! " cry Madame d'Estrées , wave to they . " shall we 
 draw out and come to you?--or will you just join on where you be ? " 

 for the Vercelli gondola be already wedge into a serrie line of boat 
 in the wake of the _ barca _ . 

 " never mind we , " say Kitty . " we will tack on somehow . " 

 and inwardly she be delighted to be thus separate from her mother and 
 the chattering crowd by which Madame d'Estrées seem to be surround . 
 Kitty and Margaret bid their man fall in , and they presently find 
 themselves on the Salute side of the float audience , their prow 
 pointing to the canal . 

 the _ barca _ begin to move , and the mass of gondola follow . round 
 they , and behind they , other boat be pass and repasse , each with 
 its slim black body , its swanlike motion , its poised oarsman , and its 
 twinkle light . the lagoon towards the Guidecca be alive with these 
 light ; and a magnificent white steamer adorn with flag and 
 lantern -- the yacht , indeed , of a german prince -- shine in the 
 mid - channel . 

 on they float . here be the hotel , with other illuminated boat in 
 front of their step , whence spoil voice shout , " Santa Lucia , " till 
 even Venice and the Grand Canal become a vulgarity and a weariness . 
 these be the " serenate publiche , " common and commercial affair , which 
 the private serenata leave behind in contempt , steer past their 
 flare light for the dark water of romance which lie beyond . 

 suddenly Kitty 's sadness give way ; her starve sens clamor ; she wake 
 to poetry and pleasure . all round she , stretch almost across the 
 canal , the noiseless flock of gondola -- dark , lean figure impel 
 they from behind , and in front the high prow and glow - worm light ; in 
 the boat , a multitude of dim , shrouded figure , with not a face 
 visible ; and in their midst the _ barca _ , temple of light and music , 
 build up of flower , and flutter scarf , and many - color lantern , 
 a sparkle fantasy of color , rise and gold and green , shin on the 
 bosom of the night . to either side , the long , dark line of 
 thrice - historic palace ; scarcely a poor light here and there at their 
 water - gate ; and now and then the lamp of the Traghetti .... otherwise , 
 darkness , soundless motion , and , overhead , dim star . 

 " Margaret ! look ! " 

 Kitty catch her companion 's arm in a mad delight . 

 some one for the amusement of the guest of Venice be experiment on 
 the top of the campanile of St. Mark 's with those electric light which 
 be then the toy of science , and be now the eye and tool of war . a 
 search - light be play on the basin of St. Mark 's and on the mouth of 
 the canal . suddenly it catch the Church of the Salute -- and the whole 
 vast building , from the Queen of Heaven on its topmost dome down to the 
 water 's brim , the figure of saint and prophet and apostle which 
 crowd its step and ledge , the white whorl , like huge sea - shell , that 
 make its buttress , the curve and volute of its cornice and 
 doorway , rush upon the eye in a white and blind splendor , make 
 the very darkness out of which the vision spring alive and rich . not a 
 christian church , surely , but a palace of Poseidon ! the bewildered gazer 
 see naiad and bearded sea - god in place of angel and saint , and must 
 need imagine the champing of Poseidon 's horse at the marble step , 
 strain towards the sea . 

 the vision waver , fade , reappear , and finally die upon the night . 
 then the wild beam begin to play on the canal , follow the serenata , 
 light up now the palace on either hand , now some single gondola , 
 reveal every figure and gesture of the laugh English or Americans 
 who fill it , in a hard white flash . 

 " oh ! listen , Kitty ! " say Margaret . " some one be go to sing ' ché 
 faro . ' " 

 Miss French be very musical , and she turn in a trance of pleasure 
 towards the _ barca _ whence come the first bar of the accompaniment . 

 she do not see meanwhile that Kitty have make a hurried movement , and 
 be now lean over the side of the gondola , peer with arrest 
 breath into the scatter group of boat on their left hand . the 
 search - light flash here and there among they . a gondola at the very 
 edge of the serenata contain one figure beside the gondolier , a man in 
 a large cloak and slouch hat , sit very still with fold arm . as 
 Kitty look , hear the beating of her heart , their own boat be 
 suddenly light up . the light pass in a second , and while it last those 
 in the flash could see nothing outside it . when it withdraw all be in 
 darkness . the black mass of boat float on , soundless again , save for 
 an occasional plash of water or the hoarse cry of a gondolier -- and in 
 the distance the wail for Eurydice . 

 Kitty fall back in her seat . an excitement , from which she shrink in a 
 kind of terror , possess she . her thought be wholly absorb by the 
 gondola and the figure she could no long distinguish -- for which , 
 whenever a group of lamp throw their reflection on the water , she 
 search the canal in vain . if what she madly dream be true , have she 
 herself be see -- and recognize ? 

 the serenata in honor of Italy 's beautiful princess duly make its way to 
 the Grand Canal . the princess come to her balcony , while the " Jewel 
 Song " in " Faust " be be sing below , and there be a demonstration 
 which echo from palace to palace and die away under the arch of the 
 Rialto . then the gondola disperse . that of Lady Kitty Ashe have some 
 difficulty in make its way home against a force of wind and tide 
 come from the lagoon . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Kitty be apparently asleep when Ashe return . he have sit late with his 
 host -- man prominent in the Risorgimento and in the politic of the new 
 kingdom -- discuss the late intricacy of the roman situation and 
 the prospect of italian finance . his mind be all alert and vigorous , 
 range over great question and delight in its own strength . to come 
 in contact with these able foreigner , not as the mere traveller but as 
 an important member of an english government , begin to be speak of 
 by the world as one of the two or three man of the future -- this be a 
 new experience and a most agreeable one . door hitherto close have 
 open before he ; information no casual Englishman could have command 
 have be freely pour out for he ; last , but not least , he have at 
 length make himself talk French with some fluency , and he look back on 
 his performance of the evening with a boy 's complacency . 

 for the rest , Venice be a mere trial of his patience ! as his gondola 
 bring he home , struggle with wind and wave , Ashe have no eye 
 whatever for the beauty of this Venice in storm . his mind be in 
 England , in London , wrestle with a hundred difficulty and 
 possibility . the old literary and speculative habit be fast 
 disappear in the stress of action and success . his well - wear Plato or 
 Horace still lie beside his bedside ; but when he wake early , and light a 
 candle carefully shade from Kitty , it be not to the poet and 
 philosopher that he turn ; it be to a heap of official document and 
 report , to the letter of political friend , or an unfinished letter of 
 his own , the phrase of which have perhaps be run through his 
 dream . the measure for which he be wrestle against the intrigue of 
 Lord Parham and Lord Parham 's clique fill all his mind with a lively 
 ardor of battle . they be the child -- the darling -- of his thought . 

 nevertheless , as he enter his wife 's dim - light room the eager argument 
 and consideration that be run through his head die away . he 
 stand beside she , overwhelm by a rush of feeling , alive through all 
 his be to the appeal of her frail sweetness , the helplessness of her 
 sleep , the dumb significance of the thin , blue - veined hand -- eloquent at 
 once of character and of physical weakness -- which lie beside she . she 
 face be hide , but the beautiful hair with its childish curl and 
 ripple draw he to she -- touch all the spring of tenderness . 

 it be a loveliness so full , it seem , of meaning and of promise . hand , 
 brow , mouth -- they be the sign of no mere empty and insipid beauty . 
 there be not a movement , not a feature , that do not speak of 
 intelligence and mind . 

 and yet , be he to wake she now and talk to she of the experience of 
 his evening , how little joy would either get out of it . 

 be it because she have no intellectual disinterestedness ? well , what 
 woman have ! but other woman , even if they see everything in term of 
 personality , have the power of pursue an aim , steadily , persistently , 
 for the sake of a person . he think of Lady Palmerston -- of Princess 
 Lieven fight Guizot 's battle -- and sigh . 

 by Jove ! the woman could do most thing , if they choose . he recall 
 Kitty 's triumph in the great party gather to welcome Lord Parham , 
 contrast it with her wilful and absurd behavior to the man himself . 
 there be something bewilder in such power -- combine with such folly . 
 in a sense , it be perfectly true that she have insult her husband 's 
 chief , and jeopardize her husband 's policy , because she could not put 
 up with Lord Parham 's white eyelash . 

 well , let he make his account with it ! how to love she , tend she , make 
 her happy -- and yet carry on himself the life of high office -- there be 
 the problem ! meanwhile he recognize , fully and humorously , that she have 
 marry a political sceptic -- and that it be hard for she to know what 
 to do with the enthusiast who have take his place . 

 Poor , pretty , incalculable darling ! he would coax she to stay abroad 
 part of the parliamentary season -- and then , perhaps , lure she into the 
 country , with the rebuilding and refurnishing of Haggart . she must be 
 manage and keep from harm -- and afterwards indulge and spoil and 
 _ fête _ to her heart 's content . 

 if only the fate would give they another child!--a child brilliant and 
 lovely like herself , then surely this melancholy which overshadow she 
 would disperse . that look -- that tragic look -- she have give he on the 
 day of the _ fête _ , when she speak of " separation " ! the wild adventure 
 with the lamp have be her revenge -- her despair . he shudder as he 
 think of it . 

 he fall asleep , still ponder restlessly over her future and his own . 
 amid all his anxiety he never stoop to recollect the man who have 
 endanger her name and peace . his optimism , his pride , the sanguine 
 perfunctoriness of much of his character be all show in the omission . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Kitty , however , be not asleep while Ashe be beside she . and she sleep 
 but little through the hour that follow . between three and four she 
 be finally rouse by the sound of storm in the canal . it be as though 
 a fleet of gigantic steamer -- in day when Venice know but the 
 gondola -- be pass outside , send a mountainous " wash " against the 
 wall of the old palace in which they lodge . in this languid autumnal 
 Venice the sudden noise and crash be startling . Kitty spring softly 
 out of bed , fling on a dressing - gown and fur cloak , and slip through 
 the open window to the balcony . 

 a strange sight ! beneath , livid wave , lash the marble wall ; above , 
 a pale moonlight , obscure by scud cloud . not a sign of life on 
 the water or in the dark palace opposite . Venice look precisely as 
 she might have look on some wild sixteenth - century night in the year 
 of her glorious decay , when her palace be still build and her 
 state tottering . Opposite , at the Traghetto of the Accademia , there be 
 lamp , and a few light in the gondola ; and through the storm - noise 
 one could hear the tossed boat grind on their post . 

 the riot of the air be not cold ; there be still a recollection of 
 summer in the gust that beat on Kitty 's fair hair and wrestle with she 
 cloak . as she cling to the balcony she picture to herself the tumbling 
 wave on the Lido ; the pile storm - cloud parting like a curtain above a 
 dead Venice ; and behind , the gleam eternal Alps , send their 
 challenge to the sea -- the force that make the land , to the force that 
 engulf it . 

 her wild fancy go out to meet the tumult of blast and wave . she feel 
 herself , as it be , anchor a moment at sea , in the midst of a war of 
 element , physical and moral . 

 yes , yes!--it be Geoffrey . once , under the skip light , she have see 
 the face distinctly . Paler than of old -- gaunt , unhappy , absent . it be 
 the face of one who have suffer -- in body and mind . but -- she tremble 
 through all her slight frame!--the old harsh power be there unchanged . 

 have he see and recognize she -- slip away afterwards into the mouth 
 of a side canal , or drop behind in the darkness ? be he ashamed to 
 face she -- or anger by the reminder of her existence ? no doubt it 
 seem to he now a monstrous absurdity that he should ever have say he 
 love she ! he despise she -- think she a base and coward soul . very 
 likely he would make it up with Mary Lyster now , accept her nursing and 
 her money . 

 her lip curl in scorn . no , _ that _ she do not believe ! well , then , what 
 would be his future ? his name have be but little in the newspaper 
 during the precede year ; the big public seem to have forget he . 
 a cloud have hang for month over the struggle of race and of faith now 
 pass in the Balkans . obscure fighting in obscure mountain ; massacre 
 here , revolt there ; and for some month now hardly an accredited voice 
 from Turk or Christian to tell the world what be go on . 

 but Geoffrey have now emerge -- and at a moment when Europe be begin 
 perforce to take notice of what she have so far wilfully ignore . _ à lui 
 la parole ! _ no doubt he be prepare it , the bloody , exciting story 
 which would bring he before the foot - light again , and make he once 
 more the lion of a day . More social flattery , more doubtful 
 love - affair ! fool like herself would feel his spell , would cherish and 
 caress he , only to be sting and scathe as she have be . the bitter 
 line of his " portrait " rung in her ear -- blacken and discrowne she 
 in her own eye . 

 she abhor him!--but the thought that he be in Venice burn deep 
 into sens and imagination . should she tell William she have see he ? 
 no , no ! she would stand by herself , protect herself ! 

 so she steal back to bed , and lie there wakeful , start guiltily at 
 William 's every movement . if he know what have happened!--what she be 
 think of ! why on earth should he ? it would be monstrous to harass 
 he on his holiday -- with all these political affair on his mind . 

 then suddenly -- by an association of idea -- she sit up shiver , her 
 hand press to her breast . the telegram -- the book ! oh , but _ of course _ 
 she have be in time!--_of course _ ! why , she have offer the man two 
 hundred pound ! she lie down laugh at herself -- force herself to try 
 and sleep . 




 XIX 


 Sir Richard Lyster unfold his _ time _ with a jerk . 

 " a beastly rheumatic hole I call this , " he say , look angrily at the 
 window of his hotel sit - room , which show drop from a light shower 
 then pass across the lagoon . " and the dilatoriness of these italian 
 post be , upon my soul , beyond bear ! this _ Times _ be _ three _ day 
 old . " 

 Mary Lyster look up from the letter she be write . 

 " why do not you read the french paper , papa ? I see a _ figaro _ of 
 yesterday in the Piazza this morning . " 

 " because I can not ! " be the indignant reply . " there be not the same 
 amount of money squander on _ my _ education , my dear , that there have 
 be on your . " 

 Mary smile a little , unseen . her father have be , of course , at Eton . 
 she have be educate by a succession of small and hunted governess , 
 mostly Swiss , whose remuneration have certainly count among the 
 frugality rather than the extravagance of the family budget . 

 Sir Richard read his _ time _ for a while . Mary continue to write check 
 for the board wage of the servant leave at home , and to give direction 
 for the beating of carpet and cleaning of curtain . it be dull work , 
 and she detest it . 

 presently Sir Richard rise , with a stretch . he be a tall old man , with 
 a shock of white hair and very black eye . a victim to certain obscure 
 form of gout , he be in character neither stupid nor inhuman , but he 
 suffer from the usual drawback of his class -- too much money and too 
 few idea . he come abroad every year , reluctantly . he do not choose to 
 be leave behind by county neighbor whose wife talk nonsense about 
 Botticelli . and Mary would have it . but Sir Richard 's tour be 
 generally one prolong course of battle between himself and all foreign 
 institution ; and if it be Mary who drive he forth , it be Mary also 
 who generally hurry he home . 

 " who be it you see last night in that ridiculous singing affair ? " he 
 ask , as he put the fire together . 

 " Kitty Ashe -- and her mother , " say Mary -- after a moment -- still write . 

 " her mother!--what , that disreputable woman ? " 

 " they be not in the same gondola . " 

 " Ashe will be a great fool if he let his wife see much of that woman ! 
 by all account Lady Kitty be quite enough of a handful already . 
 by - the - way , have you find out where they be ? " 

 " on the Grand Canal . shall we call this afternoon ? " 

 " I do not mind . of course , I think Ashe be do an immense amount of 
 harm . " 

 " well , you can tell he so , " say Mary . 

 Sir Richard frown . his daughter 's manner seem to he at time 
 abrupt . 

 " why do you see so little now of Elizabeth Tranmore ? " he ask she , with 
 a sharp look . " you use to be always there . and I do not believe you even 
 write to she much now . " 

 " do she see much of anybody ? " 

 " because , you mean , of Tranmore 's condition ? what good can she be to he 
 now ? he know nobody . " 

 " she do not seem to ask the question , " say Mary , dryly . 

 a queer , soft look come over Sir Richard 's old face . 

 " no , the woman do not , " he say , half to himself , and fall into a little 
 reverie . he emerge from it with the remark -- accompany by a smile , a 
 little sly but not unkind : 

 " I always use to hope , Polly , that you and Ashe would have make it up ! " 

 " I be sure I do not know why , " say Mary , fasten up her envelope . as 
 she do so it cross her father 's mind that she be still very 
 good - look . her dress of dark - blue cloth , the plain fashion of her 
 brown hair , her oval face and well - mark feature , her plump and pretty 
 hand , be all pleasant to look upon . she have rather a hard way with 
 she , though , at time . the servant be always give warning . and , 
 personally , he be much fonder of his young daughter , whom Mary 
 consider foolish and improvident . but he be well aware that Mary make 
 his life easy . 

 " well , you be always on excellent term , " he say , in answer to she 
 last remark . " I remember his saying to I once that you be very good 
 company . the Bishop , too , use to notice how he like to talk to you . " 

 when Mary and her father be together , " the Bishop " be Sir Richard 's 
 property . he only fall to Mary 's share in the old man 's absence . 

 Mary color slightly . 

 " oh yes , we get on , " she say , count her letter the while with a 
 quick hand . 

 " well , I hope that young woman whom he _ do _ marry be now behave 
 herself . it be that fellow Cliffe with whom the scandal be last year , 
 be not it ? " 

 " there be a good deal of talk , " say Mary . 

 " a rum fellow , that Cliffe ! a man at the club tell I last week it be 
 believe he have be fight for these bosnian rebel for month . 
 shocking bad form I call it . if the Turks catch he , they will string he 
 up . and quite right , too . what be he get to do with other people 's 
 quarrel ? " 

 " if the Turks will be such brutes-- " 

 " Nonsense , my dear ! do not you believe any of this radical stuff . the 
 Turks be awfully fine fellow -- fight like bull - dog . and as for the 
 ' atrocity , ' they make they up in London . oh , of course , what Cliffe 
 want be notoriety -- we all know that . well , I be go out to see if I 
 can find another english paper . beastly climate ! " 

 but as Sir Richard turn again to the window , he be meet by a burst of 
 sunshine , which hit he gayly in the face like a child 's impertinence . 
 he grumble something unintelligible as Mary put he into his inverness 
 cape , take hat and stick , and depart . 

 Mary sit still beside the writing - table , her hand cross on her lap , 
 her eye absently bend upon they . 

 she be think of the serenata . she have follow it with an 
 acquaintance from the hotel , and she have see not only Kitty and Madame 
 d'Estrées , but also -- the solitary man in the heavy cloak . she know quite 
 well that Cliffe be in Venice ; though , true to her secretive temper , 
 she have not mention the fact to her father . 

 of course he be in Venice on Kitty 's account . it would be too absurd to 
 suppose that he be here by mere coincidence . Mary believe that nothing 
 but the intervention of Cliffe 's mighty kinsman from the north have save 
 the situation the year before . Kitty would certainly have betray she 
 husband but for the _ force majeure _ array against she . and now the 
 magnate who have play Providence slumber in the family vault . he have 
 pass away in the spring , full of year and honor , leave Cliffe some 
 money . the path be clear . as for the escapade in the Balkans , Geoffrey 
 be , of course , tired of it . a sensational book , hurry out to meet the 
 public appetite for horror -- and the pursuance of his intrigue with Lady 
 Kitty Ashe -- Mary be calmly certain that these be now his object . he 
 be , no doubt , write his book and meet Kitty where he could . Ashe 
 would soon have to go home . and then ! as if that girl Margaret French 
 could stop it ! 

 well , William have only get his desert ! but as her thought pass from 
 Kitty or Cliffe to William Ashe , their quality change . hatred and 
 bitterness , scorn or wounded vanity , pass into something gentle . she 
 fall into recollection of Ashe as he have appear on that bygone 
 afternoon in May when he come back triumphant from his election , with 
 the world before he . if he have never see Kitty Bristol!-- 

 " I should have make he a good wife , " she say to herself . " _ i _ should 
 have know how to be proud of he . " 

 and there emerge also the tragic consciousness that if the fate have 
 give he to she she might have be another woman -- teach by happiness , 
 by love , by motherhood . 

 it be that little , heartless creature who have snatch they both from 
 she -- William and Geoffrey Cliffe -- the high and the low -- the man who 
 might have ennoble she -- and the man , half charlatan , half genius , whom 
 she might have serve and raise , by her fortune and her ability . her 
 life might have be so full , so interesting ! and it be Kitty that have 
 make it flat , and cold , and futureless . 

 Poor William ! have he really like she , in those boy - and - girl day ? she 
 dream over their old cousinly relation -- over the present he have 
 sometimes give she . 

 then a thought , like a burn arrow , pierce she . her hand lock , 
 strain one against the other . if this intrigue be indeed 
 renew -- if Geoffrey succeed in tempt Kitty from her husband -- why 
 then -- then-- 

 she shiver before the image that be pass through her mind , and , 
 rise , she put away her letter and ring for the waiter , to order 
 dinner . 

 " where shall we go ? " say Kitty , languidly , put down the french 
 novel she be read . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " Mr. Ashe suggest San Lazzaro . " Margaret look up from her writing as 
 Kitty move towards she . " the rain seem to have all clear off . " 

 " well , I be sure it do not matter where , " say Kitty , and be turn 
 away ; but Margaret catch her hand and caress it . 

 " Naughty Kitty ! why this sea air can not put some more color into your 
 cheek I do not understand . " 

 " I be _ not _ pale ! " cry Kitty , pouting . " Margaret , you do croak about I 
 so ! if you say any more I will go and rouge till you will be ashamed to go 
 out with I -- there ! where 's William ? " 

 William open the door as she speak , the _ Gazetta di Venezia _ in one 
 hand and a telegram in the other . 

 " something for you , darling , " he say , hold it out to Kitty . " shall I 
 open it ? " 

 " oh no ! " say Kitty , hastily . " give it I . it be from my Paris woman . " 

 " ah -- ha ! " laugh Ashe . " some extravagance you want to keep to yourself , 
 I will be bind . I have a good mind to see ! " 

 and he teasingly hold it up above her head . but she give a little jump , 
 catch it , and run off with it to her room . 

      " much regret impossible stop publication . fifty copy distribute 
      already . write . " 

 she drop speechless on the edge of her bed , the crumple telegram in 
 her hand . the minute pass . 

 " when will you be ready ? " say Ashe , tap at the door . 

 " be the gondola there ? " 

 " wait at the step . " 

 " five minute ! " Ashe depart . she rise , tear the telegram into little 
 bit , and begin with deliberation to put on her mantle and hat . 

 " you have get to go through with it , " she say to the white face in the 
 glass , and she straighten her small shoulder defiantly . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 they be bind for the armenian convent . it be a misty day , with 
 shaft of light on the lagoon . the storm have pass , but the water be 
 still rough , and the cloud seem to be withdraw their force only 
 to marshal they again with the darkness . a day of sudden burst of 
 watery light , of band of purple distance strike into enchanting beauty 
 by the red or orange of a sail , of a wild salt breath in air that seem 
 to be still suffuse with spray . the Alps be hide ; but what sun 
 there be play faintly on the euganean hill . 

 " I say , Margaret , at last she do we some credit ! " say Ashe , point 
 to his wife . 

 Margaret start . be it rouge?--or be it the strong air ? Kitty 's 
 languor have entirely disappear ; she be more cheerful and more 
 talkative than she have be at any time since their arrival . she 
 chatter about the current scandal of Venice -- the mysterious contessa 
 who live in the palace opposite their own , and only go out , in deep 
 mourning , at night , because she have be the love of a russian 
 grand - duke , and the grand - duke be dead ; of the carlist pretender and 
 his wife , who have be very popular in Venice until they take it into 
 their head to require royal honor , and Venice , take time to think , 
 have lazily decide the game be not worth the candle -- so now the sulky 
 pair go about alone in a fine gondola , turn glassy eye on their 
 former acquaintance ; of the needy marchese who have sell a Titian to the 
 Louvre , and have then find himself boycott by all his kinsfolk in 
 Venice who be not needy and have no Titians to sell -- all these tale 
 Kitty reel out at length till the handsome gondolier marvel at the 
 little lady 's vivacity and the queer brightness of her eye . 

 " gracious , Kitty , where do you get all these story from ? " cry Ashe , 
 when the chatter pause for a moment . 

 he look at she with delight , rejoice in her gayety , the slight 
 touch of white which to - day for the first time relieve the sombreness 
 of her dress , the return of her color . and Margaret wonder again how 
 much of it be rouge . 

 at the armenian convent a handsome young monk take charge of they . as 
 George Sand and Lamennais have do before they , they look at the 
 printing - press , the garden , the cloister , the church ; they marvel 
 lazily at the cleanliness and brightness of the place ; and finally they 
 climb to the library and museum , and the room close by where Byron 
 play at grammar - making . in this room Ashe fall suddenly into a 
 political talk with the young monk , who be an ardent and patriotic son 
 of the most unfortunate of nation , and they pass out and down the 
 stair , follow by Margaret French , not notice that Kitty have 
 linger behind . 

 Kitty stand idly by the window of Byron 's room , think restlessly of 
 verse that be not Byron 's , though there be in they , clothe in form 
 of the new age , the spirit of Byronic passion , and more than a touch of 
 Byronic affectation -- think also of the morning 's telegram . Supposing 
 Darrell 's prophecy , which have seem to she so absurd , come true , that 
 the book do William harm , not good -- that he cease to love she -- that he 
 cast she off ? ... 

 ... a plash of water outside , and a voice give direction . from the 
 lagoon towards Malamocco a gondola approach . a gentleman and lady be 
 seat in it . the lady -- a very handsome italian , with a loud laugh and 
 brilliant eye -- carry a scarlet parasol . Kitty give a stifled cry as 
 she draw back . she flee out of the room and overtook the other two . 

 " may we go back into the garden a little ? " she say , hurriedly , to the 
 monk who be talk to William . " I should like to see the view towards 
 Venice . " 

 William hold up a watch , to show that there be but just time to get 
 back to the Piazza , for lunch . Kitty persist , and the monk , 
 understand what the impetuous young lady wish , good - naturedly 
 turn to obey she . 

 " we must be _ very _ quick ! " say Kitty . " take we please , to the edge , 
 beyond the tree . " 

 and she herself hurry through the garden to its farth side , where it 
 be bound by the lagoon . 

 the other follow she , rather puzzle by her caprice . 

 " not much to be see , darle ! " say Ashe , as they reach the 
 water--"and I think this good man want to get rid of we ! " 

 and , indeed , the monk be look backward across the intervene tree 
 at a party which have just enter the garden . 

 " ah , they have find another brother ! " he say , politely , and he begin 
 to point out to Kitty the various landmark visible , the arsenal , the 
 two asylum , San Pietro di Castello . 

 the new - comer just glance at the garden apparently , as the Ashes have 
 do on arrival , and promptly follow their guide back into the 
 convent . 

 Kitty ask a few more question , then lead the way in a hasty return to 
 the garden door , the entrance - hall , and the step where their gondola 
 be wait . nothing be to be see of the second party . they have pass 
 on into the cloister . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 animation , oddity , inconsequence , all these thing Margaret observe in 
 Kitty during luncheon in a restaurant of the Merceria , and various 
 incident connect with it ; animation above all . the Ashes fall in with 
 acquaintance -- a fashionable and harassed mother , on the fringe of the 
 Archangels , accompany by two daughter , one pretty and one plain , and 
 sore press by their demand , real or suppose . the parent be not 
 rich , but the girl have to be dress , take abroad , produce at 
 country - house , at Ascot , and the opera , like all other girl . the 
 eld girl , a considerable beauty , be an accomplished egotist at 
 nineteen , and regard her mother as a rather inefficient _ dame de 
 compagnie _ . Kitty understand this young lady perfectly , and after 
 luncheon , over her cigarette , her little , sharp , probe question give 
 the beauty twenty minute ' annoyance . then appear a young man , 
 ill - dress , red - haired , and shy . carelessly as he greet the mother 
 and daughter , his entrance , however , transform they . the mother 
 forgot fatigue ; the beauty cease to yawn ; the young girl , who have 
 be make surreptitious note of Kitty 's costume in the last leaf of 
 her guide - book , develop a charming gush . he be the owner of the 
 Magellan estate and the historic Magellan Castle ; a profess hater of 
 " absurd womankind , " and , in general , a hunted and self - conscious person . 
 Kitty give he one finger , look he up and down , ask he whether he 
 be yet engage , and when he laugh an embarrassed " no , " tell he that 
 he would certainly die in the arm of the Magellan housekeeper . 

 this get a smile out of he . he sit down beside she , and the two laugh 
 and talk with a freedom which presently draw the attention of the 
 neighboring table , and make Ashe uncomfortable . he rise , pay the bill , 
 and succeed in carry the whole party off to the Piazza , in search 
 of coffee . but here again Kitty 's extravagance , the provocation of her 
 light loveliness , as she sit toy with a fresh cigarette and 
 " chaff " Lord Magellan , draw a disagreeable amount of notice from the 
 Italians pass by . 

 " Mother , let us go ! " say the angry beauty , imperiously , in her mother 's 
 ear . " I do not like to be see with Lady Kitty ! she be impossible ! " 

 and with cold farewell the three lady depart . then Kitty spring up 
 and throw away her cigarette . 

 " how those girl bully their mother ! " she say , with scorn . " however , it 
 serve she right . I be sure she bully her . well , now we must go and do 
 something . Ta - ta ! " 

 Lord Magellan , to whom she offer another casual finger , want to know 
 why he be dismiss . if they be go sight - seeing , might he not come 
 with they ? " 

 " oh no ! " say Kitty , calmly . " sight -- see with people you do not really 
 know be too try to the temper . even with one 's good friend it be 
 risky . " 

 " where be you ? may I call ? " say the young man . 

 " we be always out , " be Kitty 's careless reply . " But-- " 

 she considered-- 

 " would you like to see the Palazzo Vercelli ? " 

 " that magnificent place on the Grand Canal ? very much . " 

 " meet I there to - morrow afternoon , " say Kitty . " four o'clock . " 

 " delighted ! " say Lord Magellan , make a note on his shirt - cuff . " and 
 who live there ? " 

 " my mother , " say Kitty , abruptly , and walk away . 

 Ashe follow she in discomfort . this young man be the son of a certain 
 Lady Magellan , an intimate friend of Lady Tranmore's -- one of the noble 
 woman of her generation , pure , high - minded , spiritual , to whom neither 
 an ugly word nor thought be possible . it annoy he that either he or 
 Kitty should be introduce _ her _ son to Madame d'Estrées . 

 it be really tiresome of Kitty ! rich young man with character yet 
 indeterminate be not to be lightly bring in contact with Madame 
 d'Estrées . Kitty could not be ignorant of it -- poor child ! it have be 
 one of her reckless stroke , and Ashe be conscious of a sharp 
 annoyance . 

 however , he say nothing . he follow his companion from church to 
 church , till picture become an abomination to he . then he plead 
 letter , and go to the club . 

 " will you call on maman to - morrow ? " say Kitty , as he turn away , 
 look at he a little askance . 

 she know that he have disapprove of her invitation to Lord Magellan . why 
 have she give it ? she do not know . there seem to be a kind of revive 
 mischief and fever in the blood , drive she to these foolish and 
 ill - consider thing . 

 Ashe meet her question with a shake of the head and the remark , in a 
 decide tone , that he should be too busy . 

 privately he think it a piece of impertinence that Madame d'Estrées 
 should expect either Kitty or himself to appear in her drawing - room at 
 all . that this imply a complete transformation of his early attitude 
 he be well aware ; he accept it with a curious philosophy . when he and 
 Kitty first meet he have never trouble his head about such thing . if a 
 woman amuse or interested he in society , so long as his taste be 
 satisfied she might have as much or as little character as she please . 
 it stir his mocking sense of English hypocrisy that the point should 
 be even raise . but now -- how can any individual , he ask himself , with 
 political work to do , affect to despise the opinion and prejudice of 
 society ? a politician with great reform to put through will make no 
 friction round he that he can avoid -- unless he be a fool . it weigh 
 sorely , therefore , on his present mind that Madame d'Estrées be in 
 Venice -- that she be a person of blemished repute -- that he must be and 
 be ashamed of she . it would have be altogether out of consonance with 
 his character to put any obstacle in the way of Kitty 's see she 
 mother . but he chafe as he have never yet chafe under the humiliation 
 of his relationship to the notorious Margaret Fitzgerald of the forty , 
 who have be old Blackwater 's _ chère amie _ before she marry he , and , 
 as Lady Blackwater , have sacrifice her innocent and defenceless 
 step - daughter to one of her own lover , in order to secure for he the 
 step - daughter 's fortune -- black and dastardly deed ! 

 be it all part of the general growth and concentration that any shrewd 
 observer might have read in William ashe?--the pressure -- enormous , 
 unseen -- of the traditional english ideal , english standard , assert 
 itself at last in a brilliant and paradoxical nature ? it have be 
 so -- conspicuously -- in the case of one of his political predecessor . 
 Lord Melbourne have begin his career as a person of idle habit and 
 imprudent adventure , much give to coarse conversation , and unable to 
 say the simple thing without an oath . he end it as the man of 
 scrupulous dignity , tact , and delicacy , who mould the innocent youth 
 of a girl - queen , to his own last honor and England 's gratitude . in 
 way less striking , the same influence of vast responsibility be 
 perhaps act upon William Ashe . it have already make he a sterner , 
 tough , and -- no doubt -- a great man . 

 the defection of William only leave Kitty , it seem , still more greedy 
 of thing to see and do . innumerable sacristan open all possible 
 door and unveil all possible picture . Bellini succeed Tintoret , 
 and Carpaccio Bellini . the two sable gondolier wear themselves out in 
 Kitty 's service , and Margaret 's kind , round face grow more and more 
 puzzle and distressed . and whence this strange impression that the 
 whole experience be a _ flight _ on Kitty 's part?--or , rather , that 
 throughout it she be always eagerly expect , or eagerly escape from 
 some unknown , unseen pursuer ? a glance behind she -- a start -- a sudden 
 shivering gesture in the shadow of dark church -- these thing 
 suggest it , till Margaret herself be catch by the same suppress 
 excitement that seem to be alive in Kitty . do it all point merely to 
 some mental state -- to the nervous effect of her illness and her loss ? 

 when they reach home about five o'clock , Kitty be naturally tired 
 out . Margaret put she on the sofa , give her tea , and tend she , hop 
 that she might drop asleep before dinner . but just as tea be over , and 
 Kitty be lie curl up , silent and white , with that brood look 
 which keep Margaret 's anxiety about her constantly alive , there be a 
 sudden sound of voice in the anteroom outside . 

 " Margaret ! " cry Kitty , start up in dismay--"say I be not at home . " 

 too late ! their smile Italian housemaid throw the door open , with the 
 air of one bring good - fortune . and behind she appear a tall lady , 
 and an old gentleman hat in hand . 

 " may we come in , Kitty ? " say Mary Lyster , advance . " Cousin Elizabeth 
 tell we you be here . " 

 Kitty have spring up . the disorder of her fair hair , her white cheek , 
 and the ghostly thinness of her small , black - rob form draw the curious 
 eye of Sir Richard . and the oddness of her manner as she greet they 
 only confirm the old man 's prejudice against she . 

 however , greet they be , in some sort of fashion ; and Miss French 
 give they tea . she keep Sir Richard entertain , while Kitty and Mary 
 converse . they talk perfunctorily of ordinary topic -- Venice , its 
 sight , its hotel , and the people stay in they -- of Lady Tranmore and 
 various Ashe relation . meanwhile the inmost thought of each be busy 
 with the other . 

 Kitty study the line of Mary 's face and the fashion of her dress . 

 " she look much old . and she be not enjoy her life a bit . that be my 
 fault . I spoil all her chance with Geoffrey -- and she know it . she 
 _ hat _ I . quite right , too . " 

 " oh , you mean that nonsensical thing last night ? " Sir Richard be say 
 to Margaret French . " oh no , I do not go . but Mary , of course , think 
 she must go . somebody invite she . " 

 Kitty start . 

 " you be at the serenata ? " she say to Mary . 

 " yes , I go with a party from the hotel . " 

 Kitty look at she . a sudden flush have touch her pale cheek , and she 
 could not conceal the trembling of her hand . 

 " that be marvellous , that light on the Salute , be not it ? " 

 " wonderful!--and on the water , too . I see two or three people I 
 know -- just catch their face for a second . " 

 " do you ? " say Kitty . and thought run fast through her head . " do she 
 see geoffrey?--and do she mean I to understand that she do ? how she 
 detest I ! if she do see he , of course she suppose that I know all 
 about it , and that he be here for I . why do not I ask she , straight out , 
 whether she see he , and make she understand that I do not care 
 twopence?--that she be welcome to he -- as far as I be concern ? " 

 but some hide feeling tie her tongue . Mary continue to talk about 
 the serenata , and Kitty be presently conscious that she every word and 
 gesture in reply be closely watch . " yes , yes , she see he . perhaps 
 she will tell William -- or write home to mother ? " 

 and in her excitement she begin to chatter fast and loudly , mostly to 
 Sir Richard -- repeat some of the Venice tale she have tell in the 
 gondola -- with much inconsequence and extravagance . the old man listen , 
 his hand on his stick , his eye on the ground , the expression on his 
 strong mouth hostile or sarcastic . it be a relief to everybody when 
 Ashe 's step be hear stumble up the dark stair , and the door open 
 on his friendly and courteous presence . 

 " why , Polly!--and Cousin Richard ! I wonder where you have hide 
 yourself . " 

 Mary 's bright , involuntary smile transform she . Ashe sit down beside 
 she , and they be soon deep in all sort of gossip -- relation , 
 acquaintance , politic , and what not . all Mary 's stiffness disappear . 
 she become the elegant , agreeable woman , of whom dinner - party be 
 glad . Ashe plunge into the pleasant malice of her talk , which range 
 through the good and evil fortune -- mostly the latter -- of half his 
 acquaintance ; discuss the debt , the love - affair , and the folly of 
 his political colleague or parliamentary foe ; how the Foreign 
 Secretary have be get on at Balmoral -- how so - and - so have be ruin 
 at the Derby and restore to sanity and solvency by the oak -- how Lady 
 Parham , at Hatfield , have be make to know her place by the French 
 Ambassador -- and the like ; pass thereby a charming half - hour . 

 meanwhile Kitty , Margaret French , and Sir Richard keep up intermittent 
 remark , pause at every other phrase to gather the crumb that fall 
 from the table of the other two . 

 Kitty be very weary , and a dead weight have fall on her spirit . if 
 Sir Richard have think her bad form ten minute before , his unspoken 
 mind now declare her stupid . meanwhile Kitty be say to herself , as 
 she watch her husband and Mary : 

 " I use to amuse William just as well -- last year ! " 

 when the door close on they , Kitty fall back on her cushion with an 
 " ouf ! " of relief . William come back in a few minute from show the 
 visitor the back way to their hotel , and stand beside his wife with an 
 anxious face . 

 " they be too much for you , darling . they stay too long . " 

 " how you and Mary chatter ! " say Kitty , with a little pout . but at the 
 same moment she slip an appealing hand into his . 

 Ashe clasp the hand , and laugh . 

 " I always tell you she be an excellent gossip . " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Sir Richard and Mary pursue their way through the narrow _ call _ that 
 lead to the Piazza . Sir Richard be expatiate on Ashe 's folly in 
 marry such a wife . 

 " she look like an actress!--and as to her conversation , she begin by 
 tell I outrageous story and end by not have a word to say 
 about anything . the bad blood of the Bristols , it seem to I , without 
 their brain . " 

 " oh no , papa ! Kitty be very clever . you have not hear her recite . she 
 be tired to - night . " 

 " well , I do not want to flatter you , my dear ! " say the old man , 
 testily , " but I think it be pathetic -- the way in which Ashe enjoy 
 your conversation . it show he do not get much of it at home . " 

 Mary smile uncertainly . her whole nature be still aglow from that 
 contact with Ashe 's delightful personality . after month of depression 
 and humiliation , her success with he have somehow restore those 
 illusion on which cheerfulness depend . 

 how ill Kitty look -- and how conscious ! Mary be impetuously certain 
 that Kitty have betray her knowledge of Cliffe 's presence in Venice ; 
 and equally certain that William know nothing . Poor William ! 

 well , what can you expect of such a temperament -- such a race ? Mary 's 
 thought travel confusedly towards -- and through -- some big and 
 dreadful catastrophe . 

 and then ? after it ? 

 it seem to she that she be once more in the Park Lane drawing - room ; 
 the familiar Morris paper and Burne - Jones drawing surround she ; and 
 she and Elizabeth Tranmore sit , hand in hand , talk of William -- a 
 William once more free , after much folly and suffering , to reconstruct 
 his life .... 

 " here we be , " say Sir Richard Lyster , move down a dark passage 
 towards the brightly light doorway of their hotel . 

 with a start -- as of one take red - handed -- Mary awake from her dream . 




 XX 


 Madame d'Estrées and her friend , Donna Laura , occupy the _ mezzanin _ of 
 the vast Vercelli palace . the palace itself belong to the head of the 
 Vercelli family . it be a magnificent erection of the late seventeenth 
 century , at this moment half furnish , dilapidate , and forsake . but 
 the _ entresol _ on the eastern side of the _ cortile _ be in good 
 condition , and comfortably fit up for the occasional use of the 
 Principe . as he be winter in Paris , he have let his room at an 
 ordinary commercial rent to his kinswoman , Donna Laura . she , a soured 
 and melancholy woman , unmarried in a latin society which have small use 
 or kindness for spinster , have seize on Marguerite d'Estrées -- whose 
 acquaintance she have make in a Mont d'Or hotel -- and be now keep she 
 like a cage canary that sing for its food . 

 Madame d'Estrées be quite willing . so long as she have a sofa on which 
 to sit enthrone , a sufficiency of new gown , a maid , cigarette , 
 breakfast in bed , and a supply of french novel , she appear the most 
 harmless and engaging of mortal . her youth have be cruel , disorderly , 
 and vicious . it have last long ; but now , when middle age stand at last 
 confess , she be lapse , it seem , into amiability and good 
 behavior . she be , indeed , fast forget her own history , and soon the 
 recital of it would surprise no one so much as herself . 

 it be five o'clock . Madame d'Estrées have just establish herself in 
 the silk - panel drawing - room of Donna Laura 's apartment , expectant of 
 visitor , and , in particular , of her daughter . 

 in beg Kitty to come on this particular afternoon , she have not 
 think fit to mention that it would be Donna Laura 's " day . " have she 
 do so , Kitty , in consideration of her mourning , would perhaps have 
 cry off . whereas , really -- poor , dear child!--what she want be 
 distraction and amusement . 

 and what Madame d'Estrées want be the presence beside she , in public , 
 of Lady Kitty Ashe . Kitty have already visit her mother privately , and 
 have explore the antiquity of the Vercelli palace . but Madame 
 d'Estrées be now intent on something more and different . 

 for in the four year which have now elapse since the Ashe 's marriage 
 this lively lady have know adversity . she have be force to leave 
 London , as we have see , by the pressure of certain fact in her past 
 history so ancient and far removed when their true punishment begin that 
 she no doubt feel it highly unjust that she should be punish for they 
 at all . her London debt have swallow up what then remain to she of 
 fortune ; and , afterwards , the allowance from the Ashes be all she have 
 to depend on . banish to Paris , she fall into a low stratum of life , 
 at a moment when her faithful and mysterious friend , Markham Warington , 
 be hold in Scotland by the first painful symptom of his sister 's last 
 illness , and could do but little for she . she have , in fact , know the 
 sordid shift and strait of poverty , though the small moral effort 
 would have save she from they . she have keep disreputable company , she 
 have be miserable , and base ; and although shame be not easy to person 
 of her temperament , it may perhaps be say that she be ashamed of this 
 period of her existence . appeal to the Ashes yield less and less , and 
 Warington seem to have forsake she . she awake at last to a 
 panic - stricken fear of dark possibility and more real suffering than 
 any she have yet know , and under the stress of this fear she collapse 
 physically , write both to Warington and to the Ashes in a tone of 
 mingle reproach and despair . 

 the Ashes send money , and , though Kitty be at the moment not fit to 
 travel , prepare to come . Warington , who have just close the eye of his 
 sister , go at once . he be now the last of his family , without any 
 tie that he could not lawfully break . within two day of his arrival in 
 Paris , Madame d'Estrées have promise to marry he in three month , to 
 break off all her Paris association , and to give her life henceforward 
 into his somewhat stern hand . the visit to Venice be part of the price 
 that he have have to pay for her decision . Marguerite plead , with a 
 shudder , that she must have a little amusement before she go to live 
 in Dumfriesshire ; and he have be oblige to acquiesce in her 
 arrangement with Donna Laura -- stipulate only that he should be their 
 escort and guardian . 

 what have move he to such an act ? his reason can only be guess at . 
 Warington be a man of religion , a Calvinist by education and 
 inheritance , and of a silent and dreamy temperament . he have be 
 intimate with very few woman in his life . his sister have be a second 
 mother to he , and both of they have be the guardian of their young 
 brother . when this adore brother fall shoot through the lung in the 
 hopeless defence of Lady Blackwater 's reputation , it would have be 
 natural enough that Markham should hate the woman who have be the 
 occasion of such a calamity . the sister , a pious and devoted Christian , 
 have indeed hat she , properly and duly , thenceforward . Markham , on the 
 contrary , accept his brother 's last commission without reluctance . in 
 this matter at least Lady Blackwater have not be directly to blame ; his 
 mind acquit she ; and her soft , distressed beauty touch his heart . 
 before he know where he be she have make an impression upon he that be 
 to be life - long . 

 then gradually he awake to a full knowledge of her character . he 
 suffer , but otherwise it make no difference . find it be then 
 impossible to persuade she to marry he , he watch over she as well he 
 could for some year , pass through phase of alternate hope and 
 disgust . his sister 's affection for he be cloud by his strange 
 relation to the Jezebel who in her opinion have destroy their brother . 
 he could not help it ; he could only do his good to meet both claim upon 
 he . during her lingering passage to the grave , his sister have nearly 
 sever he from Marguerite d'Estrées . she die , however , just in time , 
 and now here he be in Venice , pass through what seem to he one of 
 the ante - room of life , lead to no very radiant beyond . but , radiant 
 or no , his path lie thither . and at the same time he see that although 
 Marguerite feel he to be her only refuge from poverty and disgrace , she 
 be painfully afraid of he , and afraid of the life into which he be 
 lead she . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the first guest of the afternoon prove to be Louis Harman , the painter 
 and dilettante , who have be in former day one of the _ habitué _ of the 
 house in St. James 's Place . this perfectly correct yet tolerant 
 gentleman be winter in Venice in order to copy the Carpaccios in San 
 Giorgio dei Schiavoni . his copy be not good , but they be all 
 promise to artistic fair lady , and the day which the painter spend 
 upon they be happy and harmless . 

 he come in gayly , delight to see Madame d'Estrées in flourish 
 circumstance again , deliver apparently from the abyss into which he 
 have find she slide on the occasion of various chance visit of his 
 own to Paris . Warington 's doing , apparently -- queer fellow ! 

 " Well!--I see Lady Kitty in the Piazza this afternoon , " he say , as he 
 sit down beside his hostess . Donna Laura have not yet appear . " very 
 thin and fragile ! but , by Jove ! how these english beauty hold their 
 own . " 

 " irish , if you please , " say Madame d'Estrées , smile . 

 Harman bow to her correction , admire at the same time both the 
 toilette and the good look of his companion . drop his voice , he 
 ask , with a gingerly and sympathetic air , whether all be now well 
 with the Ashe ménage . he have be sorry to hear certain gossip of the 
 year before . 

 Madame d'Estrées laugh . yes , she understand that Kitty have behave 
 like a little goose with that _ poseur _ Cliffe . but that be all 
 over -- long ago . 

 " why , the silly child have everything she want ! William be devoted to 
 she -- and it can not be long before he succeed . " 

 " no need to go trifle with poet , " say Harman , smile . " by - the - way , 
 do you know that Geoffrey Cliffe be in Venice ? " 

 Madame d'Estrées open her eye . " Est - il possible ? oh ! but Kitty have 
 forget all about he . " 

 " of course , " say Harman . " I be tell he have be see with the Ricci . " 

 Madame d'Estrées raise her shoulder this time in addition to her eye . 
 then her face cloud . 

 " I believe , " she say , slowly , " that woman may come here this 
 afternoon . " 

 " be she a friend of your ? " Harman 's tone express his surprise . 

 " I know she in Paris , " say Madame d'Estrées , with some hesitation , 
 " when she be a student at the Conservatoire . she and I have some common 
 acquaintance . and now -- frankly , I dare not offend she . she have the most 
 appalling temper!--and she stick at nothing . " 

 Harman wonder what the exact truth of this might be , but do not 
 inquire . and as guest -- include Colonel Warington -- begin to arrive , 
 and Donna Laura appear and begin to dispense tea , the _ tête - à - tête _ 
 be interrupt . 

 Donna Laura 's _ salon _ be soon well fill , and Harman watch the 
 gathering with curiosity . as far as it concern Madame d'Estrées -- and 
 she be clearly the main attraction which have bring it together -- it 
 represent , he see , a phase of social recovery . a few prominent 
 Englishmen , pass through Venice , come in without their wife , make 
 perfunctory excuse for the absence of these lady . but the 
 cosmopolitan of all kind , who crowd in -- anglo - Italians , foreign 
 diplomat , traveller of many sort , and a few restless Venetians , 
 bear the great name of old , to whom their own Venice be little more 
 than a place of occasional sojourn -- make satisfactory amend for these 
 person of too long memory . in all these traveller ' town , Venice , 
 Rome , and Florence , there be indeed a society , and a very agreeable 
 society , which be wholly irresponsible , and ask few or no question . 
 the element of it meet as stranger , and as stranger they mostly part . 
 but between the meeting and the parting there lie a moment , all the 
 gayer , perhaps , because of its social uncertainty and freedom . 

 Madame d'Estrées be profit by it to the full . she be in excellent 
 spirit and talk ; bright - rose carnation shine in the bosom of her 
 dress ; one white arm , bar to the elbow , lie stretch carelessly on 
 the fine cut - velvet which cover the gilt sofa -- part of a suite of 
 Venetian Louis Quinze , clumsily gorgeous -- on which she sit ; the other 
 hand pull the ear of a toy spaniel . on the ceiling above she , Tiepolo 
 have paint a headlong group of sensuous form , alive with vulgar 
 movement and passion ; the _ putti _ and the goddess , peer through 
 aërial balustrade , look down complacently on Madame d'Estrées . 

 meanwhile there stand behind she -- a silent , distinguished figure -- the 
 man of whom Harman see that she be always nervously and sometimes 
 timidly conscious . Harman have be read Molière 's _ Don Juan _ . the 
 sentinel figure of Warington mingle in his imagination with the statue 
 of the Commander . 

 or , again , he be tickle by a vision of Madame d'Estrées grow old , 
 live in a Scotch house , turrete and severe , tend by servant of the 
 " Auld Licht , " or shiver under a faithful minister on Sundays . have she 
 any idea of the sort of fold towards which Warington -- at once Covenanter 
 and man of the world -- be carry his lose sheep ? 

 the sheep , however , be still gambol at large . occasionally a guest 
 appear who prove it . for instance , at a certain tumultuous entrance , 
 billow skirt , vast hat , and high - pitch voice all combine in the 
 effect , Madame d'Estrées flush violently , and Warington 's stiffness 
 redouble . on the threshold stand the young actress , Mademoiselle Ricci , 
 a Marseillaise , half french , half italian , who be at the moment the 
 talk of Venice . why , would take too long to tell . it be by no mean 
 mostly due to her talent , which , however , be display at the Apollo 
 theatre two or three time a week , and be no doubt considerable . she 
 be a flamboyant lady , with astonishing black eye , a too transparent 
 white dress , over which be sling a small black mantilla , a scarlet hat 
 and parasol , and a startling fan of the same color . both before and 
 after her greeting of Madame d'Estrées -- whom she call she " chérie " and 
 her " belle Marguerite"--she create a whirlwind in the _ salon _ . she be 
 noisy , rude , and false ; it could only be say on the other side that she 
 be handsome -- for those who admire the kind of thing ; and famous -- more 
 or less . the intimacy of the party be break up by she , for wherever 
 she be she bring uproar , and it be impossible to forget she . and 
 this uneasy attention which she compel be at its height when the 
 door be once more throw open for the entrance of Lady Kitty Ashe . 

 " ah , my darling Kitty ! " cry Madame d'Estrées , rise in a soft 
 enthusiasm . 

 Kitty come in slowly , hold herself very erect , a delicate and 
 distinguished figure , in her deep mourning . she frown as she see the 
 crowd in the room . 

 " I will come another time ! " she say , hastily , to her mother , begin to 
 retreat . 

 " oh , Kitty ! " cry Madame d'Estrées , in distress , hold she fast . 

 at that moment Harman , who be watch they both with keenness , see 
 that Kitty have perceive Mademoiselle Ricci . the actress have pause in 
 her chatter to stare at the new - comer . she sit front the entrance , 
 her head insolently throw back , knee cross , a cigarette poise in 
 the plump and dimpled hand . 

 a start run through Kitty 's small person . she allow her mother to lead 
 she in and introduce she to Donna Laura . 

 " ah - ha , my lady ! " say Harman , to himself . " be you , perhaps , interested 
 in the Ricci ? be it possible even that you have see she before ? " 

 Kitty , however , betray herself to no one else . to other people it be 
 only evident that she do not mean to be introduce to the actress . she 
 pointedly and sharply avoid it . this be interpret as aristocratic 
 _ hauteur _ , and do she no harm . on the contrary , she be soon chatter 
 French with a group of diplomat , and the centre of the most animate 
 group in the room . all the new - comer who could attached themselves to 
 it , and the actress find herself presently almost deserted . she put up 
 her eye - glass , study Kitty impertinently , and ask a man sit near 
 she for the name of the strange lady . 

 " be not she lovely , my little Kitty ! " say Madame d'Estrées , in the ear 
 of a bavarian baron , who be also much occupy in star at the small 
 beauty in black . " I may say it , though I be her mother . and my 
 son - in - law , too . have you see he ? such a handsome fellow!--and _ such _ 
 a dear!--so kind to I . they _ say _ , you know , that he will be Prime 
 Minister . " 

 the baron bow , ironically , and inquire who the gentleman might be . he 
 have not catch Kitty 's name , and Madame d'Estrées have be for some time 
 label in his mind as something very near to an adventuress . 

 Madame d'Estrées eagerly explain , and he bow again , with a 
 difference . he be a man of great intelligence , acquaint with English 
 politic . so that be _ really _ the wife of the man to whose personality 
 and future the London correspondent of the _ Allgemeine Zeitung _ have 
 within the precede week devote a particularly interesting article , 
 which he have read with attention . his estimate of Madame d'Estrées ' 
 place in the world alter at once . yet it be strange that she -- or , 
 rather , Donna Laura -- should admit such a person as Mademoiselle Ricci to 
 their _ salon _ . 

 the mother , indeed , that afternoon have much reason to be socially 
 grateful to the daughter . curious contrast with the day when Kitty have 
 be the mere troublesome appendage of her mother 's life ! it be clear 
 to Marguerite d'Estrées now that if she be to accept restraint and 
 virtuous living , if she be to submit to this marriage she dread , yet 
 see no way to escape , her good link with the gay world in the future 
 might well be through the Ashes . Kitty could do a great deal for she ; 
 let she cultivate Kitty ; and begin , perhaps , by convince William Ashe 
 on this present occasion that for once she be not go to ask he for 
 money . 

 in the height of the party , Lord Magellan appear . Madame d'Estrées at 
 first look at he with bewilderment , till Kitty , shake herself free , 
 come hastily forward to introduce he . at the name the mother 's face 
 flash into smile . the ramification of two or three aristocracy 
 represent the only subject she might be say to know . dear Kitty ! 

 Lord Magellan , after Madame d'Estrées have talk to he about his family 
 in a few light and skilful phrase , which suggest knowledge , while 
 avoid flattery , be introduce to the bavarian baron and a french 
 naval officer . but he be not interesting to they , nor they to he ; 
 Kitty be surround and unapproachable ; and a flood of new arrival 
 distract Madame d'Estrées ' attention . the Ricci , who have notice the 
 restrain _ empressement _ of his reception , pounce on the young man , 
 tame her way and gesture to what she suppose to be his english 
 prudery , and produce an immediate effect upon he . Lord Magellan , who 
 be only dumb with english marriageable girl , allow himself to be 
 amuse , and throw himself into a low chair by the actress -- a capture 
 apparently for the afternoon . 

 Louis Harman be sit behind Kitty , a little to her right . he see she 
 watch the actress and her companion ; notice a compression of the 
 lip , a flash in the eye . she spring up , say she must go home , and 
 practically dissolve the party . 

 Mademoiselle Ricci , who have also rise , propose to Lord Magellan that 
 she should take he in her gondola to the shop of a famous dealer on the 
 Canal . 

 " thank you very much , " say Lord Magellan , irresolute , and he look at 
 Kitty . the look apparently decide he , for he immediately add that he 
 have unfortunately an engagement in the opposite direction . the actress 
 angrily draw herself up , and propose a later appointment . then Kitty 
 carelessly intervene . 

 " do you remember that you promise to see I home ? " she say to the 
 young man . " do not if it bore you ! " 

 Lord Magellan eagerly protest . Kitty move away , and he follow she . 

 " Chère madame , will you present I to your daughter ? " say the Ricci , in 
 an unnecessarily loud voice . 

 Madame d'Estrées , with a flurry gesture , touch Kitty on the arm . 

 " Kitty , Mademoiselle Ricci . " 

 Kitty take no notice . Madame d'Estrées say , quickly , in a low , 
 implore voice : 

 " please , dear Kitty . I will explain . " 

 Kitty turn abruptly , look at her mother , and at the woman to whom 
 she be to be introduce . 

 " ah ! comme elle est charmante ! " cry the actress , with an inflection of 
 irony in her strident voice . " Miladi , il faut absolument que nous nous 
 connaission . Je connais votre chère mère depuis si longtemps ! À Paris , 
 l'hiver passé c'était une amitié des plus tendre ! " 

 the nasal drag she give to the word be partly natural , partly 
 insolent . Madame d'Estrées bite her lip . 

 " Oui ? " say Kitty , indifferently . " Je n'en avais jamais entendu parler . " 

 her brilliant eye study the woman before she . " she have some hold on 
 maman , " she say to herself , in disgust . " she know of something shady 
 that maman have do . " then another thought sting she ; and with the most 
 indifferent bow , triumph in the evident offence that she be give , 
 she turn to Lord Magellan . 

 " you would like to see the Palazzo ? " 

 Warington at once offer himself as a guide . 

 but Kitty declare she know the way , would just show Lord Magellan the 
 _ piano nobile _ , dismiss he at the grand staircase , and return . Lord 
 Magellan make his farewell . 

 as Kitty pass through the door of the _ salon _ , while the young man 
 hold back the velvet _ portière _ which hang over it , she be aware that 
 Mademoiselle Ricci be watch she . the Marseillaise be lean 
 heavily on a _ fauteuil _ , support by a hand behind she . a slow , 
 disdainful smile play about her lip , some evil threaten thought 
 express itself through every feature of her rounded , coarsened beauty . 
 Kitty 's sharp look meet her , and the curtain drop . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " do not , please , let that woman take you anywhere -- to see anything ! " say 
 Kitty , with energy , to her companion , as they walk through the room 
 of the _ mezzanino _ . 

 Lord Magellan laugh . " what be the matter with she ? " 

 " oh , nothing ! " say Kitty , impatiently , " except that she be wicked -- and 
 common -- and a snake -- and your mother would have a fit if she know you 
 have anything to do with she . " 

 the red - haired youth look grave . 

 " thank you , Lady Kitty , " he say , quietly . " I will take your advice . " 

 " oh , I say , what a nice boy you be ! " cry Kitty , impulsively , lay a 
 hand a moment on his shoulder . and then , as though his filial instinct 
 have awaken her , she add , with hasty falsehood : " Maman , of course , 
 know nothing about she . that be just bluff what she say . but Donna 
 Laura ought not to ask such people . there -- that be the way . " 

 and she point to a small staircase in the wall , whereof the trap - door 
 at the top be open . they climb it , and find themselves at once in 
 one of the great room of the _ piano nobile _ , to which this quick and 
 easy access from the inhabited _ entresol _ have be but recently 
 contrive . 

 " what a marvellous place ! " cry Lord Magellan , look round he . 

 they be in the principal apartment of the famous Vercelli palace , a 
 legacy from one of those classical architect whose work may be see in 
 the late seventeenth - century building of Venice . the room , enormously 
 high , panel here and there in tattered velvet and brocade , or 
 fresco in fast - fade scene of old venetian life , stretch in 
 bewildering succession on either side of a central passage or broad 
 corridor , all of they lead at last on the northern side to a vast 
 hall paint in architectural perspective by the pupil of Tiepolo , and 
 overarch by a ceiling in which the master himself have mass a 
 multitude of form equal to Rubens in variety and facility of design , 
 express in a thin trenchancy of style . figure recall the ancient 
 triumph and possession of Venice , in day when she sit dishonor and 
 despoil , crowd the cove roof , the paint cornice and pediment . 
 Gayly color bird hover in blue sky ; philosopher and poet in 
 grisaille make a strange background for large - limbed beauty couch on 
 rose , or young warrior amid trophy of shin arm ; and while all 
 this garrulous commonplace live and breathe above , the wall below , 
 cold in color and academic in treatment , maintain as good they could 
 the dignity of the vast place , thus give up to one of the great of 
 artist and emptiest of mind . 

 on the floor of this magnificent hall stand a few old and broken chair . 
 but the candelabra of glass and ormolu , hang from the ceiling , be 
 very nearly of the date of the palace , and superb . meanwhile , through a 
 fade taffeta of a golden - brown shade , the afternoon light from the high 
 window to the southwest pour into the stately room . 

 " how it dwarf we ! " say Lord Magellan , look at his companion . " one 
 feel the mere pygmy ! from the age of decadence indeed ! " he glance at 
 the guide - book in his hand . " good heavens!--if this be their decay , 
 what be their bloom ? " 

 " yes -- it be big -- and jolly . I like it , " say Kitty , absently . then she 
 recollect herself . " this be your way out . federigo ! " she call to an 
 old man , the _ custode _ of the palace , who appear at the magnificent 
 door lead to the grand staircase . 

 " Commanda , eccellenza ! " the old man , bent and feeble , approach . he 
 carry a watering - pot wherewith he be about to minister to some 
 straggle flower in the window front the Grand Canal . a thin cat 
 rub itself against his leg . as he stand in his shabbiness under the 
 high , carved door , the only permanent denizen of the building , he seem 
 an embodiment of the old shrunken venetian life , still haunt a city 
 it be no long strong enough to use . 

 " will you show this signor the way out ? " say Kitty , in tourist ' 
 italian . " be you soon shut up ? " 

 for the main palazzo , which during the day be often show to 
 sightseer , be lock at half - past five , only the two _ entresols_--one 
 tenant by Donna Laura , the other by the _ custode_--remaine 
 accessible . 

 the old man murmur something which Kitty do not understand , point 
 at the same time to a door lead to the interior of the _ piano 
 nobile _ . Kitty think that he ask she to be quick , if she wish 
 still to go round the palace . she try to explain that he might lock up 
 if he please ; her way of retreat to the _ mezzanino _ , down the small 
 staircase , be always open . Federigo look puzzle , again say 
 something in unintelligible Venetian , and lead the way to the grand 
 staircase follow by Lord Magellan . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 a heavy door clang below . Kitty be alone . she look round she , at 
 the stretch of marble floor , and the streak of pale sunshine that lie 
 upon its black and white , at the lofty wall paint with a dim superb 
 architecture , at the crowded ceiling , the gorgeous candelabra . with its 
 costly decoration , the great room suggest a rich and festal life ; 
 throng group below answer to the Tiepolo group above ; beauty 
 patch and mask ; gallant in brocade coat ; splendid senator , rob 
 like William at the fancy ball . 

 suddenly she catch sight of herself in one of the high and narrow 
 mirror that fill the space between the window . in her mourning 
 dress , with the light behind she , she make a tiny spectre in the immense 
 hall . the image of her present self -- frail , black - rob -- recall the 
 two figure in the glass of her Hill Street room -- the sparkling white of 
 her goddess dress , and William 's smile face above her , his arm round 
 her waist . 

 how happy she have be that night ! even her wild fury with Mary Lyster 
 seem to she now a kind of happiness . how gladly would she have 
 exchange for it either of the two terror that now possess she ! 

 with a shiver she cross the hall , and push her way into the suite of 
 room on the northern side . she feel herself in absolute possession of 
 the palace . Federigo no doubt have lock up ; her mother and a few guest 
 be still talk in the _ salon _ of the _ mezzanine _ , expect she to 
 return . she would return -- soon ; but the solitariness and wildness of 
 this deserted place draw she on . 

 room after room open before she -- bare , save for a few worm - eat 
 chair , a fragment of tapestry on the wall , or some tattered portrait 
 in the Longhi manner , indifferent to begin with , and long since ruin 
 by neglect . yet here and there a young face look out , rose in the 
 hair and at the breast ; or a Doge 's cap -- and beneath it phantom feature 
 still breathe even in the last decay of canvas and paint the violence 
 and intrigue of the live man -- the ghost of character hold there by 
 the ghost of art . or a lad in slash brocade , for whom even in this 
 silent palace , and in spite of the gap crack across his face , life 
 be still young ; a cardinal ; a nun ; a man of letter in clerical dress , 
 the Abbé Prévost of his day .... 

 presently she find herself in a wide corridor , before a high , closed 
 door . she try it , and see a staircase mount and descending . a 
 passion of curiosity that be half romance , half restlessness , drive she 
 on . she begin to ascend the marble step , hear only the echo of her 
 own movement , a little afraid of the cold space of the vast house , and 
 yet delight in the fancy that crowd upon she . at the top of the 
 flight she find , of course , another apartment , on the same plan as the 
 one below , but small and less stately . the central hall enter from a 
 door support by marble caryatid , be flag in yellow marble , and 
 fresco freely with fade eighteenth - century scene -- cardinal walk 
 in stiff garden , a pope alight from his coach , surround by 
 peasant on their knee , and behind he fountain and obelisk and the 
 tower façade of St. Peter 's . at the moment , thank to a last glow of 
 light come in through a west window at the farther end , it be a place 
 beautiful though forlorn . but the room into which she look on either 
 side be wreck and desolation itself , crowd with broken furniture , 
 many of they shutter and dark . 

 as she close the last door , her attention be catch by a strange bust 
 place on a pedestal above the entrance . what be wrong with it ? an 
 accident ? an injury ? she go nearer , strain her eye to see . 
 No!--there be no injury . the face indeed be go . or , rather , where 
 the face should have be there now descend a marble veil from brow to 
 breast , of the most singular and sinister effect . otherwise the bust be 
 that of a young and beautiful woman . a pleasing horror seize on Kitty 
 as she look . her fancy hunt for the clew . a faithless wife , blot 
 from her place?--made infamous forever by the veil which hide from human 
 eye the beauty she have dishonor ? or a beloved mistress , on whom the 
 mourning lover could no long bear to look -- the veil an emblem of 
 undying and irremediable grief ? 

 Kitty stand enthral , strive to pierce the ghastly meaning of the 
 bust , when a sound -- a distant sound -- a shock through she . she hear a 
 step overhead , in the topmost apartment , or _ mansarde _ of the palace , a 
 step that presently traverse the whole length of the floor immediately 
 above her head and begin to descend the stair . 

 strange ! Federigo must have shut the great gate by this time -- as she 
 have bid he ? he himself inhabit the small _ entresol _ on the farther 
 side of the palace , far away . other inhabitant there be none ; so 
 Donna Laura have assure she . 

 the step approach , resonant in the silence . Kitty , seize with nervous 
 fright , turn and run down the broad staircase by which she have come , 
 through the series of desert room in the _ piano nobile _ , till she 
 reach the great hall . 

 there she pause , panting , curiosity and daring once more get the 
 upperhand . the door she have just pass through , which give access to 
 the staircase , open again and shut . the stranger who have enter come 
 leisurely towards the hall , linger apparently now and then to look at 
 object on the way . presently a voice -- an exclamation . 

 Kitty retreat , catch at the arm of a chair for support , clung to it 
 tremble . a man enter , hold his hat in one hand and a small white 
 glove in the other . 

 at sight of the lady in black , stand on the other side of the hall , 
 he start violently -- and stop . then , just as Kitty , who have so far 
 make neither sound nor movement , take the first hurried step towards the 
 staircase by which she have enter , Geoffrey Cliffe come forward . 

 " how do you do , Lady Kitty ? do not , I beg of you , let I disturb you . I 
 have half an hour to spare , and I give the old man down - stair a franc or 
 two , that he might let I wander over this magnificent old place by 
 myself for a bit . I have always have a fancy for deserted house . you , I 
 gather , have it , too . I will not interfere with you for a moment . before 
 I go , however , let I return what I believe to be your property . " 

 he come nearer , with a study , deliberate air , and hold out the white 
 glove . she see it be her own and accept it . 

 " thank you . " 

 she bow with all the haughtiness she could muster , though her limb 
 shake under she . then as she walk quickly towards the door of exit , 
 Cliffe , who be near to it than she , also move towards it , and throw 
 it open for she . as she approach he he say , quietly : 

 " this be not the first time we have meet in Venice , Lady Kitty . " 

 she waver , could not avoid look at he , and stand arrest . that 
 almost white head!--that furrow brow!--those haggard eye ! a slight , 
 involuntary cry break from her lip . 

 Cliffe smile . then he straighten his tall figure . 

 " you see , perhaps , that I have not grow young . you be quite right . I 
 have leave my youth -- what remain of it -- among those splendid fellow 
 whom the Turks have be harry and torture . well!--they be worth 
 it . I would give it they again . " 

 there be a short silence . 

 the eye of each peruse the other 's face . Kitty begin some word , and 
 leave they unfinished . Cliffe resume -- in another tone -- while the door he 
 hold swing gently backward , his hand follow it . 

 " I spend last winter , as perhaps you know , with the bosnian insurgent 
 in the mountain . it be a tough business -- hardship I should never have 
 have the pluck to face if I have know what be before I . then , in July , 
 I get fever . I have to come away , to find a doctor , and I be a long time 
 at Cattaro pull round . and , meanwhile , the Turks -- God blast 
 them!--have be at their fiend ' work . half my particular friend , with 
 whom I spend the winter , have be hack to piece since I leave they . " 

 she waver , hold by his look , by the coercion of that mingled passion 
 and indifference with which he speak . there be in his manner no 
 suggestion whatever of thing behind , no reference to herself or to the 
 past between they . his passion , it seem , be for his comrade ; his 
 indifference for she . what have he to do with she any more ? he have be 
 among the reality of battle and death , while she have be mince and 
 amble along the usual feminine path . that be the utterance , it 
 seem , of the man 's whole manner and personality , and nothing could 
 have more effectually recall Kitty 's wild nature to the lure . 

 " be you go back ? " she have turn from he and be pull at the 
 finger of the glove he have pick up . 

 " of course ! I be only kick my heel here till I can collect the money 
 and store -- ay , and the _ men_--I want . I give my order in London , and I 
 must be here to see to the transshipment of store and the embarkation 
 of my small force ! not mean for the newspaper , you see , Lady 
 Kitty -- these little detail ! " 

 he draw himself up smile , his worn aspect express just that 
 mingling of dare - devil adventure with subtler and more self - conscious 
 thing which give edge and power to his personality . 

 " I hear you be wound , " say Kitty , abruptly . 

 " so I be -- badly . we be defend a _ polje_--one of their high 
 mountain valley , against a Beg and his troop . my left arm"--he point 
 to the black sling in which it be still held--"wa nearly cut to 
 piece . however , it be practically well . " 

 he take it out of the sling and show that he could use it . then his 
 expression change . he step back to the door , and open it 
 ceremoniously . 

 " do not , however , let I delay you , Lady Kitty -- by my chatter . " 

 Kitty 's cheek be crimson . her momentary yielding vanish in a 
 passion of scorn . What!--he know that she have see he before , see he 
 with that woman -- and he dare to play the mere shattered hero , keep in 
 Venice by these crusader 's reason ! 

 " have you another volume on the way ? " she ask he , as she advance . " I 
 read your last . " 

 her smile be the smile of an enemy . he eye she strangely . 

 " do you ? that be waste of time . " 

 " I think you intend I should read it . " 

 he hesitate . 

 " Lady Kitty , those thing be very far away . I can not defend myself -- for 
 they seem wipe out . " he have cross his arm , and be lean back 
 against the open door , a fine , rugged figure , by no mean repentant . 

 Kitty laugh . 

 " you overstate the difference ! " 

 " between the past and the present ? what do that mean ? " 

 she drop her eye a moment , then raise they . 

 " do you often go to San Lazzaro ? " 

 he bow . 

 " I have a suspicion that the vision at the window -- though it be there 
 only an instant -- be you ! so you see Mademoiselle Ricci ? " 

 his tone be assurance itself . Kitty disdain to answer . her slight 
 gesture bade he let she pass through ; but he ignore it . 

 " I find her kind , Lady Kitty . she listen to I -- I get sympathy from 
 she . " 

 " and you want sympathy ? " 

 her tone sting he . " as a hungry man want food --as an artist want 
 beauty . but I know where I shall _ not _ get it . " 

 " that be always a gain ! " say Kitty , throw back her little head . " Mr. 
 Cliffe , pray let I bid you good - bye . " 

 he suddenly make a step forward . " Lady kitty!"--his deep - set , imperious 
 eye search she face--"i can not restrain myself . your look -- your 
 expression -- go to my heart . laugh at I if you like . it be true . what 
 have you be do with yourself ? " 

 he bend towards she , scrutinize every delicate feature , and , as it 
 seem , shake with agitation . she breathe fast . 

 " Mr. Cliffe , you must know that any sympathy from you to I -- be an 
 insult ! kindly let I pass . " 

 he , too , flush deeply . 

 " insult be a hard word , Lady Kitty . I regret that poem . " 

 she sweep forward in silence , but he still stand in the way . 

 " I write it -- almost in delirium . ah , well"--he shake his head 
 impatiently--"if you do not believe I , let it be . I be not the man I 
 be . the perspective of thing be alter for I . " his voice fall . 
 " woman and child in their blood -- heroic trust -- and brute hate -- the 
 star for candle -- the high peak for friend -- those thing have come 
 between I and the past . but you be right ; we have well not talk any 
 more . I hear old Federigo come up the stair . good - night , Lady 
 Kitty -- good - night ! " 

 he open the door . she pass he , and , to her own intense annoyance , a 
 bunch of pale rose she carry at her belt brush against the 
 doorway , so that one break and fall . she turn to pick it up , but it 
 be already in Cliffe 's hand . she hold out her , threateningly . 

 " I think not . " he put it in his pocket . " here be Federigo . good - night . " 

 it be quite dark when Kitty reach home . she grope her way up - stair 
 and open the door of the _ salon _ . so weary be she that she drop 
 into the first chair , not see at first that any one be in the room . 
 then she catch sight of a brown - paper parcel , apparently just 
 unfastened , on the table , and within it three book , of similar shape 
 and size . a movement startle she . 

 " William ! " 

 Ashe rise slowly from the deep chair in which he have be sit . his 
 aspect seem to her terrified eye utterly and wholly change . in his 
 hand he hold a book like those on the table , and a paper - cutter . his 
 face express the remote abstraction of a man who have be wrestle 
 his way through some hard contest of the mind . 

 she run to he . she wind her arm round he . 

 " William , William ! I do not mean any harm ! I do not ! oh , I have be so 
 miserable ! I try to stop it -- I do all I could . I have hardly sleep at 
 all -- since we talk -- you remember ? oh , William , look at I ! do not be 
 angry with I ! " 

 Ashe disengage himself . 

 " I have ask Blanche to pack for I to - night , Kitty . I go home by the 
 early train to - morrow . " 

 " home ! " 

 she stand petrify ; then a light flash into her face . 

 " you will buy it all up ? you will stop it , William ? " 

 Ashe draw himself together . 

 " I be go home , " he say , with slow decision , " to place my resignation 
 in the hand of Lord Parham . " 




 XXI 


 Kitty fall back in silence , star at William . she loosen her mantle 
 and throw it off , then she sit down in a chair near the wood fire , and 
 bent over it , shiver . 

 " of course you do not mean that , William ? " she say , at last . 

 Ashe turn . 

 " I should not have say it unless I have mean every word of it . it be , 
 of course , the only thing to be do . " 

 Kitty look at he miserably . " but you _ can not _ mean that -- that you will 
 resign because of that book ? " 

 she pull it towards she and turn over the page with a hand that 
 tremble . " that would be too foolish ! " 

 Ashe make no reply . he be stand before the fire , with his hand in 
 his pocket , and a face half absent , half ironical , as though his mind 
 follow the sequence of a far distant future . 

 " William ! " she catch the sleeve of his coat with a little cry . " I write 
 that book because I think it would help you . " 

 his attention come back to she . 

 " yes , Kitty , I believe you do . " 

 she gulp down a sob . his tone be so odd , so remote . 

 " many people have do such thing . I know they have . why -- why , it be 
 only mean -- as a skit -- to make people laugh ! there be _ no _ harm in it , 
 William . " 

 Ashe , without speak , take up the book and look back at certain 
 page , which he seem to have mark . Kitty 's feeling as she watch 
 he be the feeling of the condemn culprit , hold dumb and strangle in 
 the grip of his own sense of justice , and yet passionately conscious how 
 much more he could say for himself than anybody be ever likely to say 
 for he . 

 " when do you have the first idea of this book , Kitty ? " 

 " about a year ago , " she say , in a low voice . 

 " in October ? at Haggart ? " 

 Kitty nod . 

 Ashe think . her admission take he back to the autumn week at 
 Haggart , after the Cliffe crisis and the rearrangement of the ministry 
 in the July of that year . he well remember that those week have be 
 week of special happiness for both of they . afterwards , the winter have 
 bring many renew qualm and vexation . but in that period , between 
 the storm of the session and Kitty 's escapade in the hunting - field , 
 memory recall a tender , melt time -- a time rich in hidden and 
 exquisite hour , when with Kitty on his breast , lip to lip and heart to 
 heart , he have reap , as it seem to he , the fruit of that indulgence 
 which , as he know , his mother scorn . and at that very moment , behind 
 his back , out of his sight , she have begin this atrocious thing . 

 he look at she again -- the bitterness almost at his lip , almost beyond 
 his control . 

 " I wish I know what could have be your possible object in write 
 it ? " 

 she sit up and confront he . the color flame back again into her pale 
 cheek . 

 " you know I tell you -- when we have that talk in London -- that I want to 
 write . I think it would be good for I -- would take my thought 
 off -- well , what have happen . and I begin to write this -- and it amuse 
 I to find I could do it -- and I suppose I get carry away . I love 
 describe you , and glorify you -- and I love make caricature of 
 Lady Parham -- and all the people I hat . I use to work at it whenever 
 you be away -- or I be dull and there be nothing to do . 

 " do it never occur to you , " say Ashe , interrupting , " that it might get 
 you -- get we both -- into trouble , and that you ought to tell I ? " 

 she waver . 

 " no ! " she say , at last . " I never do mean to tell you , while I be 
 write it . you know I do not tell lie , William ! the real fact be , I be 
 afraid you would stop it . " 

 " Good God ! " he throw up his hand with a sound of amazement , then thrust 
 they again into his pocket and begin to pace up and down . 

 " but then"--she resumed--"i think you would soon get over it , and that it 
 be funny -- and everybody would laugh -- and you would laugh -- and there would 
 be an end of it . " 

 he turn and star at she . " frankly , Kitty -- I do not understand what 
 you can be make of ! you imagine that that sketch of Lord Parham"--he 
 strike the open page--"a sketch write by _ my wife _ , describe my 
 official chief -- when he be my guest -- under my own roof -- with all sort 
 of detail of the most intimate and offensive kind -- mock his 
 speech -- his manner -- his little personal way -- charge he with be 
 the corrupt tool of Lady Parham , disloyal to his colleague , a man not 
 to be trust -- and justify all this by a sort of evidence that you 
 could only have get as my wife and Lord Parham 's hostess -- you actually 
 suppose that you could write and publish _ that!_--without in the first 
 place its be plain to every Tom , Dick , and Harry that you have write 
 it -- and in the next , without make it impossible for your husband to 
 remain a colleague of the man you have treat in such a way ? Kitty!--you 
 be not a stupid woman ! do you really mean to say that you could write 
 and publish this book without _ know _ that you be do a wrong 
 action -- which , so far from serve I , could only damage my career 
 irreparably ? do nothing -- do no one warn you -- if you be determined to 
 keep such a secret from your husband , whom it most concerned ? " 

 he have come to stand beside she , both hand on the back of a 
 chair -- stoop forward to emphasize his word -- the line of his fine 
 face and noble brow contract by anger and pain . 

 " Mr. Darrell warn I , " say Kitty , in a low voice , as though those 
 imperious eye compel the truth from her--"but of course I do not 
 believe he . " 

 " Darrell ! " cry Ashe , in amazement--"Darrell ! you confide in he ? " 

 " I tell he all about it . it be he who take it to a publisher . " 

 " Hound ! " say Ashe , between his tooth . " so that be his revenge . " 

 " oh , you need not blame he too much , " say Kitty , proudly , not 
 understand the remark . " he write to I not long ago to say it be 
 horribly unwise -- and that he wash his hand of it . " 

 " ay -- when he have do the deed ! when do you show it he ? " say Ashe , 
 impetuously . 

 " at Haggart -- in August . " 

 " _ Et tu , Brute ! _ " say Ashe , turn away . " well , that be do with . now 
 the only thing to do be to face the music . I go home . whatever can be 
 do to withdraw the book from circulation I shall , of course , do ; but I 
 gather from this precious letter"--he hold up the note which have be 
 enclose in the parcel--"that some thousand of copy have already be 
 order by the bookseller , and a few distribute to ' person in high 
 place . ' " 

 " William , " she say , in despair , catch his arm again--"listen ! I 
 offer the man two hundred pound only yesterday to stop it . " 

 Ashe laugh . 

 " what do he reply ? " 

 " he say it be impossible . fifty copy have be already issue . " 

 " the review copy , no doubt . by next week there will be , I should say , 
 five thousand in the shop . your man understand his business , Kitty . 
 this be the kind of puff preliminary he have be scatter about . " 

 and with sparkle eye he hand to she a print slip contain an 
 outline of the book for the information of the bookseller . 

 it draw attention to the extraordinary interest of the production as a 
 painting of the upper class by the hand of one belong to its inmost 
 circle . " People of the high social and political importance will be 
 recognize at once ; the writer handle cabinet minister and their wife 
 with equal freedom , and with a touch betray the close and most 
 intimate knowledge . detail hitherto quite unknown to the public of 
 ministerial combination and intrigue -- especially of the feminine 
 influence involve -- will be find here in their light and most 
 amusing form . a certain famous fancy ball will be identify without 
 difficulty . scathing as some of the portrait be , the writer be by no 
 mean merely cynical . the central figure of the book be a young and 
 rise statesman , whose aim and hope be touch with a love 
 hand -- the charm of the portrait be only equal by the venom with 
 which the writer assail those who have thwart or injure his hero . 
 but our advice be simply--'Buy and Read ! ' conjecture will run wild about 
 the writer . all we can say be that the most romantic or interesting 
 surmise that can possibly be form will fall far short of the reality . " 

 " the beast be a shrewd beast ! " say Ashe , as he raise himself from the 
 stoop position in which he have be follow the sentence over 
 Kitty 's shoulder . " he know that the public will rush for his ware ! how 
 much money do he offer you , Kitty ? " 

 he turn sharply on his heel to wait for her reply . 

 " a hundred pound , " say Kitty , almost inaudibly--"and a hundred more if 
 five thousand sell . " she have return again to her crouch attitude 
 over the fire . 

 " generous!--upon my word ! " say Ashe , scornfully turn over the two 
 thick - leave , loosely print Mudie volume . " a guinea to the public , I 
 suppose -- fifteen shilling to the trade . Darrell do not exactly advise 
 you to advantage , Kitty . " 

 Kitty keep silence . the sarcastic violence of his tone fall on she like 
 a blow . she seem to shrink together ; while Ashe resume his walk to 
 and fro . 

 presently , however , she look up , to ask , in a voice that try for 
 steadiness : 

 " what do you mean to do -- exactly -- William ? " 

 " I shall , of course , buy up all I can ; I shall employ some lawyer 
 fellow , and appeal to the good feeling of the newspaper . there will be 
 no trouble with the respectable one . but some copy will get out , and 
 some of the Opposition newspaper will make capital out of they . 
 Naturally!--they'd be precious fool if they do not . " 

 a momentary hope spring up in Kitty . 

 " but if you buy it up -- and stop all the paper that matter , " she 
 faltered--"why should you resign , William ? there will not be -- such great 
 harm do . " 

 for answer he open the book , and without speak point to two 
 passage -- the first , an account full of point and malice of the 
 negotiation between himself and Lord Parham at the time when he enter 
 the cabinet , the condition he himself have make , and the confidential 
 comment of the Premier on the man and affair of the moment . 

 " do you remember the night when I tell you those thing , Kitty ? " 

 yes , Kitty remember well . it be a night of intimate talk between man 
 and wife , a night when she have show he her sweetest , tender mood , 
 and he -- incorrigible optimist!--had persuade himself that she be 
 grow as wise as she be lovely . 

 her lip tremble . then he point to the second -- to the pitiless picture 
 of Lord Parham at Haggart . 

 " you write that -- when he be under our roof -- there by our press 
 invitation ! you could not have write it -- unless he have so put himself 
 in your power . a wandering Arab , Kitty , will do no harm to the man who 
 have eat and drunk in his tent ! " 

 she look up , and as she read his face she understand at last how what 
 she have do have outrage in he all the natural and all the inherit 
 instinct of a generous and fastidious nature . the " great gentleman , " so 
 strong in he as in all the good of english statesman , whether they 
 spring from the class or the mass , be up in arm . 

 she spring to her foot with a cry . " William , you can not give up politic ! 
 it would make you miserable . " 

 " that can not be help . and I could not go on like this , Kitty -- even if 
 this affair of the book could be patch up . the strain 's too great . " 

 they be but a yard apart , and yet she seem to be look at he 
 across a gulf . 

 " you have be so happy in your work ! " this time the sob escape she . 

 " oh , do not let us talk about that , " he say , abruptly , as he walk away . 
 " there will be a certain relief in give up the impossible . I will go back 
 to my book . we can travel , I suppose , and put politic out of our 
 head . " 

 " but -- you will not resign your seat ? " 

 " no , " he say , after a pause--"no . as far as I can see at present , I 
 sha'n't resign my seat , though my constituent , of course , will be very 
 sick . but I doubt whether I shall stand again . " 

 every phrase fall as though with a thud on Kitty 's ear . it be the wreck 
 of a man 's life , and she have do it . 

 " shall you -- shall you go and see Lord Parham ? " she ask , after a pause . 

 " I shall write to he first . I imagine"--he point to the letter lie 
 on the table--"that creature have already send he the book . then later I 
 daresay I shall see he . " 

 she look up . 

 " if I write and tell he it be all my doing , William?--if I grovel 
 to he ? " 

 " the responsibility be mine , " he say , sternly . " I have no business to 
 tell even you the thing print there . I tell they at my own risk . if 
 anything I say have any weight with you , Kitty , you will write nothing . " 

 she spread out her hand to the fire again , and he hear she say , as 
 though to herself : 

 " the thing be -- the awful thing be , that I be mad -- I must be mad . I never 
 think of all this when I be write it . I write it in a kind of 
 dream . in the first place , I want to glorify you-- " 

 he break into an exclamation . 

 " your _ taste _ , Kitty!--where be your taste ? that a wife should praise a 
 husband in public ! you could only make we both laugh - stock . " 

 his handsome feature quiver a little . he feel this part of it the 
 most galling , the most humiliating of all ; and she understand . in his 
 eye she have show herself not only reckless and treacherous , but 
 indelicate , vulgar , capable of besmirch the most sacred and intimate 
 of relation . 

 she rise from her seat . 

 " I must go and take my thing off , " she say , in " a vague voice , " and as 
 she move she totter a little . he turn to look at she . amid his own 
 crush sense of defeat and catastrophe , his natural and righteous 
 indignation , he remember that she have be ill -- he remember their 
 child . but whether from the excitement , first of the meeting in the 
 Vercelli palace , and now of this scene -- or merely from the heat of the 
 fire over which she have be hang , her cheek be flushed , her eye 
 blaze . her beauty have never be more evident ; but it make little 
 appeal to he ; it be the wild , ungovernable beauty from which he have 
 suffer . he see that she be excited , but there be an air also of 
 return physical vigor ; and the nascent feeling which might have be 
 strengthen by pallor and prostration die away . 

 Kitty move as though to pass he and go to her room , which open out 
 of the _ salon _ . but as she near he she suddenly catch he by the 
 arm . 

 " William!--William ! do not do it!--don't resign ! let I apologize ! " 

 he be anger by her persistence , and merely say , coldly : 

 " I have give you my reason , Kitty , why such a course be impossible . " 

 " and -- and you start to - morrow morning ? " 

 " by the early train . please let I go , Kitty . there be many thing to 
 arrange . I must order the gondola , and see if the people here can cash 
 I a check . " 

 " you mean -- to leave I alone ? " the word have a curious emphasis . 

 " I have a few word with Miss French before you come in . the packet 
 arrive by the evening post , and see that it be book -- for you -- I 
 open it . after about an hour"--he turn and walk away again--"i see 
 my bearing . then I call Miss French , tell she I should have to go 
 to - morrow , and ask she how long she could stay with you . " 

 " William ! " cry Kitty again , lean heavily on the table beside 
 her--"don't go!--don't leave I ! " 

 his face darken . 

 " so you would prevent I from take the only honorable , the only decent 
 way out of this thing that remain to I ? " 

 she make no immediate reply . she stand -- wrap apparently in painful 
 abstraction -- a creature lovely and distraught . the mass of her fair 
 hair loosen by the breeze on the canal have fall about her cheek and 
 shoulder ; her black hat frame the white brow and large , feverish eye ; 
 and the sable cape she have wear in the gondola have slip down over the 
 thin , slop shoulder , reveal the young figure and the slender 
 waist . she might have be a child of seventeen , grieve over the death 
 of her goldfinch . 

 Ashe gather together his official letter and paper , find his 
 check - book , and begin to write . while he write he explain that Miss 
 French could keep her company at least another fortnight , that he could 
 leave with they four or five circular note for immediate expense , and 
 would send more from home directly he arrive . 

 in the middle of his direction Kitty once more appeal to he in a 
 passionate , muffled voice not to go . this time he lose his temper , and 
 without answer she he hastily leave the room to arrange his packing 
 with his valet . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 when he return to the _ salon _ Kitty be not there . he and Miss 
 French -- who know only that something tragic have happen in which Kitty 
 be concern -- keep up a fragmentary conversation till dinner be 
 announce and Kitty enter . she have evidently be weep , but with 
 powder and rouge she have try to conceal the trace of her tear ; and 
 at dinner she sit silent , hardly answer when Margaret French speak to 
 she . 

 after dinner Ashe go out with his cigar towards the Piazza . he be in 
 a smarting , daze state , begin , however , to realize the blow more 
 than he have do at first . he believe that Parham himself would not be 
 at all sorry to be rid of he . he and his friend form a powerful 
 group both in the cabinet and out of it . but they be force the pace , 
 and the element of resistance and reaction be strong . he picture the 
 dismay of his friend , the possible breakdown of the reform party . of 
 course they might so stand by he -- and the suppression of the book might 
 be so complete-- 

 at this moment he catch sight of a newspaper content bill display at 
 the door of the only shop in the Piazza which sell english newspaper . 
 one of the line run , " anonymous attack on the Premier . " he start , 
 go in and buy the paper . there , in the " London Topics " column , be 
 the follow paragraph : 

 " a string of extract from a forthcoming book , accompany by a somewhat 
 startle publisher 's statement , have lately be send round to the 
 press . we be ask not to print they before the day of publication , but 
 they have already rouse much attention , if not excitement . they 
 certainly contain a very gross attack on the Prime Minister , base 
 apparently on first - hand information , and involve indiscretion 
 personal and political of an unusually serious character . the wife of a 
 cabinet minister be freely name as the writer , and even if no violation 
 of cabinet secrecy be concern , it be clear that the book outrage the 
 confidential relation which ought to subsist between a Premier and his 
 colleague , if government on our english system be to be satisfactorily 
 carry on . the statement it make with every appearance of authority 
 both as to the relation between Lord Parham and some of the most 
 important member of his cabinet , and as to the Premier 's intention 
 with regard to one or two of the most vital question now before the 
 country , be calculate seriously to embarrass the government . we fear 
 the book will have a veritable _ succès de scandale _ . " 

 " that fellow at least have do his good to kick the ball , damn he ! " 
 think Ashe , with contempt , as he thrust the paper into his pocket . 

 it be no more than he expect ; but it put an end to all thought of a 
 more hopeful kind . he walk up and down the _ piazza _ smoking , till 
 midnight , count the hour till he could reach London , and revolve 
 the phrase of a telegram to be send to his solicitor before start . 

 Kitty make no sign or sound when he enter her room . her fair head be 
 turn away from he , and all be dark . he could hardly believe that she 
 be asleep ; but it be a relief to he to accept her pretence of it , and 
 to escape all further conversation . he himself sleep but little . the 
 mere profundity of the venetian silence tease he ; it remind he how 
 far he be from home . 

 two image pursue he -- of Kitty write the book , while he be away 
 electioneering or toil at his new office -- and then , of his return to 
 Haggart -- tired or triumphant -- on many a winter evening , of her glad rush 
 into his arm , her sparkling face on his breast . 

 or again , he conjure up the scene when the MS . have be show to 
 Darrell -- his pretence of disapproval , his sham warning , and the smile 
 on his sallow face as he walk off with it . Ashe look back to the 
 early day of his friendship with Darrell , when he , Ashe , be one of the 
 leader at Eton , popular with the master in spite of his incorrigible 
 idleness , and popular with the boy because of his bodily prowess , and 
 Darrell have be a small , sickly , bully colleger . scene after scene 
 recur to he , from their later relation at Oxford also . there be a 
 kind of deliberation in the way in which he force his thought into 
 this channel ; it make an outlet for a fierce bitterness of spirit , which 
 some imperious instinct forbid he to spend on Kitty . 

 he doze in the later hour of the night , and be rouse by something 
 touch his hand , which lie outside the bedclothe . again the little 
 head!--and the soft curl . Kitty be there -- crouch beside 
 he -- weeping . there flash into his mind an image of the night in 
 London when she have come to he thus ; and unwelcome as the whole 
 remembrance be , he be conscious of a sudden swell wave of pity and 
 passion . what if he spring up , catch she in his arm , forgave she , and 
 bade the world go hang ! 

 no ! the impulse pass , and in his turn he feign sleep . the thought of 
 her long deceit , of the selfish wilfulness wherewith she have requite 
 deep love and easy trust , be too much ; it sear his heart . and there 
 be another and a subtler influence . to have forgive so easily would 
 have seem treachery to those high ambition and ideal from which -- as 
 he think , only too certainly -- she have now cut he off . it be part of 
 his survive youth that the catastrophe seem to he so absolute . any 
 thought of the fresh effort which would be necessary for the 
 reconquering of his position be no less sickening to he than that of 
 the immediate discomfort and humiliation to be undergone . he would go 
 back to book and amusement ; and in the idling of the future there would 
 be plenty of time for love - making . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 in the morning , when all preparation be make , the gondolier wait 
 below , Ashe 's telegram send , and the circular note hand over to 
 Margaret French , who have discreetly leave the room , William approach 
 his wife . 

 " good - bye ! " say Kitty , and give he her hand , with a strange look and 
 smile . 

 Ashe , however , draw she to he and kiss she -- against her will . " I will 
 do my good , Kitty , " he say , in a would - be cheery voice--"to pull we 
 through . perhaps -- I do not know!--thing may turn out well than I 
 think . good - bye . take care of yourself . I will write , of course . do not 
 hurry home . you will want a fortnight or three week yet . " 

 Kitty say not a word , and in another minute he be go . the italian 
 servant congregate below at the water - gate send laugh " A 
 rivederla " after the handsome , good - temper Englishman , whom they 
 like and regret ; the gondola move off ; Kitty hear the plash of the 
 water . but she hold back from the window . 

 half - way to the bend of the canal beyond the Accademia , Ashe turn and 
 give a long look at the balcony . no one be there . but just as the 
 gondola be pass out of sight , Kitty slip onto the balcony . she 
 could see only the figure of Piero , the gondolier , and in another second 
 the boat be go . she stay there for many minute , cling to the 
 balustrade and star , as it seem , at the sparkle of autumnal sun 
 which dance on the green water and on the red palace to her right . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 all the morning Kitty on her sofa pretend to write letter . Margaret 
 French , work or read behind she , know that she scarcely get 
 through a single note , that her pen lie idle on the paper , while her 
 eye absently watch the palace window on the other side of the canal . 
 Miss French be quite certain that some tragic cause of difference 
 between the husband and wife have arise . Kitty , the indiscreet , have for 
 once keep her own counsel about the book , and Ashe have with his own 
 hand pack away the volume which have arrive the night before ; so 
 that she could only guess , and from that delicacy of feel restrain 
 she as much as possible . 

 once or twice Kitty seem on the point of unburden herself . then 
 overmaster tear would threaten ; she would break off and begin to 
 write . at luncheon she look alarmed Miss French , so white be the little 
 face , so large and restless the eye . ought Mr. Ashe to have leave she , 
 and leave she apparently in anger ? no doubt he think she much well . 
 but Margaret remember the bad day of her illness , the anxious look 
 of the doctor , and the anguish that Kitty have suffer in the first 
 week after her child 's death . she seem now , indeed , to have forget 
 little Harry , so far as outward expression go ; but who could tell what 
 be pass in her strange , unstable mind ? and it often seem to 
 margaret that the sign of the past summer be stamp on she 
 indelibly , for those who have eye to see . 

 be it the perception of this pity beside she that drive Kitty to 
 solitude and flight ? at any rate , she say after luncheon that she would 
 go to Madame d'Estrées , and do not ask Miss French to accompany she . 

 she set out accordingly with the two gondolier . but she have hardly 
 pass the Accademia before she bid her man take a cross - cut to the 
 Giudecca . on these wide water , with their fresher air and full 
 sunshine , a certain physical comfort seem to breathe upon she . 

 " piero , it be not rough ! can we go to the Lido ? " she ask the gondolier 
 behind she . 

 Piero , who be all smile and complaisance , as well he might be with a 
 lady who scatter _ lire _ as freely as Kitty do , turn the boat at 
 once for that channel " Del Orfano " where the bone of the vanquished 
 dead lie deep amid the ooze . 

 they pass San Giorgio , and be soon among the pile and sand - bank of 
 the lagoon . Kitty sit in a dream which blot the sunshine from the 
 water . it seem to she that she be a dead creature , float in a dead 
 world . William have cease to love she . she have wreck his career and 
 destroy her own happiness . her child have be take from she . Lady 
 Tranmore 's affection have be long since alienate . her own mother be 
 nothing to she ; and her friend in society , like Madeleine Alcot , would 
 only laugh and gloat over the scandal of the book . 

 no -- everything be finish ! as her finger hang over the side of the 
 gondola feel the touch of the water , her morbid fancy , incredibly quick 
 and keen , fancy herself drown , or poison -- lie somehow white and 
 cold on a bed where William might see and forgive she . 

 then with a start of memory which bring the blood rush to her face , 
 she think of Cliffe stand beside the door of the great hall in the 
 Vercelli palace -- she seem to be look again into those deep , 
 expressive eye , hold by the irony and the passion with which they be 
 infuse . have the passion any reference to her?--or be it merely part of 
 the man 's nature , as inseparable from it as flame from the volcano ? if 
 William have cast she off , be there still one man -- wild and bad , indeed , 
 like herself , but poet and hero nevertheless -- who love she ? 

 she do not much believe it ; but still the possibility of it lure she , 
 like some dark gulf that promise her oblivion from this pain -- pain 
 which torture one so impatient of distress , so hungry for pleasure and 
 praise . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 in those day the Lido be still a noble and solitary shore , without the 
 degradation of to - day . 

 Kitty walk fast and furiously across the sandy road , and over the 
 shingle , turning , when she reach the firm sand , southward towards 
 Malamocco . it be between four and five , and the autumn afternoon be 
 fast decline . a fresh breeze be on the sea , and the short wave , 
 intensely blue under a wide , clear heaven , break in dazzle foam on the 
 red - brown sand . 

 she seem to be alone between sea and sky , save for two figure 
 approach from the south -- a fisher - boy with a shrimp - net and a man 
 walking bareheade . she notice they idly . a mirage of sun be between 
 she and they , and the agony of remorse and despair which hold she 
 blunt all perception . 

 thus it be that not till she be close upon he do her dazzle sight 
 recognize Geoffrey Cliffe . 

 he see she first , and stop in motionless astonishment on the edge of 
 the sand . she almost run against he , when his voice arrest she . 

 " Lady Kitty ! " 

 she put her hand to her breast , waver , and come to a stand - still . he 
 see a little figure in black between he and those " gorgeous tower and 
 cloud - cap palace " of Alpine snow , which dimly close in the north ; 
 and beneath the droop hat a face even more changed and tragic than 
 that which have haunt he since their meeting of the day before . 

 [ illustration : " she think of CLIFFE stand BESIDE the DOOR of the 
 GREAT HALL . " ] 

 " how do you do ? " she say , mechanically , and would have pass he . 
 but he stand in her path . as he star at she an impulse of rage run 
 through he , resent the wreck of anything so beautiful -- rage against 
 Ashe , who must surely be somehow responsible . 

 " be not you wander too far , Lady Kitty ? " his voice shake under the 
 restraint he put upon it . " you seem tired -- very tired -- and you be 
 perhaps far from your gondola than you think . " 

 " I be not tired . " 

 he hesitate . 

 " might I walk with you a little , or do you forbid I ? " 

 she say nothing , but walk on . he turn and accompany she . one or 
 two question that he put to she -- have she companions?--where have she 
 leave she gondola?--remaine unanswered . he study her face , and at last 
 he lay a strong hand upon her arm . 

 " sit down . you be not fit for any more walking . " 

 he draw she towards some log of driftwood on the upper sand , and she 
 sink down upon they . he find a place beside she . 

 " what be the matter with you ? " he say , abruptly , with a harsh 
 authority . " you be in trouble . " 

 a tremor shake she -- as of the prisoner who feel on his limb the first 
 touch of the fetter . 

 " no , no ! " she say , try to rise ; " it be nothing . I -- I do not know it 
 be so far . I must go home . " 

 his hand hold she . 

 " Kitty ! " 

 " yes . " her voice be scarcely audible . 

 " tell I what hurt you ! tell I why you be here , alone , with a face 
 like that ! do not be afraid of I ! could I lift a finger to harm a 
 mother that have lose her child ? give I your hand . " he gather both 
 her into the warm shelter of his own . " look at I -- trust I ! my heart 
 have grow , Kitty , since you know I last . it have take into itself so 
 many grief -- so many death . tell I your grief , poor child!--tell I ! " 

 he stoop and kiss her hand -- most tenderly , most gravely . 

 tear rush into her eye . the wild emotion that be she be be 
 rouse beyond control . bend towards he she begin to pour out , first 
 brokenly , then in a torrent , the wretched , incoherent story , of which 
 the mere telling , in such an ear , mean new treachery to William and new 
 ruin for herself . 




 XXII 


 on a certain cloudy afternoon , some ten day later , a fishing - boat , with 
 a patch orange sail , might have be see scud under a light 
 northwesterly breeze through the channel which connect the island of 
 San Francesco with the more easterly stretch of the venetian lagoon . 
 the boat presently near the shore of one of the cultivate 
 _ lidi_--island form out of the silt of many river by the travail of 
 century , some of they still mere sand or mud bank , other cover by 
 vineyard and fruit orchard -- which , with the _ murazzi _ or sea - wall of 
 Venice , stand sentinel between the city and the sea . on the _ lido _ along 
 which the boat be coast , the vintage be long since over and the 
 fruit gather ; the last yellow and purple leaf in the orchard , " a 
 pestilent - stricken multitude , " be to - day fall fast to earth , under 
 the sighing , importunate wind . the air be warm ; November be at its 
 mild . but all color and light be drown in float mist , and 
 darkness lie over the distant city . it be one of those drear and 
 ghostly day which may well have breathe into the soul of Shelley that 
 superb vision of the dead generation of Venice , rise , a phantom host 
 from the bosom of the sunset , and sweep in " a rapid mask of death " 
 over the shadowed water that see the birth and may yet furnish the tomb 
 of so vast a fame . 

 two person be in the boat -- Kitty , wrap in sable , her straying 
 hair hold close by a cap of the same fur -- and Geoffrey Cliffe . they have 
 be wander in the lagoon all day , in order to escape from Venice 
 and observer -- first at Torcello , then at San Francesco , and now they 
 be ostensibly come home in a wide sweep along the northern _ lidi _ 
 and _ murazzi _ , that Cliffe might show his companion , from near by , the 
 Porto del Lido , that exit from the lagoon where the salt lake grow 
 into the sea . 

 a certain wildness and exaltation , draw from the solitude around they 
 and from their _ tête - à - tête _ , could be read in both the man and the 
 woman . Cliffe watch his companion incessantly . as he lie against the 
 side of the boat at her foot , he see she frame in the curve side of 
 the stern , and could read she change expression . not a happy 
 face!--that he know ! a face haunt by shadow from an underworld of 
 thought -- pursue fury of remorse and fear . not the less do he 
 triumph that he have it _ there _ , in his power ; nor have the flash of 
 terror and wavering will which he discern in any way diminish its 
 beauty . 

 " how long have you know -- that woman ? " Kitty ask he , suddenly , after 
 a pause break only by the playing of the wind with the sail . 

 Cliffe laugh . 

 " the Ricci ? why do you want to know , madame ? " 

 she make a contemptuous lip . 

 " I know she first , " say Cliffe , " some year ago in Milan . she be then 
 at La Scala -- walk on -- pay for her good look . then somebody send she 
 to Paris to the Conservatoire , which she only leave this spring . this be 
 her first italian engagement . her people be shopkeeper here -- in the 
 Merceria -- which help she . she be as vain as a peacock and as dangerous 
 as a pet panther . " 

 " dangerous ! " Kitty 's scorn have pass into her voice . 

 " well , Italy be still the country of the knife , " say Cliffe , 
 lightly--"and I could still hire a bravo or two -- in Venice -- if I want 
 they . " 

 " do the Ricci hire they ? " 

 Cliffe shrug his shoulder . 

 " she would do it without wink , if it suit she . " then , after a 
 pause--"Do you still wonder why I should have choose her society ? " 

 " oh no , " say Kitty , hastily . " you tell I . " 

 " as much as a _ friend _ care to know ? " 

 she nod , flush , and drop the subject . 

 Cliffe 's mouth still smile , but his eye study she with a veiled and 
 sinister intensity . 

 " I have not see the lady for a week , " he resume . " she pester I with 
 note . I promise to go and see she in a new play to - morrow night , 
 but-- " 

 " oh , go ! " say Kitty--"by all mean go ! " 

 " ' Ruy Blas ' in Italian ? I think not . ah ! do you see that gleam on the 
 Campanile?--marvellous ! ... miladi , I have a question to ask you . " 

 " _ dite ! _ " say Kitty . 

 " do you put I into your book ? " 

 " certainly . " 

 " what kind of thing do you say ? " 

 " the bad I could ! " 

 " ah ! how shall I get a copy ? " say Cliffe , musing . 

 she make no answer , but she be conscious of a sudden movement -- be it 
 of terror ? at the bottom of her soul be she , indeed , afraid of the man 
 beside she ? 

 " by - the - way , " he resume , " you promise to tell I your news of this 
 morning . but you have not tell I a word ! " 

 she turn away . she have gather her fur around she , and her face be 
 almost hide by they . 

 " nothing be settle , " she say , in a cold , reluctant voice . 

 " which mean that you will not tell I anything more ? " 

 she be silent . her lip have a proud line which pique he . 

 " you think I be not worthy to know ? " 

 her eye gleam . 

 " what do it matter to you ? " 

 " oh , nothing ! I should have be glad to hear that all be well , and 
 Ashe 's mind at rest about his prospect . " 

 " his prospect ! " she repeat , with a scorn which sting . " how _ dare _ we 
 mention his name here at all ? " 

 Cliffe redden . 

 " I dare , " he say , calmly . 

 Kitty look at he -- a quivering defiance in face and frame ; then bent 
 forward . 

 " would you like to know -- who be the good -- the noble -- the 
 handsome -- the most generous -- the most delightful man I have ever meet ? " 

 each word come out wing and charge with a strange intensity of 
 passion . 

 " do I ? " say Cliffe , raise his eyebrows--"do I want to know ? " 

 her look hold he . 

 " my husband , William Ashe ! " 

 and she fall back , flushed and breathless , like one who throw out a 
 rebel and challenging flag . 

 Cliffe be silent a moment , observe she . 

 " strange ! " he say , at last . " it be only when you be miserable you be 
 kind . I could wish you miserable again , _ chérie _ . " 

 Tone and look break into a sombre wildness before which she shrink . her 
 own violence pass away . she lean over the side of the boat , 
 struggle with tear . 

 " then you have your wish , " be her muffled answer . 

 the three bronze Venetians , a father and two son , who be work the 
 _ bragozzo _ glance curiously at the pair . they be persuade that these 
 charterer of their boat be lover fly from observation , and the 
 unknown tongue do but stimulate guess . 

 Cliffe raise himself impatiently . 

 they be near a point where the line of _ murazzi _ they have be 
 follow -- low breakwater of great strength -- sweep away from they 
 outward and eastward towards a distant opening . on the other side of the 
 channel be a low line of shore , broaden into the Lido proper , with 
 its scattered house and church , and soon lose in the mist as it 
 stretch towards the south . 

 " Ecco!--il Porto del Lido ! " say the old boatman , point far away to 
 a line of deep color beneath a dark and lower sky . 

 Kitty bend over the side of the boat star towards the dim spot he 
 show she -- where be the mouth of the sea . 

 " Kitty ! " say Cliffe 's voice beside she , hoarse and hurried--"one word , 
 and I tell these fellow to set their helm for Trieste . this boat will 
 carry we well -- and the wind be with we . " 

 she turn and look he in the face . 

 " and then ? " 

 " then ? we will think it out together , Kitty -- together ! " he bend his lip 
 to her hand , bend so as to conceal the action from the sailor . but 
 she draw her hand away . 

 " you and I , " she say , fiercely--"would tire of each other in a week ! " 

 " have the courage to try ! No!--you should not tire of I in a week ! I 
 would find way to keep you mine , Kitty -- cradle , and comfort , and 
 happy . " 

 " happy ! " her slight laugh be the forlornest thing . " take I out to 
 sea -- and drop I there -- with a stone round my neck . that might be worth 
 doing -- perhaps . " 

 he survey she unmoved . 

 " listen , Kitty ! this kind of thing can not go on forever . " 

 " what be you wait for ? " she say , tauntingly . " you ought to have 
 go last week . " 

 " I be not go , " he say , raise himself by a sudden movement--"till 
 you come with I ! " 

 Kitty start , her eye rivet to his . 

 " and yet go I will ! not even you shall stop I , Kitty . I will take the 
 help I have gather back to those poor devil -- if I die for it . but 
 you will come with I -- you'll come ! " 

 she draw back -- tremble under an impression she strove to conceal . 

 " if you will talk such madness , I can not help it , " she say , with 
 shorten breath . 

 " yes -- you'll come ! " he say , nod . " what have you to do with Ashe , 
 Kitty , any long ? you and he be already divided . you have try life 
 together and what have you make of it ? you be not fit for this mincing , 
 trip London life -- nor be I ? and as for morals--- I will tell you a 
 strange thing , Kitty . " he bend forward and grasp her hand with a 
 force which hurt -- from which she could not release herself . " I 
 believe -- yes , by God , I believe!--that I be a well man than I be 
 before I start on this adventure . it be be like drink at last at 
 the very source of life -- living , not talk about it . one bitter night 
 last February , for instance , I help a man -- one of the insurgent -- who 
 have take to the mountain with his wife and child -- to carry his 
 wife , a die woman , over a mountain - pass to the only place where she 
 could possibly get help and shelter . we carry she on a litter , six man 
 taking turn . the cold and the fatigue be such that I shudder now when 
 I think of it . yet at the end I seem to myself a man reborn . I be 
 happy than I have ever be in my life . some mystic virtue have flow 
 into I . among those man and woman , instead of be the selfish beast 
 I have be all these year , I can forget myself . death seem 
 nothing -- brotherhood -- liberty!--everything ! and yet-- " 

 his face relax , become ironical , reflective . but he hold the hand 
 close , his grasp of they hide by the fold of fur which hang about 
 she . 

 " and _ yet_--i can say to you without a qualm -- put this marriage which 
 have already come to naught behind you -- and come with I ! Ashe cramp 
 you . he blame you -- you blame yourself . what _ reality _ have all that ? it 
 make you miserable -- it waste life . _ I _ accept your nature -- I do not ask 
 you to be anything else than yourself -- your wild , vain , adorable self ! 
 Ashe ask you to put restraint on yourself -- to make painful effort -- to 
 be good for his sake -- the sake of something outside . _ I _ say -- come and 
 look at the elemental thing -- death and battle -- hatred , solitude , love . 
 _ they will _ sweep we out of ourselves!--no need to strive and cry for 
 it -- into the great current of the world 's being -- bring we close to the 
 force at the root of thing -- the force which create -- and destroy . Dip 
 your heart in that stream , Kitty , and feel it grow in your breast . take 
 a nurse 's dress -- put your hand in mine -- and come ! I can not promise you 
 luxury or ease . you have have enough of those . come and open another door 
 in the House of Life ! take starve woman and hunt child into your 
 arms--- feel with they -- weep with they -- look with they into the face of 
 death ! make friend with nature -- with rock , forest , torrent -- with 
 night and dawn , which you have never see , Kitty ! they will love 
 you -- they'll support you -- the rough people -- and the dark forest . 
 they will draw nature 's glamour round you -- they'll pour her balm into your 
 soul . and I shall be with you -- beside you!--your guardian -- your 
 lover -- your _ lover _ , Kitty -- till death do we part . " 

 he look at she with the smile which be his only but sufficient 
 beauty ; the violent , exciting word flow in her ear , amid the sound of 
 rise wave and the distant talk of the fisherman . his hand crush 
 her ; his mad , implore eye repel and constrain she . the wild 
 hunger and curiosity of her be rush to meet he ; she hear the 
 echo of her own word to ashe : " More life -- more _ life_!--even though it 
 lead to pain -- and agony -- and tear ! " 

 then she wrench herself away -- suddenly , contemptuously . 

 " of course , that be all nonsense -- romantic nonsense . you have perhaps 
 forget that I be one of the woman who do not stir without their maid . " 

 Cliffe 's expression change . he thrust his hand into his pocket . 

 " oh , well , if you must have a maid , " he say , dryly , " that settle it . a 
 maid would be the deuce . and yet -- I think I could find you a bosnian 
 girl -- strong and faithful-- " 

 their eye meet -- his already full of a kind of ownership , tender , 
 confident , humorous even -- hers alive with passionate anger and 
 resistance . 

 " _ without a qualm _ ! " she repeat , in a low voice--"without a qualm ! Mon 
 Dieu ! " 

 she turn and look towards the Adriatic . 

 " where be we ? " she say , imperiously . 

 for a gesture of command on Cliffe 's part , unseen by she , have send the 
 boat eastward , spin before the wind . the lagoon be no long 
 tranquil . it be cover with small wave ; and the roar of the outer 
 sea , though still far off , be already in their ear . the mist lifting 
 show white , distant crest of foam on a tumble field of water , and 
 to the north , clothe in tempestuous purple , the dim shape of 
 mountain . 

 Kitty raise herself , and beckon towards the captain of the 
 _ bragozzo _ . 

 " Giuseppe ! " 

 " Commanda , Eccellenza ! " 

 the man come forward . 

 with a voice sharp and clear , she give the order to return at once to 
 Venice . Cliffe watch she , the vein on his forehead swelling . she know 
 that he debate with himself whether he should give a counter - order or 
 no . 

 " a Venezia ! " say Kitty , wave her hand towards the sailor , her eye 
 shin under the tangle of her hair . 

 the helm be put round , and beneath a tacking sail the boat sweep 
 southward . 

 with an awkward laugh Cliffe fall back into his seat , stretch his 
 long limb across the boat . he have speak under a strong and genuine 
 impulse . his passion for she have make enormous stride in these few wild 
 day beside she . and yet the fantastic poet 's sense respond at a touch 
 to the new impression . he shake off the heroic mood as he have doff his 
 bosnian cloak . in a few minute , though the heighten color remain , 
 he be chat and laugh as though nothing have happen . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 she , exhaust physically and morally by her conflict with he , hardly 
 speak on the way home . he entertain she , watch she all the time -- a 
 hundred speculation about she pass through his brain . he understand 
 perfectly how the insight which she have allow he into her grief and 
 her remorse have break down the barrier between they . her incapacity 
 for silence , and reticence , have undo she . be he a villain to have 
 take advantage of it ? 

 why ? with a strange , half - cynical clearness he see she , as the obstacle 
 that she be , in Ashe 's life and career . for Ashe -- suppose he , Cliffe , 
 persuade she -- there would be no doubt a first shock of wrath and 
 pain -- then a sense of deliverance . for she , too , deliverance ! it excite 
 his artist 's sense to think of all the further development through 
 which he might carry that eager , plastic nature . there would be a new 
 Kitty , with new capacity and power . be not that justification enough ? 
 he feel himself a sculptor in the very substance of life , mould a 
 living creature afresh , disengage it from harsh and hinder 
 condition . what be there vile in that ? 

 the argument pursue itself . 

 " the modern judge for himself -- make his own law , as a god , know 
 good and evil . no doubt in time a new social law will emerge -- with new 
 sanction . meanwhile , here we be , in a moment of transition , 
 manufacture new type , explore new combination -- by which let those 
 who come after profit ! " 

 little delicate , distinguished thing!--every aspect of she , angry or 
 sweet , sad or wilful , delight his taste and sense . moreover , she be 
 _ his _ deliverance , too -- from an ugly and vulgar entanglement of which he 
 be ashamed . he shrink impatiently from memory which every now and 
 then pursue he of the Ricci 's coarse beauty and exact way . Kitty 
 have just appear in time ! he feel himself rehabilitate in his own 
 eye . love may trifle as it please with what people call " law " ; but 
 there be certain æsthetic limit not to be transgress . 

 the Ricci , of course , be wild and thirst for revenge . let she ! 
 anxiety far more press disturb he . what if he tempt Kitty to 
 this escapade -- and the rough life kill she ? he see clearly how frail 
 she be . 

 but it be the artificiality of her life , the innumerable burden of 
 civilization , which have bring she to this ! woman be not the 
 weakling they seem , or believe themselves to be . for many of they , 
 probably for Kitty , a rude and simple life would mean not only fresh 
 mental but fresh physical strength . he have see what woman could endure , 
 for love 's or patriotism 's sake ! make but appeal to the spirit -- the 
 proud and tameless spirit -- and how the flesh answer ! he know that his 
 power with Kitty come largely from a certain stoicism , a certain 
 hardness , mingle , as he would prove to she , with a boundless devotion . 
 let he carry it through -- without fear -- and so enlarge her being and 
 his own ! and as to responsibility beyond , as to their later life -- let 
 time take care of its own birth . for the modern determinist of Cliffe 's 
 type there _ be _ no responsibility . he wait on life , follow where it 
 lead , rejoice in each new feeling , each fresh reaction of 
 consciousness on experience , and so link his fatalist belief to that 
 Nietzsche doctrine of self - development at all cost , and the come man , 
 in which Cliffe 's thought anticipate the year . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Kitty meanwhile listen to his intermittent talk of Venice , or Bosnia , 
 with all its suggestion of new world and far horizon , and scarcely 
 say a word . 

 but through the background of the brain there float with she , as with 
 he , a procession of unspoken thought . she have receive three letter 
 from William . immediately on his arrival he have tender his 
 resignation . Lord Parham have ask he to suspend the matter for ten 
 day . only the pressure of his friend , it seem , and the consternation 
 of his party have wring from Ashe a reluctant consent . meanwhile , all 
 copy of the book have be buy up ; the important newspaper have 
 readily lend themselves to the suppression of the affair ; private wrath 
 have be deal with by conciliatory lawyer ; and in general a far more 
 complete hushing - up have be attain than Ashe have ever imagine 
 possible . there be no doubt infinite gossip in the country - house . but 
 sympathy for Kitty in her grief , for Ashe himself , and Lady Tranmore , 
 have do much to keep it within bound . the little Dean especially , 
 belove of all the world , have be incessantly active on behalf of peace 
 and oblivion . 

 all this Kitty read or guess from William 's letter . after all , then , 
 the harm have not be so great ! why such a panic!--such a hurry to leave 
 her!--when she be ill -- and sorry ? and now how curtly , how measuredly he 
 write ! behind the hopefulness of his tone she read the humiliation and 
 soreness of his mind -- and say to herself , with a more headlong 
 conviction than ever , that he would never forgive she . 

 no , _ never!_--and especially now that she have add a thousandfold to 
 the original offence . she have never write to he since his departure . 
 Margaret French , too , be angry with she -- have almost break with she . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 they leave their boat on the Riva , and walk to the _ Piazza _ , through 
 the now starry dusk . as they pass the great door of St. Mark 's , two 
 person come out of the church . Kitty recognize Mary Lyster and Sir 
 Richard . she bow slightly ; Sir Richard put his hand to his hat in a 
 flurry way ; but Mary , look they both in the face , pass without 
 the small sign , unless the scorn in face and bear might pass for 
 recognition . 

 Kitty gasp . 

 " she cut I ! " she say , in a shake voice . 

 " oh no ! " say Cliffe . " she do not see you in the dark . " 

 Kitty make no reply . she hurry along the northern side of the Piazza , 
 avoid the group which be gather in the sunset light round the 
 flock of feed pigeon , brush past the table in front of the 
 cafe 's , still well fill on this mild evening . 

 " take care ! " say Cliffe , suddenly , in a low , imperative voice . 

 Kitty look up . in her abstraction she see that she have nearly come 
 into collision with a woman sit at a café table and surround by a 
 noisy group of man . 

 with a painful start Kitty perceive the mock eye of Mademoiselle 
 Ricci . the Ricci say something in Italian , star the while at the 
 English lady ; and the man near she laugh , some furtively , some loudly . 

 Cliffe 's face set . " walk quickly ! " he say in her ear , hurry she 
 past . 

 when they have reach one of the narrow street behind the Piazza , Kitty 
 look at he -- white and haughtily tremulous . " what do that mean ? " 

 " why should you deign to ask ? " be Cliffe 's impatient reply . " I have 
 cease to go and see she . I suppose she guess why . " 

 " I will have no rivalry with Mademoiselle Ricci ! " cry Kitty . 

 " you can not help it , " say Cliffe , calmly . " the power of light be 
 always in rivalry with the power of darkness . " 

 and without far plead or excuse he stalk on , his gaunt form and 
 strike head tower above the crowded pavement . Kitty follow he 
 with difficulty , conscious of a magnetism and a force against which she 
 struggle in vain . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 about a week afterwards Kitty shut herself up one evening in her room to 
 write to Ashe . she have just pass through an agitate conversation 
 with Margaret French , who have announce her intention of return to 
 England at once , alone , if Kitty would not accompany she . Kitty 's hand 
 be tremble as she begin to write . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " I be glad -- oh ! so glad , William -- that you _ have _ withdraw your 
 resignation -- that people have come forward so splendidly , and _ make _ you 
 withdraw it -- that Lord Parham be behave decently -- and that you have 
 be able to get hold of all those copy of the book . I always hop it 
 would not be quite so bad as you think . but I know you must have go 
 through an awful time -- and I be _ sorry _ . 

 " William , I want to tell you something -- for I can not go on lie to 
 you -- or even just hide the truth . I meet Geoffrey Cliffe here -- before 
 you leave -- and I never tell you . I see he first in a gondola the night 
 of the serenata -- and then at the armenian convent . do you remember my 
 hurry you and Margaret into the garden ? that be to escape meeting 
 he . and that same afternoon when I be in the unused room of the 
 Palazzo Vercelli -- the room they show to tourist -- he suddenly 
 appear -- and somehow I speak to he , though I have never mean to do so 
 again . 

 " then when you leave I I meet he again -- that afternoon -- and he find out 
 I be very miserable and make I tell he everything . I know I have no 
 right to do so -- they be your secret as well as mine . but you know how 
 little I can control myself -- it be wretche , but it be true . 

 " William , I do not know what will happen . I can not make out from Margaret 
 whether she have write to you or not -- she will not tell I . if she have , 
 this letter will not be much news to you . but , mind , I write it of my 
 own free will , and not because Margaret may have force my hand . I 
 should have write it anyway . poor old darling!--she think I mad and 
 bad , and to - night she tell I she can not take the responsibility of 
 look after I any long . woman like she can never understand 
 creature like I -- and I do not want she to . she be a dear saint , and as 
 true as steel -- not like your Mary Lysters ! I could go on my knee to 
 she . but she can not control or save I . not even you could , William . 
 you have try your good , and in spite of you I be go to perdition , and 
 I can not stop myself . 

 " for , William , there be something break forever between you and I . I 
 know it be I who do the wrong , and that you have no choice but to leave 
 I when you do . but yet you _ do _ leave I , though I implore you not . 
 and I know very well that you do not love I as you use to -- why should 
 you?--and that you never can love I in the same way again . every letter 
 you write tell I that . and though I have deserve it all , I can not 
 bear it . when I think of come home to England , and how you would try 
 to be nice to I -- how good and dear and magnanimous you would be , and 
 what a beast I should feel -- I want to drown myself and have do . 

 " it all seem to I so hopeless . it be my own nature--- the stuff out of 
 which I be cut -- that be all wrong . I may promise my breath away that I 
 will be discreet and gentle and well behave , that I will behave properly 
 to people like Lady Parham , that I will keep secret , and not make absurd 
 friendship with absurd people , that I will try and keep out of debt , and 
 so on . but what be the use ? it be the _ will _ in I -- the something that 
 drive , or ought to drive -- that will not work . and nobody ever teach I or 
 show I , that I can remember , till I meet you . in Paris at the Place 
 Vendôme , half the time I use to live with maman and papa , be hideously 
 spoil , dress absurdly , eat off silver plate , and make myself sick 
 with rich thing -- and then for day together maman would go out or away , 
 forget all about I , and I use to storm the kitchen for food . she 
 either neglect I or make a show of I ; she be my bad enemy , and I 
 hat and fight she -- till I go to the convent at ten . when I be 
 fourteen maman ask a doctor about I . he say I should probably go 
 mad -- and at the convent they think the same . Maman use to throw this 
 at I when she be cross with I . 

 " well , I do not repeat this to make you excuse I and think well of 
 me--- it be all too late for that -- but because I be such a puzzle to 
 myself , and I try to explain thing . I _ do _ love you , William -- I 
 believe I do still -- but when I think of our live together again , my 
 arm drop by my side and I feel like a dead creature . your life be too 
 great a thing for I . why should I spoil or hamper it ? if you love I , 
 as you do once -- if you still think _ everything _ worth while , then , if 
 I have a spark of decency leave , I might kill myself to free you , but I 
 should never do -- what I may do now . but , William , you will forget I soon . 
 you will pass great law , and make great speech , and the year when I 
 torment you -- and all my wretched way -- will seem such a small , small 
 thing . 

 " Geoffrey say he love I . and I think he do , though how long it will 
 last , or may be worth , no one can tell . as for I , I do not know whether 
 I love he . I have no illusion about he . but there be moment when he 
 absolutely hold I -- when my will be like wax in his hand . it be 
 because , I think , of a certain grandness--_grandeur _ seem too 
 strong -- in his character . it be always there ; because no one could 
 write such poem as his without it . but now it be more marked , though I 
 do not know that it make he a well man . he think it do ; but we all 
 deceive ourselves . at any rate , he be often superb , and I feel that I 
 could die , if not for he , at least with he . and he be not unlikely to 
 die in some heroic way . he go out as you know simply as correspondent 
 and to distribute relief , but lately he have be fight for these 
 people -- of course he has!--and when he go back he be to be one of 
 their regular leader . when he talk of it he be noble , transform . it 
 remind I of Byron -- his wicked life here -- and then his death at 
 Missolonghi . Geoffrey can do such base , cruel thing -- and yet-- 

 " but I have not yet tell you . he ask I to go with he , back to the 
 fighting - line in upper Bosnia . there seem to be a great deal that 
 woman can do . I shall wear a nurse 's uniform , and probably nurse at a 
 little hospital he found -- high up in one of the mountain valley . I 
 know this will almost make you laugh . you will think of I , not know 
 how to put on a button without Blanche -- and want to be wait on 
 every moment . but you will see ; there will be nothing of that sort . I wonder 
 whether it be hardship I have be thirst for all my life -- even when I 
 seem such a selfish , luxurious little ape ? 

 " at the same time , I think it will kill I -- and that would be the good 
 end of all . to have some great , heroic experience , and then--'cease upon 
 the midnight with no pain ! ... ' 

 " oh , if I think you would care very , _ very _ much , I should have 
 pain -- horrible pain . but I know you will not . politic have take my place . 
 think of I sometimes , as I be when we be first marry -- and of 
 Harry -- my little , little fellow ! 

 " --Maman and I have have a ghastly scene . she come to scold I for my 
 behavior -- to say I be the talk of Venice . _ she ! _ of course I know what 
 she mean . she think if I be divorce she will lose her allowance -- and 
 she can not bear the thought of that , though Markham Warington be quite 
 rich . my heart just _ boil _ within I . I tell she it be the poison of 
 her life that work in I , and that whatever I do , _ she _ have no right to 
 reproach I . then she cry -- and I be like ice -- and at last she go . 
 Warington , good fellow , have write to I , and ask to see I . but what 
 be the use ? 

 " I know you will leave I the £ 500 a year that be settle on I . it will be 
 so good for I to be poor -- and dress in serge -- and try to do 
 something else with these useless hand than write book that break 
 your heart . I be give away all my smart clothe . Blanche be go 
 home . oh , William , William ! I be go to shut this , and it be like the 
 good - bye of death -- a mean and ugly--_death _ . 

 " ... later . they have just bring I a note from Danieli 's . so Margaret 
 do write to you , and your mother have come . why do you send she , 
 William ? she do not love I -- and I shall only stab and hurt she . though 
 I will try not -- for your sake . " 

 two day later Ashe receive almost by the same post which bring he 
 the letter from Kitty , just quote , the following letter from his 
 mother : 

      " my dearest william,--i have see Kitty . with some difficulty she 
      consent to let I go and see she yesterday evening about nine 
      o'clock . 

      " I arrive between six and seven , have travel straight through 
      without a break , except for an hour or two at Milan , and 
      immediately on arrive I send a note to Margaret French . she come 
      in great distress , have just have a fresh scene with Kitty . oh , my 
      dear William , her report could not well be bad . since she write 
      to we Kitty seem to have throw over all precaution . they use to 
      meet in church or gallery , and go out for long day in the 
      gondola or a fishing - boat together , and Kitty would come home alone 
      and lie on the sofa through the evening , almost without speak 
      or move . but lately he come in with she , and stay hour , 
      read to she , or hold her hand , or talk to she in a low 
      voice , and Margaret can not stop it . 

      " yet she have do she good , poor girl ! know what we all know 
      last year , it fill she with terror when she first discover that 
      he be in Venice and that they have meet . but it be not till it have 
      go on about a week , with the strange result on Kitty 's spirit 
      and nerve , that she feel she must interfere . she not only speak to 
      Kitty , but she speak and write to he in a very firm , dignified 
      way . Kitty take no notice -- only become very silent and secretive . 
      and he treat poor Margaret with a kind of courteous irony which 
      make her blood boil , and against which she could do nothing . she 
      say that Kitty seem to she sometimes like a person move in 
      sleep -- only half conscious of what she be do ; and at other she 
      be wildly excitable , irritable with everybody , and only calm 
      down and become reasonable when this man appear . 

      " there be much talk in Venice . they seem to have be see together 
      by various London friend who know -- about the difficulty last 
      year . and then , of course , everybody be aware that you be not 
      here -- and the whole story of the book go from mouth to mouth -- and 
      people say that a separation have be arrange -- and so on . these 
      be the kind of rumor that Margaret hear , especially from Mary 
      Lyster , who be stay in this hotel with her father , and seem to 
      have a good many friend here . 

      " Dearest William -- I have be linger on these thing because it 
      be so hard to have to tell you what pass between I and Kitty . 
      oh ! my dear , dear son , take courage . even now everything be not 
      lose . her conscience may awaken at the last moment ; this bad man 
      may abandon his pursuit of she ; I may still succeed in bring she 
      back to you . but I be in terrible fear -- and I must tell you the 
      whole truth . 

      " Kitty receive I alone . the room be very dark -- only one lamp 
      that give a bad light -- so that I see she very indistinctly . she be 
      in black , and , as far as I could see , extremely pale and weary . and 
      what strike I painfully be her haggard , careless look . all the 
      little detail of her dress and hair seem so neglect . Blanche 
      say she be far too irritable and impatient in the morning to let 
      her hair be do as usual . she just roll it into one big knot 
      herself and put a comb in it . she wear the simple clothe , and 
      change as little as possible . she say she be soon go to have 
      do with all that kind of thing , and she must get use to it . my 
      own impression be that she be go through great agony of 
      mind -- above all , that she be ill -- ill in body and soul . 

      " she tell I quite calmly , however , that she have make up her mind 
      to leave you ; she say that she have write to you to tell you so . 
      I ask she if it be because she have cease to love you . after a 
      pause she say ' no . ' be it because some one else have come between 
      you ? she throw up her head proudly , and say it be good to be 
      quite plain and frank . she have meet Geoffrey Cliffe again , and she 
      mean henceforward to share his life . then she go into the 
      wild dream about go back with he to the Balkans , and 
      nursing in a hospital , and die -- she hopes!--of hard work and 
      privation . and all this in a torrent of word -- and her eye 
      blaze , with that look in they as though she see nothing but the 
      scene of her own imagination . she talk of devotion -- and of 
      forget herself in other people . I could only tell she , of 
      course , that all this sound to I the most grotesque sophistry 
      and perversion . she be forget her first duty , break her 
      marriage vow , and tear your life asunder . she shake her head , 
      and say you would soon forget she . ' if he have love I he would 
      never have leave I ! ' she say , again and again , with a passion I 
      shall never forget . 

      " of course that make I very angry , and I describe what the 
      situation have be when you reach London -- Lord Parham 's state of 
      mind -- and the consternation cause everywhere by the wretched book . 
      I try to make she understand what there be at stake -- the hope 
      of all who follow you in the House and the country -- the great 
      reform of which you be the life and soul -- your personal and 
      political honor . I impress on her the endless trouble and 
      correspondence in which you have be involve -- and how meanwhile 
      all your Home Office and cabinet work have to be carry on as 
      usual , till it be decide whether your resignation should be 
      withdraw or no . she listen with her head on her hand . I think 
      with regard to the book she be most genuinely ashamed and 
      miserable . and yet all the time there be this unreasonable , this 
      monstrous feeling that you should not have leave she ! 

      " as to the scandalous reference to private person , she say that 
      Madeleine Alcot have write to she about the country - house gossip . 
      that wretched being , Mr. Darrell , seem also to have write to 
      she , try to save himself through she . and the only time I see 
      her laugh be when she speak of have have a furious letter from 
      Lady Grosville about the reference to Grosville Park . it be like 
      the laugh of a mischievous , unhappy child . 

      " then we come back to the main matter , and I implore she to let I 
      take her home . first I give she your letter . she read it , flush 
      up , and throw it away from she . ' he command I ! ' she say , 
      fiercely . ' but I be no one 's chattel . ' I reply that you have only 
      summon she back to her duty and her home , and I ask she if she 
      could really mean to repay your unfailing love by bring anguish 
      and dishonor upon you ? she sit dumb , and her stubbornness move I 
      so that I fear I lose my self - control and say more , much more -- in 
      denunciation of her conduct -- than I have mean to do . she hear I 
      out , and then she get up and look at I very bitterly and 
      strangely . I have never love she , she say , and so I could not 
      judge she . always from the beginning I have think her unfit to be 
      your wife , and she have know it , and my dislike of she , especially 
      during the past year , have make she hard and reckless . it have seem 
      no use try . I just want she dead , that you might marry a wife 
      who would be a help and not a stumbling - block . well , I should have 
      my wish , for she would soon be as good as dead , both to you and to 
      I . 

      " all this hurt I deeply , and I could not restrain myself from 
      cry . I feel so helpless , and so doubtful whether I have not do 
      more harm than good . then she soften a little , and ask I to 
      let she go to bed -- she would think it all over and write to I in 
      the morning .... 

      " so , my dear William , I can only pray and wait . I be afraid there 
      be but little hope , but God be merciful and strong . he may yet save 
      we all . 

      " but whatever happen , remember that you have nothing to reproach 
      yourself with -- that you have do all that man could do . I should 
      telegraph to you in the morning to say , ' come , at all hazard , ' but 
      that I feel sure all will be settle to - morrow one way or the 
      other . either Kitty will start with I -- or she will go with 
      Geoffrey Cliffe . you could do nothing -- absolutely nothing . God help 
      we ! she seem to have some money , and she tell I that she count 
      on retain her jointure . " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 on the night follow her interview with Lady Tranmore , Kitty go from 
 one restless , torment dream into another , but towards morning she fall 
 into one of a different kind . she dream she be in a country of great 
 mountain . the peak be snow - crown , vast glacier fill the chasm 
 on their flank , forest of pine clothe the low side of the hill , 
 and the field below be full of spring flower . she see a little 
 Alpine village , and a church with an old and slender campanile . a plain 
 stone building stand by -- it seem to be an inn of the old - fashioned 
 sort -- and she enter it . the dinner - table be ready in the low - roof 
 _ salle - à - manger _ , and as she sit down to eat she see that two other 
 guest be at the same table . she glance at they , and perceive that 
 one be William and the other her child , Harry , grow old -- and 
 transfigure . instead of the dull and clouded look which have wring she 
 heart in the old day , against which she have strive , patiently and 
 impatiently , in vain , the blue eye be alive with mind and affection . 
 it be as if the child behold his mother for the first time and she he . 
 as he recognize she he give a cry of joy , wave one hand towards she 
 while with the other he touch his father on the arm . William raise 
 his head . but when he see his wife his face change . he rise from his 
 seat , and draw the little boy into his arm he walk away . Kitty see 
 they disappear into a long passage , indeterminate and dark . the child 's 
 face over his father 's shoulder be turn in longing towards his 
 mother , and as he be carry away he stretch out his little hand to 
 she in lamentation . 

 Kitty wake up bath in tear . she spring out of bed and throw the 
 window near to she open to the night . the winter night be mild , and 
 a full moon sail the southern sky . not a sound on the water , not a 
 light in the palace ; a city of ebony and silver , Venice sleep in the 
 moonlight . Kitty gather a cloak and some shawl round she , and sink 
 into a low chair , still cry and half conscious . at his inn , some few 
 hundred yard away , between she and the Piazzetta , be Geoffrey Cliffe 
 wake too?--make his last preparation ? she know that all his store 
 be ready , and that he propose to ship they and the twenty young 
 fellow , Italians and Dalmatians , who be go with he to join the 
 insurgent , that morning , by a boat leave for Cattaro . he himself be 
 to follow twenty - four hour later , and it be his firm and confident 
 expectation that Kitty would go with he -- pass as his wife . and , 
 indeed , Kitty 's own arrangement be almost complete , her money in her 
 purse , the clothe she mean to take with she pack in one small trunk , 
 some of the tranmore jewel which she have be recently wear ready 
 to be return on the morrow to Lady Tranmore 's keeping , other jewel , 
 which she regard as her own , together with the remainder of her 
 clothe , put aside , in order to be leave in the custody of the landlord 
 of the apartment till Kitty should claim they again . 

 one more day -- which would probably see the departure of Margaret 
 French -- one more wrestle with Lady Tranmore , and all the link with the 
 old life would be tear away . a bare , strip soul , dependent henceforth 
 on Geoffrey Cliffe for every crumb of happiness , treading in unknown 
 path , suffer unknown thing , probe unknown passion and 
 excitement -- it be so she see herself ; not without that corroding 
 double consciousness of the modern , that it be all very interesting , 
 and as such to be forgive and admire . 

 Notwithstanding what she have say to Ashe , she do believe -- with a 
 clinging and desperate faith -- that Cliffe love she . have she really 
 doubt it , her conduct would have be inexplicable , even to herself , 
 and he must have seem a madman . what else could have induce he to 
 burden himself with a woman on such an errand and at such a time ? she 
 have promise , indeed , to be his lieutenant and comrade -- and to return to 
 Venice if her health should be unequal to the common task . but in spite 
 of the sternness with which he put that task first -- a sternness which 
 be one of his chief attraction for Kitty -- she know well that she 
 coming throw a glamour round it which it have never yet possess , that 
 the passion she have arouse in he , and the triumph of bind she to 
 his fate , possess he -- for the moment at any rate -- heart and soul . he 
 have the poet 's resource , too , and a mind wherewith to organize and 
 govern . she shrink from he still , but she already envisage the time 
 when her be would sink into and fuse with his , and like two collide 
 star they would flame together to one fiery death . 

 thought like these run in her mind . yet all the time she see the high 
 mountain of her dream , the old inn , the recede face of her child on 
 William 's shoulder ; and the tear run down her cheek . the letter from 
 William that Lady Tranmore have give she lay on a table near . she take 
 it up , and light a candle to read it . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " Kitty -- I bid you come home . I should have start for Venice an hour 
 ago , after read Miss French 's letter , but that honor and public duty 
 keep I here . but mother be go , and I implore and command you , as 
 your husband , to return with she . oh , Kitty , have I ever fail 
 you?--have I ever be hard with you?--that you should betray our love 
 like this ? be I hard when we part -- a month ago ? if I be , forgive I , 
 I be sore pressed . come home , you poor child , and you shall hear no 
 reproach from I . I think I have nearly succeed in undo your rash 
 work . but what good will that be to I if you be to use my absence for 
 that purpose to bring we both to ruin ? Kitty , the grass be not yet green 
 on our child 's grave . I be at Haggart last Sunday , and I go over in 
 the dusk to put some flower upon it . I think of you without a 
 moment 's bitterness , and pray for we both , if such as I may pray . then 
 next morning come Miss French 's letter . Kitty , have you no heart -- and no 
 conscience ? will you bring disgrace on that little grave ? will you dig 
 between we the gulf which be irreparable , across which your hand and 
 mine can never touch each other any more ? I can not and I will not 
 believe it . come back to I -- come back ! " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 she reread it with a melt heart -- with deep , shake sob . when she 
 first glance through it the word " command " have burn into her proud 
 sense ; the rest pass almost unnoticed . now the very strangeness in it 
 as come from William -- the strangeness of its grave and deep 
 emotion -- hold and grapple with she . 

 suddenly -- some tension of the whole be seem to give way . her head 
 sink back on the chair , she feel herself weak and tremble , yet happy 
 as a soul new - bear into a world of light . wake dream pass through 
 her brain in a feverish succession , reverse the dream of the 
 night -- image of peace and goodness and reunion . 

 Minutes -- hour -- pass . with the first light she get up feebly , find 
 ink and paper , and begin to write . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 _ from Lady Tranmore to William Ashe _ : 


 " oh ! my dear William -- at last a gleam of hope . 

 " no letter this morning . I be in despair . Margaret report that Kitty 
 refuse to see any one -- have lock her door , and be write . yet no 
 letter come . I make an attempt to see Geoffrey Cliffe , who be stay at 
 the ' Germania , ' but he refuse . he write I the most audacious letter to 
 say that an interview could only be very painful , that he and Kitty must 
 decide for themselves , that he be wait every hour for a final word 
 from Kitty . it rest with she , and with she only . coercion in these 
 matter be no long possible , and he do not suppose that either you 
 or I would attempt it . 

 " and now come this blessed note -- a respite at least ! ' _ I be go to 
 Verona to - night with Blanche . please let no one attempt to follow I . I 
 wish to have two day alone -- absolutely alone . wait here . I will write . 
 K _ . ' 

 " ... Margaret French , too , have just be here . she be almost hysterical 
 with relief and joy -- and you know what a calm , self - control person 
 she be . but her dear , round face have grow white , and her eye behind 
 her spectacle look as though she have not sleep for night . she say 
 that Kitty will not see she . she send she a note by Blanche to ask she 
 to settle all the account , and tell she that she should not say 
 good - bye -- it would be too agitate for they both . in two day she 
 should hear . meanwhile the maid Blanche be certainly go with Kitty ; 
 and the gondola be order for the Milan train this evening . 

 " two P.M. there be one thing that trouble I , and I must confess it . I 
 do not see that across Kitty 's letter in the corner be write ' tell 
 _ nobody _ about this letter . ' and Polly Lyster happen to be with I 
 when it come . she have be _ au courant _ of the whole affair for the last 
 fortnight -- that be , as an on - looker . she and Kitty have only meet once or 
 twice since Mary reach Venice ; but in one way or another she have be 
 extraordinarily well informed . and , as I tell you , she come to see I 
 directly I arrive and tell I all she know . you know her old friendship 
 for we , William ? she have many weakness , and of late I have think she 
 much change , grow very hard and bitter . but she be always _ very _ 
 loyal to you and I -- and I could not help betray my feeling when 
 Kitty 's note reach I . Mary come and put her arm round I , and I say 
 to she , ' oh , Mary , thank God!--she 's break with he ! she be go to 
 Verona to - night on the way home ! ' and she kiss I and seem so glad . 
 and I be very grateful to she for her sympathy , for I be begin to 
 feel my age , and this have be rather a strain . but I ought not to have 
 tell her!--or anybody ! I see , of course , what Kitty mean . it be 
 incredible that Mary should breathe a word -- or if she do that it should 
 reach that man . but I have just send she a note to Danieli 's to warn she 
 in the strong way . 

 " beloved son -- if , indeed , we save she -- we will be very good to she , you 
 and I. we will remember she bring up and her inheritance . I will be 
 more loving -- more like Christ . I hope he will forgive I for my 
 harshness in the past .... my William!--I love you so ! God be merciful to 
 you and to your poor Kitty ! " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " will the signora have her dinner outside or in the _ salle - à - manger ? " _ 

 the question be address to Kitty by a little italian waiter belong 
 to the Albergo San Zeno at Verona , who stand bent before she , his white 
 napkin under his arm . 

 " out here , please -- and for my maid also . " 

 the speaker move wearily towards the low wall which bound the foaming 
 Adige , and look across the river . far away the alp that look down on 
 Garda glisten under the star ; the citadel on its hill , the house 
 across the river be alive with light ; to the leave the great mediæval 
 bridge rise , a dark , ponderous mass , above the torrent of the Adige . 
 Overhead , the little outside restaurant be roof with twining 
 vine - stem from which the leaf have fall ; colored light twinkle 
 among they and on the white table underneath . the night be mild and 
 still , and a veiled moon be just rise over the town of Juliet . 

 " Blanche ! " 

 " yes , my lady ? " 

 " bring a chair , Blanchie , and come and sit by I . " 

 the little maid do as she be tell , and Kitty slip her hand into 
 her with a long sigh . 

 " be you very tired , my lady ? " 

 " yes -- but do not talk ! " 

 the two sit silent , cling to each other . 

 a step on the cobble - stone disturb they . Blanche look up , and see a 
 gentleman issue from a lane which connect the narrow quay whereon 
 stand the old Albergo San Zeno with one of the main street of Verona . 

 there be a cry from Kitty . the stranger pause -- look -- advanced . the 
 little maid rise , half fierce , half frightened . 

 " go , Blanche , go ! " say Kitty , panting ; " go back into the hotel . " 

 " not unless your ladyship wish I to leave you , " say the girl , 
 firmly . 

 " go at once ! " Kitty repeat , with a peremptory gesture . she herself 
 rise from her seat , and with one hand rest on the table await the 
 new - comer . Blanche look at she -- hesitate -- and go . 

 Geoffrey Cliffe come to Kitty 's side . as he approach she his eye 
 fasten on the loveliness of her attitude , her fair head . in his own 
 expression there be a visionary , fantastic joy ; it be the look of the 
 dreamer who , for once , find in circumstance and the real , poetry 
 adequate and overflowing . 

 " Kitty!--why do you do this ? " he say to she , passionately , as he 
 catch her hand . 

 Kitty snatch it away , tremble under his look . she begin the answer 
 she have devise while he be cross the flagged quay towards she . but 
 Cliffe pay no heed . he lay a hand on her shoulder , and she sink back 
 powerless into her chair as he bend over she . 

 " cruel -- cruel child , to play with I so ! do you mean to put I to a 
 last test?--or do your hard little heart misgive you at the last 
 moment ? I cross - examine your landlady -- I bribe the servant -- the 
 gondolier . not a word ! they be loyal -- or you have pay they well . I 
 go back to my hotel in black despair . oh , you artist!--you plotter ! 
 Kitty -- you shall pay I this some day ! and there -- there on my table -- all 
 the time -- lie your little crumpled note ! " 

 " what note ? " she gasped--"what note ? " 

 " Actress ! " he say , with an amuse laugh . 

 and cautiously , playfully , lest she should snatch it from he , he 
 unfold it before she . 

 without signature and without date , the soil half - sheet contain this 
 message , write in Italian and in a disguised handwriting : 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " too many spectator . come to Verona to - night . 
                                        " K. " 

 Kitty look at it , and then at the face beside she -- infuse with a 
 triumphant power and passion . she seem to shrink upon herself , and her 
 head fall back against one of the support of the _ pergola _ . one of the 
 blue light from above fall with ghastly effect upon the delicate tilted 
 face and closed eye . Cliffe bend over she in a sharp alarm , and see 
 that she have faint away . 




 PART V 

 REQUIESCAT 


      " Pluck , pluck cypress , o pale maiden , 
      Dusk the hall with yew ! " 




 xxiii 


 " how strange ! " think the Dean , as he once more step back into the 
 street to look at the front of the Home Secretary 's house in Hill 
 Street . " he be certainly in town . " 

 for , accord to the _ Times _ , William Ashe the night before have be 
 hotly engage in the House of Commons fight an important bill , of 
 which he be in charge , through committee . yet the blind of the house 
 in Hill Street be all draw , and the Dean have not yet succeed in 
 get any one to answer the bell . 

 he return to the attack , and this time a charwoman appear . at sight 
 of the Dean 's leg and apron , she drop a courtesy , or something like 
 one , inform he that they have workman in the house and Mr. Ashe be 
 " stay with her ladyship . " 

 the Dean take the tranmore ' number in Park Lane and depart thither , 
 not without a sad glance at the desolate hall behind the charwoman and 
 at the darken window of the drawing - room overhead . he think of that 
 May day two year before when he have drop in to lunch with Lady 
 Kitty ; his memory , equally effective whether it summon the detail of 
 an english chronicle or the feature of a face once see , place firm 
 and clear before he the long - chin fellow at Lady Kitty 's left , to 
 whose villany that empty and forsaken house bore cruel witness . and the 
 little lady herself -- what a radiant and ethereal beauty ! ah I ! ah I ! 

 he walk on in meditation , his hand behind his back . even in this May 
 London the little Dean be capable of an abstract spirit , and he have 
 still much to think over . he have his appointment with Ashe . but Ashe have 
 write -- evidently in a press of business -- from the House , and have 
 omit to mention his temporary change of address . the Dean regret 
 it . he would rather have do his errand with Lady Kitty 's injure 
 husband on some neutral ground , and not in Lady Tranmore 's house . 

 at Park Lane , however , he be immediately admit . 

 " Mr. Ashe will be down directly , sir , " say the butler , as he usher 
 the visitor into the commodious library on the ground - floor , which have 
 witness for so long the death - in - life of Lord Tranmore . but now Lord 
 Tranmore be bedridden up - stair , with two nurse to look after he , and 
 to judge from the aspect of the table pile with letter and book , and 
 from the armful of paper which a private secretary carry off with he 
 as he disappear before the Dean , Ashe be now fully at home in the 
 room which have be his father 's . 

 there be still a fire in the grate , and the small Dean , who be a 
 chilly mortal , stand on the rug look nervously about he . Lord 
 Tranmore have be in office himself , and the room , with its bookshelf 
 fill with volume in worn calf binding , its solid writing - table and 
 leather sofa , its candlestick and inkstand of old silver , slender and 
 simple in pattern , its well - wear Turkey carpet , and its political 
 portraits--"the Duke , " Johnny Russell , Lord Althorp , Peel , 
 Melbourne -- seem , to the observer on the rug , steep in the typical 
 habit and reminiscence of english public life . 

 well , if the father , poor fellow , have be distinguish in his day , the 
 son have go far beyond he . the Dean ruminate on a conversation 
 wherewith he have just beguile his cup of tea at the Athenæum -- a 
 conversation with one of the shrewd member of Lord Parham 's cabinet , 
 a " new man , " and an enthusiastic follower of Ashe . 

 " Ashe be magnificent ! at last our side have find its leader . oh ! Parham 
 will disappear with the next appeal to the country . he be get too 
 infirm ! above all , his eye be nearly go ; his oculist , I hear , give 
 he no more than six month ' sight , unless he throw up . then Ashe will 
 take his proper place , and if he do not make his mark on English 
 history , I be a Dutchman . oh ! of course that affair last year be an 
 awful business -- the two affair ! when Parliament open in February 
 there be some of we who think that Ashe would never get through the 
 session . a man so change , so strike down , I have seldom see . you 
 remember what a handsome boy he be , up to last year even ! now he be a 
 middle - aged man . all the same , he hold on , and the House give he that 
 quiet sympathy and support that it can give when it like a fellow . and 
 gradually you could see the life come back into he -- and the ambition . 
 by George ! he do well in that trade - union business before Easter ; and 
 the bill that be on now -- it be masterly , the way in which he be pilot it 
 through ! the House positively like to be manage by he ; it be a sight 
 worthy of our good political tradition . oh yes , Ashe will go far ; and , 
 thank God , that wretche little woman -- what have become of she , 
 by - the - way?--has neither crush his energy nor rob England of his 
 service . but it be touch and go . " 

 to all of which the Dean have reply little or nothing . but his heart 
 have sink within he ; and the doubtfulness of a certain enterprise in 
 which he be engage have appear to he in even more startling color 
 than before . 

 however , here he be . and suddenly , as he stand before the fire , he 
 bow his white head , and say to himself a couple of verse from one of 
 the Psalms for the day : 

      " who will lead I into the strong city : who will bring I into Edom ? 
      oh , be thou our help in trouble : for vain be the help of man . " 

 the door open , and the Dean straighten himself impetuously , every 
 nerve tightening to its work . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " how do you do , my dear Dean ? " say Ashe , enclose the frail , ascetic 
 hand in both his own . " I trust I have not keep you wait . my mother 
 be with I . sit there , please ; you will have the light behind you . " 

 " thank you . I prefer stand a little , if you do not mind -- and I like 
 the fire . " 

 Ashe throw himself into a chair and shade his eye with his hand . the 
 Dean notice the strain of gray in his curly hair , and that aspect , as 
 of something wither and wayworn , which have invade the man 's whole 
 personality , balanced , indeed , by an intellectual dignity and 
 distinction which have never be so commanding . it be as though the 
 stern and constant wrestle of the mind have burn away all less 
 thing -- the old , easy grace , the old , careless pleasure in life . 

 " I think you know , " begin the Dean , clear his throat , " why I ask 
 you to see I ? " 

 " you wish , I think , to speak to I -- about my wife , " say Ashe , with 
 difficulty . 

 under his shelter hand , his eye look straight before he into the 
 fire . 

 the Dean fidget a moment , lift a small greek vase on the 
 mantel - piece , and set it down -- then turn round . 

 " I hear from her ten day ago -- the most piteous letter . as you know , I 
 have always a great regard for she . the news of last year be a sharp 
 sorrow to I -- as though she have be a daughter . I feel I must see she . 
 so I put myself into the train and go to Venice . " 

 Ashe start a little , but say nothing . 

 " or , rather , to Treviso , for , as I think you know , she be there with 
 Lady Alice . " 

 " yes , that I have hear . " 

 the Dean pause again , then move a little near to Ashe , look down 
 upon he . 

 " may I ask -- stop I if I seem impertinent -- how much you know of the 
 history of the winter ? " 

 " very little ! " say Ashe , in a low voice . " my mother get some 
 information from the english consul at Trieste , who be a friend of 
 her -- to whom , it seem , Lady Kitty apply ; but it do not amount to 
 much . " 

 the Dean draw a small note - book from a breast - pocket and look at some 
 entry in it . 

 " they seem to have reach Marinitza in November if I understand aright , 
 Lady Kitty have no maid with she ? " 

 " no . the maid Blanche be send home from Verona . " 

 " how Lady Kitty ever get through the journey!--or the winter ! " say the 
 Dean , throw up his hand . " her health , of course , be irreparably 
 injure . but that she do not die a dozen time over , of hardship and 
 misery , be the most astonishing thing ! they be in a wretched village , 
 nearly four thousand foot up , a village of wooden hut , with a wooden 
 hospital . all the winter nearly they be deep in snow , and Lady Kitty 
 work as a nurse . Cliffe seem to have be away fight , very often , 
 and at other time come back to rest and see to supply . " 

 " I understand she pass as his wife ? " say Ashe . 

 the Dean make a sign of reluctant assent . 

 " they live in a little house near the hospital . she tell I that after 
 the first two month she begin to loathe he , and she move into the 
 hospital to escape he . he try at first to melt and propitiate she ; 
 but when he find that it be no use , and that she be practically lost 
 to he , he change his temper , and he might have behave to she like the 
 tyrant he be but that her hold over the people among whom they be 
 live , both on the fighting - man and the woman , have become by this time 
 great than his own . they adore she , and Cliffe dare not ill - treat 
 she . and so it go on through the winter . sometimes they be on more 
 friendly term than at other . I gather that when he show his 
 dare - devil , heroic side she would relent to he , and talk as though she 
 love he . but she would never go back -- to live with he ; and that after 
 a time alienate he completely . he be away more and more ; and at last 
 she tell I there be a handsome bosnian girl , and -- well , you can 
 imagine the rest . Lady Kitty be so ill in March that they think she 
 dying , but she manage to write to this consul you speak of at Trieste , 
 and he send up a doctor and a nurse . but this you probably know ? " 

 " yes , " say Ashe , hoarsely . " I hear that she be apparently very ill 
 when she reach Treviso , but that she have rally under Alice 's 
 nursing . Lady Alice write to my mother . " 

 " do she tell Lady Tranmore anything of Lady Kitty 's state of mind ? " 
 say the Dean , after a pause . 

 Ashe also be slow in answer . at last he say : 

 " I understand there have be great regret for the past . " 

 " Regret ! " cry the Dean . " if ever there be a terrible case of the 
 dealing of God with a human soul-- " 

 he begin to walk up and down impetuously , wrestle with emotion . 

 " do she give you any explanation , " say Ashe , presently , in a voice 
 scarcely audible--"of their meeting at Verona ? you know my mother 
 believe -- that she have break with he -- that all be save . then come a 
 letter from the maid , write at Kitty 's direction , to say that she have 
 leave her mistress -- and they have start for Bosnia . " 

 " no ; I try . but she seem to shrink with horror from everything to do 
 with Verona . I have always suppose that fellow in some way get the 
 information he want -- buy it no doubt -- and pursue she . but that 
 she honestly mean to break with he I have no doubt at all . " 

 Ashe say nothing . 

 " think , " say the Dean , " of the effect of that man 's sudden 
 appearance -- of his romantic and powerful personality -- your wife alone , 
 miserable -- doubt your love for her-- " 

 Ashe raise his hand with a gesture of passion . 

 " if she have have the small love leave for I she could have protect 
 herself ! I have write to she -- she knew-- " 

 his voice break . the Dean 's face quiver . 

 " my dear fellow -- God knows-- " he break off . when he recover composure 
 he say : 

 " let we go back to Lady Kitty . Regret be no word to express what I see . 
 she be consume by remorse night and day . she be also still -- as far as 
 my eye can judge -- desperately ill . there be probably lung trouble 
 cause by the privation of the winter . and the whole nervous system be 
 shatter . " 

 Ashe look up . his aspect show the effect of the word . 

 " every provision shall be make for she , " he say , in a voice muffle and 
 difficult . " Lady Alice have be tell already to spare no expense -- to do 
 everything that can be do . " 

 " there be only one thing that can be do for she , " say the Dean . 

 Ashe do not speak . 

 " there be only one thing that you or any one else could do for she , " the 
 Dean repeat , slowly , " and that be to love -- and forgive she ! " his 
 voice tremble . 

 " be it her wish that you should come to I ? " say Ashe , after a moment . 

 " yes . I find she at first very despairing -- and extremely difficult to 
 manage . she regret she have write to I , and neither Lady Alice nor 
 I could get she to talk . but one day"--the old man turn away , look 
 into the fire , with his back to Ashe , and with difficulty pursue his 
 story--"one day , whether it be , the sight of a paralyzed child that 
 use to come to Lady Alice 's lace - class , or some impression from the 
 service of the mass to which she often go in the early morning with 
 her sister , I do not know , but she send for I -- and -- and break down 
 entirely . she implore I to see you , and to ask you if she might live 
 at Haggart , near the child 's grave . she tell I that accord to every 
 doctor she have see she be doom , physically . but I do not think she 
 want to work upon your pity . she herself declare that she have much 
 more vitality than people think , and that the doctor may be all wrong . 
 so that you be not to take that into account . but if you will so far 
 forgive she as to let she live at Haggart , and occasionally to go and 
 see she , that would be the only happiness to which she could now look 
 forward , and she promise that she will follow your wish in every 
 respect , and will not hinder or persecute you in any way . " 

 Ashe throw up his hand in a melancholy gesture . the Dean understand it 
 to mean a disbelief in the ability of the person promise to keep such 
 an engagement . his face flush -- he look uncertainly at Ashe . 

 " for my part , " he say , quickly , " I be not go to advise you for a 
 moment to trust to any such promise . " 

 rise from his seat , Ashe begin to pace the room . the Dean follow he 
 with his eye , which kindle more and more . 

 " but , " he resume , " I none the less urge and implore you to grant Lady 
 Kitty 's prayer . " 

 Ashe slightly shake his head . the little Dean draw himself together . 

 " may I speak to you -- with a full frankness ? I have know and love you 
 from a boy . And"--he stop a moment , then say , simply--"i be a 
 christian minister . " 

 Ashe , with a sad and charming courtesy , lay his hand on the old man 's 
 arm . 

 " I can only be grateful to you , " he say , and stand wait . 

 " at least you will understand I , " say the Dean . " you be not one of 
 the small soul . well -- here it be ! Lady Kitty have be an unfaithful 
 wife . she do not attempt to deny or cover it . but in my belief she 
 love you still , and have always love you . and when you marry she , you 
 must , I think , have realize that you be run no ordinary risk . 
 the position and antecedent of her mother -- the bringing up of the poor 
 child herself -- the wildness of her temperament , and the absence of 
 anything like self - discipline and self - control , must surely have make 
 you anxious ? I certainly remember that Lady Tranmore be full of fear . " 

 he look for a reply . 

 " yes , " say Ashe , " I be anxious . or , rather , I see the risk clearly . 
 but I be in love , and I think that love could do everything . " 

 the Dean look at he curiously -- hesitate -- and at last say : 

 " forgive I . do you take your task seriously enough?--did you give Lady 
 Kitty all the help you might ? " 

 the blue eye scan Ashe 's face . Ashe turn away , as though the word 
 have touch a sore . 

 " I know very well , " he say , unsteadily , " that I seem to you and 
 other a weak and self - indulgent fool . all I can say be , it be not in 
 I to play the tutor and master to my wife . " 

 " she be so young , so undisciplined , " say the Dean , earnestly . " do you 
 guard she as you might ? " 

 a touch of impatience appear in Ashe . 

 " do you really think , my dear Dean , " he say , as he resume his walk up 
 and down , " that one human being have , ultimately , any decisive power over 
 another ? if so , I be more of a believer in -- fate -- or liberty -- I be not 
 sure which -- than you . " 

 the Dean sigh . 

 " that you be infinitely good and love to she we all know . " 

 " ' good'--'loving ' ? " say Ashe , under his breath , with a note of scorn . 
 " I-- " 

 he restrain himself , hide his face as he hang over the fire . 

 there be a silence , till the Dean once more place himself in Ashe 's 
 path . " my dear friend -- you see the risk , and yet you take they ! you 
 make the vow ' for well , for bad . ' my friend , you have , so to speak , 
 lose your venture ! but let I urge on you that the obligation remain ! " 

 " what obligation ? " 

 " the obligation to the life you take into your own hand -- to the soul 
 you vow to cherish , " say the Dean , with an apostolic and passionate 
 earnestness . 

 Ashe stand before he , pale , and charge with resolution . 

 " that obligation -- have be cancel -- by the law of your own Christian 
 faith , no less than by the ordinary law of society . " 

 " I do not so read it ! " cry the Dean , with vivacity . " man say so , ' for 
 the hardness of their heart . ' but the divine pity which transform 
 man 's idea of marriage could never have mean to lay it down that in 
 marriage alone there be to be no forgiveness . " 

 " you forget your text , " say Ashe , steadily . " save for the cause-- ' " 
 his voice fail he . 

 " Permissive ! " be the Dean 's eager reply--"permissive only . there be 
 case , I grant you -- case of impenitent wickedness -- where the high law 
 be suspend , find no chance to act -- where relief from the bond be 
 itself mercy and justice . but the high law be always there . you know 
 the formula--'It be say by they of old time . but _ I _ say unto you-- ' 
 and then follow the new law of a new society . and so in marriage . if 
 love have the small room to work -- if forgiveness can find the 
 narrow foothold -- love and forgiveness be impose on -- demand 
 of -- the christian!--here as everywhere else . love and forgiveness--_not _ 
 penalty and hate ! " 

 " there be no question of hate -- and -- I doubt whether I be a Christian , " 
 say Ashe , quietly , turn away . 

 the Dean look at he a little askance -- breathe fast . 

 " but you be a _ heart _ , William ! " he say , use the privilege , of his 
 white hair , speak as he might have speak to the Eton boy of twenty 
 year before--"ay , and one of the noble . you gather that poor thing 
 into your arm -- know what be the temptation of her nature , and she 
 become the mother of your child . now -- alas ! those temptation have 
 conquer she . but she still turn to you -- she still cling to you -- and 
 she have no one else . and if you reject she she will go down unforgiven 
 and despair to the grave . " 

 for the first time Ashe 's lip tremble . but his speech be very quiet 
 and collect . 

 " I must try and explain myself , " he say . " why should we talk of 
 forgiveness ? it be not a word that I much understand , or that mean much 
 to man of my type and generation . I see what have happen in this way . 
 Kitty 's conduct last year hit I desperately hard . it destroy my 
 private happiness , and but for the generosity of the good friend ever 
 man have it would have drive I out of public life . I warn she that 
 the consequence of the Cliffe matter would be irreparable , and she 
 still carry it through . she leave I for that man -- and at a time when 
 by her own action it be impossible for I to defend either her or 
 myself . what course of action remain to I ? I _ do _ remember she 
 temperament , her antecedent , and the certainty that this man , whatever 
 might be his moment of heroism , be a selfish and incorrigible brute in 
 his dealing with woman . so I write to she , through this same consul at 
 Trieste . I let she know that if she wish it , and if there be any 
 chance of his marry she , I would begin divorce proceeding at once . 
 she have only to say the word . if she do not wish it , I would spare she 
 and myself the shame and scandal of publicity . and if she leave he , I 
 would make additional provision for she which would insure she every 
 comfort . she never send a word of reply , and I have take no step . but 
 as soon as I hear she be at Treviso , I write again -- or , rather , this 
 time my lawyer write , suggest that the time have come for the extra 
 provision I have speak of , which I be most ready and anxious to make . " 

 he pause . 

 " and this , " say the Dean , " be all ? this be , in fact , your answer to 
 I ? " 

 Ashe make a sign of assent . 

 " except , " he add , with emotion , " that I have hear , only to - day , that 
 if Kitty wish it , her old friend Miss French will go out to she at 
 once , nurse she , and travel with she as long as she please . Miss 
 French 's brother have just marry , and she be at liberty . she be most 
 deeply attach to Kitty , and as soon as she hear Lady Alice 's 
 report of her state she forget everything else . can you not 
 persuade -- Kitty"--he look up urgently--"to accept her offer ? " 

 " I doubt it , " say the Dean , sadly . " there be only one thing she pin 
 for , and without it she will be a sick child cross . ah ! well -- well ! so 
 to allow she to share your life again -- however humbly and 
 intermittently -- be impossible ? " 

 it seem to the Dean that a shudder pass through the man beside he . 

 " impossible , " say Ashe , sharply . " but not only for private reason . " 

 " you mean your public duty stand in the way ? " 

 " Kitty leave I of her own free will . I have put my hand to the plough 
 again -- and I can not turn back . you can see for yourself that I be not at 
 my own disposal -- I belong to my party , to the man with whom I act , who 
 have behave to I with the utmost generosity . " 

 " of course Lady Kitty could no long share your public life . but at 
 Haggart -- in seclusion ? " 

 " you know what her personality be -- how absorbing -- how impossible to 
 forget ! no -- if she return to I , on any term whatever , all the old 
 condition would begin again . I should inevitably have to leave 
 politic . " 

 " and that -- you be not prepared to do ? " 

 the Dean wonder at his own audacity , and a touch of proud surprise 
 express itself in Ashe . 

 " I should have prefer to put it that I have accept great task and 
 heavy responsibility -- and that I be not my own master . " 

 the Dean watch he closely . across the field of imagination there 
 pass the figure of one who " go away sorrowful , have 
 great possession , " and his heart -- the heart of a child or a 
 knight - errant -- burn within he . 

 but before he could speak again the door of the room open and a lady 
 in black enter . Ashe turn towards she . 

 " do you forbid I , William ? " she say , quietly--"or may I join your 
 conversation ? " 

 Ashe hold out his hand and draw she to he . Lady Tranmore greet she 
 old friend the Dean , and he look at she overcome with emotion and 
 doubt . 

 " you have come to we at a critical moment , " he said--"and I be afraid 
 you be against I . " 

 she ask what they have be discuss , though , indeed , as she say , 
 she partly guess . and the Dean , begin to be shake in his own 
 cause , repeat his pleading with a sink heart . they sound to he 
 strange and less persuasive than before . in do what he have do he 
 have be influence by an instinctive feeling that Ashe would not treat 
 the wrong do he as other man might treat it ; that , to put it at the 
 least , he would be able to handle it with an ethical originality , to 
 separate himself in deal with it from the mere weight of social 
 tradition . yet now as he see the face of mother and son together -- the 
 mother lean on the son 's arm -- and realize all the strength of the 
 social idea which they represent , even though , in Ashe 's case , there 
 have be a certain individual flouting of they , futile and powerless in 
 the end -- the Dean give way . 

 " there -- there ! " he say , as he finish his plea , and Lady Tranmore 's 
 sad gravity remain untouched . " I see you both think I a dreamer of 
 dream ! " 

 " Nay , dear friend ! " say Lady Tranmore , with the melancholy smile which 
 lend still further beauty to the refined austerity of her face ; " these 
 thing seem possible to you , because you be the soul of goodness-- " 

 " and a pious old fool to boot ! " say the Dean , impatiently . " but I be 
 willing -- like St. Paul and my better -- to be a fool for Christ 's sake . 
 Lady Tranmore , be you or be you not a Christian ? " 

 " I hope so , " she say , with composure , while her cheek flush . " but our 
 Lord do not ask impossibility . he know there be limit to human 
 endurance -- and human pardon -- though there might be none to God 's . " 

 " ' be ye perfect , as your Father which be in heaven be perfect , ' " cry 
 the Dean . " where be the limit there ? " 

 " there be other duty in life besides that to a wife who have betray 
 her husband , " she say , steadily . " you ask of William what he have not 
 the strength to give . his life be wreck , and he have piece it 
 together again . and now he have give it to his country . that poor , 
 guilty child have no claim upon it . " 

 " but understand , " say Ashe , interpose , with an energy that seem to 
 express the whole man--"while I live , _ everything_--short of what you 
 ask -- that can be do to protect or ease she , shall be do . tell she 
 that . " 

 his feature work painfully . the Dean take up his hat and stick . 

 " and may I tell she , too , " he say , pausing--"that you forgive she ? " 

 Ashe hesitate . 

 " I do not believe , " he say , at last , " that she would attach any more 
 meaning to that word than I do . she would think it unreal . what be do 
 be do . " 

 the Dean 's heart leap up in the typical christian challenge to the 
 fatal and the irrevocable . while life last the lost sheep can always be 
 seek and find ; and love , the mystical wine , can always be pour into 
 the wound of the soul , healing and recreate ! but he say no more . he 
 feel himself humiliate and defeat . 

 Ashe and Lady Tranmore take leave of he with an extreme gentleness and 
 affection . he would almost rather they have treat he ill . yes , he be 
 an optimist and a dreamer!--one who have , indeed , never grapple in his 
 own person with the bad poison and corrosion of the soul . yet still , 
 as he pass along the London street -- mark here and there by the 
 newspaper placard which announce Ashe 's committee triumph of the 
 night before -- he be haunt anew by the immortal word : 

 " one thing thou lackest , " ... and " come , follow I ! " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 ah!--could he have do such a thing himself ? or be he merely the 
 scribe carelessly bind on other man 's shoulder thing grievous to be 
 bear ? the answer passion of his faith mount within he -- join 
 with a scorn for the easy condition and happy , scholarly pursuit of 
 his own life , and a thirst which in the early day of Christendom would 
 have be a thirst for witness and for martyrdom . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 three day later the Dean -- a somewhat shrunken and diminished figure , in 
 ordinary clerical dress , without the buckle and silk stocking that 
 typically belong to he -- stand once more at the entrance of a small 
 villa outside the venetian town of Treviso . 

 he be very weary , and as he seek disconsolately through all his 
 pocket for the wherewithal to pay his fly , while the spring rain 
 patter on his wide - awake , he produce an impression as of some 
 delicate , draggle thing , which would certainly have go to the heart 
 of his adore wife could she have behold it . the Dean 's way be not 
 sybaritic . he peck at food and drink like a bird ; his clothe never 
 cause he a moment 's thought ; and it seem to he a waste of the night 
 to use it for sleep . but none the less do he go through life finely 
 look after . Mrs. Winston dress he , take his ticket and pay his 
 cab , and without she it be an arduous matter for the Dean to arrive at 
 any destination whatever . as it be , in the journey from Paris he have 
 lose one of the two bag which Mrs. Winston have pack for he , and he 
 look remorsefully at the survivor as it be deposit on the step 
 beside he . 

 it do not , however , remain on the step . for when Lady Alice 's 
 maid - housekeeper appear , she inform the Dean , with a certain flurry 
 of manner , that the lady be not at home . they have go off that 
 morning -- suddenly -- to Venice , leave a letter for he , should he 
 arrive . 

 " _ fermate ! _ " cry the Dean , turn towards the cab , which be trail 
 away , and the man , who have be scandalously overpay , come back with 
 alacrity , while the Dean step in to read the letter . 

 when he come out again he be very pale and in a great haste . he bid 
 the man replace the bag and drive he at once to the railway - station . 

 on the way thither he murmur to himself , " Horrible!--horrible!"--and 
 both the letter and a newspaper which have be enclose in it shake in 
 his hand . 

 he have half an hour to wait before the advent of the evening train for 
 Venice , and he spend it in a quiet corner pore over the newspaper . and 
 not that newspaper only , for he presently become aware that all the 
 small , ill - print sheet offer he by an old newsvender in the 
 station be full of the same news , and some with later detail -- nay , 
 that the people walk up and down in the station be eagerly talk 
 of it . 

 an Englishman have be assassinate in Venice . it seem that a body have 
 be discover early on the precede morning float in one of the 
 small canal connect the Fondamente Nuove with the Grand Canal . it 
 have be stab in three place ; two of the wound must have be 
 fatal . the paper in the pocket identify the murder man as the 
 famous English traveller , poet , and journalist , Mr. Geoffrey Cliffe . Mr. 
 Cliffe have just return from an arduous winter in the Balkans , where he 
 have render superb service to the cause of the bosnian insurgent . he 
 be well know in Venice , and the terrible event have cause a profound 
 sensation there . no clew to the outrage have yet be obtain . but Mr. 
 Cliffe 's purse and watch have not be remove . 

 the Dean arrive in Venice by the midnight train , and go to the hotel 
 on the riva whither Lady Alice have direct he . she be still up , 
 wait to see he , and in the dark passage outside Kitty 's door she 
 tell he what she know of the murder . it appear that late that night a 
 startling arrest have be make -- of no less a person than the Signorina 
 Ricci , the well - know actress of the Apollo Theatre , and of two man 
 suppose to have be hire by she for the deed . this news be still 
 unknown to Kitty -- she be in bed , and her companion have keep it from 
 she . 

 " how be she ? " ask the Dean . 

 " frightfully excited -- or else dumb . she let I give she something to 
 make her sleep . strangely enough , she say to I this morning on the 
 way from Treviso : ' it be a woman -- and I know she ! ' " 

 the following day , when the Dean enter the dingy hotel sit - room , a 
 thin figure in black come hurriedly out of the bedroom beside it , and 
 Kitty catch he by the hand . 

 " be not it horrible ? " she say , star at he with she change , 
 dark - rim eye . " she try once , in Bosnia . one of the Italians who 
 come out with we -- she have get hold of he . do you think -- he suffer ? " 

 her voice be quite quiet . the Dean shudder . 

 " one of the stab be in the heart , " he say . " but try and put it from 
 you , Lady Kitty . sit down . " he touch she gently on the shoulder . 

 Kitty nod . 

 " ah , then , " she said--"_then _ he could not have suffer -- could he ? I be 
 glad . " 

 she let the Dean put she in a chair , and , clasp her hand round her 
 knee , she seem to pursue her own thought . 

 her aspect affect he almost beyond bear . Ashe 's brilliant 
 wife?--london 's spoil child?--this withered , tragic little creature , 
 of whom it be impossible to believe that , in year , she be not yet 
 twenty - four ? so bewilder in mind , so broken in nerve be she , that it 
 be not till he have sit with she some time , now enter perforce into 
 the cloud of horror that brood over she , now strive to drag she from 
 it , that she ask he about his visit to England . 

 he tell she in a falter voice . 

 she receive it very quietly , even with a little , queer , twisting 
 laugh . 

 " I think he would not . be Lady Tranmore there ? " 

 the Dean reply that Lady Tranmore have be there . 

 " ah , then , of course there be no chance , " say Kitty . " when one be as 
 good as that , one never forgive . " 

 she look up quickly . " do William say he forgive I ? " 

 the Dean hesitate . 

 " he say a great deal that be kind and generous . " 

 a slight spasm pass over Kitty 's face . 

 " I suppose he think it ridiculous to talk of forgive . so do 
 I -- once . " 

 she cover her eye with her hand -- remove they to say , impatiently : 

 " one can not go on be sorry every moment of the day . no , one can not ! why 
 be we make so ? William would agree with I there . " 

 " Dear Lady Kitty ! " say the Dean , tenderly--"God forgive -- and with he 
 there be always hope , and fresh beginning . " 

 Kitty shake her head . 

 " I do not know what that mean , " she say . " I wonder whether"--she look 
 at he with a certain piteous and yet affectionate malice--"if you would 
 be as deep as I , whether _ you_'d know . " 

 the Dean flush . the hidden wound sting again . have he , then , no right 
 to speak ? he feel himself the eld son of the parable -- and hat 
 himself anew . 

 but he be a Christian , on his Master 's business . he must obey order , 
 even though he could feel no satisfaction , or belief in himself -- though 
 he seem to himself such a shallow and perfunctory person . so he do his 
 tender good for Kitty . he spend his love , enthusiastic , pitiful soul 
 upon she ; and while he talk to she she sit with her hand cross on 
 her lap , and her eye wander through the open window to the forest 
 of mast outside and the dancing wavelet of the lagoon . when at last he 
 speak of the further provision Ashe wish to make for she , when he 
 implore she to summon Margaret French , she shake her head . " I must 
 think what I shall do , " she say , quietly ; and a minute afterwards , with 
 a flash of her old revolt--"He can not prevent my go to Harry 's 
 grave ! " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 early the following morning the murder man be carry to the cemetery 
 at San Michele . in spite of some attempt on the part of the police to 
 keep the hour secret , half Venice follow the black - drape barca , which 
 bear that flawed poet and dubious hero to his rest . 

 it be a morning of exceed beauty . on the mean and solitary front of 
 the Casa dei Spiriti there shine a splendor of light ; the lagoon be 
 azure and gold ; the main - land a mist of tree in their spring leaf ; 
 while far away the cypress of San Francesco , the slender tower of 
 Torcello , and the long line of Murano -- and far still the majestic 
 wall of silver Alps -- greet the eye that love they , as the ear be 
 soothe by the note of a glorious and yet familiar music . 

 amid the crowd of gondola that cover the shallow stretch of lagoon 
 between the northernmost house of Venice and the island graveyard , 
 there be one which hold two lady . Alice Wensleydale be there against 
 her will , and her pinched and tragic face show her repulsion and 
 irritation . she have endeavor in vain to dissuade Kitty from come ; 
 but in the end she have insist on accompany she . possibly , as the 
 boat glide over the water amid a crowd of laughing , chatter 
 Italians , the silent Englishwoman be ask herself what be to be the 
 future of the trust she have take on herself . Kitty in her extremity have 
 remember her half - sister 's promise , and have throw herself upon it . 
 but a few week ' experience have show that they be strange and 
 uncongenial to each other . there be no true affection between 
 they -- only a certain haunting instinct of kindre . and even this be 
 weaken or embitter by those memory in Alice 's mind which Kitty 
 could never approach and Alice never forget . what be she to do with her 
 half - sister , strand and dishonor as she was?--How content or comfort 
 her?--How live her own life beside she ? 

 Kitty sit silent , her eye fix upon the barca which hold the coffin 
 under its pall . her mind be the scene of an infinite number of float 
 and fragmentary recollection ; of the day when she and Cliffe have 
 follow the _ murazzi _ towards the open sea ; of the meeting at Verona ; 
 of the long winter , with its hardship and its horror ; and that hatred 
 and contempt which have spring up between they . could she love no one , 
 cle faithfully to no one ? and now the restless brain , the vast 
 project , the mixed nature , the half - greatness of the man have be 
 silence -- crush -- in a moment , by the stroke of a knife . he have be 
 kill by a jealous woman -- because of his suppose love for another 
 woman , whose abhorrence , in truth , he have earn in a few short week . 
 there be something absurd mingle with the horror -- as though one 
 watch the prank of a demon . 

 her sensuous nature be torment by the thought of the last moment . have 
 he have time to feel despair -- the thirst for life ? she pray not . she 
 think of the Sunday afternoon at Grosville Park when they have try to 
 play billiard , and Lord Grosville have come down on they ; or she see he 
 sit opposite to she , at supper , on the night of the fancy ball , in 
 the splendid titian dress , while she gloat over the thought of the 
 trick she have play on Mary Lyster -- or bend over she when she wake 
 from her swoon at Verona . have she ever really love he for one 
 hour?--and if not , what possible excuse , before god or man , be there 
 for this ugly , self - weave tragedy into which she have bring herself and 
 he , merely because her vanity could not bear that William have not be 
 able to love she , for long , far above all her desert ? 

 William ! her heart leap in her breast . he be thirty - six -- and she not 
 twenty - four . a strange and desolate wonder overtake she as the thought 
 seize she of the year they might still spend on the same 
 earth -- member of the same country , breathe the same air -- and yet 
 forever separate . never to see he -- or speak to he again!--the thought 
 stir her imagination , as it be , while it torture she ; there be in 
 it a certain luxury and romance of pain . 

 thus , as she follow Cliffe to his last blood - stain rest , do she 
 mind sink in dream of Ashe -- and in the dismal reckoning up of all that 
 she have so lightly and inconceivably lose . sometimes she find herself 
 absorb in a kind of angry marvelling at the strength of the old moral 
 commonplace . 

 it have be so easy and so exciting to defy they . stone which the 
 builder of life reject -- do they still avenge themselves in the old way ? 
 there be a kind of rage in the thought . 

 on the way home Kitty express a wish to go into St. Mark 's alone . Lady 
 Alice leave she there , and in the shadow of the atrium Kitty look at 
 she strangely , and kiss she . 

 an hour after Lady Alice have reach the hotel a letter be bring to 
 she . in it Kitty bade she -- and the Dean -- farewell , and ask that no 
 effort should be make to track she . " I be go to friend -- where I 
 shall be safe and at peace . thank you both with all my heart . let no one 
 think about I any more . " 

 of course they disobey she . they make what search in Venice they 
 could , without rouse a scandal , and Ashe rush out to join it , use 
 the special mean at a minister 's disposal . but it be fruitless . Kitty 
 vanish like a wraith in the dawn ; and the live world of action and 
 affair know she no more . 




 XXIV 


 " well , I must have a carriage ! " say William Ashe to the landlord of one 
 of the coach inn of Domo Dossola--"and if you can not give I one for 
 less , I suppose I shall have to pay this most ridiculous charge . tell 
 the man to put to at once . " 

 the landlord who own the carriage , and would be sit snugly at 
 home while the peasant on the box face the element in consideration of 
 a large number of extra franc to his master , retire with a deferential 
 smile , and tell Emilio to bring the horse . 

 meanwhile Ashe finish an indifferent dinner , pay a large bill , and 
 go out to survey the preparation for departure , so far as the pelting 
 rain in the court - yard would let he . he be go over the Simplon , 
 start rather late in the day , and the weather be abominable . his 
 valet , Richard Dell , keep watch over the luggage and encourage the 
 ostler , with a fairly stoical countenance . he be an old traveller , and 
 though he would have prefer not to travel in a deluge , he dislike 
 Italy , as a country of sour wine , and would be glad to find himself 
 across the Alps . moreover , he know the decision of his master 's 
 character , and , be a man of some ability and education , he take a 
 pride in the loftiness of the affair on which Ashe be generally 
 engage . if Mr. Ashe say that he _ must _ get to Geneva the follow 
 morning , and to London the morning after , on important business -- why , he 
 _ must _ , and it be no good talk about weather . 

 they rattle off through the street of Domo Dossola , Dell in front with 
 the driver , under a waterproof hood and apron , Ashe in the closed landau 
 behind , with a plentiful supply of book , newspaper , and cigar to 
 while away the time . 

 at Isella , the frontier village , he take advantage of the custom - house 
 formality and of a certain lull in the storm to stroll a little in 
 front of the inn . on the italian side , look east , there be a certain 
 wild lifting of the cloud , above the low course of the stream 
 descend from the Gondo ravine ; upon the distant meadow and mountain 
 slope that mark the opening of the Tosa valley , storm - light come and 
 go , like phantom deer chase by the storm - cloud ; beside he the 
 swollen river thunder past , seek a thirsty Italy ; and behind , over 
 the famous Gondo cleft , lie darkness , and a pelting tumult of rain . 

 Ashe turn back to the carriage , bid a silent farewell to a country 
 he do not love -- a country mainly significant to he of memory which 
 rise like a harsh barrier between his present self and a time when he , 
 too , fleet life carelessly , like other man , and find every hour 
 delightful . never , as long as he live , should he come willingly to 
 Italy . but his mother this year have fall into such an exhaustion of 
 body and mind , cause by his father 's long agony , that he have persuade 
 she to let he carry she over the Alps to Stresa -- a place she have know 
 as a girl and of which she often speak -- for a whitsuntide holiday . he 
 himself be no long in office . a coalition between the Tories and 
 certain dissident liberal have turn out Lord Parham 's government in 
 the course of a stormy autumn session , some eight month before . it have 
 be succeed by a weak administration , rest on two or three loosely 
 knit group -- with Ashe as leader of the Opposition . hence his 
 comparative freedom , and the chance to be his mother 's escort . 

 but at Stresa he have be overtake by some startling political 
 news -- news which seem to foreshadow an almost immediate change of 
 ministry ; and urgent telegram bid he return at once . the coalition on 
 which the government rely have break down ; the resignation of its 
 chief , a " transient and embarrassed phantom , " be imminent ; and it be 
 practically certain , in the singular dearth of old man on his own 
 side , since the retirement of Lord Parham , that within a few week , if 
 not day , Ashe would be call upon to form an administration .... 

 the carriage be soon on its way again , and presently , in the darkness 
 of the superb ravine that stretch west and north from Gondo , the 
 tumult of wind and water be such that even Ashe 's slacken pulse feel 
 the excitement of it . he leave the carriage , and , wrap in a waterproof 
 cape , breast the wind along the water 's edge . Wordsworth 's magnificent 
 line in the " Prelude , " dedicate to this very spot , come back to he , 
 as to one who in these later month have be able to renew some of the 
 literary habit and recollection of early year 

      " --tumult and peace , the darkness and the light ! " 

 but here on this wild night be only tumult and darkness ; and if nature 
 in this aspect be still to be hold , as Wordsworth make she , the Voice 
 and apocalypse of God , she breathe a power pitiless and terrible to 
 man . the fierce stream below , the tiny speck make by the carriage and 
 horse strain against the hurricane of wind , the forest on the 
 farth bank climb to endless height of rain , the flower in the 
 rock cranny lash and tear , the gloom and chill which have thus 
 blot out a June evening : all these impression be impression of 
 war , of struggle and attack , of force unfriendly and overwhelming . 

 a certain restless and melancholy joy in the challenge of the storm , 
 indeed , Ashe feel , as many another strong man have feel before he , in a 
 similar emptiness of heart . but it be because of the mere provocation 
 of physical energy which it involve ; not , as it would have be with 
 he in youth , because of the infinitude and vastness of nature , 
 breathing power and expectation into man : 

      " effort , and expectation and desire-- 
      and something evermore about to be ! " 

 he fling the word upon the wind , which scatter they as soon as they 
 be utter , merely that he might give they a bitter denial , reject for 
 himself , now and always , the temper they express . he have know it 
 well , none better!--gone to bed , and rise up with it -- the mere joy in 
 the " mere living . " it have season everything , twined round everything , 
 great and small -- a day 's trout - fishing or deer - stalk ; a new book , a 
 friend , a famous place ; then politic , and the joy of power . 

 go ! here he be , hurry back to England , to take perhaps in his 
 still young hand the helm of her vast fortune ; and of all the old 
 " expectation and desire , " the old passion of hope , the old sense of the 
 magic that lie in thing unknown and way untrodden , he seem to 
 himself now incapable . he would do his good , and without the political 
 wrestle life would be too trifle to be bear ; but the relish and the 
 savor be go , and all be gray . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Ah!--he remember one or two storm - walk with Kitty in their engaged or 
 early married day -- in Scotland chiefly . as he trudge up this swiss 
 pass he could see stretch of Scotch heather under drift mist , and 
 feel a little figure in its tweed dress fling suddenly by the wind and 
 its own soft will against his arm . and then , the sudden embrace , and the 
 wet , fragrant cheek , and her Voice -- mocking and sweet ! 

 oh , God ! where be she now ? the shock of her disappearance from Venice 
 have leave in some way a deep mark upon he than even the original 
 catastrophe . for who that have know she could think of such a being , 
 alone , in a world of stranger , without a peculiar dread and anguish ? 
 that she be alive he know , for her five hundred a year -- and she have 
 never accept another penny from he since her flight -- be still draw 
 on her behalf by a banking firm in Paris . his solicitor , since the 
 failure of their first effort to trace she after Cliffe 's death , have 
 make repeat inquiry ; Ashe have himself go to Paris to see the 
 banker in question . but he be meet by their solemn promise to Kitty to 
 keep her secret inviolate . Madame d'Estrées supply he with the name 
 of the convent in which Kitty have be bring up ; but the mother 
 superior deny all knowledge of she . meanwhile no course of action on 
 Kitty 's part could have restore she so effectually to her place in 
 Ashe 's imagination . she haunt his day and night . so also do his 
 memory of the Dean 's petition . insensibly , without argument , the whole 
 attitude of his mind thereto have break down ; since he have be out of 
 office , and his day and night be no long absorb in the detail of 
 administration and parliamentary leadership , he have be the defenceless 
 prey of grief ; yearning and pity and agonized regret , rise from the 
 deep subconscious self , have overpower his first recoil and 
 determination ; and in the absence of all other passionate hope , the one 
 desire and dream which still live warm and throb at his heart be 
 the dream that still in some crowd , or loneliness , he might again , 
 before it be too late , see Kitty 's face and the wildness of Kitty 's 
 eye . 

 and he believe much the same process have take place in his mother 's 
 feeling . she rarely speak of Kitty ; but when she do the doubt and 
 soreness of her mind be plain . her own life have grow very solitary . 
 and in particular the old friendship between she and Polly Lyster have 
 entirely cease to be . Lady Tranmore shiver when she be name , and 
 would never herself speak of she if she could help it . Ashe have try in 
 vain to make she explain herself . surely it be incredible that she 
 could in any way blame Mary for the incident at Verona ? Ashe , of course , 
 remember the passage in his mother 's letter from Venice , and they have 
 the maid Blanche 's report to Lady Tranmore , of Kitty 's intention when 
 she leave Venice , of her terror when Cliffe appear -- of her swoon . but 
 he believe with the Dean that any treacherous servant could have 
 bring about the catastrophe . Vincenzo , one of the gondolier who take 
 Kitty to the station , have see the luggage label for Verona ; no doubt 
 Cliffe have bribe he ; and this explanation be , indeed , suggest to 
 Lady Tranmore by the maid . his mother 's suspicion -- if indeed she 
 entertain it -- be so hideous that Ashe , find it impossible to make 
 his own mind harbor it for an instant , be harrow by the mere 
 possibility of its existence ; as though it represent some hide sore 
 of consciousness that refuse either to be probe or heal . 

 as he labor on against the storm all think of his present life and 
 activity drop away from he ; he live entirely in the past . " what 
 be it in I , " he think , " that have make the difference between my life 
 and that of other man I know -- that weaken I so with Kitty ? " he 
 canvass his own character , as a third person might have do . 

 the Christian , no doubt , would say that his married life have fail 
 because God have be absent from it , because there have be in it no 
 consciousness of high law , of compelling grace . 

 Ashe ponder what such thing might mean . " the Christian -- in 
 speculative belief -- fail under the challenge of life as often as other 
 man . surely it depend on something infinitely more primitive and 
 fundamental than christianity?--somethe out of which Christianity 
 itself spring ? but this something -- do it really exist -- or be I only 
 cheat myself by fancy it ? be it , as all the sage have say , the 
 pursuit of some eternal good , the identification of the self with 
 it -- the ' die to live ' ? and be this the real meaning at the heart of 
 christianity?--at the heart of all religion?--the everlasting meaning , 
 let science play what havoc it please with outward form and 
 statement ? " 

 have he , perhaps , _ doubt the soul ? _ 

 he groan aloud . " o my God , what matter that I should grow wise -- if 
 Kitty be lose and desolate ? " 

 and he trample on his own thought -- feel they a mere hypocrisy and 
 offence . 

 as they leave the Gondo ravine and begin to climb the zigzag road to the 
 Simplon inn , the storm grow still wilder , and the driver , with set lip 
 and dripping face , urge his patient beast against a deluge . the road 
 run river ; each torrent , carefully channel , that pass beneath it 
 bring down wood and soil in choke abundance ; and Ashe watch the 
 downward push of the rain on the high , expose bank above the carriage . 
 once they pass a fragment of road which have be wash away ; the 
 driver point to it say something sulkily about " _ frane " _ on the 
 " other side . " 

 this bad moment , however , prove to be the last and bad , and when they 
 emerge upon the high valley in which stand the village of Simplon , the 
 rain be already lessen and the cloud roll up the great side and 
 peak of the Fletschhorn . Ashe promise himself a comparatively fine 
 evening and a rapid run down to Brieg . 

 outside the old Simplon posting - house , however , they presently come upon 
 a crowd of vehicle of every description , of which the driver be 
 stand in group with dripping rug across their shoulder -- shout 
 and gesticulate . 

 and as they drive up the news be thunder at they in every possible 
 tongue . between the hospice and Bérizal two hundred metre of road have 
 be completely wash away . the afternoon diligence have just get 
 through by a miracle an hour before the accident occur ; before 
 anything else could pass it would take at least ten or twelve hour ' 
 hard work , through the night , before the laborer now be 
 requisition by the commune could possibly provide even a temporary 
 passage . 

 Ashe in despair go into the inn to speak with the landlord , and find 
 that unless he be prepared to abandon book and paper , and make a push 
 for it over mountain path cover deep in fresh snow , there be no 
 possible escape from the dilemma . he must stay the night . the navvy 
 be already on their way ; and as soon as ever the road be passable he 
 should know . for not even a future Prime Minister of England could Herr 
 Ludwig do more . 

 he and Dell go gloomily up the narrow stone stair of the inn to look 
 at the bedroom , which be low - roofed and primitive , penetrate 
 everywhere by the roar of a stream which come down close behind the inn . 
 through the open door of one of the room Ashe see the foaming mass , 
 frame as it be in a window , and almost in the house . 

 he choose two small room look on the street , and bade Dell get a fire 
 light in one of they , a bed move out , an arm - chair move in , and as large 
 a table set for he as the inn could provide , while he take a stroll 
 before dinner . he have some important letter to answer , and he point 
 out to Dell the bag which contain they . 

 then he step out into the muddy street , which be still a confusion 
 of horse , vehicle , and man , and , turn up a path behind the inn , be 
 soon in solitude . an evening of splendor ! nature be still in a tragic , 
 declamatory mood -- send pile thunder - cloud of dazzle white across 
 a sky extravagantly blue , and throw on the high snow - field and 
 craggy top a fierce , flame - color light . the valley be resonant with 
 angry sound , and the village , now in shadow , with its slender , crumble 
 campanile , seem like a cower thing over which the eagle have pass . 

 the grandeur and the freshness , the free , elemental play of stream and 
 sky and mountain , seize upon a man in whom the main impulse of life 
 be already weary , and fill he with an involuntary physical delight . 
 he notice the flower at his foot , in the drench grass which be 
 already lift up its battered stalk , and along the margin of the 
 stream -- deep blue colombine , white lily , and yellow anemone . 
 incomparable beauty live and breathe in each foot of pasture ; and when 
 he raise his eye from the grass they feed on visionary splendor of 
 snow and rock , stretch into the heaven . 

 no life visible -- except a line of home cattle , lead by a little girl 
 with tuck - up skirt and bare foot . and -- in the distance -- the slender 
 figure of a woman walk -- stop often to gather a flower -- or to 
 rest ? not a woman of the valley , clearly . no doubt a traveller , 
 weather - bind like himself at the inn . he watch the figure a little , 
 for some vague grace of movement that seem to enter into and make a 
 part of that high beauty in which the scene be steep ; but it 
 disappear behind a fold of pasture , and he do not see it again . 

 in spite of the multitude of vehicle gather about the inn there be 
 not so many guest in the _ salle - à - manger _ , when Ashe enter it , as he 
 have expect . he suppose that a majority of these vehicle must be 
 return carriage from Brieg . still there be much clatter of talk and 
 plate , and German seem to be the prevail tongue . except for a 
 couple whom Ashe take to be a genevese professor and his wife , there be 
 no lady in the room . 

 he linger somewhat late at table , toy with his orange , and read 
 a _ Journal de Genève _ , capture from a neighbor , which contain an 
 excellent " London letter . " the room empty . the two swiss handmaiden 
 come in to clear away soil linen and arrange the table for the 
 morning 's coffee . only , at a farth table , a _ couvert _ for one person , 
 set by itself , remain still untouched . 

 he happen to be alone in the room when the door again open and a 
 lady enter . she do not see he behind his newspaper , and she walk 
 languidly to the farth table and sit down . as she do so she be 
 seize with a fit of coughing , and when it be over she lean her head 
 on her hand , gasp . 

 Ashe have half rise -- the newspaper be crush in his hand -- when the 
 swiss waitress whom the man of the inn call Fräulein Anna -- who be , 
 indeed , the daughter of the landlord -- come back . 

 " how be you , madame ? " she say , with a smile , and in a slow English of 
 which she be evidently proud . 

 " I be well to - day , " say the other , hastily . " I shall start to - morrow . 
 what a noise there be to - night ! " she add , in a tone both fretful and 
 weary . 

 " we be so full -- it be the accident to the road , madame . will madame 
 have a _ thé complet _ as before ? " 

 the lady nod , and Frãulein Anna , who evidently know her way , bring 
 in the tea at once , stay chat beside she for a minute , and then 
 depart , with a long , disapprove look at the gentleman in the corner 
 who be so long over his coffee and would not let she clear away . 

 Ashe make a fierce effort to still the thumping in his breast and decide 
 what he should do . for the guest there be only one door of entrance or 
 exit , and to reach it he must pass close beside the new - comer . 

 he lay down his newspaper . she hear the rustling , and involuntarily 
 look round . 

 there be a slight sound -- an exclamation . she rise . he hear and see she 
 come , and sit trance and motionless , his eye bent upon she . she come 
 tottering , cling to the chair , her hand on her side , till she 
 reach the corner where he be . 

 " William ! " she say , with a little , glad sob , under her 
 breath--"William ! " 

 he himself could not speak . he stand there gaze at she , his lip 
 move without sound . it seem to he that she turn her head a 
 moment , as though to look for some one beside he -- with an exquisite 
 tremor of the mouth . 

 " be not it strange ? " she say , in the same guard voice . " I have a dream 
 once -- a valley -- and mountain -- and an inn . you sit here -- just like 
 this -- and-- " 

 she put up her hand to her eye a moment , shiver , and withdraw they . 
 from her expression she seem to be wait for he to speak . he move 
 and stand beside she . 

 " where can we talk ? " he say , with difficulty . she shake her head 
 vaguely , look round she with that slight frown , complain and yet 
 sweet , which be like a touch of fire on memory . 

 the waitress come back into the room . 

 " it _ be _ odd to have meet you here ! " say Kitty , in a laugh voice . 
 " let we go into the _ salon de lecture _ . the maid want to clear away . 
 please bring your newspaper . " 

 Fräulein Anna look at they with a momentary curiosity , and go on 
 with her work . they pass into the passage - way outside , which be full 
 of smoker overflow from the crowded room beyond , where the humbler 
 frequenter of the inn ate and drank . 

 Kitty glance round she in bewilderment . " the _ salon de lecture _ will be 
 full , too . where shall we go ? " she say , look up . 

 Ashe 's hand clinch as it hang beside he . the old gesture -- and the 
 draw , emaciated face -- they pierce the heart . 

 " I tell my servant to arrange I a sitting - room up - stair , " he say , 
 hurriedly , in her ear . " will you go up first?--number ten . " 

 she nod , and begin slowly to mount the stair , cough as she go . 
 the man whom Ashe have take for a genevese professor look after she , 
 glance at his neighbor , and shrug his shoulder . " Phthisique , " he 
 say , with a note of pity . the other nod . " et d'un type très avancé ! " 

 they move towards the door and stand look into the night , which be 
 dark with intermittent rain . Ashe study a map of the commune which 
 hang on the wall beside he , till at a moment when the passage have 
 become comparatively clear he turn and go up - stair . 

 the door of his improvise _ salon _ be ajar . beyond it his valet be 
 come out of his bedroom with wet clothe over his arm . Ashe hesitate . 
 but the man have be with he through the great part of his married 
 life , and be a good heart . he beckon he back into the room he be 
 leave , and the two step inside . 

 " Dell , my good fellow , I want your help . I have just meet my wife 
 here -- Lady Kitty . you understand . neither of we , of course , 
 have any idea . Lady Kitty be very ill . we wish to have a 
 conversation -- uninterrupted . I trust you to keep guard . " 

 the young man , son of one of the Haggart gardener , start and flush , 
 then give his master a look of sympathy . 

 " I will do my good , sir . " 

 Ashe nod and go back to the next room . he close the door behind 
 he . Kitty , who be sit by the fire , half rise . their eye meet . then 
 with a stifled cry he fling himself down , kneel beside she , and she 
 sink into his arm . his tear fall on her face , anguish and pity 
 overwhelm he . 

 " you may ! " she say , brokenly , put up her hand to his cheek , and 
 kiss him--"you may ! I be not mad or wicked now -- and I be die ! " 

 agonized murmur of love , pardon , self - abasement pass between they . it 
 be as though a great stream bear they on its breast ; an awful and 
 majestic power enwrap they , and make each word , each kiss , wonderful , 
 sacramental . he draw himself away at last , hold her hair back from 
 her brow and temple , study her feature , his own face convulse . 

 " where have you be ? why do you hide from I ? " 

 " you forbid I , " she say , stroke his hair . " and it be quite right . 
 the dear Dean tell I -- and I quite understand . if I have go to Haggart 
 then there would have be more trouble . I should have try to get my old 
 place back . and now it be all over . you can give I all I want , because I 
 can not live . it be only a question of month , perhaps week . nobody could 
 blame you , could they ? People do not laugh when -- it be death . it 
 simplify thing so -- doesn't it ? " 

 she smile , and nestle to he again . 

 " what do you mean ? " he say , almost violently . " why be you so ill ? " 

 " it be Bosnia first , and then -- be miserable -- I suppose . and poitier 
 be very cold -- and the nun very stuffy , bless they -- they would not let 
 I have air enough . " 

 he groan aloud while he remember his winter in London , in the 
 forlorn luxury of the Park Lane house . 

 " where have you be ? " he repeat . 

 " oh ! I go to the Soeurs Blanches -- you remember?--where I use to be . 
 you go there , do not you?"--he make a sign of miserable assent--"but I 
 make they promise not to tell ! there be an old mistress of novice 
 there still who use to be very fond of I . she get one of the house of 
 the Sacré Coeur to take I in -- at Poitiers . they think they be 
 gather a stray sheep back into the fold , you understand , as I be 
 bring up a Catholic -- of sort . and I do not mind ! " the familiar 
 intonation , soft , complacent , humorous , rise like a ghost between they . 
 " I use to like go to mass . but this Easter they want to make I 
 ' go to my duties'--you know what it means?--and I would not . I want to 
 confess . " she shudder and draw his face down to hers again--"but only 
 once -- to -- you -- and then , well then , to die , and have do with it . you 
 see , I know one can not get on long with three - quarter of a lung . and 
 they be rather tiresome -- they do not understand . so three week ago I 
 draw some money out and say good - bye to they . oh ! they be very kind , 
 and very sorry for I . they want I to take a maid , and I mean to . 
 but the one they find would not come with I when she see how ill I 
 be -- and it all linger on -- so one day I just walk out to the 
 railway - station and go to Paris . but Paris be rainy -- and I feel I 
 must see the sun again . so I stay two night at a little hotel maman 
 use to go to -- horrid place!--and each night I read your speech in the 
 reading - room -- and then I get my thing from Poitiers , and started-- " 

 a fit of cough stop she , cough so terrible and destructive that 
 he almost rush for help . but she restrain he . she make he 
 understand that she want certain remedy from her own room across the 
 corridor . he go for they . the door of this room have be shut by the 
 observant Dell , who be watch the passage from his own bedroom 
 far on . when Ashe have open it he find himself face to face as it 
 be with the foaming stream outside . the window , as he have see it 
 before , be wide open to the water - fall just beyond it , and the 
 temperature be piercingly cold and damp . the furniture be of the 
 roughest , and a few of Kitty 's clothe lie scatter about . as he 
 fumble for a light , there hover before his eye the remembrance of 
 their room in Hill Street , strew with chiffon and all the elegant and 
 costly trifle that make the natural setting of its mistress . 

 he find the medicine and hurry back . she feebly give he direction . 
 " now the strychnine!--and some brandy . " 

 he do all he could . he draw some chair together before the fire , and 
 make a couch for she with pillow and rug . she thank he with smile , 
 and her eye follow his every movement . 

 " tell your man to get some milk ! and listen"--she catch his hand . " lock 
 my door . that nice woman down - stair will come to look after I , and 
 she will think I be asleep . " 

 it be do as she wish . Ashe take in the milk from Dell 's hand , and 
 a fresh supply of wood . then he turn the key in his own door and come 
 back to she . she be lie quiet , and seem revive . 

 " how cosey ! " she say , with a childish pleasure , look round she at 
 the bare white wall and scour board warm with the fire - light . the 
 bitter tear swam in Ashe 's eye . he fall into a chair on the other side 
 of the fire , and star -- see nothing -- at the burn log . 

 " you need not suppose that I do not get people to look after I ! " she go 
 on , smile at he again , one shadowy hand prop her cheek . and she 
 prattle on about the kindness of the chambermaid at Vevey and Brieg , 
 and how one of they have want to come with she as her maid . " oh ! I 
 shall find one at Florence if I get there -- or a nurse . but just for 
 these few day I want to be free ! in the winter there be so many 
 people about -- so many eye ! I just pin to cheat they -- get quit of 
 they . a maid would have bother I to stay in bed and see doctor -- and 
 you know , William , with this illness of mine you be so _ restless _ ! " 

 " where be you go to ? " he say , without look up . 

 " oh ! to Italy somewhere -- just to see some flower again -- and the sun . 
 only not to Venice ! " 

 there be a silence , which she break by a sudden cry as she draw he 
 down to she . 

 " William ! you know -- I be come home to you , when that man -- find I . " 

 " I know . if it have only be I who kill he ! " 

 " I be just--_kitty _ ! " she say , choking--"a bad as bad can be . but I 
 could not have do what Mary Lyster do . " 

 " Kitty -- for God 's sake ! " 

 " oh , I know it , " she say , almost with triumph--"now I _ know _ it . I 
 determine to know -- and I get people in Venice to find out . she send the 
 message -- that tell he where I be -- and I know the man who take it . I 
 suppose it would be pathetic if I send her word that I have forgive she . 
 but I _ have not _ ! " 

 Ashe cry out that it be wholly and utterly inconceivable . 

 [ illustration : " he draw some CHAIRS together before the fire " ] 

 " oh no!--she hat I because I have rob she of Geoffrey . I have kill 
 her life , I suppose -- she kill mine . it be what I deserve , of 
 course ; only just at that moment -- if there be a God , William , how could 
 he have let it happen so ? " 

 the tear choke she . he leave his seat , and , kneel beside she , he 
 raise she in his arm , while she murmur break and anguished 
 confession . 

 " I be so weak -- and frightened . and _ he _ say , it be no good try to 
 go back to you . everybody know I have go to Verona -- and he have follow 
 I -- no one would ever believe -- and he would not go -- wouldn't leave I . it 
 would be mere cruelty and desertion , he say . my real life be -- with 
 he . and I seem -- paralyze . who _ have _ send that message ? it never 
 occur to I -- I feel as if some demon hold I -- and I could not 
 escape-- " 

 and again the sigh and tear , which wring his heart -- with which his own 
 mingle . he try to comfort she ; but what comfort could there be ? they 
 have be the victim of a crime as hideous as any murder ; and 
 yet -- behind the crime -- there stretch back into the past the 
 preparation and antecedent by which they themselves , alack , have 
 contribute to their own undoing . have they not both trifle with the 
 mysterious test of life -- he no less than she ? and out of the dark have 
 come the axe - stroke that end weakness , and crush the unsteeled , 
 inconstant will . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 after long silence , she begin to talk in a ramble , delirious way of 
 her month in Bosnia . she speak of the _ cold_--of the high mountain 
 loneliness -- of the terrible sight she have see -- till he draw she , 
 shuddering , close into his arm . and yet there be that in her talk 
 which amaze he ; flash of insight , of profound and passionate 
 experience , which seem to fashion she anew before his eye . the hard 
 peasant life , in contact with the soil and natural force ; the elemental 
 fact of birth and motherhood , of daily toil and suffering ; what it 
 mean to fight oppressor for freedom , and see your dearest -- son , lover , 
 wife , betroth -- die horribly amid the clash of arm ; into this caldron 
 of human fate have Kitty plunge her light soul ; and in some way Ashe 
 scarcely know she again . 

 she recur often to the story of a youth , handsome and beardless , who 
 have be wound by a stray turkish shot in the course of the long climb 
 to the village where she nurse . he have manage to gain the height , and 
 then , kill by the march as much as by the shot , he have sink down to 
 die on the ground - floor of the house where Kitty live . 

 " he be a stranger -- no one know he in the village -- no one care . they 
 have their own grief . I dress his wound -- and give he water . he 
 think I be his mother , and ask I to kiss he . I kiss he , 
 William -- and he smile once -- before the last hemorrhage . if you have see 
 the cold , dismal room -- and his poor face ! " 

 Ashe gather she to his breast . and after a while she say , with closed 
 eye : 

 " oh , what pain there be in the world , william!--what _ pain _ ! that be 
 what -- I never know . " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the evening wear on . all the noise cease down - stair . one by one the 
 guest come up the stone stair and along the creak corridor . boot 
 be throw out ; the door close . the stroke of eleven o'clock rang 
 out from the village campanile ; and amid the quiet of the now drizzling 
 rain the echo of the bell linger on the ear . last of all a woman 's 
 step pass the door -- stop at the door of Kitty 's room , as though 
 some one listen , and then gently return . " Fräulein Anna ! " say 
 Kitty--"she be a good soul . " 

 soon nothing be hear but the roar of the flooded stream on one side of 
 the old narrow building and the dripping of rain on the other . their low 
 voice be amply cover by these sound . the night lie before they , 
 safe and undisturbed . candle burn on the mantel - piece , and on a table 
 behind Kitty 's head be a paraffine lamp . she seem to have a craving 
 for light . 

 " Kitty ! " say Ashe , suddenly bend over her--"understand ! I shall 
 never leave you again . " 

 she start , her head fall back on his arm , and her brown eye 
 consider he : 

 " William ! I see the _ Standard _ at Geneva . be not you go home -- because 
 of politic ? " 

 " a few telegram will settle that . I shall take you to Geneva to - morrow . 
 we shall get doctor there . " 

 a little smile play about her mouth -- a smile which do not seem to 
 have any reference to his word or to her next question . 

 " nobody think of the book now , do they , William ? " 

 " no , Kitty , no ! it be all forget , dear . " 

 " oh , it be abominable ! " she draw a long breath . " but I can not help it -- I 
 do get a horrid pleasure out of write it -- till Venice -- till you leave 
 off love I . oh , William ! william!--what a good thing it be I be 
 die ! " 

 " hush , Kitty -- hush . " 

 " it give one such an unfair advantage , though , do not it ? you can not 
 ever be angry with I again . there will not be time . William , dear!--I 
 have not have a brain like other people . I know it . it be only since I have 
 be so ill -- that I have be sane ! it be a strange feeling -- as though one 
 have be _ bled_--and some poison have drain away . but it would never do 
 for I to take a turn and live ! oh no!--people like I be well safely 
 under the grass . oh , my beloved ! my beloved ! I just want to say that all 
 the time , and nothing else -- i've hunger so to say it ! " 

 he answer she with all the anguish , all the passionate , fruitless 
 tenderness and vain comforting that rise from the human heart in such a 
 strait . but when he ask her pardon for his hardness towards the Dean 's 
 petition , when he say that his conscience have torment he 
 thenceforward , she would scarcely hear a word . 

 " you do quite right , " she say , peremptorily--"quite right . " 

 then she raise herself on her arm and look at he . 

 " William ! " she say , with a strange , kindle expression . " I -- I do not 
 think I can live any more ! I think -- I'm die -- here -- now ! " 

 she fall back on her pillow , and he spring to his foot , cry that he 
 must go for Fräulein Anna and a doctor . but she hold he feebly , 
 motioning towards the brandy and strychnine . " that be all -- you can do . " 

 he give they to she , and again she revive and smile at he . 

 " do not be frightened . it be a sudden feeling -- it come over I -- that 
 this dear little room -- and your arm -- would be the end . oh , how much 
 well ! there!--that be foolish!--I'm well . it be not only the lung , 
 you see ; they say the heart 's bad . I nearly go at Vevey , one night . 
 it be such a long faint . " 

 then she lie quiet , with her hand in his , in a dreamy , peaceful 
 state , and his panic subside . once she send message to Lady 
 Tranmore -- message full of sorrow , touch also -- by a word here , a look 
 there -- by the charm of the old Kitty . 

 " I do not deserve to die like this , " she say , once , with a 
 half - impatient gesture . " nothing can prevent it be be beautiful -- and 
 touch -- you know ; our meeting like this -- and your goodness to I . oh , 
 I be glad ! but I do not want to glorify -- what I have do . _ shame ! shame ! " _ 

 and again her face contract with the old habitual agony , only to be 
 soothe away gradually by his tone and presence , the spending of his 
 whole be in the broken word of love . 

 towards the morning , when , as it seem to he , she have be sleep 
 for a time , and he have be , if not sleep , at least dream awake 
 beside she , he hear a little , low laugh , and look round . her brown 
 eye be wide open , till they seem to fill the small , blighted face ; 
 and they be fix on an empty chair the other side of the fire . 

 " it be so strange -- in this illness , " she whispered--"that it make one 
 dream -- and generally kind dream . it be fever -- but it be nice . " she turn 
 and look at he . " Harry be there , William -- sit in that chair . not 
 a baby any more -- but a little fellow -- and so lively , and strong , and 
 quick . I have you both--_both _ . " 

 look back afterwards , also , he remember that she speak several 
 time of religious hope and belief -- especially of the hope in another 
 life -- and that they seem to sustain she . most keenly do he recollect 
 the delicacy with which she have refrain from ask his opinion upon 
 they , lest it should trouble he not to be able to uphold or agree with 
 she ; while , at the same time , she wish he to have the comfort of 
 remembering that she have draw strength and calm , in these last hour , 
 from religious thought . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 for they prove , indeed , to be the last hour . about three the morning 
 begin to dawn , clear and rosy , with rich light strike on the snow . 
 suddenly Kitty sit up , disengage herself from her wrap , and totter 
 to her foot . 

 " I will go back to my room , " she say , in bewilderment . " I would rather . " 

 and as she cling to he , with a startled yet half - consider look , she 
 gaze round she , at the bright fire , the morning light , the chair from 
 which he have rise -- his face . 

 he try to dissuade she . but she would go . her aspect , however , be 
 deathlike , and as he softly undo the door , and half - help , 
 half - carry she across the passage , he say to she that he must go and 
 waken Fräulein Anna and find a doctor . 

 " no -- no . " she grasp he with all her remain strength ; " stay with 
 I . " 

 they enter the little room , which seem to be in a glory of light , 
 for the sun strike across the low roof of the inn have catch the foamy 
 water - fall beyond , and the reflection of it on the white wall and 
 ceiling be dazzle . 

 beside the bed she sway and nearly fall . 

 " I will not undress , " she murmured--"I'll just lie down . " 

 she lie down with his help , turn her face to make a fond , hardly 
 articulate sound , and press her cheek against his . in a few minute it 
 seem to he that she be sleep again . he softly go out of the 
 room and down - stair . there , early as it be , he find Fräulein Anna , 
 who look at he with amazement . 

 " where can I find a doctor ? " he ask she ; and they talk for a few 
 minute , after which she go up - stair beside he , tremble and 
 flushed . 

 they find Kitty lie on her side , her face hide entirely in the 
 curl which have fall across it , and one arm hang . there be that in 
 her aspect which make they both recoil . then Ashe rush to she with a 
 cry , and as he passionately kiss her cold cheek he hear the clamor of 
 the frightened girl behind he . " Ach , Gott!--Ach Gott!"--and the voice 
 of other , man and woman , who begin to crowd into the narrow room . 


 the END 
