harvest 

 by 

 MRS . HUMPHRY WARD 
 I 


 two old labourer come out of the lane lead to Great End Farm . both 
 carry bag sling on stick over their shoulder . one , the eld and 
 tallest , be a handsome fellow , with regular feature and a delicately 
 humorous mouth . his stoop and his slouch gait , the gray lock also , 
 which straggle from under his broad hat , show he an old man -- probably 
 very near his old - age pension . but he carry still with he a look 
 of youth , and he have be a splendid creature in his time . the other 
 be short of stature and of neck , bent besides by field work . a 
 broadly - build , clumsy man , with something gnome - like about he , and the 
 cheerful look of one whose country nerve have never know the touch of 
 worry or long sickness . the name of the tall man be Peter Halsey , and 
 Joseph Batts be his companion . 

 it be a fine July evening , with a cold north wind blow from the plain 
 which lie stretch to their right . under the unclouded sun , which by its 
 own ' sun - time " have only reach half - past four in the afternoon , though 
 the clock in the village church have already strike half - past five , the 
 air be dry and parch , and the field all round , the road itself , and 
 the dusty hedge show sign of long drought . 

 " it du want rain , " say Peter Halsey , look at a crop of oats through 
 an open gate , " it du want rain--_bad _ . " 

 " aye ! " say the other , " that it du . Muster Shenstone have well ' a read 
 the prayer for rain lasst Sunday , I be thinkin ' , than all they long one 
 as ee _ do _ read . " 

 Halsey be silent a moment , his half - smile eye glance from side to 
 side . at last he say slowly,-- 

 " we du be prayin ' a lot about ower sin , and Muster Shenstone be allus 
 preachin ' about them . but it be the sin o ' the _ Garmins _ I be thinkin ' of . 
 if it have not   a bin for the sin o ' the Garmins my Tom would not   ha ' lose 
 ' be right hand . " 

 " An ' ower Jim would not   be go into they trench next November as ever 
 be , " put in Batts . " it be the sin o ' the Garmins as ha ' do _ that _ , an ' 
 nothing as you or I ha ' do , Peter . " 

 Halsey shake his head assentingly . 

 " Noa -- for all that pratin ' , pacifist chap be sayin ' lasst week . I 
 do not   believe a word ee say . ' yis , ' I say , ' if you want this war to 
 stop , I be o ' your mind , ' I say , ' but when you tell I as _ England _ 
 do it -- you'm-- ' " 

 the short man burst into a cackle laugh . 

 " ' You'm a liar ! ' do you say that , Peter ? " 

 Peter fence a little . 

 " there be more way nor one o ' speakin ' your mind , " he say at last . " but 
 I stand up to un . do you hear , Batts , as Great End Farm be let ? " 

 the old man turn an animate look on his companion . 

 " well , for sure ! " say Batts , astonish . " an ' who be the man ? " 

 " it be not a man . it be a woman . " 

 " a woman ! " repeat Batts , wonder . " well , these be funny time to live 
 in , when the woman go ridin ' astride an ' hay - balin ' , an ' steam - ploughin ' , 
 an ' the Lord know what . and now they must be takin ' the farm , and 
 turnin ' out the man . well , for sure . " 

 a mild and puzzled laughter cross the speaker 's face . 

 Halsey nod . 

 " An ' now they have   get the vote . that be the top on't ! my old missis , she 
 talk poltik now to I of a night . I do not   mind she , now the childer be 
 all go . but I would ha ' bid her mind her own business when they be yoong 
 an ' want seein ' to . " 

 " now , what can a woman knoa about poltik ? " say Batts , still in the same 
 tone of pleasant rumination . " it be not   in natur . _ we _ warn't   give the 
 producin ' o ' the baby -- we'd ha ' cry out if we ' ad be ! " 

 a chuckle pass from one old man to the other . 

 " well , onyway the woman be all in a flutter about the votin ' , " say 
 Halsey , light his pipe with old hand that shake . " an ' there 's chap 
 already coomin ' round lookin ' out for it . " 

 " you bet there be ! " be Batts 's amused reply . " but they will take their 
 toime , will the woman . ' do not   you try to hustle - bustle I like you be 
 do , ' say my missus sharp - like to a labour chap as coom round lasst 
 week , 'cos yo ' will not   get nothing by it . ' and she worn't   no more 
 forthcomin ' to the conservative man when ee call . " 

 " will she do what _ you _ tell she , Batts ? " ask Halsey , with an evident 
 interest in the question . 

 " oh , Lord , no ! " say Batts placidly , ' shall not   try . but now about this 
 yoong woman an ' great end?-- " 

 " well , I be not   hear much about she -- not yet awhile . but they say as 
 she be nice - lookin ' , an ' Muster Shentsone ee say as she have be to college 
 somewhere , where they would larn't   her farmin ' . " 

 Batts make a sound of contempt . 

 " College ! " he say , with a twitching of the broad nostril which seem 
 to spread over half his face . " _ they _ can not   larn yer farmin ' ! " 

 " she be be on a farm too somewhere near Brighton , Muster Shenstone say , 
 since she be at college ; and ee tell I she do seem to be terr'ble 
 full o ' new notion . " 

 " she would well be full o ' money , " say the other , cuttingly . " notion be 
 no good without money to them . " 

 " Aye , they be wunnerfull costly thing be notion . Yo'd well by a long 
 way go by the folk as know . but they do say she will be payin ' good wage . " 

 " I dessay she will ! she will be obleege . it be Hobson 's choice , as you 
 might say ! " say Batts , chuckle again . 

 Halsey be silent , and the two old man trudge on with cheerful 
 countenance . through the mind of both there run pleasant thought 
 of the contrast between the day before the war and the day now 
 prevail . both of they could remember a wage of fifteen and sixteen 
 shilling a week . then just before the war , it have rise to eighteen 
 shilling and a pound . and now -- why the Wages Board for Brookshire have 
 fix thirty - three shilling as a weekly minimum , and a nine - hour ' day ! 
 price be high , but they would go down some day ; and wage would not go 
 down . the old man could not have tell exactly why this confidence lie so 
 deep in they ; but there it be , and it seem to give a strange new 
 stability and even dignity to life . their son be fight ; and they 
 have the normal human affection for their son . they wish the war to 
 end . but , after all , there be something to be say for the war . 
 they -- old Peter Halsey and old Joe Batts -- be more consider and more 
 comfortable than they would have be before the war . and it be the 
 consideration more even than the comfort that warm their heart . 

 the evening grow hotter , and the way to the village seem long . the old 
 man be now too tired to talk ; till just as they come in sight of the 
 first house , they perceive the village wagonette come towards they . 

 " there she be ! I do hear as Webb wor to meet she at the station . he be 
 take she over once before , " say old Halsey , raise his eye for a 
 moment and then drop they again . Batts do the same . the glance be 
 momentary . but both man have the same impression of a pleasant - faced young 
 woman sit erect behind Jonathan Webb , the decrepit driver of the 
 wagonette , and look straight at they as they pass she . there be a 
 general effect of youth and bright colour ; of pale brown hair , too , 
 over very dark eye . 

 " Aye , she be quite nice - lookin ' , " say Batts , with unction , " rayther 
 uncommon . she mind I summat o ' my missis when she wor a young ' un . " 
 Halsey 's mouth twitch a little , but though his thought be ironical , 
 he say nothing . it be generally admit by the old people that Mrs. 
 Batts have be through many year the village beauty , but her fall from 
 that high place be now of such ancient date that it seem foolish of 
 Batts to be so fond of refer to it . 

 the wagonette pass on . the woman sit in it carefully take note of 
 the scene around she , in a mood of mingle hope and curiosity . she be to 
 live in this valley without a stream , under these high chalk down with 
 their hang wood , and within a mile or so of the straggle village 
 she have just drive through . at last , after much wandering , she be to 
 find a home -- a real home of her own . the word " home " have not mean 
 much -- or much at least that be agreeable -- to she , till now . her large 
 but handsome mouth take a bitter fold as she think over various past 
 event . 

 now they have leave the village behind , and be pass through field 
 that be soon to be her field . her keen eye appraise the crop 
 stand in they . she have pay the family of her predecessor a good 
 price for they , but they be worth it . and just ahead , on she left , be 
 a wide stretch of newly - plough land rise towards a bluff of grassy 
 down - land on the horizon . the plough land itself have be down up to a 
 few month before this date ; thin pasture for a few sheep , through many 
 generation . she think with eagerness of the crop she be go to 
 make it bear , in the come year . wheat , or course . the wheat crop all 
 round the village be really magnificent . this be go to be the 
 resurrection year for English farming , after fifty year of " death and 
 damnation"--comparatively . and there would be many good year to come 
 after . 

 yes , Mr. Thomas Wellin , whose death have throw the farm which she have now 
 take on the market , have do well for the land . and it be not his fault 
 but the landlord 's that the farmhouse and building have be allow to 
 fall into such a state . Mr. Wellin have not want the house , since he be 
 only work the land temporarily in addition to his own farm half a mile 
 away . but the owner , Colonel Shepherd , ought to have look after the 
 farmhouse and building well . still , they be make she a fair 
 allowance for repair . 

 she be long to know how the workman from Millsboro have be get 
 on . Hastings , the Wellins ' former bailiff , now temporarily her , have 
 promise to stay behind that evening to meet she at the farm . she only 
 mean to insist on what be absolutely necessary . even if she have wish 
 for anything more , the lack of labour would have prevent it . 

 the old horse jog on , and presently from a row of lime beside the 
 road , a wave of fragrance , evanescent and delicious , pass over the 
 carriage . Miss Henderson sniff it with delight . " but one have never 
 _ enough _ of it ! " she think discontentedly . and then she remember how 
 as a child -- in far - away Sussex -- she use to press her face into the 
 lime - blossom in her uncle 's garden -- passionately , greedily , try to get 
 from it a great pleasure than it would ever yield . for the more she 
 try to compel it , by a kind of violence , the more it escape she . she 
 use to envy the bee lie drunk among the bloom . they at least be 
 surfeit and satisfied . 

 it strike she that there be a kind of parable in it of her whole 
 life -- so far . 

 but now there be a new world opening . the past be behind she . she draw 
 herself stiffly erect , conscious through every limb of youth and 
 strength , and fill with a multitude of vague hope . conscious , too , of 
 the three thousand pound that Uncle Robert have so opportunely leave she . 
 she have never realize that money could make so much difference ; and she 
 think gratefully of the elderly bachelor , her mother 's brother , who have 
 unexpectedly remember she . it have enable she to get her year 's 
 training , and to take this farm with a proper margin of capital . she 
 wish she have be able to tell Uncle Robert before he die what it 
 mean to she . 

 they pass one or two pair of labourer go home , then a group of 
 girl in overall , then a spring cart contain four workman behind a 
 ragged pony , no doubt the builder 's man who have be at work on the great 
 end repair . they all look at her curiously , and Rachel Henderson 
 look back at they -- steadily , without shyness . they be evidently aware 
 of who she be and where she be go . some of they perhaps would soon 
 be in her employ . she would be settle all that in a week or two . 

 ah , there be the house . she leant forward and see it lie under the 
 hill , the wood on the slope come down to the back of it . yes , it be 
 certainly a lonely situation . that be why the house , the farm land , 
 too , have be so long unlet , till old Wellin , the farm 's near 
 neighbour , have make a good deal of money , have rent the land from 
 Colonel Shepherd , to add to his own . the farm building , too , he have make 
 some use of , keep cart and machine , and certain store there . but 
 the house he have refuse to have any concern with . it have remain empty 
 and lock up for a good many year . 

 the wagonette turn into the rough road lead through the middle of a 
 fine field of oat to the house . the field be gaily splash with 
 poppy , which run , too , along the edge of the crop , sway by the 
 evening breeze , and flame in the level sun . though lonesome and 
 neglect , the farm in July be a pleasant and picturesque object . it 
 stand high and the air about it blow keen and fresh . the chalk hill 
 curve picturesquely round it , and the friendly wood run down behind to 
 keep it company . Rachel Henderson , in pursuit of that campaign she be 
 always now wag against a natural optimism , try to make herself 
 imagine it in winter -- the leafless tree , the solitary road , the treeless 
 pasture or arable field , that stretch westward in front of the farm , 
 cover perhaps with snow ; and the distant stretch of the plain . there 
 be not another house , not even a cottage , anywhere in sight . the 
 village have disappear . she herself , in the old wagonette , seem the 
 only live thing . 

 no , there be a man emerge from the farm - gate , and come to meet 
 she -- the bailiff , George Hastings . she have only see he once before , on 
 her first hurried visit , when , after get a rough estimate from he of 
 the repair necessary to the house and building , she have make up her 
 mind to take the farm , if the landlord would agree to do they . 

 " Yon 's Muster Hastings , " say Jonathan Webb , turn on her a benevolent 
 and wrinkle countenance , with two bright red spot in the midst of each 
 weather - beat cheek . Miss Henderson again notice the observant 
 curiosity in the old man 's eye . everybody , indeed , seem to look at she 
 with the same expression . as a woman farmer she be no doubt just a 
 freak , a sport , in the eye of the village . well , she prophesy they 
 would take she seriously before long . 

 " I be afraid I have not   as much to show you , miss , as I would like , " say 
 Hastings , as he help she to alight . " it be cruel work nowadays try to 
 do anything of this kind . two of the man that begin work last week have 
 be call up , and there be another be just ' tice away from I this 
 week . the wage that some people about will give be just mad ! " he throw 
 up his hand . " Colonel Shepherd say he can not   compete . " 

 Miss Henderson reply civilly but decidedly that somehow or other the 
 work would have to be do . if Colonel Shepherd could not   find the wage , 
 she must pay the difference . get in some time , during August , she must . 

 the bailiff look at she with a little sluggish surprise . he be not 
 use to be hustle , still less to person who be ready to pay rather 
 than be keep wait . he murmur that he dare say it would be all 
 right , and she must come and look . 

 they turn to the right up a stony pitch , through a dilapidated gate , 
 and so into the quadrangle of the farm . to the left be a long row of 
 open cow - shed , then cow - house and barn , the stable , a large shed in 
 which stand an old and broken farm cart , and finally the house , front 
 the barn . 

 the house be little more than a large cottage build in the shabby way 
 forty year ago , and of far less dignity than the fine old barn on which 
 it look . it abut at one end on the cart - shed , and between it and the 
 line of cow - shed be the gate into the farmyard . 

 Miss Henderson step up to the house and look at it . 

 " it be a poor place ! " she say discontentedly ; " and those man do not   seem 
 to have do much to it yet . " 

 Hastings admit it . but they have do a little , he say , shamefacedly , 
 and he unlock the door . Miss Henderson linger outside a moment . 

 " I never notice , " she say , " that the living room go right through . 
 what draught there will be in the winter ! " 

 for as she stand look into the curtainless window that front the 
 farm - yard , she see through it a further window at the back of the room , 
 and beyond that a tree . both window be large and seem to take up 
 most of the wall on either side of the small room . the effect be 
 peculiarly comfortless , as though no one live in the room could 
 possibly enjoy any shred of privacy . there be no cosy corner in it 
 anywhere , and Miss Henderson 's fancy imagine row of face look in . 

 inside a little paper and whitewashing have be do , but certainly 
 the place look remarkably unviting . a narrow passage run from front 
 to back , on one side of which be the living room with the two window , 
 while on the other be the kitchen and scullery . Upstairs there be two 
 good - sized bedroom with a small third room in a lean - to at the back , the 
 low part of which be occupy by a wash - house . through the window 
 could be see a neglect bit of garden , and an untidy orchard . 

 but when she have wander about the room a little , Rachel Henderson 's 
 naturally buoyant temperament reassert itself . she have bring some 
 bright pattern of distemper with she which she give to Hastings with 
 precise instruction . she have vision of casement curtain to hide the 
 nakedness of the big window with warm serge curtain to draw over they 
 in the winter . the floor must be stain . there should be a deep 
 indian - red drugget in the sitting - room , with pigeon - blue wall , and she 
 think complacently of the bit of old furniture she have be 
 collecting , which be store in a friend 's flat in town . an old dresser , 
 a grandfather 's clock , some bit of brass , two arm - chair , an old oak 
 table -- it would all look very nice when it be do , and would cost 
 little . then the bedroom . she have bring with she some roll of flowery 
 paper . she run to fetch they from the wagonette , and pin some piece 
 against the wall . the large room with the south aspect should be 
 Janet 's . she would take the north room for herself . she see they both in 
 her mind 's eye already comfortably furnish ; above all fresh and bright . 
 there should be no dirt or dinginess in the house , if she could help it . 
 in the country whitewash and distemper be cheap . 

 then Hastings follow she about through the farm building , where she 
 quick eye , train in modern way , perceive a number of small 
 improvement to be make that he would never have notice . she be always 
 ready , he see , to spend money on thing that would save labour or lessen 
 dirt . but she be not extravagant , and look through the list of her 
 direction and commission , as he hastily jot they down , he admit 
 to himself that she seem to know what she be about . and be an 
 honest man himself , and good - temper , though rather shy and dull , he 
 presently recognize the same quality of honesty and good temper in 
 she ; and take to she . insensibly their tone to each other grow friendly . 
 though he be temporarily in the landlord 's employ , he have be for some 
 year in the service of the Wellin family . half - consciously he contrast 
 Miss Henderson 's manner to he with theirs . in his own view he have be 
 bad treat than an ordinary farm labourer throughout his farming life , 
 though he have more education , and be expect naturally to have more 
 brain and foresight than the labourer . he be a little well pay ; but 
 his work and that of his wife be never do . he have get little credit 
 for success and all the blame for failure . and the Wellin woman - folk have 
 look down on his wife and himself . a little patronage sometimes , and 
 worthless gift , that burn in the taking ; but no common feeling , no real 
 respect . but Miss Henderson be different . his rather downtrodden 
 personality feel a stimulus . he begin to hope that when she come into 
 possession she would take he on . a woman could not possibly make 
 anything of great end without a bailiff ! 

 her " nice " look , no doubt , count for something . her face be , perhaps , 
 a little too full for beauty -- the delicately colour cheek and the 
 large smile mouth . but her brown eye be very fine , with very dark 
 pupil , and marked eyebrow ; and her nose and chin , with their soft , 
 blunt line , seem to promise laughter and easy way . she be very 
 lightly and roundly make ; and everything about she , her step , her 
 sunburn , her freckle , her evident muscular strength , speak of open - air 
 life and physical exercise . yet , for all this general aspect of a comely 
 country - woman , there be much that be sharply sensitive and individual 
 in the face . even a stranger might well feel that its tragic , as well as 
 its humorous or tender possibility , would have to be reckon with . 

 " all right ! " say Miss Henderson at last , close her little notebook 
 with a snap , " now I think we have   be through everything . I will take 
 over one cart , and Mrs. Wellin must remove the other . I will buy the 
 chaff - cutter and the dairy thing , but not the reap machine-- " 

 " I be afraid that will put Mrs. Wellin out considerably ! " throw in Hastings . 

 " can not   help it . I can not   have the place clutter up with old iron like 
 that . it be worth nothing . I be sure _ you _ would not   advise I to buy it ! " 

 she look with bright decision at her companion , who smile a little 
 awkwardly , and say nothing . the old long habit of consider the Wellin 
 interest first , before any other in the world , hold he still , though he 
 be no long their servant . 

 Miss Henderson move back towards the house . 

 " and you will hurry these man up?--as much as you can ? they _ be _ 
 slow - coach ! I must get in the week after next . Miss Leighton and I 
 intend to come , whatever happen . " 

 Hastings understand that " Miss Leighton " be to be Miss Henderson 's 
 partner in the farm , specially to look after the dairy work . Miss 
 Henderson seem to think a lot of she . 

 " and you must please engage those two man you speak of . neither of they , 
 you say , under sixty ! well , there be no picking and choose now . if they 
 be eighty I should have to take they ! till the harvest 's get in . there 
 be two girl come from the Land Army , and you have   clinch that other 
 girl from the village ? " 

 Hastings nod . 

 " well , I dare say we shall get the harvest in somehow , " she say , 
 stand at the gate , and look over the field . " Miss Leighton and I 
 mean to put our back into it . but Miss Leighton be not   as strong as I 
 be . " 

 her eye wander thoughtfully over the wheat - field , ablaze under the 
 level gold of the sun . then she suddenly smile . 

 " I expect you think it a queer business , Mr. Hastings , woman take to 
 farming ? " 

 " well , it be new , you see , Miss Henderson . " 

 " I believe it be go to be very common . why should not   the woman do it ! " 
 she frown a little . 

 " oh , no reason at all , " say Hastings hurriedly , think he have offend 
 she . " I have   nothing against it myself . and there will not   be man enough to go 
 round , after the war . " 

 she look at he sharply . 

 " you have   get a son in the war ? " 

 " Two , and one be be kill . " 

 " last year ? " 

 " no , last month . " 

 Miss Henderson say nothing , but her look be full of softness . " he be 
 to have be allow home directly , " Hastings go on , " for two or three 
 month . he be head woodman before the war on Lord Radley 's property . " he 
 point to the woode slope of the hill . " and they be to have give 
 he leave to see to the cutting of these wood . " 

 " these wood ! " Miss Henderson turn a startled face upon he . " you do not 
 mean to say they be come down ! " 

 " half of they commandeer , " say Hastings , with a shrug . " the Government 
 valuer have be all over they these last week . they be splendid 
 timber , you know . there be be a timber camp the other side of the hill 
 a long while . they have   get Canadians , and no doubt they will move on here . " 

 Miss Henderson make another quick movement . she say nothing , however . 
 she be star at the wood , which shine in the glow now steadily 
 creep up the hill , and Hastings think she be protest from the 
 scenery point of view . 

 " well , the Government must have the wood , " he say , with resignation . 
 " we have   get to win the war . but it do seem a pity . " 

 " I do not   know that I should have take the farm , " she say , under she 
 breath-- 

 " if you have know ? I wish I would think to tell you . but it be really only 
 settle a few day ago . " 

 " I do not   like have a lot of strange man about the farm , " she say 
 abruptly , " especially when I have girl to look after . " 

 " oh , the camp be a long way from the farm , " he say consolingly . " and 
 these wood will come last . " 

 still Miss Henderson 's face do not quite recover its cheerfulness . she 
 look at her watch . 

 " do not   let I keep you , Mr. Hastings . I will lock up the house , if you will 
 tell I where to leave the key . " 

 he show she where to put it , in a corner of the stable , for he to find 
 on the morrow . then , in her rapid way , Miss Henderson offer he the 
 post of bailiff on the farm , from the date of her entry . he agree at 
 once ; his salary be settle , and he depart with a more cheerful aspect 
 than when he arrive . the hopefulness and spring of youth have long since 
 leave he , and he have dread the new experience of this first meeting 
 with a woman - farmer , from whom he desire employment simply because he 
 be very badly off , he be get old , and Mr. Wellin 's widow have 
 treat he shabbily . he have lose his nerve for new venture . but Miss 
 Henderson have make thing easy . she have strike he as considerate and 
 sensible -- a " good sort . " he would do his good for she . 

 Rachel Henderson , leave to herself , do not immediately re - enter the 
 house . she go with a face on which the cloud still rest to look at 
 the well which be to be find under the cart - shed , at the eastern end of 
 the house . 

 it be cover with a wooden lid which she remove . under the shed roof 
 there be but little light leave . a faint gleam show the level of the 
 water , which , owe to the long drought , be very low . Hastings have tell 
 she that the well be extremely deep---150 foot at least , and 
 inexhaustible . the water be chalky but good . it would have to be pump 
 up every morning for the supply of the house and stable . 

 the well have a brick margin . Rachel sit down upon it , her eye upon that 
 distant gleam below . the dusk be fast possess itself of all the farm , 
 and an evening wind be gustily blow through the cart - shed , play 
 with some old guano sack that have be leave there , and whistle round 
 the corner of the house . outside , Rachel could hear the horse fidgeting , 
 and old Jonathan coughing -- no doubt as a signal to she that she have keep 
 he long enough . 

 still , she sit bent together on the margin of the well . then she draw off 
 her glove , and feel for something in the leather bag she carry on her 
 wrist . she take it out , and the small object sparkle a little as she 
 hold it poise for a moment -- as though consider . then with a rapid 
 movement , she bend over the well , and drop it into the water . there 
 be a slight splash . 

 Rachel Henderson raise herself and stand up . 

 " that be do with ! " she say to herself , with a straightening of all her 
 young frame . 

 yet all the way back to London she be torment by thought of what she 
 have declare be " do with " ; of scene and person , that is , which she 
 be determined to forget , and have just formally renounce for ever by her 
 symbolic action at the well . 




 II 


 " you do seem to have hit on a rather nice spot , Rachel , though lonesome , " 
 say Miss Henderson 's friend and partner , Janet Leighton , as they stand 
 on the front step of Great End Farm , survey the scene outside , on an 
 August evening , about a week after she and Rachel have arrive with their 
 furniture and personal belonging to take possession of the farm . 

 during that week they have both work hard -- from dawn till dark , both 
 outside and in . the harvest be in full swing , and as the dusk be 
 fill , Janet Leighton , who have just return herself from the field , 
 could watch the scene go on in the wheat - field beyond the farm - yard , 
 where , as the reap machine steadily par away the remain square of 
 wheat , two or three man and boy with gun lay in wait outside the square 
 for the rabbit as they bolt from their fast lessening shelter . the 
 gold and glow of harvest be on the field and in the air . at last the 
 sun have come back to a sodden land , after week of cold and drench 
 shower which , welcome in June , have by the middle of August make all 
 England tremble for the final fate of the gorgeous crop then fill the 
 large area ever till on british soil with their fat promise . wheat , 
 oat , and barley stand once more erect , root be save , and the young 
 vicar of Ipscombe be reflect as he walk towards Great End Farm that 
 his harvest festival sermon might now after all be rather easy to write 
 than have seem probable during the forego anxious week of chill and 
 storm . 

 Rachel Henderson , who have throw herself -- tired out -- into a chair in the 
 sit - room window , which be wide open , nod as she catch she 
 friend 's remark and smile . but she do not want to talk . she be in that 
 state of physical fatigue when mere rest be a positive delight . the sun , 
 the warm air , the busy harvest scene , and all the long hour of hard but 
 pleasant work seem to be still somehow in her pulse , thrill through 
 her blood . it be long since she have know the acute physical pleasure of 
 such a day ; but her sense of it have conjure up involuntarily 
 recollection of many similar day in a distant scene -- great golden 
 space , blind sun , and huge reaping machine , twice the size of that 
 at work in the field yonder . the recollection be unwelcome . thought 
 be unwelcome . she want only food and sleep -- deep sleep -- renew 
 her tired muscle , till the delicious early morning come round again , and 
 she be once more in the field direct her team of worker . 

 " why , there be the vicar ! " say Janet Leighton , perceive the tall and 
 willowy figure of Mr. Shenstone , as its owner stop to speak to one of 
 the boy with the gun who be watch the game . 

 Rachel look round with a look of annoyance . 

 " oh , dear , what a bore , " she say wearily . " I suppose I must go and tidy 
 up . nobody ought to be allow to pay visit after five o'clock . " 

 " you ask he something about a village woman to help , do not   you ? " 

 " I do , bad luck ! " sigh Rachel , gather up her sunbonnet and 
 disappear from the window . Janet hear she go upstairs , and a hasty 
 opening of cupboard overhead . she herself have come back an hour early 
 from the field than Rachel in order to get supper ready , and have slip 
 a skirt over the khaki tunic and knickerbocker which be her dress -- and 
 her partner' -- when at work on the farm . she wonder mischievously what 
 Rachel would put on . that her character include an average dose of 
 vanity , the natural vanity of a handsome woman , Rachel 's new friend be 
 well aware . but Janet , Rachel 's elder by five year , be only tenderly 
 amuse by it . all Rachel 's foible , as far as she know they , be 
 pleasant to she . they be in that early stage of a new friendship when 
 all be glamour . 

 yet Janet do sometimes reflect , " how little I really know about she . she 
 be a darling -- but a mystery ! " 

 they have meet at college , take their farm training together , and fall 
 in love with each other . Janet have scarcely a relation in the world . 
 Rachel possess , it seem , a brother in Canada , another in South 
 Africa , and some cousin whom she scarcely know , child of the uncle 
 who have leave she three thousand pound . each have be attract by the 
 loneliness of the other , and on leave college nothing be more natural 
 than they should agree to set up together . Rachel , as the capitalist , be 
 to choose the farm and take command . Janet go to a Cheshire dairy farm 
 for a time to get some further training in practical work ; and she be 
 now responsible for the dairy at Great End , with the housekeeping and the 
 poultry throw in . she be a thin , tall woman with spectacle , and have 
 just see her thirty - second birthday . her eye be honest and clear , her 
 mouth humorous . she never grudge other woman their beauty or their 
 success . it always seem to she she have what she deserve . 

 meanwhile the vicar approach , and Miss Leighton descend the step and 
 go to meet he at the gate . his aspect show he apologetic . 

 " I have come at an unearthly hour , Miss Leighton . but I think I should 
 have no chance of find Miss Henderson free till the evening , and I 
 come to tell you that I think I have find a woman to do your work . " 

 Janet bid he come in , and assure he that Rachel would soon be 
 visible . she usher he into the sitting - room , which he enter on a 
 note of wonderment . 

 " how nice you have make it all , " he say , look round he . " when I 
 think what a deserted hole this have be for year . you know , the village 
 people firmly believe it be haunt ? old Wellin never could get anybody 
 to sleep here . but tramp often use it , I be certain . they get in through 
 the window . Hastings tell I he have several time find a smoulder 
 fire in the kitchen . " 

 " what sort be the ghost ? " Janet inquire , as she point he to a chair , 
 devoutly hop that Rachel would hurry herself . 

 " well , there be a story -- but I wonder whether I ought to tell you-- " 

 " I assure you as to ghost -- I have no nerve ! " say Janet with a 
 confident laugh , " and I do not   think Rachel have either . we be more 
 frightened of rat . this farm - yard contain the big I have   ever see . 
 I dream of they at night . " 

 " it be not exactly the ghost-- " say the vicar , hesitate . 

 " but the story that produce the ghost ? what -- a murder ? " 

 " half a century ago , " say the vicar reassuringly ; " you will not   mind that ? " 

 " not the least . a century ago would be romantic . if it be just the other 
 day , we should feel we ought to have get the farm cheap . but half a 
 century do not   matter . it be a mid - victorian , just a plain , old - fashioned 
 murder . who do it ? " 

 the vicar open his eye a little . Miss Leighton be , he see , a lady , 
 and perhaps clever . her spectacle look like it . no doubt she have be 
 at Oxford or Cambridge before go to Swanley ? these educate woman in 
 new profession be become a very pressing and common fact ! as to the 
 murder , he explain that it have be just an ordinary poaching affair . 
 an old gamekeeper on the Shepherd estate have be attack by a gang of 
 poacher in the winter of 1866 . he have be shoot in one of the wood , and 
 though mortally wounded have be able to drag himself to the outskirt of 
 the farm where his strength have fail he . he be find dead under the 
 cart - shed which back on the stable , and the trace of blood on the 
 hill mark the stage of his struggle for life . two man be suspect , 
 one of they a labourer on the great end Farm ; but there be no evidence . 
 the suspect labourer have go to Canada the year after the murder , and 
 no one know what have happen to he . 

 but have tell the tale the vicar be again seize with compunction . 

 " I ought not   to have tell you -- I really ought not ; just on your settling 
 in -- I hope you will not   tell Miss Henderson ? " 

 Janet 's amused reply be interrupt by Rachel 's entrance . the vicar 
 arise with eagerness to receive she . he be evidently attract by his 
 new parishioner and anxious to make a good impression on they . Miss 
 Henderson 's reception of the vicar , however , be far more guard . the 
 easy friendliness of manner which have attract the bailiff Hastings be , 
 at first at any rate , entirely absent . her attitude be almost that of a 
 woman defend herself against possible intrusion , and Janet Leighton , 
 look on , and occasionally share in the conversation , be surprised 
 by it , as indeed she be by so many thing concern Rachel now that 
 their acquaintance be deepen ; surprised also , as though it be a new 
 thing , by her friend 's good look as she sit languidly chat with the 
 vicar . Rachel have merely put on a blue overall above her land - worker 's 
 dress . but her beautiful head , with its wealth of brown hair , and her 
 face , with its sensuous fulness of cheek and lip , its rounded line , and 
 lovely colour -- like a slightly overblown rose -- be greatly set off by 
 the simple fold of blue linen ; and her foot and leg , shapely but not 
 small , in their khaki stocking and shoe , complete the general effect 
 of lissom youth . the flush and heat of hard bodily work have pass away . 
 she have have time to plunge her face into cold water and smooth her hair . 
 but the atmosphere of the harvest field , its ripeness and glow , seem to 
 be still about she . a classically minded man might have think of some 
 nymph in the train of Demeter , might have fancy a horn of plenty , or a 
 bow , sling from the sunburnt neck . 

 but the vicar have forget his classic . _ en revanche _ , however , he be 
 do his good to show himself sympathetic and up - to - date with regard to 
 woman and their new sphere of work -- especially on the land . he have 
 notice three girl , he say , work in the harvest field . two of they 
 he recognize as from the village ; the third he suppose be a stranger ? 

 " she come from ralstone , " say Rachel . 

 " ah , that be the village where the new timber camp be . you really must see 
 that camp , Miss Henderson . " 

 " I hate to think of the wood come down , " she say , frown a little . 

 " we all do . but that be the war . it can not   be help , alack ! but it be 
 wonderful to see the woman at work , measure and check , do the 
 brain work , in fact , while the man do the felling and loading . it make 
 one envious . " 

 the vicar sigh . a flush appear on his young but slightly cadaverous 
 face . 

 " of the man -- or the woman ? " 

 " oh , their work , I mean . they be do something for the war . I have   do 
 my good . but the Bishop will not   hear of it . " 

 and he rather emphatically explain how he have apply in vain for an 
 army chaplaincy . Health and the shortage of clergy have be against he . 
 " I suppose there must be some leave at home , " he say with a shrug , " and 
 the doctor seem to have a down on I . " 

 Janet be quite sorry for the young man -- he be so eagerly apologetic , so 
 anxious to propitiate what he imagine ought to be their feeling about 
 he . and Rachel all the time sit so silent and unresponsive . 

 Miss Leighton draw the conversation back to the timber camp ; she would 
 like to go and see it , she say . every one know the Canadians be 
 wonderful lumberman . 

 the Vicar 's eye have travel back to Rachel . 

 " be you ever in Canada , Miss Henderson ? " the question be evidently 
 throw out nervously at a venture , just to evoke a word or a smile from 
 the new mistress of the farm . 

 Rachel Henderson frown slightly before reply . 

 " yes , I have be in Canada . " 

 " you have ? oh , then , you know all about it . " 

 " I know nothing about canadian lumbering . " 

 " you be on the prairie ? " 

 " I live some time on a prairie farm . " 

 " everything here must seem very small to you , " say the vicar 
 sympathetically . but this amiable tone fall flat . Miss Henderson still 
 sit silent . the vicar begin to feel matter awkward and take his hat from 
 the floor . 

 " I trust you will call upon I for any help I can possibly be to you , " he 
 say , turn to Janet Leighton . " I should be delighted to help in the 
 harvest if you want it . I have a pair of hand anyway , as you see ! " he 
 hold they out . 

 he expatiate a little more on his disappointment as to the front . janet 
 throw in a few civil word . Rachel Henderson have move to the window , and 
 be apparently look at the farm - girl carry straw across the yard . 

 " good - night , Miss Henderson , " say the young man at last , conscious of 
 rebuff , but irrepressibly effusive and friendly all the time . " I hope you 
 will let your ralstone girl come sometimes to the clubroom my sister and 
 I have in the village ? we feel young people ought to be amuse , 
 especially when they work hard . " 

 " thank you , but it be so far away . we do not   like they to be out late . " 

 " certainly not . but in the long evening -- don't   you know ? " the vicar 
 smile persuasively . " however , there it be -- whenever she come she will 
 be welcome . and then , as to your seat in church . there be a pew that have 
 always belong to the farm . it be about half - way up . " 

 " we do not   go to church , " say Rachel , face he . " at least , I do not . " 
 she look at her companion . 

 " and I can not   be count on , " say Janet , smile . 

 the vicar flush a little . 

 " then you be not Church of England ? " 

 " I be , " say Rachel indifferently ; " at least I be not anything else . Miss 
 Leighton be a Unitarian . " then her eye light up with a touch of fun , and 
 for the first time she smile . " I be afraid you will think we dreadful 
 heathen , Mr. Shenstone ! " 

 what the vicar do think be that he have never see a smile transform a 
 face so agreeably . and have begin to smile , Rachel perversely continue 
 it . she walk to the gate with her visitor , talk with irrelevant 
 animation , invite he to come the following day to help in the 
 " carry , " ask question about the village and its people , and 
 graciously consent to fix a day when she and her friend would go to 
 tea with Miss Shenstone at the vicarage . the young man fairly beam 
 under the unexpected change , and linger at the gate as though unable to 
 tear himself away ; till with a little peremptory nod , though still 
 smile , Rachel dismiss he . 

 Janet Leighton meanwhile watch it all . she have see Rachel treat a new 
 male acquaintance before as she have just treat the vicar . to begin 
 with , the manner of an icicle ; then a sudden thaw , just in time to save 
 the situation . she have come with amusement to the conclusion that , 
 however really indifferent or capricious , her new friend could not in the 
 long run resign herself to be dislike , even by a woman , and much more in 
 the case of a man . be it vanity , or sex , or both ? Temperament perhaps ; 
 the modern word which cover so much . Janet remember a little niece of 
 her own who in her mother 's absence entertain a gentleman visitor with 
 great success . when ask for his name , she shake her pretty head . " just 
 a man , mummy , " she say , bridle . Janet Leighton suspect that similar 
 tale might have be tell of Miss Henderson in her babyhood . 

 and yet impression recur to she of another kind -- of a sensitive , 
 almost fierce delicacy -- a shrinking from the ugly or merely physical 
 fact of life , as of one who have suffer some torment in connection with 
 they . 

 Janet 's eye follow the curly brown head as its possessor come slowly 
 back from the gate . she be think of a moment when , one evening , while 
 they be both still at college , they have realize their liking for each 
 other , and have agree to set up in partnership . then Rachel , spring to 
 her foot , with her hand behind she , and head throw back , have say 
 suddenly : " I warn you , I have a story . I do not   want to tell you , to tell 
 anybody . I shall not   tell you . it be do with . I give you my word that I be 
 not a bad woman . but if you do not   want to be my partner on these term , 
 say so ! " 

 and Janet have feel no difficulty whatever in become Rachel Henderson 's 
 partner on these term . nor have she ever yet regret it . 

 the light farm cart which have be send to the station for store drive 
 up to the yard gate as Rachel leave it . she turn back to receive some 
 parcel hand out by the " exempted " man who drive it , together with some 
 letter which have be find lie at the village post office . two of the 
 letter be for Janet . she send they up to the house , and go herself 
 towards the harvest field . 

 there they stand -- the row of golden ' shock " or stook . the ' shocker " 
 have just finish their day 's work . she could hear the footstep of the 
 last batch , a cheerful chatter , while talk and laughter come soften 
 through the evening air . the man who have be drive the reap machine 
 be do some rough repair to it in a far corner of the field , with a 
 view to the morrow , and she catch sight of her new bailiff , Hastings , 
 who have wait to see everybody off , disappear towards his own 
 cottage , which stand on a lonely spur of the down . the light be fast 
 go , but the deep glow of the western sky answer the pale gold of 
 the new - make stubble and the ranged stook , while between rise the dark 
 and splendid mass of the wood . 

 Rachel stand look at the scene , possess by a pleasure which in she 
 be always an ardour . she feel nothing by half . the pulse of life beat 
 in she still with an energy , a passion , that astonish herself . she be 
 full of eagerness for her new work and for success in it , full of 
 desire , too , for vague , half - see thing , thing she have miss so 
 Far -- her own fault . but somewhere in the long , hide year , they must , 
 they should be wait for she . 

 the harvest be magnificent . she have pay the Wellins a high price for 
 the stand crop , but there be go to be a profit on her bargain . 
 her mind be full of scheme , if only she could get the labour to carry 
 they out . Farming be now on the up - grade . she have come into it at the 
 very good moment , and England would never let farming go down again , 
 after the war , for her own safety 's sake . 

 _ the War _ ! she feel towards it as to some distant force , which , so far as 
 she personally be concern , be a force for good . owe to the war , 
 farming be boom all over England , and she be in the boom , take 
 advantage of it . yet she be ashamed to think of the war only in that 
 way . she try to tame the strange ferment in her blood , and could only 
 do it by remind herself of Hastings 's wound son , whose letter he have 
 show she . and then -- in imagination -- she begin to see thousand of 
 other like he , in hospital bed , or lie dead in trample field . her 
 mood soften , the tear come into her eye . 

 suddenly -- a slight whimper -- a child 's whimper -- close beside she . she 
 pause in amazement , look round she , till the whimper be renew ; and 
 there , almost at her foot , cradle in the fragrant hollow of a wheat 
 stook , she see a tiny child -- a baby about a year old , a fair , plump 
 thing , just wake from sleep . 

 at sight of the face bend over she , the child set up a loud cry , 
 which be not angry , however , only forlorn . the tear well fast into 
 her blue eye . she look piteously at Rachel . 

 " Mummy , mummy ! " 

 " you poor little thing ! " say Rachel . " whose be you ? " 

 one of the village woman who have be help in the ' shocking , " she 
 suppose , have bring the child . she have notice a little girl play 
 about the reaper in the afternoon -- no doubt an eld sister bring to 
 look after the baby . between the mother and the sister there must have 
 be some confusion , and one or other would come run back directly . 

 but meanwhile she take up the child , who at first resist passionately , 
 fight with all its chubby strength against the strange arm . but 
 Rachel seem to have a way with she -- a spell , which work . she bend 
 over the little thing , soothe and coo to she , and then find a few 
 crumb of cake in the pocket of she overall , the remain of her own lunch 
 in the field , she daintily feed the rosy mouth , till the sob cease and 
 the child star upwards in a sleep wonder , her blue eye hold by the 
 brown one above she . 

 " Mummy ! " she repeat , still whimper slightly . 

 " Mummy 's come , " say Rachel tenderly . " what a duck it be ! " 

 and bend , she kiss the soft , downy cheek greedily , with the same 
 ardour she have just be throw into her own dream of success . 

 she carry the child , now quiet and comfort , towards the house . the 
 warm weight upon her arm be delicious to she . only as she near the 
 gate in the now moonlit dusk , her lip quiver suddenly , and two tear 
 roll down her cheek . 

 " I have not   carry a child , " she think , ' since-- " 

 suddenly there be a shout from the farth gate of the harvest field , 
 and a girl come run at top speed . it be the little one 's eld 
 sister , and with a proper scolding , Rachel give up her prize . 

 the two land - girl have finish give food and water to the cattle and a 
 special mush to new - bear calf . everything be now in order for the 
 night , and Janet , stand on the step of the farm - house , ring a bell , 
 which mean that supper would be ready in a few minute . the two partner 
 and their employee be soon gather round the table in the kitchen , 
 which be also the dining - room . it be a cold meal of bacon , with 
 lettuce , bread and jam , some tea make on a " Tommy 's cooker , " and potato 
 which Janet , who be for the present housekeeper and cook , produce hot 
 and steam from the hay - box to which she have consign they after the 
 midday dinner . a small oil - lamp have be light , and through the open 
 window afterglow and moonrise stream in to mingle with its light . 
 there be a pot of flower on the table -- purple scabious , and tall 
 cow - parsley , gather from the orchard , where no one have yet have time to 
 cut the ragged hay beneath the tree . 

 the scene be typical of a new England . woman govern -- and woman 
 serve -- they be all alike make their way through new path to new 
 end . it be no household in the ordinary sense . the man be want . the 
 two eld woman be bind to the two young by a purely business tie , 
 which might or might not develop into something more personal . the two 
 land - lass have come to supper in their tunic and breech , while Rachel 
 Henderson and Janet have now both put on the coloured overall which 
 disguise the masculine garb beneath , and give they something of the 
 usual feminine air . Rachel 's overall , indeed , be both pretty and 
 artistic , embroider a little here and there , and show a sunburnt 
 throat beneath the rounded chin . 

 the talk turn on the day 's work , the weather prospect , the vagary of 
 the cow at milk time , and those horrid little pest the " harvester , " 
 which haunt the chalk soil . the two " hand " be clear by now that they 
 like Miss Leighton the good of the two lady , they hardly know why . 
 Betty Rolfe , the young of they , who come from Ralstone , be a taking 
 creature , with deep black , or rather violet , eye , small feature frame 
 in curly hair , and the bloom of ripe fruit . she be naturally full of 
 laughter and talk , and only spoilt by her discolour and uneven tooth , 
 which show the usual english neglect of such thing in childhood . 

 her companion , Jenny Harberton , be a much more ordinary type , with broad 
 cheek , sandy hair , and a perpetual friendly grin , which generally serve 
 she instead of speech , at least in her employer 's presence . she be a 
 capital milker , and a good honest child . her people live in the village , 
 and her forebear have always live there . they be absolutely indigenous 
 and autochthonous -- a far old brookshire family than any of the dweller 
 in the big house about . 

 then in the midst of a love report by Betty on the virtue and docility 
 of a beautiful Jersey cow who be the pride of Miss Henderson 's new herd , 
 Janet Leighton remember one of her letter of the evening and draw it 
 out of her pocket . 

 " who do you think be go to be -- be already -- the commandant of the 
 timber girl in the new camp ? " 

 Rachel could not   guess . 

 " you remember Mrs. Fergusson -- at College ? " 

 Rachel raise her eyebrow . 

 " the irish lady ? perfectly . " 

 " well , it be she . she write to I to say she be quite settle , with 
 thirty girl , that the work be fascinating , and they all love it , and you 
 and I _ must _ go over to see she . " 

 Rachel look irresponsive . 

 " it be a long way . " 

 " oh , Miss , " say Jenny Harberton timidly , " it be not so very far . an ' it be 
 lovely when you get there . Father be there last week , drivin ' some 
 officer . he say it _ be _ interestin ' ! " 

 Jenny 's father , a plumber in the village , own a humble open car which 
 be in perpetual request . 

 " there be a hundred Canadians apparently , " say Janet Leighton , look 
 at her letter , " and german prisoner , quite a good few , and these thirty 
 girl . Mrs. Fergusson beg we to come . Sunday 's no good because we 
 could not   see the work , but -- after the harvest ? we could get there with 
 the pony quite well . " 

 Rachel say nothing . 

 Janet Leighton drop the subject for the moment , but after supper , with 
 her writing - desk on her knee , she return to it . 

 " can not   you go without I ? " say Rachel , who be stand with she back to 
 the room , look out of the window . 

 " well , I could , " say Janet , feel rather puzzle , " but I think you 
 be curious to see these new kind of work for woman ? " 

 " so I be . it be not   the woman . " 

 " the german prisoner , then ? " laugh Janet . 

 " Heavens , no ! " 

 " the Canadians ? " ask Janet -- in wonder -- after a moment . Rachel turn 
 abruptly towards she . 

 " well , I do not   have exactly a good time in Canada , " she say , as though 
 the admission be drag out of she ; add immediately , " but of course 
 I will go -- sometime -- after the harvest . " 

 on which she leave the room , and presently Janet see she wander among 
 the stook in the gloaming , her hand behind her back . she seem in her 
 ripe and comely youth to be somehow the very spirit of the harvest . 

 a little later , just before ten o'clock , while the sunset glow be still 
 brood on the harvest field , the two farm - girl , after a last visit to 
 the cow , slip into the little sitting - room . Janet , who be mend 
 her Sunday dress , greet they with a smile and a kind word . then she 
 move to the table and take up a New Testament that be lie there . she 
 be an ardent and mystically - minded Unitarian , and her mind be much set 
 towards religion . 

 " shall we have prayer at night ? " she have say quite simply to the f 
 arm - girl on their arrival . " do not   if you do not   want to . " and they have 
 shyly say " yes"--not particularly attract by the proposal , but willing 
 to please Miss Leighton , who be always nice to they . 

 so Janet read some verse from the sixth chapter of St. John : " verily , 
 verily , I say unto you , he that believeth on I hath everlasting 
 life ... I be the Bread of Life ... I be the live Bread which come down 
 from Heaven ... the word that I speak unto you they be spirit and they 
 be life . " 

 close the book , while her quiet eye shine in the gleam dusk , she 
 say a few simple thing about the word of Christ , and how the human 
 soul may feed on they -- the Word of Love -- the Word of Purity -- the Word of 
 Service . while she be still speak , the door open and Rachel come 
 in . it have be agree between she and Janet that although she have no 
 objection to the prayer , she be not to be ask to take part in they . 
 so that Janet 's pulse flutter a little when she appear . but there 
 be no outward sign of it . the speaker finish what she have to say , 
 while the eye of her three hearer be sometimes on her face and 
 sometimes on the wide cornfield beyond the open window , where the harvest 
 moon , as yet only a brilliant sickle , be rise . the Earth Bread 
 without -- the " Bread of life " within ; even in Jenny 's primitive mind , 
 there be a mingling of the two idea , which bring a quiet joy . she sit 
 with part lip , feel that she like Miss Leighton very much , and 
 would try to please she with the cow . 

 Betty , meanwhile , beside she , pass into a wake dream . she be 
 think of a soldier in the village : the blacksmith 's son , a tall , 
 handsome fellow , who have just arrive on leave for ten day . she have 
 spend Sunday evening wandering in the lane with he . she feel 
 passionately that she must see he again -- soon . 

 the little reading pass into the Lord 's Prayer . then it be over and 
 the two girl disappear to bed . Janet feel a little awkward when she 
 be leave alone with Rachel , but she go back to her sewing and begin to 
 talk of the day 's news of the war . Rachel answer at random , and very 
 soon say good - night . 

 but long after everybody else in the solitary farmhouse be asleep , 
 Rachel Henderson be sit up in bed , broad awake , her hand round her 
 knee . the window beside she be open . she see the side of the hill and 
 the bare down in which it end , with the moonlight bright upon it , and 
 the dark wood crown it . there be owl call from the hill , and 
 every now and then a light wind rustle through the branch of an oak 
 that stand in the farm - yard . 

 she be think of what Janet have say about the " word " of Christ -- the 
 Word of Purity -- and the Word of Love . how often she have hear she 
 father read and expound that chapter ! very differently as far as 
 phraseology -- perhaps even as far as meaning -- go , yet with all his 
 heart , like Janet . he be an anglican clergyman who have do missionary 
 service in the Canadian West . he have be dead now three year , and her 
 mother five . she have bitterly miss they both when she be in her bad 
 need ; yet now she be thankful they have die -- before-- 

 what would her father think of she now ? would he grant that she be free , 
 or would he still hold to those rigid , those cruel view of his ? oh , he 
 must grant it ! she _ be _ free ! her breast shake with the fervour of her 
 protest . she have be through passion and wrong , through thing that 
 sear and defile . she know well that she have be no mere innocent 
 sufferer . yet now she have her life before she again ; and both heart and 
 sens be hungry for the happiness she have so abominably miss . and 
 her starve conscience -- that , too , be eagerly awake . she have she 
 self - respect to recover -- the past to forget . 

 _ work _ ! that be the receipt -- hard work ! and this dear woman , Janet 
 Leighton , to help she ; Janet , with her pure , modest life and her high 
 aim . so , at last , cling to the thought of her new friend like a 
 weary child , Rachel Henderson fall asleep . 




 III 


 " a jolly view ! " 

 Janet assent . she be sit behind the pony , while Rachel have walk 
 up the hill beside the carriage , to the high point where both she and the 
 pony -- a lethargic speciman of the race -- have pause to take breath . 

 they be on a ridge whence there be a broad bit of the world to see . to 
 the north , a plain rich in all the diversity of english land -- field and 
 wood , hamlet and church , the rise ground and shallow depression , the 
 small enclosure and the hedgerow timber , that make all the difference 
 between the english midland and , say , the plain of Champagne , or a 
 russian steppe . across the wide , many - coloured scene , great cloud from 
 the west be sweeping , with fringe of rain and sudden burst of light 
 or shadow , which in their perpetual movement -- suggest attack from the 
 sky and response from the earth -- give drama and symbol to the landscape . 

 on the south -- thing very different ! first , an interlocked range of 
 hill , forest - clothe , stretch east and west , and , at the very foot of 
 the two woman , a forest valley offer much that be strange to english 
 eye . two year before it have be know only to the gamekeeper and the 
 shooting guest of a neighbouring landowner . now a great timber camp 
 fill it . the gully run far and deep into the heart of the forest 
 country , with a light railway wind along the bottom , towards an unseen 
 road . the steep side of the valley -- Rachel and Janet stand on the edge 
 of one of they -- be cover with felled tree , cut the precede winter , 
 and leave as they fall . the dead branch and leaf of the tree have turn 
 to a rich purple , and dye all the inside of the long deep cup . but along 
 its edge stretch the forest , still untouched , and everywhere , in the 
 bare space leave here and there by the felling among the " rubble and 
 woody wreck , " green and gold moss and delicate grass have spring up , 
 a brilliant enamel , inlay with a multitude of wild flower . 

 " look ! " cry Rachel . 

 for suddenly , down below they , a huge trunk begin to move as though of 
 its own accord . hiss and crash like some gray serpent , it glide 
 down the hill - side , till it approach a group of figure and horse 
 congregate at the head of the valley , near an engine puff smoke . then 
 something invisible happen , and presently a trolley pile high with 
 log detach itself from the group , and set out on a solitary journey 
 down the railway , watch here and there by man in queer uniform with 
 patch on their back . 

 " german prisoner ! " say Janet , and strain her eye to see , think 
 all the time of a letter she have receive that morning from her soldier 
 brother fight with the english troop to the west of rheims:-- 

 " the beggar be on the run ! Foch have get they this time . but , oh , Lord , 
 the sight they have   make of all this beautiful country ! trample , and 
 ruin , and smash ! all of it . deliberate loot and malice everywhere , 
 and tale of thing do in the village that make one see red . we 
 capture a letter to his wife on a dead German this morning : ' well , the 
 offensive be a failure , but we have   do one thing -- we've   smash up 
 another bit of France ! ' how be we ever go to live with this people in 
 the same world after the war ? " 

 and there below , in the heart of this remote english woodland , now be 
 sacrifice to the war , move the son of this very people , cast up here 
 by the tide of battle . Janet have hear that nobody speak to they during 
 the work , except to give direction ; after work they have their own wire 
 camp , and all intercourse between they and the canadian woodman , or the 
 english timber girl , be forbid . but what be they say among 
 themselves -- what be they think -- these peasant , some perhaps from 
 the Rhineland , or the beautiful bavarian country , or the prussian plain ? 
 Janet have travel a good deal in Germany before the war , use her 
 holiday as a mistress in a secondary school , and her small saving , in a 
 kind of wandering which have be a passion with she . she have know 
 Bavarians and Prussians at home . but here , in this corner of rural 
 England , with this veil of silence draw between they and the nation 
 which at last , in this summer of 1918 , be grimly certain , after four 
 year of vengeance and victory , what ferment be , perhaps , work in 
 the german mind ? 

 yes , there be the german camp , and beyond it under the hill the canadian 
 forestry camp ; whilst just beneath they could be see the roof of the 
 large woman 's hostel . 

 another exclamation from Rachel , as , on their left , another great tree 
 start for the bottom of the hollow . 

 " but have not   you see all this before ? " ask Janet . 

 " no , I never see anything of lumber . " 

 the tone show the sudden cooling and reserve that be always apparent 
 in Rachel 's manner when any subject connect with Canada come into 
 conversation . yet Janet have notice with surprise that it be Rachel 
 herself who , when the harvest be nearly over , have revive the subject of 
 the camp , and plan the drive for this Saturday afternoon . it have 
 seem to Janet once or twice that she be force herself to do it , as 
 though brave some nervousness of which she be ashamed . 

 the rough road on which they be drive wound gradually downward 
 through the felled timber . soon they could hear the clatter of the 
 engine , and the hiss of the saw which seize the tree on their 
 landing , and cut and strip they in a trice , ready for loading . Round 
 the engine and at the starting - place of the trolley be a busy crowd : 
 lean and bronzed Canadians ; woman in leather breech and coat , busily 
 measuring and mark ; a team of horse show silvery white against the 
 purple of the hill ; and everywhere the german prisoner lad , mostly quite 
 young and of short stature . the pony carriage pass a group of they , and 
 they star with cheerful , furtive look at the two woman . 

 then the group of timber girl below perceive the approach visitor , 
 and a figure , detach itself from the rest , come to meet the carriage . 
 a stately woman , black - haired , in coat and breech like the rest , with a 
 feel hat , and a badge of authority , touch of green besides on the khaki 
 uniform . Janet recognize she at once as Mrs. Fergusson , their comrade 
 for a time at college , and much like both by she and Rachel . 

 she come laugh , with hand outstretche . 

 " well , here we meet again ! jolly to see you ! a new scene , be not   it ? life 
 do not   stand still nowadays ! one of my girl will take the carriage for 
 you . " 

 a stalwart maiden unharness the pony and let he graze . 

 Mrs. Fergusson take possession of her visitor , and walk on beside 
 they , describe the different stage of the work , and section of the 
 worker . 

 " you see those tall fellow farthest off ? those work the saw and cut up 
 the tree as they come down . then the horse bring they to the roller , 
 and the Canadians guide they with those hook till the crane seize hold 
 of they and lift they on to the trolley . but before the hook get 
 they -- you see the girl there?--they do all the measuring ; they note 
 everything in their book and they mark every log . all the payment of 
 the camp , the wage pay , the sum earn by the trolley contractor who 
 take they to the station , the whole finance in fact , depend on the 
 _ woman _ . I have   train score besides and send they out to other camp ! 
 but now come , I must introduce you to the commandant of the camp . " 

 " a Canadian ? " ask Janet . 

 " no , an American ! he come from Maine , but he have be lumber in 
 Canada , with several mill and , camp under he . so he volunteer a year 
 ago to bring over a large Forestry battalion -- mostly the man he have be 
 work with in Quebec . splendid fellow ! but he be the king ! " 

 then she raise her voice,-- 

 " Captain Ellesborough ! " 

 a young man in uniform , with a slouch hat , come forward , leap over the 
 log in his path . he give a military salute to the two visitor , and a 
 swift scrutinize look to each of they . Rachel be aware of a thin , 
 handsome face bronze by exposure , a pair of blue eye , rather pale in 
 colour , to which the sunburn of brow and cheek give a singular 
 brilliance , and a well - cut , determined mouth . the shoulder be those of 
 an athlete , but on the whole the figure be lightly and slenderly build , 
 make an impression rather of grace and elasticity than of exceptional 
 strength . 

 " you would like to see the camp ? " he say , look at Rachel . 

 " be not   you too busy to show it ? " 

 " not at all . I be not want just now . let I help you over those log . " 
 he hold out his hand . 

 " oh , thank you , I do not   want any help , " say Rachel a little scornfully . 
 he smile in approve silence , and she follow his lead , leap and 
 scramble over the pile of wood , with a deer 's sureness of foot , till 
 he invite she to stop and watch the timber girl at their measuring . as 
 the two visitor approach , land - woman and forest - woman eye each other 
 with friendly look , but without speech . for talk , indeed , the business 
 in hand be far too strenuous . the log be come in fast ; there must 
 be no slip in measurement or note . the work be hard , and the woman do 
 it have be at it all day . but on the whole , what a comely and energetic 
 group , with the bright eye , the clear skin , the animation bear of open 
 air and exercise . 

 " they can not   talk to you now ! " say Mrs. Fergusson in Janet 's ear , amid 
 the din of the engine , " but they will talk at tea . and there be a dance 
 to - night . " 

 Janet look round the wild glen in wonder . 

 " who come ? " 

 " oh , there be an Air Force camp half a mile away -- an Army Service camp on 
 the other side . the officer come -- some of they -- every Saturday . we take 
 down the partition in our hut . you can not   think what pretty frock the 
 girl put on ! and we dance till midnight . " 

 " and you have   no difficulty with the man work in the camp ? " 

 " you mean -- how do they treat the girl ? " laugh Mrs. Fergusson . " they be 
 _ charming _ to the girl ! chivalrous , kind , everything they should be . but 
 then , " she add proudly , " my girl be the pick -- educate woman all of 
 they . I could trust they anywhere . and Captain Ellesborough -- you will not 
 get any mischief go on where he be . " 

 meanwhile the captain , well out of earshot of Mrs. Fergusson 's praise , 
 be explain the organization of the camp to Rachel as they slowly 
 climb the hill , on the opposite side from that by which she and Janet 
 have descend . 

 " which work hard , I wonder ? " she say at last , as they pause to look 
 down on the scene below . " we on our farm , or you here ? I have   never have 
 more than five hour ' sleep through the harvest ? but now thing be 
 slacker . " 

 he throw his head back with a laugh . 

 " why , this seem to I like play at lumber ! it be all so tiny -- so 
 babyish . oh , yes , there be plenty of work -- for the moment . but it will be 
 all do , in one more season ; not a stick leave . England can not   grow a real 
 forest . " 

 " compare to America ? " 

 " well , I be think of Canada . do you know Canada ? " 

 " a little . " then she add hastily : " but I never see any lumbering . " 

 " what a pity ! it be a gorgeous life . oh , not for woman . these woman 
 here -- awfully nice girl , and awfully clever too -- couldn't   make anything 
 of it in Canada . I have a couple of square mile of forest to look 
 after -- magnificent stuff!--douglas fir most of it -- and two pulp mill , 
 and about two hundred man -- a rough lot . " 

 " but you be not canadian ? " 

 " oh , Lord , no ! my people live in Maine . I be at Yale . I get train 
 at the forest school there , and after a bit go over the canadian 
 frontier with my brother to work a big concession in Quebec . we do very 
 well -- make a lot of money . then come the war . my brother join up with 
 the canadian army . I stay behind to try and settle up the business , 
 till the States go in , too . then they set I and some other fellow to 
 raise a Forestry battalion -- pick man . we go to France first , and last 
 winter I be send here -- to boss this little show ! but I shall not   stay here 
 long ! it be not   good enough . besides , I want to fight ! they have   promise I 
 a commission in our own army . " 

 he look at she with sparkle eye , and her face involuntarily answer 
 the challenge of his ; so much so that his look prolong itself . she be 
 wonderfully pleasant to look upon , this friend of Mrs. Fergusson 's . and 
 she be farm on her own ? a jolly plucky thing to do ! he decide that 
 he like she ; and his talk flow on . he be frank about himself , and 
 full of self - confidence ; but there be a win human note in it , and 
 Rachel listen eagerly , talk readily , too , whenever there be an 
 opening . they climb to the top of the hill where they stand on the 
 northern edge of the forest , look across the basin and the busy throng 
 below . he point out to she a timber - slide to their right , and they 
 watch the tree rush down it , drag , as he now see plainly , by the 
 wire cable which be work by the engine in the hollow . a group of 
 german prisoner , half - way down , be on the edge of the slide , guide 
 the log . 

 " we do not   have any trouble with they , " say the captain carelessly . 
 " they be only too thankful to be here . they have   two corporal of their own 
 who keep order . oh , of course we have our eye open . there be some sly 
 beggar among they . our man have no truck with they . I should not   advise 
 you to employ they . it would not   do for woman alone . " 

 his smile be friendly , and Rachel find it pleasant to be advise by 
 he . as to employ prisoner , she say , even be it allow , nothing 
 would induce she to risk it . there be a good many on Colonel Shepherd 's 
 estate , and she sometimes meet they , bicycle to and from their billet 
 in the village , in the evening after work . " once or twice they have   jeer 
 at I , " she say , flush . 

 " jeered at you ! " he repeat in surprise . 

 " at my dress , I mean . it seem to amuse they . " 

 " I see . you wear the land army dress like these girl ? " 

 " when I be at work . " 

 " well , I be glad you do not   wear it always , " he say candidly . " these girl 
 here look awfully nice of an evening . they always change . " 

 he glance at her curiously . her dress of dark blue linen , her pretty hat 
 to match , with its bunch of flower , not to speak of the slender ankle 
 and foot in their blue stocking and khaki shoe , seem to he 
 extraordinarily become . but she puzzle he . there be something about 
 she quite different from the girl of the hostel . she appear to be 
 old and riper than they ; yet he do not believe she be a day more than 
 five - and - twenty , and some of they be old than that . unmarried , he 
 suppose . " Miss Henderson ? " yes , he be sure that be the name Mrs. 
 Fergusson have mention . his eye travel discreetly to her bare , left 
 hand . that settle it . 

 " well , if I come across these fellow jeer at an Englishwoman , I would 
 know the reason why ! " he resume hotly . " you should have complain . " 

 she shake her head , smile . " one do not   want to be a nuisance in war 
 time . one can always protect oneself . " 

 he smile . 

 " that be what woman always say , and -- excuse I -- they can not ! " 

 she laugh . 

 " oh , yes , we can -- the modern woman . " 

 " I do not   see much difference between the modern woman and the 
 old - fashioned woman , " he say obstinately . " it be not   dress or work at 
 munition that make the difference . " 

 " no , but -- what they signify . " 

 " what?--a free life , get your own way , see more of the world ? " 
 the tone be a trifle antagonistic . 

 " _ know _ more of the world , " she say , quietly . " we be not the ignorant 
 babe our grandmother be at our age . that be why we can protect 
 ourselves . " 

 and again he be aware of something sharp or bitter in she -- some note of 
 disillusionment -- that jar with the soft , rather broad face and dreamy 
 eye . it stir he , and they presently find themselves plunge in a 
 free and exciting discussion of the new place and opportunity of woman 
 in the world , the man from the more conservative , the woman from the more 
 revolutionary point of view . secretly , he be a good deal repel by 
 some of his companion 's opinion , and her expression of they . she quote 
 Wells and Shaw , and he hat both . he be an idealist and a romantic , 
 with a volume of poem in his pocket . she , it seem , be still on a 
 rise wave of rebellion , moral and social , like so many woman ; while his 
 wave have pass , and he be drift in the trough of it . he suppose she 
 have drop religion , like everything else . well , the type do not   attract 
 he . he believe the world be come back to the old thing . the war have 
 do it -- make people think . no doubt this girl have rush through a lot 
 of thing already , and think she know everything . but she do not . 

 then , as their talk go on , this first opinion drop in confusion . for 
 instead of present he with a consistent revolutionist , his companion 
 be , it appear , full of the most unexpected vein and pocket of 
 something much soft and more appealing . she have astonishing return 
 upon herself ; and after some sentiment that have seem to he silly or 
 even outrageous , a hurried " oh , I dare say that be all nonsense ! " would 
 suddenly bewilder or appease a mark trenchancy of judgment in himself 
 which be not accustomed to be so trip up . 

 the upshot of it be that both Rachel and her new acquaintance enjoy 
 an agreeable , an adventurous half hour . they get rapidly beyond 
 conventionality . one moment she think he rude , the next delightful ; 
 just as she alternately appear to he feminist and feminine . above they 
 the doomed beech tree , still green in the late August afternoon , spread 
 their canopy of leaf , and through their close stem run dark aisle of 
 shadow . below they be the tree - strew hill - side . in the hollow Rachel 
 could see Janet Leighton and Mrs. Fergusson among the measure girl ; 
 the horse move to and fro ; the canadian lumber - man catch at and 
 guide the log ; the trolley descend the valley ; while just opposite 
 to they trunk after trunk be crash down the hill , the line of the 
 steel cable gleam now and then in a fitful sunshine which have begin 
 to slip out below a roof of purple cloud . only one prisoner be leave to 
 look after the slide . the other have just go down the hill , at a 
 summon from below . suddenly Ellesborough spring to his foot . 

 " Good Heavens ! what be that ? " for a loud cry have ring out , accompany by 
 what sound like a report . the man who have be stand among the dead 
 brushwood on the other side of the descend timber , about a hundred 
 yard away , have disappear ; and the huge beech just launch from above 
 have cease to move . 

 another cry for help . 

 " the cable 's break ! " say Ellesborough , start at full speed for the 
 slide . Rachel rush after he , and presently catch he up where he 
 kneel beside a man lie on the ground , and writhe in great pain . the 
 prisoner 's cap have fall off , and reveal a young german lad of 
 nineteen or twenty , hardly conscious , and groan pitifully at 
 interval . as he lie crouch on his face , the red patch on his back , 
 intend to guide the aim of an armed guard in case of any attempt to 
 escape , show with a sinister plainness . 

 " the cable snap , and have catch he round the body , " Ellesborough 
 explain . " give he this brandy , please , while I try and make out-- " 

 with skilled and gentle finger he begin to explore the injury . 

 " a rib break , I think . " he look with anxiety at some blood that have 
 begin to appear on the lip . " I must go down and get some man and a 
 stretcher . they will not   know what to do without I . my second in command be 
 off duty for the day . can you look after he while I go ? awfully sorry 
 to-- " 

 he give she a swift , investigate glance . 

 she interrupt he . 

 " tell I what to do , and I will do it . " 

 he loosen the boy 's collar and very gently try to ease his position . 

 " Mamma ! " murmur the boy , with the accent of a miserable child in a bad 
 dream . Ellesborough 's face soften . he bend over he and say something 
 in German . Rachel do not understand it -- only the compassionate look in 
 the man 's blue eye . 

 " give he more brandy if you can , and try and keep he still , " say 
 Ellesborough as he rise to his foot . " I shall be back directly . " 

 her glance answer . by this time there be commotion below , the engine 
 have stop work and man be run up the hill . Ellesborough go 
 bound down the steep slope to meet they . they turn back with he , 
 and Rachel suppose they have go to fetch a stretcher , and if possible a 
 doctor , from the small camp hospital which Mrs. Fergusson have point out 
 to she near the gate . meanwhile , for a few minute , she be alone with 
 this suffer lad . be he fatally hurt -- die ? she manage to get some 
 brandy down , and then he lie groan and unconscious , murmur 
 incoherent word . she catch " Mamma " again , then " Lisa , " " Hans , " and 
 break phrase that mean nothing to she . be his mind back in some 
 german home , which , perhaps , he would never see again ? 

 all sort of thought pass through her : vague memory gather 
 from the newspaper , of what the Germans have do in Belgium and 
 France -- horrible , indescribable thing ! oh , not this boy , surely ! 
 he could not be more than nineteen . he must have be capture in the 
 fighting of July , perhaps in his first action . Captain Ellesborough have 
 say to she that there be no fighting spirit among any of the prisoner . 
 they be thankful to find themselves out of it , ' safely capture , " as 
 one of they have have the bravado to say , and with enough to eat . no doubt 
 this boy have dream day and night of peace , and get back to Germany , 
 to " Mamma " and " Lisa " and " Hans . " to die , if he be to die , by this 
 clumsy accident , in an enemy country , be hard ! 

 Pity , passionate pity spring up in she , and it warm her heart to 
 remember the pity in the face of Captain Ellesborough . she would have 
 hat he if he have show any touch of a callous or cruel spirit towards 
 this helpless creature . but there have be none . 

 in a few more minute she be aware of Mrs. Fergusson and Janet climb 
 rapidly towards she . and behind they come stretcher - bearer , the captain , 
 and possibly a doctor . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the accident break up the work afternoon . the injured lad be carry 
 to hospital , where the surgeon shake his head , and refuse to prophesy 
 till twenty - four hour be over . 

 Captain Ellesborough disappear , while Rachel and Janet be give tea 
 at the woman 's hostel and show the camp . Rachel take an absorbed 
 interest in it all . this world of the new woman , with its widening 
 horizon , its atmosphere of change and discovery , its independence of 
 man , soothe some deep smart in she that Janet be only now begin 
 to realize . and yet , Janet remember the vicar , and have watch the talk 
 with Ellesborough . clearly to be the professed enemy of man do not 
 altogether disincline you for his company ! 

 at any rate it seem quite natural to Janet Leighton that , when it be 
 time to go , and a charming girl in khaki with green facing catch the 
 pony , and harness it for Mrs. Fergusson 's parting guest , Ellesborough 
 should turn up , as soon as the farewell be over ; and that she should 
 find herself drive the pony - carriage up the hill , while Ellesborough 
 and Rachel walk behind , and at a lengthen distance . once or twice 
 she look back , and see that the captain be gather some of the 
 abound wild flower which have spring up on the heel of the retreating 
 forest , and that Rachel have fasten a bunch of they into her hat . she 
 smile to herself , and drive steadily on . Rachel be young and pretty . 
 marriage with some man -- some day -- be certainly her fate . the kind , 
 unselfish Janet intend to " play up . " 

 then , with a jerk , she remember there be a story . nonsense ! an unhappy 
 love affair , no doubt , which have happen in her first youth , and in 
 Canada . well , such thing , in the case of a girl with the temperament of 
 Rachel , be only mean to be absorb in another love affair . they be 
 the leaf mould that feed the final growth . Janet cheerfully say to 
 herself that , probably , her partnership with Rachel would only be a short 
 one . 

 the pair behind be , indeed , much occupy with each other . the tragic 
 incident of the afternoon seem to have carry they rapidly through the 
 preliminary stage of acquaintance . at least , it lead naturally to talk 
 about thing and feeling more real and intimate than generally haunt the 
 first step . and in this talk each find the other more and more 
 congenial . Ellesborough be now half amuse , half touch , by the mixture 
 of childishness and maturity in Rachel . one moment her ignorance 
 surprise he , and the next , some shrewd or cynical note in what she be 
 say scatter the _ ingénue _ impression , and pique his curiosity 
 afresh . she be indeed crassly ignorant about many current affair in 
 which he himself be keenly interested , and of which he suppose all 
 educate woman must by now have learn the ABC . she could not have give 
 he the simple historical outline of the great war ; he see that she be 
 quite uncertain whether Lloyd George or Asquith be Prime Minister ; and 
 as to politic and public person in Canada , where she have clearly live 
 some time , her mind seem to be a complete blank . none the less she have 
 read a good deal -- novel and poetry at least -- and she take a queerly 
 pessimistic view of life . she like her farm work ; she say so frankly . 
 but on a sympathetic reply from he to the effect that he know several 
 other woman who have take to it , and they all seem to be " happy " in it , 
 she make a scornful mouth . 

 " oh , well--'happy'?--that be a different thing . but it do as well as 
 anything else . " 

 the last thing she want , apparently , be to talk about Canada . he , 
 himself , as a temporary settler in the Great Dominion , cherish an 
 enthusiasm for Canada and a belief in the canadian future , not , perhaps , 
 very general among Americans ; but although her knowledge of the country 
 give they inevitably some common ground , she continually hold back from 
 it , she enter on it as little as she could . she have be in the 
 Dominion , he presently calculate , about seven or eight year ; but she 
 avoid name and date , how adroitly , he do not perceive till they have 
 part , and he be think over their walk . she must have go out to 
 Canada immediately after leave school . he gather that her father have 
 be a clergyman , and be dead ; that she know the prairie life , but have 
 never be in British Columbia , and only a few day in Montreal and 
 Toronto . that be all that , at the end of their walk , he know ; and all 
 apparently she mean he to know . whereas she on her side show a 
 beguiling power of listen to all he have to say about the mysterious 
 infinity of the canadian forest - land and the wild life that , winter or 
 spring , a man may live among they , which flatter the very human conceit 
 of a strong and sensitive nature . 

 but at last they have climb the tree - strew slope , and be on the open 
 ridge with the northern plain in view . the sun be now triumphantly out , 
 just before his setting ; the cloud have be fling aside , and he shine 
 full upon the harvest world -- such a harvest world as England have not see 
 for a century . there they lay , the new and golden field , where , to north 
 and south , to east and west , the soil of England , so long unturned , have 
 joyously answer once more to its old comrade the plough . 

 " ' an enemy hath do this , ' " quote Ellesborough , with an approve 
 smile , as he point towards the plain . " but there be a God behind he ! " 

 Rachel laugh . " well , I have   get three field still to get in , " she say . 
 " and they be the good . goodnight . " 

 she give he her hand , stand transfigure in the light , the wind 
 blow her beautiful hair about she . 

 " may I come and see you ? " he ask , rather formally . 

 she smile assent . 

 " next week _ everything _ will be in , and some of it thresh . I shall be 
 free then . you will like our place . " 

 he press her hand , and she be off , run like a fawn after the 
 retreating pony carriage . 

 he turn away , a little dazzle and shake . the image of she on the 
 ridge remain ; but what perhaps have strike deep have be the 
 sweetness of she as she hang above the injure boy . he go slowly 
 towards the camp , conscious that the day now depart have open a new 
 door in the House of Life . 




 IV 


 Ellesborough allow a week to pass before make the call at Great End 
 he have arrange with Rachel . but at last , when he think that her 
 harvesting would be really over , he set out on his motor bicycle , one 
 fine evening , as soon as work at the camp be over . accord to summer 
 time it be about seven o'clock , and the sun be still sail clear 
 above the western wood . 

 part of his way lie over a broad common chequer with fine tree and 
 group of tree , some of they of great age ; for the rest he run through a 
 world where harvest in its late stage be still the govern fact . in 
 some field the corn be be thresh on the spot , without wait for 
 the stack ; in other , the last load be be lead ; and everywhere in 
 the clear field there be scatter figure of gleaner , cast long 
 shadow on the gold and purple carpet of the stubble . for Ellesborough 
 the novelty of this garden England , so elaborately comb and finish in 
 comparison with his own country , be by no mean exhaust . there be 
 time when the cottage garden , the endless hedge - row , and miniature 
 plantation please he like the detail in those early florentine 
 picture in the Metropolitan Museum , for which , business man as he be , 
 and accustom to the wild , he have once or twice , on visit to New York , 
 discover in himself a considerable taste . he be a man , indeed , of many 
 aptitude , and of a loyal and affectionate temper . his father , a country 
 doctor , now grow old , his mother , still pretty at sixty , and his two 
 unmarried sister be all very dear to he . he write to they constantly , 
 and receive many letter from they . they belong to one of the old 
 unitarian stock still common in New England ; and such stock be 
 generally conspicuous for high standard and clean living . " discipline " 
 be among the chief mark of the old generation . a father or mother 
 dread an " undisciplined " child , and the word be often on their lip , 
 though in no pharisaical way ; while the fact be evident in their life , 
 and in those private diary which they be apt to keep , wherein , up to 
 old age , they jealously watch their own daily thought and action from 
 the same point of view . 

 and though the young generation , like the young generation of 
 Quakers , show change and some disintegration , the old Puritan 
 tradition and standard be still , as we all know , of great effect 
 among they . especially with regard to woman , and all that concern they . 
 among the Ellesborough clan , which be a large one , there prevail , 
 along with the traditional american consideration for woman , and 
 especially among the woman of the family themselves -- a strict and even 
 severe standard of sexual moral . there be no hypocrisy in it ; they 
 talk of it but little , but they live by it ; and their man be bring 
 up in the atmosphere create by it . and as affection and tenderness and 
 self - sacrifice be freely mix with the asceticism , there be 
 no rebellion -- at any rate no open rebellion -- among their man folk . the 
 atmosphere create lead , no doubt , to certain evasion of the hard 
 problem of life ; and to some quiet revaluation of thing and person 
 when the son of the family come to man 's estate . but in general the " ape 
 and tiger , " still survive in the normal human being , have be really 
 and effectively tame in the Ellesborough race . there be also a 
 sensitive delicacy both of thought and speech among they ; answer to 
 more important and test reality . their marriage be a success ; 
 their child be well bring up , under light but effective control ; 
 and , if it be true , as Americans be ready to say , that the old 
 conception of marriage be be slowly but profoundly modify over large 
 section of their great Commonwealth , towards a laxity undreamt of half a 
 century ago , the Ellesboroughs could neither be tax nor applaud in 
 the matter . they stand by the old way , and they stand by they 
 whole - heartedly . 

 Ellesborough himself , no doubt , have knock about the world more than 
 most of his kindre , and have learn to look at many thing differently . 
 but essentially , he be the son of his race . his attitude towards woman 
 be at once reverential and protective . he believe woman be well 
 than man , because practically he have find it so in his own circle ; but 
 he hold also very strong belief , seldom express , as to their social 
 disadvantage and their physical weakness . the record of the Germans 
 towards woman in France and Flanders , a record he have verify for 
 himself , have perhaps do more than anything else to feed the stern flame 
 of war in his own soul . at thirty - two , he would probably have already 
 be a married man , but for the war . he rather fiercely hold that it be 
 a man 's duty to marry and have child . but beyond a few pass fancy 
 he have never be in love ; and since the american declaration of war , he 
 have be , like his President , out to " make the world safe for democracy " ; 
 and the ardour of the struggle have sweep his private interest out of 
 sight . 

 all the same here he be , walk his motor cycle up the field road 
 lead to Great End Farm , and look eagerly about he . a lonely 
 position , but beautiful ! on the wood behind the house he turn a 
 professional eye . fine timber ! the man who be to succeed he at Ralstone 
 would no doubt have the cutting of it . the farm quadrangle , with its 
 sixteenth century barn , out of which the corn seem to be actually 
 burst from various open door and window , appear to he through 
 that glamour which , for the intelligent American , belong to everything 
 that medieval and Elizabethan England have bequeath to the England of 
 the present . he will back himself , he think , to plan and build a modern 
 town well than the Britisher -- in any case quick . but the moss and 
 tile of an old Brookshire barn beat he . 

 Ellesborough pause at the gate to watch two land lassie carry 
 pail of milk across the yard towards a prolongation of the farm - house , 
 which he suppose be the dairy . just beyond the farm - yard , two great 
 wheat - stack be visible ; while in the hayfield run up to the 
 wood , large hay - stack , already nearly thatch , show dimly in the 
 evening light . and all this be run by woman , work by woman ! well , 
 american woman , so he hear from home , be do the same in the field 
 and farm of the States . it be all part , he suppose , of a world 
 movement , by which , no less than by the war itself , these great year 
 would be for ever remember . 

 the farm - house itself , however , seem to he from the outside a poor , 
 flimsy thing , unworthy of the old farm building . he could see that the 
 wall of it be only a brick thick , and in spite of the pretty curtain , 
 he be strike by the odd feature of the two large window exactly 
 opposite each other , so that a spectator on either side of the house 
 might look right through it . 

 " seem like be in the street . however , if there be nobody to look at 
 you , I suppose it do not   matter . " 

 then he laugh , for just as he lead his motor cycle into the yard , and 
 pass the sit - room window , he be strike by the appearance of two 
 large sheep , who seem to be actually in the sitting - room , at its 
 farther end . they be stand , he presently perceive , upon the steep 
 down beyond the house , on the slope of which the farm be build ; which on 
 the southern side of the farm quadrangle come right up to the house wall . 
 at the same moment he see a woman inside get up and shoo they from the 
 open window , so that they run away . 

 but when Jenny Harberton have admit he , and he be wait in the 
 sitting - room , from which the woman he have see have disappear , he be in 
 the mood to admire everything . how nice the two woman have make it ! his 
 own rough life , both before and since the war , have only increase a 
 natural instinct for order and seemliness . the pretty blue paper , the 
 fresh drugget , the photograph on the wall , the flower , and the delicate 
 neatness of everything delight he . he go round look at the 
 picture and the few book , perfectly conscious that everything which he 
 see have a more than common interest for he . the room seem to be 
 tell a story -- opening point of view . 

 " ah ! " 

 he pause , a broad smile overspread his bronzed face . 

 for he have perceive a popular history of the War lie open and face 
 downward on the table , one that he have recommend to the mistress of 
 the farm . so she have follow his advice . it please he particularly ! he 
 have gather that she be never a great reader ; still , she be an 
 educate woman , she ought to know something of what her country have do . 

 and there be actually a piano ! he wonder whether she play , or her 
 friend . 

 meanwhile Rachel be change her dress upstairs -- rather deliberately . 
 she do not want to look too glad to see her visitor , to flatter he by 
 too much hurry . when he arrive she have just come in from the field 
 where she have be at the threshing machine all day . it have cover she 
 with dirt and chaff ; and the process of change be only half through 
 when she hear the rattle of Ellesborough 's cycle outside . she stand now 
 before the glass , a radiant daughter of air and earth ; her vein , as it 
 be , still full of the sheer pleasure of her long day among the stubble 
 and the young stock . she be tired , of course ; and she know very well 
 that the winter , when it come , would make a great difference , and that 
 much of the work before she would be hard and disagreeable . but for the 
 moment , her deep satisfaction with the life she have choose , the congruity 
 between it and she , give she a peculiar charm . she breathe content , and 
 there be no more beautifying thing . 

 she have think a good deal about Ellesborough since their meeting ; yet 
 not absorbingly , for she have her work to do . she be rather inclined to 
 quarrel with he for have be so long in make his call ; and this 
 feeling , perhaps , induce she to dawdle a little over the last touch of 
 her toilet . she have put on a thin , black dress , which tame the 
 exuberance of her face and hair , and set off the brilliance and fineness 
 of her skin where the open blouse display it . the beautiful throat be 
 sunburnt , indeed , but not unbecomingly so ; and she be about to fasten 
 round it a slender gold chain , when she suddenly drop the chain . some 
 association have pass through her mind which make her shrink from it . 

 she choose instead a necklace of bluish - green bead , long , and curiously 
 interweave , which give a touch of dignity to the plain dress . then she 
 pause to consider the whole effect , in a spirit of meditation rather 
 than mere vanity . " _ I wish he know _ ! " she think , and the glass 
 reflect a frown of perplexity . have she be wise , after all , to make 
 such a complete mystery of the past ? People in and about Ipscombe would 
 probably know some time -- what all her canadian friend know . and then , 
 the thought of the endless explanation and gossip , of the horrid 
 humiliation involve in any renew contact whatever with the ugly thing 
 she have put behind she , rouse a sudden , surge disgust . 

 " yes , I be quite right , " she think vehemently . " I be quite right ! " 

 voice in the room downstairs ! that mean that Janet have go in to greet 
 the visitor . should they ask he to stay for supper ? the vicar be 
 come , and his pious little sister . there would be quite enough to eat . 
 Cold ham , potato and salad , with their own butter and bread -- Janet make 
 beautiful bread -- be enough for anybody in war time . Rachel be in the 
 mood to feel a certain childish exultation in the plenty of the farm , 
 amid the general rationing . the possession of her seven milch cow , the 
 daily pleasure of the milk , morning and evening , the sight of the rich 
 separate cream , and of the butter as it come fresh from the churn , the 
 grow weight and sleekness of the calf ; all these thing give she a 
 warm sense of protection against the difficulty and restriction of the 
 war . she and Janet be ' self - supplier . " no need to bother about ounce 
 of butter , or spoonful of cream . of course they sell all they could , but 
 they could still feed their few guest well -- well , perhaps , than any of 
 the folk in the villa house round Millsborough . 

 " yes ! and no one 's leave to ask ! " 

 she throw out her arm in a vehement gesture as she turn away from the 
 glass . it be the gesture of a wild bird take flight . 

 by which , however , she be not hurl defiance at the gentle but most 
 efficient little lady who represent the Food Control of the 
 neighbourhood , and the mere sight of whom be enough to jog uneasy 
 conscience in the matter of ration . Rachel be long since on the good 
 of term with she . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Captain Ellesborough be ask to stay to supper , and gladly accept . 
 the vicar and his young sister arrive and be introduce to the 
 American . Betty and Jenny , alarm at so much company and the quality of 
 it , hurriedly ask to be allow to take their meal in the tiny scullery 
 behind the living room . but the democratic and dissent Janet would not 
 hear of it . there be room for everybody , she say , and while she live 
 in it there should only be one table for all who work on the farm . if 
 the vicar and Miss Shenstone object , she be sorry for they . but they 
 would not   object . 

 so the small living room of the farm be soon full of a merry company : 
 the two mistress , in their Sunday frock , the land girl in their 
 uniform , the young vicar in a short coat and round collar , his little 
 sister of nineteen , who be train to be a missionary , and carry 
 about with she already the sweet and dedicated look of her calling ; and 
 Ellesborough , a striking and manly figure in full khaki . Ellesborough be 
 on Rachel 's right , the vicar on Janet 's ; Miss Shenstone sit between the 
 two girl , and be so far from object to their company that she no 
 soon find she be to sit next the daughter of her brother 's handy - man 
 than her childish face flush with pleasure . she have see Jenny already 
 at her brother 's Bible - class , and she have be draw to she . something in 
 the character of the labourer 's daughter seem to make a special appeal 
 to the delicate and mystical temper of the vicar 's sister , in whom the 
 ardour of the " watcher for soul " be a natural gift . Jenny seem to be 
 aware of it . she be flushed and a little excited , alternately shy and 
 communicative -- like the bird under fascination , already alive to the 
 signal of its captor . at any rate , Margaret Shenstone keep both her 
 companion happy through the meal . 

 the vicar employ himself in vigorously make friend with Janet 
 Leighton , keenly alive all the time to that vivid and flower - like vision 
 of Miss Henderson at the farth end of the table . but some instinct 
 warn he that beside the splendid fellow in khaki his own claim on she 
 could be but a modest one . he must watch his opportunity . it be natural 
 that certain misgiving have already begin to rise in the mind of his 
 eld sister , Eleanor , who be his permanent companion and housekeeper at 
 the vicarage . for why should her brother be so specially assiduous in the 
 harvest operation at great End ? she be well aware that it be the right 
 and popular thing for the young clergy who be refuse service at the 
 front to be see in their shirt sleeve as agricultural volunteer , or in 
 some form of war work . a neighbouring curate in whom she be greatly 
 interested spend the great part of his week , for instance , on munition 
 work at a national factory . she think he a hero . but if it be to be 
 harvesting , then it seem to she that her brother should have divide 
 his help more evenly among the farm of the village . she be afraid of 
 " talk . " and it trouble she greatly that neither Miss Henderson nor Miss 
 Leighton come to church . 

 meanwhile , the vicar , like a wise man , be secure the position with 
 Janet . what he wish , what he be really drive at , he would not let 
 himself inquire . what he _ know _ be that no woman have ever flutter his 
 quiet mind as Miss Henderson have flutter it during these summer week . 
 to watch she , erect and graceful , " pitch " the sheaf on to the 
 harvest cart , where he and a labourer receive and pack they ; to be 
 privileged to lead the full cart home , with her smile and thank at the 
 barn door for reward , or to stand with she while she proudly watch she 
 new reaping machine , with the three fine horse abreast , sweep round 
 her big field , while the ripe sheaf fall beside it , as of old they 
 fall beside the reaper that Hoephoestus work in gleam gold on the 
 shield of Achilles ; and then perhaps to pay a last visit with she to the 
 farm building in the warm dusk and watch the cattle come in from the 
 field and the evening feed , and all the shutting up for the night after 
 the long , hot , busy day : these thing have lately make a veritable idyll 
 of the vicar 's life . he feel as though a hundred primitive sensation and 
 emotion , that he have only talk of or read about before , have at last 
 become real to he . Oxford memory revive . he actually feel a wish to 
 look at his Virgil or Theocritus again , such as have never stir in he 
 since he have pack his Oxford book to send home , after the sobering 
 announcement of his third class . after all , it seem these old fellow 
 know something about the earth and its joy ! 

 so that a golden light lie over these past week . and in the midst of it 
 stand the figure of a silent and -- as far as he be concern -- rather 
 difficult woman , without which there would have be no transfiguring 
 light at all . he confess to himself that she have never have much to say 
 to he . but wherever she be she draw the male creature after she . there 
 be no doubt as to that . she be a good employer -- fair , considerate , 
 intelligent ; but it be the _ woman_--so the vicar believe -- who get she 
 way . 

 from which it will be see that Miss Eleanor Shenstone have some reason 
 for misgiving , and that the vicar 's own peace of mind be in danger . his 
 standard also be no long what they be . he have really cease to 
 care that Miss Leighton be a Unitarian ! 

 " I suppose you have be horribly busy ? " say Rachel to Ellesborough , 
 when , thank to the exertion of Janet and the two girl , everybody have 
 be provide with a first course . 

 " not more than usual . do you mean-- " he look at she , smile , and 
 Rachel 's eyebrow go up slightly . " ah , I see -- you think I have 
 forget ? " 

 " oh , no , " she say indifferently . " it be a long way to come . " 

 he flush a little . 

 " that never occur to I for a moment ! " he say with emphasis . " but you 
 say you would have finish with the harvest in a week . so I wait . I 
 do not   want to be a nuisance . " 

 at which she smile , a smile that overflow eye and lip , and stir 
 the sens of the man beside she . 

 " how be the prisoner ? " 

 " poor boy ! he die the day before yesterday . we do everything we could , 
 but he have no chance from the first . hard line ! " 

 " why , he might have be home next year ! " 

 " he might , indeed . yes , Miss Henderson , it will be peace next year -- perhaps 
 this year ! who know ! but I hope I will have a look in first . I have   get my 
 order . as soon as they have   appoint my successor here , I be off . about a 
 month , I suppose . they have   accept I for the Air Force . " 

 his eye glow . Rachel say nothing . she feel hurt that he express no 
 regret at go . then the vicar strike into the conversation with some 
 enthusiastic remark about the steady flow in of the american army . 
 that , indeed , be the great , the overpower fact of these August day . 
 Ellesborough respond eagerly , describe the huge convoy with which he 
 himself have come over ; and that amazing , that incredible march across 
 three thousand mile of sea and land , which every day be pour into 
 the British Isles , and so into France , some 15,000 man -- the flower of 
 american manhood , come to the rescue of the world . he tell the great 
 story well , with the graphic phrase of a quick mind , well feed on fact , 
 yet not choke by they . the table hang on he . even little Jenny , with 
 part lip , would not have miss a word . 

 he meanwhile be lead on -- for he be not a man of facile or boastful 
 speech -- by the eye of Rachel Henderson , and those slight gesture or 
 movement by which from time to time when the talk flag she would set 
 it go again . 

 Margaret Shenstone be particularly stir . 

 " what friend we shall be ! " she say presently , with a long , quivering 
 breath--"I mean America and England . friend for ever ! and we quarrel 
 once . that be so wonderful . that show good do come out of evil ! " 

 " I should jolly well think so , " say Ellesborough , look kindly at the 
 young girl . " why , if it have not   be for this war , million of these boy 
 who be come over now would never have see England or Europe at all . 
 it will change the face of everything ! " 

 " only we must play up , " say the vicar anxiously . " we must get rid of our 
 abominable shyness , and let your people really see how we really welcome 
 they . " 

 Rachel give a little defiant shake of the head . 

 " America 's get to thank we , too ! " she say , with a challenging look at 
 Ellesborough . " we have   bear it for four year . now it be your turn ! " 

 " well , here we be , " say Ellesborough quietly , " up to the neck . but -- of 
 course -- don't   thank we . it be our business just as much as your . " 

 the talk drop a moment , and Janet take advantage of it to bring in 
 coffee as a finish to the meal . under cover of the slight bustle , 
 Ellesborough say to Rachel , in a voice no long mean for the table,-- 

 " could you spare I a letter sometimes , Miss Henderson -- at the front ? " 

 he have both elbow on the table , and be play with a cigarette . there 
 be nothing the least patronizing or arrogant in his manner . but there 
 be a male note in it -- perhaps a touch of self - confidence -- which 
 ruffle she . 

 " oh , I be a bad letter - writer , " she say , as she get up from the table . 
 " shall we go and look at the cow ? " 

 they all go out into the warm September night . Ellesborough follow 
 Rachel , cigarette in hand , his strong mouth twist a little . the night 
 be almost cloudless . the pale encircle down , patch at interval with 
 dark hang wood , lie quiet under a sky full of faint star . the scent 
 of the stubblefield , of the great corn - stack just beyond the farmyard , 
 of the big barn so full that the wide wooden door could not be close , 
 be mingle with the strong ammonia smell of the farm - yard , and here 
 and there with the sweetness leave in the evening air by the chew cow 
 on their passage to the cow - house on the farth side of the yard . 

 Rachel lead the way to the cow - house -- a vast fifteenth - century barn , with 
 an interlace forest of timber in its roof , where the six cow stand 
 range , while Janet and the two land lassie , with Hastings the bailiff 
 to help they , be change the litter and fill up the rack with hay . 
 Rachel go along the line point out the beauty of each separate 
 beast to Ellesborough , and caress two little calf whom Jenny be 
 feed by hand . Ellesborough be amuse by her technical talk and her 
 proprietor 's air . it seem to he a kind of play - acting , but it 
 fascinate he . Janet have bring in a lantern , and the light and shade 
 of it seem to have be specially devise to bring into relief Rachel 's 
 round and tempting beauty , the bright brown of her hair where it curl 
 on the temple , and the lovely oval of the cheek . Ellesborough watch 
 she , now pass into deep shadow , and now brilliantly light up , as the 
 light of the lantern catch she ; overhead , the criss - cross of the arching 
 beam as of some primitive cathedral , century old ; and on either side 
 the dim form of the munching cattle , and the pretty movement of the 
 girl busy with their work . 

 " take care , " laugh Rachel as she pass he . " there be horrid hole in 
 this floor . I have not   have time to mend they . " 

 as she speak , she slip and almost fall . Ellesborough throw out a quick 
 hand and catch she by the arm . she smile into his face . 

 " neatly do ! " she say composedly , submit to be lead by he over a 
 very broken bit of pavement near the door . his hand hold she firmly . nor 
 do she make any effort to release herself till they be outside . here 
 be the vicar and his sister wait to say good - night -- the vicar much 
 chagrin that he have see so little of his chief hostess , and incline 
 to feel that his self - sacrifice attention to Miss Leighton at supper 
 have be but poorly reward . Rachel , however , see that he be out of 
 humour , and at once set herself to appease he . and in the few minute 
 which elapse before she part with he at the gate she have quite 
 succeed . 

 then she turn to Ellesborough . 

 " shall we go up the hill a little ? " 

 they slip through a side gate of the farmyard , cross a field , and 
 find themselves on an old grass road lead gently upward along the 
 side of the down into the shadow of the wood . the still , warm night hold 
 they enwrap . Rachel have throw a white scarf over her head and throat , 
 which give a mysterious charm to the face within it . as she stroll 
 beside her hew friend she play he with all the art of a woman 
 resolve to please . and he allow himself to be handle at her will . 
 he tell she about his people , and his friend , about the idea and 
 ambition , also , with which he have come to Europe , which be now in 
 abeyance , but be to spring to active life after the war . forestry on a 
 great scale ; a part to be play in the preservation and development of 
 the vast forest area of America which have be so wilfully waste ; 
 business and patriotism combine ; fortune possible ; but in any case the 
 public interest serve . he talk shrewdly , but also with ardour and 
 imagination ; she be stir , excited even ; and all the time she like 
 the foreignness of his voice , the outline of his profile against the sky , 
 and all the other element of his physical presence . 

 but in the midst of his castle - building he break off . 

 " however , I be a silly fool to talk like this . I be go out to the front 
 directly . perhaps my bullet 's wait for I . " 

 " oh , no ! " she say involuntarily--"no ! " 

 " I hope not . I do not   want to die just yet . I want to get marry , for one 
 thing . " 

 he speak lightly , and she laugh . 

 " well , that be easy enough . " 

 he shake his head , but say nothing . they walk on till they reach the 
 edge of the hill , when Rachel , out of breath , sit down on a fallen log to 
 rest a little . below they stretch the hollow upland , with its 
 encircle wood and its white stubble field . far below lie the dark 
 square of the farm , with a light in one of its window . 

 Rachel point to the grass road by which they have come . 

 " we have not   see the ghost ! " 

 he ask she for the story , and she tell it . by now she have piece it all 
 together ; and it seem to Ellesborough that it have a morbid fascination 
 for she . 

 " he drag himself down this very path , " she say . " they track he by 
 the blood stain ; his wound drip all along it . and then he fall , just 
 under my cart - shed . it be a horrible , bitter night . of course the silly 
 people here say they hear groan and drag step : that be all nonsense , 
 but I sometimes wish it have not   happen at my farm . " 

 he could not   help laugh gently at her foolishness . 

 " why , it be a great distinction to have a ghost ! " 

 she disagree -- decidedly . 

 " any one can have my ghost that want . I be awfully easily scared . " 

 " be you ? " there be a deep note in his voice . " no , I do not   believe that . 
 I be sure you be a plucky woman . I know you be ! " 

 she laugh out . 

 " how do you know ? " 

 " why , no one but a plucky woman could have take this farm and be work 
 it as you be do . " 

 " that be not pluck , " she say , half scornfully . " but if it be -- well , I have 
 get plenty of pluck of that kind . but I be often scared , downright 
 scar , about nothing . it be just fear , that be what it be . " 

 " fear of what ? " 

 " I do not   know . " 

 she speak in a sombre , shrink tone , which strike he uncomfortably . 
 but when he try far to discover what she mean , she would say 
 nothing more . he notice , indeed , that she would often seem to turn the 
 talk upon herself , only to cut it short again immediately . she offer 
 he opening , and then he could make nothing of they ; so that when they 
 reach the outskirt of the farm on their return , he have give she all 
 the main outline of his own history , and she have say almost nothing of 
 her . 

 but all the same the walk have draw they much nearer . 

 he stop she at the little gate to say,-- 

 " I be go to ask you again -- I want you to write to I when I be in 
 France . " 

 and this time she say almost eagerly,-- 

 " yes , I will write ; indeed I will write ! but you will come over again before 
 you go ? " 

 " rather , " he say joyously ; " rather ! why , there be a month . you will be 
 tired of I before you have   do . " 

 a few minute later she be stand in her own little room , listen to 
 the retreat rush of his motor - cycle down the road . there be a great 
 tumult in her mind . 

 " be I fall in love with he ? be I -- be I ? " 

 but in the dark , when she have put out her light , the cry that shape 
 itself in her mind be identical with that sudden misgiving of the 
 afternoon , when on Ellesborough 's arrival she have first hear his voice 
 downstair talk to Janet . 

 " _ I wish he know _ ! " but this time it be no mere pass qualm . it have 
 grow into something intense and haunting . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 on this same September afternoon , a dark - eye , shabby woman , with a 
 little girl , alight at Millsborough Station . they be meet by a man who 
 have be lounge about the station for some time and whose appearance 
 have attract some attention . " see he at a distance , and you might take 
 he for a lord ; but get he close , my word!-- " say the station - master to 
 the booking - clerk , with a shrug , imply many thing . 

 " would not   give a bob for his whole bless turn - out , " say the 
 booking - clerk . " but right you be , when you sort of get the hang of he , 
 far enough away on the other platform , might be a dook ! " 

 meanwhile , the man have shoulder some of the bag and parcel bring by 
 the woman and the child , though hardly his fair share of they ; and they 
 finally reach the exit from the station . 

 " if you be go into the town , the bus will be here in a few minute , " 
 say a porter civilly to the woman . " it will help you with all those 
 thing . " 

 the man gruffly answer for she that they prefer to walk , and they 
 start , the woman and the child drag wearily beside he . 

 " now , you have   get to be content with what I have   find for you , " he say to 
 she roughly as they reach the first house of the town . " there be not 
 scarcely a lodging or a cottage to be have . partly it be the holiday 
 still , and partly it be silly folk like you -- scared of raid . " 

 " I could not   go through another winter like last , for Nina 's sake , " say 
 the woman plaintively . 

 " why , you silly goose , there will not   be any raid this winter . I have   tell 
 you so score of time . we have   get the upper hand now , and the Boche will 
 keep his plane at home . but as you will not   listen to I , you have   get to 
 have your way , I suppose . well , I have   get you room of a sort . they will 
 have to do . I have not   get money enough for anything decent . " 

 the woman make no reply , and to the porter idly look after they they 
 be soon lose from sight in the gathering dusk of the road . 




 V 


 the little town of Millsborough be _ en fête _ . there be a harvest 
 festival go on , and the County Agricultural Committee have take the 
 opportunity to celebrate the successful gathering of the crop , and the 
 part take in it by the woman land - worker under their care . they have 
 summon the land lass from far and wide ; in a field on the outskirt 
 of the town competition have be in full swing all the morning , and now 
 there be to be speech in the market - place , and a final march of land 
 girl , boy scout , and decorate wagon to the old Parish Church , where a 
 service be to be hold . 

 all Millsborough , indeed , be in the street to look at the procession , 
 and the crowd be swell by score of cadet from a neighbouring camp , 
 who be good - heartedly keep the route , and give a military air to 
 the show . but the flower - deck wagon be the centre of interest . the 
 first in the line be really a brilliant performance . it be an old wagon 
 of napoleonic day , lend by a farmer , whose forebear have rent the same 
 farm since William and Mary . every speak of the wheel blaze with red 
 geranium ; there be a fringe of heather along the edge of the cart , 
 while vegetable , huge marrow , turnip , carrot , and onion dangle from 
 its side , and the people inside sit under a nodding canopy of tall and 
 splendid wheat , mix with feathery barley . but the passenger be 
 perhaps the most attractive thing about it . they be four old woman in 
 lilac sunbonnet . they be all over seventy , and they have all work 
 bravely in the harvest . the crowd cheer they vociferously , and they 
 sit , look timidly out on the scene with smile eye and tremulous 
 lip , their grey hair blow about their wrinkle , wholesome face . 

 beside the wagon walk a detachment of land girl . one of they be the 
 granddaughter of one of the old woman , and occasionally a word would 
 pass between they . 

 " eh , Bessie , but I would like to git down ! they mun think we old fool , 
 dizen up this way . " 

 " no , gran ; you must ride . you be the very good bit of the show . why , just 
 listen how the folk cheer you ! " 

 the old woman sigh . 

 " I would like to look at it mysel ' , " she say with a childish plaintiveness . 
 but her tall granddaughter , in full uniform , with a rake over her 
 shoulder , think this a foolish remark , and make no reply . 

 in the second wagon , Rachel Henderson in full land - dress -- tunic , 
 knee - breech , and legging -- stand in the front of the cart , guide two 
 white horse , their mane and tail gaily plait with ribbon , and 
 scarlet badge on their snowy head . 

 " eh , but yon be a fine woman ! " say an old farmer of the humbler sort to 
 his neighbour . " Yo'll not tell I she be a land lassie ? " 

 " Noa , noa ; she be the new farmer at Great End -- a proud body , they say , an ' 
 a great hustler ! the man say she be allus at them . but they do not   mind 
 she neither . she treat them well . they be her two land girl walk 
 beside . " 

 for Betty and Jenny mount guard , their harvest rake on their 
 shoulder , beside their mistress , who attract all eye as she pass , 
 and know it . behind she in the cart sit Janet Leighton ; and the two 
 remain seat be fill by the Vicar of Ipscombe and Lady Alicia 
 Shepherd , the wife of the owner of Great End Farm and of the middle - sized 
 estate to which the farm belong . 

 Lady Alicia be a thin woman , with an excitable temperament , to judge 
 from her restless mouth and eye , which be never still for a moment . 
 she be very fashionably dress and hold a lace parasol . the crowd 
 scarcely recognize she , which annoy she , for in her own estimation she 
 be an important member of the Women 's Committee which look after the 
 land girl . the war have do a great deal for Lady Alicia . it have drag 
 she from a sofa , where she be rapidly become a neurasthenic invalid , 
 and have gradually drill she into something like a work day . she 
 live in a flurry of committee ; but as committee must exist , and Lady 
 Alicias must apparently be on they ; she have find a sort of vocation , and 
 with the help of other person of more weight she have not do badly . 

 she do not quite understand how it be that she find herself in Miss 
 Henderson 's wagon . the committee have refuse to have a wagon of its own , 
 and the good - natured vicar have arrange it for she . she do not herself 
 much like Miss Henderson . her husband have send she to call upon the new 
 tenant , and she have be much puzzle . they be lady , she suppose . 
 they speak quite nicely , and Miss Henderson seem to be the daughter of 
 a clergyman . but she be afraid they be dreadful socialist ! she have 
 talk to Miss Henderson about the awful -- the _ wicked_--wage that the 
 Brookshire board have just fix for the labourer . 

 " my husband say they will simply crush the life out of farming . we shall 
 all be ruin , and where will the labourer be then ? " 

 and Miss Henderson have look quite unpleasant . it be high time , she 
 say , that the labourer should have enough to live on--_decently _ ; really 
 throw the word at you . and Colonel Shepherd have tell his wife that he 
 understand from Hastings Miss Henderson have raise her wage before the 
 award of the Wages Board . well , he only hop the young woman have get 
 some money behind she , otherwise she would be find herself in Queer 
 Street and he would be whistle for his rent . 

 the wagon draw up in the centre of the market - place , and the band which 
 the cadet have bring with they strike up " God save the king . " Lady 
 Alicia rise at once and nudge her little boy , whom she have bring with 
 she , to take off his cap . she look approvingly over the crowd , which 
 be grow denser and denser every moment . it be so that she really 
 enjoy the populace -- at a safe distance -- and ready to lend itself to the 
 blandishment of its natural leader . where be her husband , Colonel 
 Shepherd ? of course they would want he to speak at some time in the 
 proceeding . but she look for he in vain . 

 meanwhile , the speaking be begin from the first cart . a land girl 
 who have play a rouse part in the recruiting campaign of the early 
 summer be speak in a high voice , clearly hear by the crowd . she 
 be tall and pretty , and speak without a sign of hesitation or 
 self - consciousness . she glory in the harvest , in the splendid news from 
 the war , in the growth of the woman 's Land Army . " we have   just be proud 
 to do our bit at home while our boy have be fight over there . 
 they will be home soon , perhaps , and will not   we give they a welcome ! and 
 we will show they the harvest that we have   help to reap -- the big 
 harvest that England 's ever known!--the harvest that be go to beat the 
 Boche . " the young simple voice flow on , with its simple story and its 
 note of enthusiasm , and sometimes of humour . " it be hard work , but we love 
 it ! it be cold work often , but we love it ! the horse and the cow and the 
 pig -- they're naughty often , but they be nice!---ye , the pig , too . it be 
 the beast and the field and the open air we love ! " 

 Betty look at Jenny with a grin . 

 " jenny!--them pigstie yesterday ; d'ye think she be ever clean one out ? " 

 " I know she have , " say Jenny confidentially . " she be Farmer Green 's girl , 
 out ralstone way . Ee say there be not   nothing she can not   do . Ee do not 
 want no man while he be get ' er . they offer he soldier , and ee 
 would not   have them . " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " silly , sentimental young woman , " say a tall man , with a pipe in his 
 mouth , who have just lounge up to the outskirt of the crowd , from a side 
 street . " who be she go to take in here ? what be the good of talk 
 poetry about farming to a lot of country people ? a London shop - girl , I 
 guess . what do she know about it ? " 

 " you bet she know a lot , " say a young man beside he , who , to judge 
 from his uniform , be one of the Canadians employ at ralstone camp . 
 he have be take with the ' sentimental young woman , " and be annoy by 
 the uncivil remark of his neighbour . " wonder what farm she be on ? " 

 " oh , you know these part ? " say the other , remove his pipe for a 
 moment and look down on his companion . 

 " well , not exactly . " the reply be hesitate . " my grandfather go out 
 to Canada from a place near here sixty year ago . I use to hear he and 
 my mother talk about Millsborough . " 

 " beastly hole ! " say the other , replace his pipe . 

 " I do not   agree with you at all , " say the other angrily . " it be as nice a 
 little town of its size as you would find anywhere . " 

 the other shrug his shoulder . a man a few yard off in the crowd 
 happen at that moment to be look in the direction of the two 
 speaker . it be the ticket - collector at the station , enjoy an 
 afternoon off . he recognize the taller of the two man as the " dook " he 
 have see at Millsborough station about a week ago . the man 's splendid 
 carriage and iron - grey head be not to be mistake -- also his cadaverous 
 and sickly look , and his shabby clothe . the ticket - collector see that 
 the man be hold the dark - eye , " furrin - look " child by the hand , 
 which the woman he meet have bring down with she . " furriner , " he 
 suppose , all of they ; part of that stream of fugitive from air raid 
 that have be flow out of London during the precede winter , and be 
 now flow out again , as the next winter approach , though in less 
 volume . every house and lodge in Millsborough be full , price have go 
 up badly , and life in Millsborough be become extremely uncomfortable 
 for its normal inhabitants--"all along o ' these panicky alien ! " think 
 the ticket - collector , resentfully , as he look at the tall man . 

 the tall man , however , be behave as though the market - place belong 
 to he , talk to his neighbour , who mostly look at he askance , and 
 every now and then break into a contemptuous laugh , provoke 
 apparently by the eloquence of the young woman in the wagon . meanwhile 
 the little girl whose hand he hold be try to pull he into a well 
 place for see the rest of the procession . for from the place where 
 they stand on the outskirt of the crowd , the foremost wagon with its 
 nodding wheat and sheaf , its speaker , its old woman , and its bodyguard 
 of girl entirely hide the cart behind it . 

 " Dis way , pappa , dis way , " say the child , drag he . he let she draw 
 he , and suddenly from behind the speaker 's cart there emerge the second 
 wagon with its white horse ; Rachel Henderson , the observed of all 
 beholder , stand flushed and smile , with the rein in her hand , the 
 vicar just behind she , and Lady Alicia 's lace parasol . 

 " my God ! " say the man . 

 his sudden start , and clutch at the child 's hand make the child cry out . 
 he check she with a savage word , and while she whimper unheede , he 
 stand motionless , shelter himself behind a girl with a large hat who 
 stand in front of he , his eye fix on the great end wagon . a ghastly 
 white have replace the patchy red on his cheek , and have any careful 
 observer chance to notice he at the moment , he or she would have be 
 strike by the expression of his face -- as of some evil , startled beast 
 aware of its enemy , and make ready to spring . 

 but the expression pass . with a long breath , Roger Delane pull 
 himself together . 

 " hold your noise , Nina , " he say roughly to the child . " if you will be a 
 good girl , I will put you on my shoulder . " 

 the child stop cry at once , and Delane , raise she on to his 
 shoulder , pull his own soft hat over his eye and place the child so 
 that her dress conceal his own feature . then he resume an excited 
 scrutiny of the great end wagon . at the same moment he see a man in 
 uniform make his way through the crowd towards Miss Henderson who be 
 wave to he . an officer -- an american officer . delane recognize at once 
 the high collar and the leathern peak to the cap . 

 the crowd have already begin to cheer he . he reach the great end wagon , 
 and its mistress , all smile , bend over to speak to he . she and the 
 vicar seem to be give direction , to which the American with a 
 laugh shrug assent , go off to the front wagon , evidently in 
 obedience to order . there the girl speaker have just sit down amid a 
 hearty cheer from the crowd ; and the chairman of the meeting , a burly 
 farmer , eagerly come to the side of the wagon , and help the american 
 officer into the cart . then with a stentorian voice the chairman 
 announce that Captain Ellesborough from ralstone camp have come " to tell 
 us what America be do ! " a roar from the crowd . Ellesborough salute 
 gaily , and then his hand in his pocket begin to talk to they . his 
 speech , which be a racy summary of all that America be do to help 
 the Allies , be deliver to a ringing accompaniment of cheer from the 
 throng market - place , rise to special thunder when the captain dwelt 
 on the wheat and bacon that America be pour across the Atlantic 
 to feed a hungry Europe . 

 " we have   tighten our own belt already ; we can tighten they , I dare say , 
 a few hole more . everybody in America 's grow something , and make 
 something . when a man think he be do enough , and want to rest a bit , 
 the man next he get behind he with a bradawl . there be no rest for 
 anybody . we have   just register _ thirteen million _ man . that sound like 
 business , do not   it ? no slack there ! well , we mean business . and you 
 mean business . and the woman mean business . " 

 then a passage about the woman , which set the land girl grin at each 
 other , and at the man in the crowd , end in three cheer for Marshal 
 Foch and Sir Douglas Haig , which come echo back from the Fourteenth 
 Century church and the old house which ring the market - place . 

 all eye be on the speaker , no one notice the tall man with the 
 olive - skin child on his shoulder . he himself , with thumping pulse , 
 never cease to watch the figure and movement in the second wagon . he 
 see Miss Henderson sit down and another woman also in tunic and knicker 
 take her place . he watch she applaud the speaker , or talk with 
 the clergyman behind she , or the lady with the lace parasol . and when the 
 speech be over , amid a hurricane of enthusiasm , when the resolution have 
 be put and carry , and the bell in the old church - tower begin to ring 
 out a deafening joy - peal above the disperse crowd , he see the american 
 officer jump down from the speaker 's wagon and return to Miss Henderson . 
 step be bring , and Captain Ellesborough hand out the lady . then 
 he and Rachel Henderson go away side by side , laugh and talk , 
 towards the porch of the church , where Delane lose they from sight . 

 the market - place empty rapidly . the decorate wagon move off to the 
 field where the competition have be hold in the morning , and some 
 of the crowd with they . another portion stream into the church , and 
 soon only a few scatter group be leave . 

 the tall man put down the child , and be seize with a fit of coughing , 
 which leave he more pallid and sink - eyed than before . when it be over , 
 he notice a group of elderly labourer . they have come late into the 
 meeting , and be make for the bar of the cow - roast Inn , but before 
 they enter it Delane go up to one of they . 

 " I be a stranger here , " he say carelessly . " can you tell I who all these 
 people be in the wagon ? " 

 the man address -- who be old Halsey -- give the speaker a reconnoitring 
 look . 

 " well , I dunno neither , " he say cautiously , " leastway , many of them . 
 there be my old missus , in the first one . she do not   want to go , dress 
 up in they sunbonnet . but they make such a fuss of she , she have to . 
 there be Farmer Broughton I seed , an ' I do not   know nobody else . " 

 " well , but the second wagon ? " say Delane impatiently . 

 " oh , the second wagon . why , that be Miss Henderson . do not   ye know ' er ? I 
 work for ' er ? " 

 " be she on the land ? " 

 the old man laugh . 

 " that she be ! she be a farmer , be Miss Henderson , an ' she frame pretty 
 fair . she do not   know much yet , but what she do not   know Hastings tell , 
 she . " 

 " who be Hastings ? " 

 " why , her bailiff , to be sure . you do be a strange , not knowin ' Muster 
 Hastings ? " 

 " I be just here for a few week . it be a rum business , be not   it , this of 
 woman take farm ? " 

 Halsey nod reflectively . 

 " Aye , it be a queer business . but they do be cleverer at it than ye'd 
 think . Miss Henderson 's a good head - piece of her own . " 

 " and some money , I suppose ? " 

 " well , that be not my look out , be it , so long as I git my wage ? I 
 dessay Colonel Shepherd , ee see to that . well , good - day to you . I be 
 go in to get summat to drink . it be a dryin ' wind to - day , and a good 
 bit walk from Ipscombe . " 

 " be that where you live ? " 

 " Aye -- an ' Miss Henderson 's place be just t'other side . a good mile to 
 Ipscombe , and near a mile beyont . I do not   want to come , but my old woman 
 she nag I to come an ' see she ' ome . " 

 and with another nod , the old man turn into the public , where his mate 
 be already enjoy the small beer of the moment . 

 for a few minute , Delane stroll down the main road in silence , the 
 child play at his heel . then he turn abruptly , call the child , 
 and go up the side street from which he have appear when the 
 meeting begin . 

 a quarter of an hour later he return to the market - place alone . the 
 service in the church be still go on . he could hear they sing , the 
 harvest hymn : " we plough the field and scatter -- the good seed on the 
 land . " but he do not stop to listen . he walk on rapidly in the 
 direction of Ipscombe . 

 Delane find the main line from Millsborough to Ipscombe dot 
 at interval with group of person return from the harvest 
 festival -- elderly woman with child , a few old labourer , a few 
 soldier on leave , with a lively fringe of noisy boy and girl 
 skirmish round and about their elder , like so many young animal on 
 the loose . the evening light be fail . the pool leave by a pass 
 shower , gleam along the road , and the black elm and oak , scarcely 
 touch as yet by autumn gold , stand straight and sharp against a rainy 
 sky . 

 the tall , slouch man scrutinize the various group as he pass they , 
 as though make up his mind whether to address they or not . he wear a 
 shabby greatcoat , warm than the day demand , and closely button 
 across the chest . the rest of his dress , feel hat , dark trouser , and tan 
 boot , have all of it come originally from expensive shop , but be now 
 only just presentable . the one thing in good condition about he be the 
 Malacca cane he carry , which have a carve jade handle , and be 
 altogether out of keep with his general appearance . 

 all the same there be something strike in that appearance . face , 
 figure and dress represent the wreck of more than one kind of 
 distinction . the face must once have be exceptionally handsome , before 
 an underlying commonness and coarseness have be bring out or 
 emphasize by development of character and circumstance . the mouth be 
 now loose and heavy . the hazel eye have lose their youth , and be 
 disfigure by the premature wrinkle of either ill - health or dissipation . 
 none the less , a certain carriage of the head and shoulder , a certain 
 magnificence in the whole general outline of the man , especially in the 
 defiant eye and brow , mark he out from the crowd , and draw attention 
 of stranger . 

 many person look at he , as he at they , while he swing slowly along 
 the road . at last he cross over towards an elderly man in company with 
 a young soldier , who be walk lamely with a stick . 

 " excuse I , " he say , formally , address the eld man , " but be I right 
 for ipscombe ? " 

 " that you be , muster . the next turnin ' to the right'll bring yer to it . " 
 Peter Betts look the stranger over as he speak , with an inquisitive 
 eye . 

 " you have   come from the meeting , I suppose ? " 

 " ay . we do not   go to the service . that worn't   in our line . but we heerd 
 the speech out o ' door . " 

 " the cart be fine!--especially the second one . " 

 " ay -- that be our missis . she and the two girl do the dressin ' o ' the 
 cart . " 

 " what be her name ? " 

 " well , her name 's Henderson , " say the old man , speak with an amiable , 
 half careless detachment , the manner rather of a philosopher than a 
 gossip . 

 " she be the farmer 's wife ? " 

 " Noa , she be not . she be the farmer herself--'at be what she be . she be take 
 the farm from Colonel Shepherd -- she do -- all on her own . to be sure 
 there be Miss Leighton as live with she . but it do seem to I as Miss 
 Henderson's -- as you might say -- the top ' un . and I an ' James Halsey work 
 for she . " 

 " _ miss _ Henderson ? she be not marry ? " 

 " not she ! " say old Betts emphatically . " she be like a lot o ' woman 
 nowadays , I guess . they doan't   want to be marry . " 

 " perhaps nobody ' as want to marry them , dad ! " say his eld son , 
 grin at his own stale jest . 

 Betts shake a meditative head . 

 " Noa -- yo'll not explain it that way , " he say mildly . " some of them 's 
 good - look -- Miss Henderson ' ersel ' , by token . a very ' andsome 
 up - standin ' young woman be Miss Henderson . " 

 Delane follow all these remark with close attention , and continue a 
 rather skilful examination . he learn that great end be a farm of about 
 two hundred and fifty acre , that Miss Henderson seem to have " lot o ' 
 money , " and have sell her autumn crop very well , that Miss Leighton 
 manage the stock and the dairy with the help of two land - girl , and it 
 be think by the village that the two lady " be do fine . " 

 arrive at the village , Betts turn into his cottage , with a nod to his 
 companion , and Delane go on his way . 

 the lane on the farth side of the village be dark under branch 
 tree . delane stumble along it , cough at interval , and grip by 
 the rise chill of the September evening . a little beyond the tree he 
 catch sight of the farm against the hill . yes , it be lonesome , as the 
 old man say , but a big , substantial - look place . Rachel 's place ! and 
 Rachel have " lot o ' money"--and as to her health and well - being , why the 
 sight of she on that cart be enough . that vision of she indeed -- of the 
 flushed , smile face under the khaki hat , of the young form in the trim 
 tunic and legging , and , not least , of the admire crowd about she , keep 
 return upon the man 's furious sense as something not to be bear , a 
 recurrent blow from which he could not escape . 

 and that american chap -- that Yankee officer who have walk off with she 
 to the church -- what be the meaning of that ? they be not stranger , 
 that be plain . she have beckon to he from the cart . the manner of 
 their short conversation , indeed , show they well acquainted . she tell 
 he to go and speak -- and he have go -- with alacrity -- smile back at she . 
 Courting , no doubt ! Rachel could never let a man alone -- or live , without 
 a man after she . a brutal phrase shape itself -- a vile epithet or 
 two -- fling into the solitude of the lane . 

 when he emerge from the tree into a space of great light between two 
 stubble field , Delane suddenly draw a letter from his pocket . while 
 Rachel be flaunt with " lot of money"--this be how his affair be 
 go . 

 " DEAR ROGER,--I can do nothing for you . your demand be simply 
 insatiable . if you write I any more begging letter , or if you attempt 
 again to force your way into my house as you do last week , I shall tell 
 the bank to cancel your allowance , and wash my hand of you altogether . 
 my husband 's determined to stop this kind of thing . do not   imagine you can 
 either threaten we , or come round we . we have try again and again to 
 help and reform you . it be no good -- and now we give you up . you have 
 wear we out . if you be wise , you will not answer this -- and if you keep 
 quiet the allowance shall be continue . MARIANNE TILNEY . " 

 that be a nice letter to get from a man 's only sister ! allowance ! what 
 be £ 100 a year to a woman as rich as Marianne ? and what be the use 
 of £ 100 a year to he , with live at the price it be now ? his wretched 
 pittance besides , dole out to he by his father 's trustee under his 
 father 's will , bring his whole income up to £ 300 a year . how be a man 
 to live on that , and support a woman and child ? 

 and here be Rachel -- free -- burst with health -- and possess of " lot 
 of money . " she think , no doubt , that she have do with he -- thrust he 
 out of her life altogether . he would let she see ! whose fault be it that he 
 have take up with Anita ? nagging , impossible creature!--with her fine 
 ladyism and her temper , and her insolent superior way ! 

 he walk on , consume with a bitterness which hold he like a physical 
 anguish . by now he have reach the farm gate . the sunset have clear and 
 deepen . great rosy thunder - cloud top the down , and strong light 
 be climb up the bronzed mass of wood behind the house . no one to 
 be see . at Millsborough they could hardly be out of church yet . he have 
 time before he . he walk cautiously up the farm - lane , diverge to the 
 leave as he reach the building so as to escape the notice of any one 
 who might be leave in charge . as he slip under the large cart - shed 
 which back on the cow - house , he hear somebody whistle inside . it be 
 old Halsey , who have do the afternoon milking in the absence of the 
 girl . delane could hear the movement of the labourer , and the munching 
 of the cow . a little far on be the stable , and two horse ' head , 
 look pensively out from the open half of the door . delane peer into 
 the stable with the eye of one to whom all farming matter be familiar . 
 three fine horse -- d --- d fine horses!--must have cost £ 100 a piece at 
 least . no doubt the cow be equally good stuff . and he have notice 
 under the outer cart - shed a brand - new reaper and binder , and other farm 
 implement and machine of the good quality . Rachel be do the thing 
 in style . 

 but where be the farm - house ? then as he creep round the third side of 
 the rough quadrangle , he become aware of a large window with white 
 curtain . look through it with his face against the glass , he be 
 startled to find that he be look straight into the farm - yard through 
 another window of equal size on the other side of the room . and at the 
 moment Halsey come out of the cow - shed carry a pail of milk in either 
 hand . delane draw hastily back into the shelter of an old holly that grow 
 against the wall , till the old man have disappear . then he eagerly 
 examine the room , which be still suffuse by the sunset . its prettiness 
 and comfort be so many fresh exasperation . he contrast it inwardly 
 with the wretched lodging from which he have just come . why , he know the 
 photograph on the wall -- her father , the old parson , and her puritanical 
 mother , whom Rachel have always throw in his tooth . her eld brother , 
 too , who have be drown at sea . and that engrave -- that sentimental 
 thing by Watts , " love and death , " that Rachel have buy once on a visit 
 to Toronto , and he have scold she for buying . there it be , as large as 
 life . how do it come there ? be it her property or his ? he believe he 
 could claim it , if he choose . gad!--what would she say if she know where 
 he be at that moment , and what he be do ! 

 for eighteen month she have hide herself so cleverly that he have 
 entirely lose sight of she . when her lawyer communicate with he in the 
 spring they have be careful to give no address . on the whole he have 
 believe she to be still in Canada . she , on the other hand , unless she 
 be a great fool than he think she , _ must _ have guess that he 
 would get back to England somehow . why , the farm have end in bankruptcy , 
 and what else be there to do but to come home and dun his relation ! 
 yet she have not be afraid to come home herself , and set up in this 
 conspicuous way . she suppose , of course , that she have do with he for 
 good -- kick he off like an old shoe ! the rage in his blood set his 
 heart beat to suffocation . then his cough seize he again . he stifle 
 it as well he could , flatten against the wall , in the shadow of a 
 yew - tree . 

 the sound , however , be apparently hear , for there be rapid step 
 across the farm - yard , and a gate open . " Hallo -- who be there ? " the voice 
 be , no doubt , that of the labourer he have see . delane slip 
 noiselessly along the wall , and to the back of the stable , till all be 
 quiet again within the farm . 

 but outside in the road there be person approach . he mount the 
 hill a little way into the shelter of the tree which cover the steep 
 face of the down , and run up into the great wood along the crest . 
 through the gathering dusk he see the large farm - cart clattering up the 
 lane with several figure in it . the cart carry lamp , which send 
 shaft of light over the stubble . there be a sound of talk and 
 laughter , and alongside the cart he see a man lead a motor - bicycle , 
 and apparently talk to the woman in the cart . a man in uniform . 
 the American , no doubt ! 

 the cart draw up at the farm - yard gate , and the old labourer come to 
 open they . everybody dismount , except one of the girl , who , stand 
 in the wagon , drive the horse . then , for a time , Delane could see 
 nothing more . the farm quadrangle have absorb the party . occasionally a 
 light flash , or a voice could be hear call , or laughter come 
 float up the hill through an open door or window . but in a little 
 while all be silence . 

 Delane sit down on a fall trunk , and watch . all kind of image be 
 rush through his brain -- wide wheat field with a blaze sun on the 
 stook -- a small frame house set nakedly on the flat prairie with a bit of 
 untidy garden round it -- its living room in winter , with a huge fire , and 
 a woman move about -- the creek behind it , and himself take horse down 
 to water . they be image of something that have once mean happiness and 
 hope -- a temporary break or interlude in a dismal tale which have close 
 upon it before and after . 

 darkness come down . the man on the hill say to himself , " now they be 
 have supper , " and he creep down again to the farm , and crouch and 
 wriggle along he make his way again to the big window , over which the 
 curtain have be draw . there be no one in the sitting - room , however , 
 to judge from the silence , but from the kitchen across the passage come a 
 rush of voice , together with a clatter of plate . the kitchen look out 
 on the front of the farm , and a wooden shutter have be fasten across 
 the window . but the wood of the shutter be old and full of chink , and 
 delane , press his face to the window , be able to get just a glimpse 
 of the scene within -- Rachel at the head of the table , the man in uniform 
 beside she -- three other woman . a paraffin lamp throw the shadow of the 
 person at the table sharply on the white distempered wall . there be 
 flower on the table , and the meal wear a home - like and tempting air to 
 the crouch spy outside . Rachel smile incessantly , and it seem to 
 delane that the handsome man beside she could not take his eye from she . 
 nor could delane . her brown head and white throat , her soft , rose - tint 
 face emerge from the black dress , be youth itself -- a vision of youth 
 and lusty - hood brilliantly paint on the white wall . 

 Delane look his fill . then he drop down the bank on which the farm 
 stand , and avoid the open track through the field , he skirt a hedge 
 which lead down to the road , and be lose in the shadow of advance 
 night . 




 VI 


 rain!--how it pelt the September field day after day and week after 
 week , as though to remind a world still steep in , still drunk with the 
 most wonderful of harvest , that the god have not yet forget their old 
 jealousy of man , and man 's prosperity . whenever a fine day come the early 
 ploughing and seeding be in full swing , and Rachel on one side of the 
 large field could watch the drill at work , and on the other the harrow 
 which cover in the seed . in the next field , perhaps , she would find 
 Betty and Jenny lifting potato , and would go to help with they , dig 
 and sort , till every limb ache and she seem to be a part herself of 
 the damp brown earth that she be rob of its treasure . for a time 
 when the harvest be do , when the rick be thatch ready for 
 threshing , there have be a moment of ease . but with the coming of 
 October , the pressure begin again . the thought of the come frost and of 
 all those greedy mouth of cattle , sheep , and horse to be fill through 
 the winter , drive and hunt the worker on Great End Farm , as they have 
 drive and hunt the child of earth since tilling and stock - keeping 
 begin . under the hedge near the house , the long potato cave have be 
 fill and cover in ; the sheep be in the turnip , and every two or 
 three day , often under torrent of rain , Rachel and the two girl must 
 change the hurdle , and put the hungry , push creature on to fresh 
 ground . on the top of the down , there be fern to be cut and cart for 
 the winter fodder , and fall wood to be gather for fuel , under the 
 daily threat of the coal - controller . 

 Rachel work hard and long . how she love the life that once under other 
 sky and other condition she have loathe ! ownership and command have 
 give she a new dignity , in a sense a new beauty . her labourer and her 
 land girl admire and obey she , while -- perhaps!--janet Leighton have 
 their heart . Rachel 's real self seem to be something that no one know ; 
 her companion be never quite at ease with she ; and yet her gay , 
 careless way , the humanity and natural fairness of her mind , carry a 
 spell that make her rule sit light upon they . 

 yes!--after all these week together , not even Janet know her much 
 well . the sense of mystery remain ; although the progress of the 
 relation between she and Ellesborough be become very evident , not only 
 indeed to Janet , but to everybody at the farm . his departure for France 
 have be delay owe to the death in action of the officer who be to 
 have be send home to replace he . it might be a month now before he 
 leave . meanwhile , every Sunday he spend some hour at the farm , and 
 generally on a couple of evening in the week he would arrive just after 
 supper , help to put the animal to bed , and then stay talk with Rachel 
 in the sitting - room , while Janet tidy up in the kitchen . janet , the 
 warm - hearted , have become much attach to he . he have be at no pain to 
 hide the state of his feeling from she . indeed , though he have say 
 nothing explicit , his whole attitude to Rachel 's friend and partner be 
 now one of tacit appeal for sympathy . and she be more than ready to 
 give it . her uprightness , and the touch of austerity in she , reach 
 out to similar quality in he ; and the intellectual dissent which she 
 derive from her east anglican forbear , from the circle which in 
 eighteenth - century Norwich gather round Mrs. Opie , the Martineaus , and 
 the Aldersons , take kindly to the same force in he ; force descend 
 from that New England Puritanism which produce half the great man -- and 
 woman -- of an early America . Rachel laugh at they for ' talk 
 theology , ' not suspect that as the week go on they talk -- whenever 
 they get a chance -- less and less of theology , and more and more of 
 herself , through the many ingenious approach that a lover invent and 
 the amused and sympathetic friend abet . 

 for clearly Ellesborough be in love . Janet read the sign of it in the 
 ease with which he have accept the postponement of his release from the 
 camp , eager as he be to get to the fight line . she hear it in his 
 voice , see it in his eye ; and she be well aware that Rachel see it . 
 what Rachel think and feel be more obscure . she watch for 
 Ellesborough ; she put on her good frock for he ; she be delighted to 
 laugh and talk with he . but she watch for Mr. Shenstone , too , and 
 would say something caustic or impatient if he be two or three day 
 without call . and when he call , Rachel very seldom snub he , as 
 at first . she be all smile ; the good frock come out for he , too ; and 
 Janet , see the grow beatitude of the poor vicar , and the grow 
 nervousness of his sister , be often incline to be really angry with 
 Rachel . but they be not yet on such term as would allow she to 
 remonstrate with what seem to she a rather unkind bit of flirtation ; 
 see that she do not believe that Rachel have , or ever would have , a 
 serious thought to give the shallow , kindly little man . 

 but though she hold her tongue , Janet show her feeling sometimes by a 
 tone , or a lift eyebrow , and then Rachel would look at her askance , 
 turn the vicar 's head none the less on the next occasion . be it that 
 she be deceive herself , as well as try , very unsuccessfully , to 
 deceive the looker - on ? the progress of the affair with Ellesborough make 
 on Janet a curious and rather sinister impression , which she could hardly 
 explain to herself . she seem to see that Ellesborough 's suit steadily 
 advance ; that Rachel make no real attempt to resist his power over she . 
 but all the same there be no happy , spontaneous growth in it . Rachel 
 seem to take her increase subjection hardly , to be fight obscurely 
 against it all the time , as though she be hamper by thought and 
 motif unknown to the other two . ellesborough , Janet think , be often 
 puzzle by the cynical or bitter talk with which Rachel would sometimes 
 deliberately provoke he . and yet it be clear that he possess the 
 self - confidence of a strong man , and do not really doubt his ultimate 
 power to win and hold the woman he be court . 

 one bitterly cold evening at the very end of September , Ellesborough , 
 arrive at the farm , be welcome by Janet , and tell that all hand be 
 in the field " clamp " potato . she herself leave a vegetable stew 
 ready for supper , safely simmer in a hay - box , and walk towards the 
 potato field with Ellesborough . on the way they fall in with Hastings , 
 the bailiff , who be walk fast , and seem to be in some excitement . 

 " Miss Leighton -- that old fool Halsey have give notice ! " 

 Janet stop in dismay . Halsey be a valuable man , an old - fashioned 
 labourer of many aptitude , equally good as a woodman , as an expert in 
 " fag " or sickle beat - down corn , as a thatcher of roof or rick , 
 as a setter of trap for mole , or snare for rabbit . Halsey be the 
 key - stone of the farm labour . Betts be well enough . but without Halsey 's 
 intelligence to keep he straight -- Janet groan . 

 " what on earth 's the matter , Hastings ? we raise his wage last week -- and 
 we do it before the county award be out ! " 

 Hastings shake his head . 

 " it be not wage . he say he be see the ghost ! " 

 Janet exclaim , and Ellesborough laugh . 

 " what , the defunct gamekeeper ? " 

 Hastings nod . 

 " Vows he be see he twice -- once on the hill -- on the green path -- and once 
 disappear round the corner of the farm . he declare that he call to 
 the man -- who be like nobody he have ever see before -- and the man take no 
 notice , but go along , all hunch up -- as they say the ghost be -- and 
 talk to himself -- till all of a sudden he vanish . I have   argue with 
 he . but nothing'll hold he -- old idiot ! he vow he will go --- and if he 
 talk to the other they will all go . " 

 " have he go home ? " ask Janet . 

 " long ago . he leave the horse to Jenny , and just march off . in the lane 
 he meet I , and give notice . such a cock - and - bull story as you never 
 hear ! but I could not   do anything with he . " 

 " I will go and tackle he , " say Janet at once . " we can not   lose he . the 
 work will go to smash . " 

 she wave a farewell to Ellesborough , and run back to the house . the 
 other , watch , see she emerge on her bicycle and disappear towards the 
 village . 

 " well , if anybody can move the old fellow , I suppose it be Miss Leighton , " 
 say Hastings disconsolately . " she be always manage to get the right side 
 of he so far . but I be nearly beat , captain ! thing be get too hard 
 for I . you can not   say a word to these man -- they're off in a moment . and 
 the wages!--it 's sinful ! " 

 " we be suppose only to be fight a war , Hastings , " say Ellesborough 
 with a smile as they walk on together . " but all the time there be 
 revolution go on beside it -- all over the world ! " 

 Hastings make a face . 

 " right you be , captain . and how be it go to work out ? " 

 " do not   ask I ! " laugh Ellesborough--"we've   all get to sit tight and 
 hope for the good . all I know be that the people who work with their 
 hand be go to get a bit of their own back from the people who work 
 with their head -- or their cheque - book . and I be glad of it ! but ghost 
 be a silly nuisance . however , I dare say Miss Leighton will get round 
 the old man . " 

 Hastings look doubtful . 

 " I do not   know . all the talk about the murder have come up again . they say 
 there be a grandson come home of the man that be suspect sixty year 
 ago -- John Dempsey . and some people tell I that this lad have the whole 
 story of the murder from his grandfather -- who confess it -- only last 
 year , when the man die . " 

 " well , if he be dead all right , and have own up to it , why on earth do 
 the ghost make a fuss ? " 

 Hastings shake his head . 

 " People get talk , " he say gloomily . " and when they get talk , 
 they will believe anything -- and see anything . it will be the girl next . " 

 Ellesborough try to cheer he , but without much success . the " poor 
 spirit " of the bailiff be a perpetual astonishment to the American , in 
 the prime of his own life and vigour . Existence for Hastings be always 
 either drab or a black business . if the weather be warm , " a bit of cold 
 would ha ' be well " : if a man recover from an illness , he would still 
 get the " bother o ' dyin ' before he . " he be certain we should lose the 
 war , and the rush of the September victory do not affect he . and if 
 we do not   lose it , no matter -- price and wage would still be enough to 
 ruin we . Rachel grow impatient under the constant drench of pessimism . 
 Janet remember that the man be a delicate man , near the sixty , 
 with , as she suspect , but small provision lay up for old age ; with an 
 ailing wife ; and bear the mark in body and spirit of year of 
 overwork . she never miss an opportunity of do he a kindness ; and 
 the consequence be that Hastings , always faithful , even to his bad 
 employer , be passionately faithful to his new mistress , defend 
 they and fight for their interest , as they be sometimes hardly 
 inclined to fight for themselves . 

 after show Ellesborough the way to the " clamp , " Hastings leave he . in 
 succession to the long day of rain there have be a sudden clearing in 
 the sky . the day have be fine , and now , towards sunset , there be a 
 grand massing of rosy cloud along the edge of the down , and windy light 
 over the valley . Rachel , busy with the covering of the potato " clamp , " 
 lay down the bundle of bracken she have be hand to Peter Betts , and 
 come quickly to meet her visitor . her work dress be splash with 
 mire from neck to foot , and coil of brown hair have escape from her 
 waterproof cap , and hang about her brilliant cheek . she look happy , 
 but tired . 

 " such a day ! " she say , pant , as they meet . " the girl and I begin at 
 six this morning -- lift and sort . it be so important to get they 
 in . now they be safe if the frost do come . it be a jolly crop ! " 

 Ellesborough look at she , and her eye waver before the ardour in 
 his . 

 " I say ! you work too hard ! have not   you do enough ? come and rest . " 

 she nod . " I will come ! " 

 she run to say a word to the other and rejoin he . 

 they go back to the farm , not talk much , but conscious through every 
 nerve of the other 's nearness . Rachel run upstairs to change her dress , 
 and Ellesborough put the fire together , and shut the window . for the sun 
 have sink behind the hill , and a bitter wind be rise . when Rachel come 
 down again , the wood - fire glow and crackle , the curtain draw , and 
 she star in astonishment at a small tea - tray beside the fire . 

 Ellesborough hurriedly apologize . 

 " I find some boiling water in the kettle , and I know by now where Miss 
 Janet keep her tea . " 

 " Janet bring we tea to the field . " 

 " I dare say she do . that be four -- this be six . you feel cold just now . 
 you look cold . be good , and take it easy ! " he point to the only 
 comfortable chair , which he have draw up to the fire . 

 " be you sure it boil ? " she say sceptically , as she sink into her 
 chair , her eye dance . " no man know when a kettle boil . " 

 " try it ! for five winter on the Saguenay , I make my own tea -- and bake 
 my own bread . man be well cook than woman when they give their mind 
 to it ! " he bring she the cup , hot and fragrant , and she sip it in 
 pure content while he stand smile above she , lean against the 
 mantelpiece . 

 " I want to see you , " he say presently . " I have   just get my marching 
 order . let us see . this be October . I shall have just a month . they have 
 find another man to take over this job , but he can not   come till 
 November . " 

 " and -- peace ? " say Rachel , look up . 

 for Prince Max of Baden have just make his famous peace offer of October 
 5th , and even in rural Brookshire there be a thrilling sense of opening 
 sky , of some loosening of those iron bond in which the world have lie 
 for four year . 

 " there will be no peace ! " say Ellesborough with sudden energy , ' so long 
 as there be a single german soldier leave in Belgium or France ! " 

 she see he stiffen from head to foot -- and thrill to the flame of 
 avenging will that suddenly possess he . the male look out upon she , 
 kindling -- by the old , old law -- the woman in she . 

 " and if they do not   accept that ? " 

 " then the war will go on , " he say briefly , " and I shall be in for the 
 last lap ! " 

 his colour change a little . she put down her cup and bend over the fire , 
 warm her hand . 

 " if it do go on , it will be fiercer than ever . " 

 " very likely . if our fellow set the pace there will be no dawdling . 
 America 's white hot . " 

 " and you will be in it ? " 

 " I hope so , " he say quietly . 

 there be a pause . then he , look down upon she , feel a sudden and 
 passionate joy invade he -- joy which be also long -- longing 
 irresistible . his mind have be wrestle with many scruple and 
 difficulty during the precede day . ought he to speak -- on the eve of 
 departure -- or not ? would she accept he ? or be all her manner and 
 attitude towards he merely the result of the new freedom of woman ? 
 gradually but surely his mount passion have idealize she . not only 
 her personal way and look have become delightful to he , but the 
 honourable , independent self in he have come to feel a deep admiration 
 for and sympathy with her honourable independence , for these new power 
 in woman that make they so strong in spite of their weakness . she have 
 become to he not only a woman but a heroine . his whole heart approve 
 and admire she when he see she so active , so competent , so human . and 
 none the less the man 's natural instinct hungered to take she in his 
 arm , to work for she , to put she back in the shelter of love and 
 home -- ith her child at her knee .... 

 and how domestic be this little scene in which they stand -- the 
 firelight , the curtain room , the tea - thing , her soft , bending form , 
 with the sign of labour put away ! ... 

 the tear rush to his eye . he bend over she , and speak her name , 
 almost unconsciously . 

 " Rachel ! " 

 his soul be in the name ! 

 she start , and look up . while he have be think only of she , her 
 thought have go wandering -- far away . and they seem to have bring 
 back -- not the happy yielding of a woman to her lover -- but distress and 
 fear . a shock run through he . 

 " rachel!-- " he hold out his hand to she . he could not find word , but 
 his eye speak , and the agitation in every feature . 

 but she draw back . 

 " do not --don't   say anything -- till-- " 

 his look hold she -- the surprise in it -- the tender appeal . she could not 
 take hers from it . but the disturbance in he deepen . for in the face 
 she raise to he there be no flood of maidenly joy . suddenly -- her eye 
 be those of a culprit examine her judge . a cry spring to his lip . 

 " Wait!--wait ! " she say piteously . 

 she fall back in her chair , cover her face , her breast heaving . he see 
 that she be try to command herself , to steady her voice . one of those 
 foreboding which be the child of our half - conscious observation shot 
 through he . but he would not admit it . 

 he stoop over she and try again to take her hand . but she draw it 
 away , and sit up in her chair . she be very white , and there be tear 
 in her eye . 

 " I have   get something to say to you , " she say , with evident difficulty , 
 " which -- I'm afraid -- will surprise you very much . of course I ought to 
 have tell you -- long ago . but I be a coward , and -- and -- it be all so 
 horrible . I be not what you suppose I . I'm -- a married woman -- at least I 
 be . I divorce my husband -- eighteen month ago . I be quite free now . I 
 think if you really care about I -- I should of course have to tell you 
 some time -- but I have   be let it go on . it be very wrong of I -- I 
 know it be very wrong ! " 

 and bow her face on her knee , she burst into a passion of weeping , 
 the weeping of a child who be yet a woman . the mingled immaturity and 
 intensity of her nature find its expression in the very abandonment of 
 her tear . 

 Ellesborough , too , have turn pale . he be astound by what 
 she say . his thought rush back over the six week of their 
 friendship -- recall his first impression of something mysterious 
 and unexplained . 

 but of late , he have entirely forget they . she have talk so frankly 
 and simply of her father and mother -- of her father 's missionary work in 
 Canada , and her early journey with he ; and of her brother in Ontario , 
 his child and his letter . once she have hand he a letter from this 
 brother to read , and he have be strike by the refined and affectionate 
 tone of it . here be the same family relation as his own . his heart , 
 his taste be satisfied . if Rachel Henderson accept he he would be 
 bring his mother a daughter she would find it easy to love . 

 and all the time -- instead of an unmarried girl , with the experience 
 of love and marriage before she -- she have be already marry -- and 
 divorce ! another man have love and possess she -- and even if she be 
 innocent -- but of course she be innocent!--there must be some ugly story 
 involve . 

 he try to collect his thought -- but all his consciousness seem to be 
 bruised and in pain . he could only put his hand on her hair , and say 
 incoherent things,-- 

 " do not   cry so , dear -- don't   cry ! " 

 and even as he speak he feel with bewilderment how -- in a moment -- their 
 respective attitude have change . she check her sob . 

 " sit there ! " she say , point peremptorily to a seat opposite . then she 
 look round she . 

 " where be Janet ? " 

 " she go to the village . " 

 Rachel dry her eye , and with tremble hand smooth her hair back 
 from her face . 

 " I will try and tell it shortly . it be a horrible tale . " 

 " do you feel able to tell it ? " 

 for he be aghast at her pallor -- the alteration in her whole aspect . 

 " I must , " she wail . " be not   you -- weren't   you just go to ask I to 
 marry you ? " 

 strange question!--strange frown eye ! 

 " I be , " he say gravely . " do not   you know I should ? " 

 " no , no , I do not   know ! " she say piteously . " I be never _ sure_--till 
 you look at I then . I would not   be sure ! " 

 he say nothing . Speech be ice - bind till he have hear what she have to 
 say . 

 " it all begin to happen three year ago , " she say hurriedly , hide she 
 face from he with her hand while she hang over the fire . " I be live 
 with my brother , who be then near Winnipeg . he offer I a home after 
 my father die . but he be marry , and I do not   get on with his wife . I 
 dare say it be my fault , but I be not   happy , and I want to get away . 
 then a man -- an Englishman -- buy the next section to we , and we begin 
 to know he . he be a gentleman -- he'd be to Cambridge -- his father have 
 some land and a house in Lincolnshire . but he be the third son , and 
 he have be teach land agency , he say , as a training for the colony . 
 that be all we know . he be very good - look , and he begin court I . 
 I suppose I be proud of his be a University man -- a public school boy , 
 and all that . he tell I a lot of story about his people , and his 
 money -- most of which be lie . but I be a fool -- and I believe they . my 
 brother try to stop it . well , you know from his letter what sort of 
 man he be , " and again she brush the sudden tear away . " but his wife 
 make mischief , and I be set on have a place of my own . so I stick to 
 it -- and marry he . " 

 she rise abruptly from her seat and begin to move restlessly about the 
 room , take up a book or her knitting from the table , and put they 
 down again , evidently unconscious of what she be do . Ellesborough 
 wait . his lean , sharply - cut face reveal a miserable , perhaps an 
 agonize suspense . this crisis into which she have plunge he so suddenly 
 be bring home to he all that he have at stake . that she matter to 
 he so vitally he have never know till this moment . 

 " what be the good of go into it ! " she say at last desperately . " you 
 can guess -- what it means"--a sudden crimson rush to her cheeks--"to 
 be tie to a man -- without honour -- or principle -- or refinement -- who 
 presently seem to I vile all through -- in what he say -- or what he do . 
 and I be at his mercy . I have marry he in such a hurry he have a right 
 to despise I , and he use it ! and when I resist and turn against 
 he , then I find out what his temper mean . " she raise her shoulder 
 with a gesture which need no word . " well -- we get on somehow till my 
 little girl be born-- " 

 Ellesborough start . Rachel turn on he her sad , swim eye . but 
 the mere mention of her child have give she back her dignity and strength 
 to go on . she become visibly more composed , as she stand opposite to he , 
 her beautiful dark head against the sunset cloud outside . 

 " she only live a few week . her death be largely owe to he . but 
 that be a long story . and after her death I could not   stand it any more . I 
 run away . and soon I hear that he have take up with an italian girl . 
 there be a large camp of Italians on the C.P.R. , quite close to we . she 
 be the daughter of one of the foreman . so then my brother make I go to 
 his lawyer in Winnipeg . we collect evidence very easily . I get my 
 divorce eighteen month ago . the decree be make absolute last February . 
 so , of course , I be quite free -- quite--_quite _ free ! " 

 she speak the last word almost savagely , and after they she move away 
 to the window look on the down , and stand gaze through it , as though 
 she have forget Ellesborough 's presence . 

 " the action be not defend ? " he ask , in a low voice . 

 she shake her head without speak . but after a minute she added,-- 

 " I can show you the report . " 

 there be silence . Ellesborough turn round , put his hand on the 
 mantelpiece , and bury his face on they . presently she approach he , 
 look at he with a quivering lip , and say in broken sentences,-- 

 " it have all come so suddenly -- hasn't   it ? I have be in such good 
 spirit to - day , not think of those horrible thing at all . I do not 
 know what I mean to do , if you do ask I -- for of course I know you 
 _ might _ . I suppose I intend to put off tell you -- so as to be sure 
 first--_certain_--that you love I . and then -- somehow -- when you look 
 down on I like that , I feel -- that _ i _ care -- much more than I have 
 think I care -- too much to let you speak -- before you know -- before I would 
 tell you . it be always be my way -- to -- put off disagreeable thing . and 
 so I think I could put this off . but every night I have be awake 
 thinking--'if only he knew!'--and I be wretche -- for a while -- because 
 you do not   know . but then it go away again -- and I forget it . one do 
 forget thing -- everything -- when one be hard at work . but I be awfully 
 sorry . and now -- I think -- we'd well say good - bye . " 

 her voice falter against her will . he raise himself quickly . 

 " no -- no , " he say passionately , " we will not   say good - bye . but you must let 
 I think -- for you , as well as for myself . " 

 " it would be well to say good - bye , " she persist . " I be afraid -- you 
 expect in I -- what I have not   get . I see that now . because I be keen about 
 this work , and I can run this farm , you think -- perhaps -- i'm a strong 
 character . but I be not . I have   no judgment -- not in moral thing . I give 
 in -- I'm weak -- and then -- I could kill myself ! " 

 she have grow very white again -- and her eye be strangely fix on he . 
 the word seem to he incoherent , out of touch somehow even with their 
 tragic conversation . but his first pass bewilderment be lose in pity 
 and passion . he stop , take her hand , and kiss it . he come nearer . 

 but again she draw back . 

 " there be Janet ! " she say , " we can not   talk any more . " 

 for she have catch sight of Janet in the farm - yard , lead her bicycle . 

 " can you meet I to - morrow evening -- on the Common ? " he say . " I could be 
 there about six . " 

 she frown a little . 

 " be it worth while ? " 

 " I beg you ! " he say huskily . 

 " very well -- i'll come . we shall be just friend , please . " 

 " but , of course , I will tell you more -- if you wish . " 

 Janet 's voice and step be hear in the passage . how Ellesborough get 
 through the next ten minute he never remember . when they be over , he 
 find himself rush through the cool and silence of the autumn night , 
 thankful for this shelter nature in which to hide his trouble , his 
 deep , deep distress . 




 VII 


 the October night rang stormily round Great end Farm . the northw wind 
 rush over the miniature pass just beyond the farm , where the road 
 drop from the level of the upland in which ipscombe lay , to the level 
 of the plain , be blow fiercely on the square of building which stand 
 naked and undefended against weather from that quarter of the heaven , 
 while protect by the hill and the wood from the northeast . and 
 mingle with the noisy or wail gust come the shrieking from time to 
 time of one of the little brown owl that be now multiply so fast in 
 the English midland . 

 the noise of the storm and the clamour of the owl be not the cause of 
 Rachel 's wakefulness ; but they tend to make it more feverish and 
 irritable . every now and then she would throw off the bed - clothe , and 
 sit up with her hand round her knee , a white and rigid figure light by 
 the solitary candle beside she . then again she would feel the chill of 
 the autumn night , and crouch down shiver among the bed - clothe , pin 
 for a sleep that would not come . instead of sleep , she could do nothing 
 but rehearse the scene with Ellesborough again and again . she watch the 
 alteration in his face -- she hear the change in his voice -- as she tell 
 her story . she be now as sorry for he as for herself ! the tear come 
 flooding into her eye as she think of he . in her selfish fear of his 
 anger she have forget his suffering . but the first true love of her 
 life be bring understanding . she realize the shock to he , and weep 
 over it . she see , too , that she have be unjust and cowardly in let 
 the situation go so far without speak ; and that there be no real 
 excuse for she . 

 would he give she up ? she have tell he that all be at an end between 
 they ; but that be only pride -- make a virtue of a necessity . oh , no , 
 no , he must not give she up ! it be only six week since their first 
 meeting , and though it would be untrue to say that since the meeting he 
 have wholly possess her thought , she have be capable all through they 
 of that sort of dally with the vicar which Janet think unkind . she 
 have be able to find plenty of mind for her work , and for the ambition 
 of her new profession , and have spend many a careless hour steep in the 
 sheer physical pleasure of the harvest . yet , from the beginning , his 
 personality have lay its grip on her . she have never be able to forget 
 he for long . one visit from he be no soon over than she be 
 calculate on and dream of the next . and as the consciousness 
 of some new birth in she have grow , and sudden glimpse have come to she 
 of some supreme joy , possibly within her grasp , so fear have grow , and 
 anxiety . she look back upon her past , and know it stain -- know that it 
 must at some point rise as an obstacle between she and he . 

 but how great an obstacle ? she be go to tell he , faithfully , 
 frankly , all the story of her marriage -- accuse her own rash self - will in 
 marry delane , confess her own failing as a wife ; she would tell no 
 hypocritical tale . she would make it plain that Roger have find in her no 
 mere suffering saint , and that probably her intolerance and impatience 
 have contribute to send he to damnation . but , after all , when it be 
 tell , what could Ellesborough do but pity her?--take she in his arm -- and 
 comfort she -- for those awful year -- and her lose child ? 

 the tear rain down her cheek . he love she ! she be certain of that . 
 when he have once hear the story , he could not forsake she ! she already 
 see the pity in his deep grey eye ; she already feel his honest , 
 protect arm about she . 

 Ah--_but then _ ? beyond that imagined scene , which rise , as though 
 it be stag , before she , Rachel 's shrink eye , in the windy 
 darkness , seem to be penetrate to another -- a phantom scene in a dim 
 distance -- draw not from the future , but the past . two figure move in 
 it . one be herself . the other be not Roger Delane . 

 the brown owl seem to be shriek just outside her window . her 
 nerve quiver under the sound as though it be her own voice . why be 
 life so cruel , so miserable ? why can not even the god themselves make 
 undo what be do ? she be none the bad -- permanently -- for what have 
 happen in that distant scene -- that play within a play ? how be she the 
 bad ? she be " not a bad woman!"--as she have say so passionately to 
 Janet , when they join hand . there be no lasting taint leave in mind 
 and soul -- nothing to prevent she be a pure and faithful wife to George 
 Ellesborough , and a good mother to his child . it be another Rachel to 
 whom all that have happen , a Rachel she have a right to forget ! she be 
 weak in will -- she have confess it . but George Ellesborough be strong . 
 lean on he , and on kind Janet , she could be all , she would be all , 
 that he still dream . the past--_that _ past -- be dead . it have no 
 existence . nothing -- neither honour nor love -- oblige she to disclose it . 
 except in her own mind it be dead and bury -- as though it have never 
 be . no human being share her knowledge of it , or ever would . 

 and yet the Accuser come close and close , wrestle with her shrink 
 heart . " you can not   live a lie beside he all your life ! " " it will not   be a 
 lie . all that matter to he be what I be now -- not what I be . and it 
 be not   i!--it be another woman -- a miserable , batter creature who 
 could not   help herself . " " it will rise up between you , and perhaps -- after 
 all -- in some way -- he will discover it . " " how can he ? Dick and I -- who in 
 all the world know , but we two?--and Dick be dead . " " be you sure that no 
 one knew:--that no one see you ? think ! " 

 a pale face grow paler in the dim light , as think hesitated:-- 

 " there be that wagon -- and the boy -- in the storm . " " yes -- what then ? " 
 " well -- what then ? the boy scarcely see I . " " he do see you . " " and if he 
 do -- it be the commonest thing in a canadian winter to be catch by a 
 storm , to ask shelter from a neighbour . " " still -- even if he draw no 
 malicious conclusion , he see you -- alone in that farm with Dick Tanner , 
 and he probably know your name . " " how should he know my name ? " " he have 
 see you before -- you have see he before . " " I do not   know his name -- I 
 do not   know it now . " " no -- but in pass your farm once , he have drop a 
 parcel for a neighbour -- and you have see he once -- at a railway station . " 
 " be it the least likely that I shall ever see he again -- or that he 
 remember see I at Dick Tanner 's door ? " " not likely , perhaps -- but 
 possible -- quite possible . " 

 and while this question and answer pass through the brain , the woman 
 sit up in bed seem to be transport to a howl wintry scene of 
 whirling snow -- a November twilight -- and against that background , the hood 
 of a covered wagon , a boy hold the rein , the heavy cape on his 
 shoulder white with snow , the lamp of the wagon shin dimly on he , 
 and make a kind of luminous mist round the cart . she hear a parley , 
 see a tall and slender man with fair hair go out to the boy with hot 
 milk and bread , catch direction as to the road , and see herself as a 
 half - hide figure in the partially open door . 

 and then afterwards -- the warm farm kitchen shut out the storm -- a man 
 at her knee -- his arm round she -- his kiss on her cheek . 

 and again the irrevocableness of it close down upon she . it could 
 _ never _ be undo : that be the terrible commonplace which hold she in 
 its grasp . it could never be wipe out from one human mind , which must 
 bear the burden of it as well it could , till gradually -- steadily -- the 
 life , have be kill out of the ugly , haunt thing , and it have be 
 bury -- drown , out of sight and memory . 

 but the piteous dialogue begin again . 

 " how _ could _ I have resist ? I be so miserable -- so lonely -- so weak ! " 
 " you do not   love he ! " " no -- but I be alone in the world . " " well , then , 
 tell George Ellesborough -- he be a reasonable man -- he would understand . " 
 " I can not --i _ can not _ ! I have deceive he up till now by pass as 
 unmarried . if I confess this , too , there will be no chance for I . he will 
 never trust I in anything!--he'll suspect everything I do or say -- even 
 if he go on love I . and I could not   bear it!--nor could he . " 

 and so at last the inward debate wear itself out , and sleep , sudden and 
 deep , come down upon Rachel Henderson . when she wake in the morning it 
 be to clear sky both in her own mind and in the physical world . the 
 nightmare through which she have pass seem to she now unreal , even a 
 little absurd . her nerve be quiet by sleep , and she see plainly what 
 she have to do . that " old , unhappy , far - off thing " lurk in the 
 innermost depth of memory have nothing more to do with she . she would look 
 it calmly in the face , and put it finally -- for ever -- away . but of her 
 marriage she would tell everything -- everything!--to George Ellesborough , 
 and he should deal with she as he please . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the day be misty and still . October , the marvellous October of this 
 year , be march on . every day , Foch on the battlefield of France and 
 Belgium be bring down the old Europe , and clear the ground for the 
 new . in english village and english farm , no less than in the big 
 town , there be ferment and excitement , though it show but little . 
 would the boy be home by Christmas -- the son , the brother , the 
 husband ? what would the change be like -- the life after the war ? if there 
 be those who yearn and pray for it -- there be those who fear it . 
 the war have do well for some , and hideously for other . and all through 
 the play of individual interest and desire , and even in the dull 
 mind there run the intoxicating sense of Victory , of an England great 
 and more powerful than even her own son and daughter have dare to 
 dream -- an England which know herself now , by the stern test of the four 
 year ' struggle , to be possess of power and resource , spiritual , 
 mental , physical , which amaze herself . in all conscious mind , brood 
 on the approach time , there rise the question : " what be we go to 
 do with it ? " and even in the unconscious , the same thought be present , 
 as a vague disturbing impulse . 

 Janet have just read the war telegram to Rachel , who have come down late , 
 complain of a headache ; but when Janet -- the reserved and equable 
 Janet -- after go through the news of the recapture of Ostend , 
 Zeebrugge , and bruge , break into the passionate , low - speak comment : 
 " the Lord be king -- be the people never so unquiet ! " or could not , for 
 tear , finish the account of the entry into recapture Lille , and the joy 
 of its inhabitant , Rachel sit irresponsive -- or apparently so . 

 how would it affect Ellesborough -- this astounding news ? would it take he 
 from she the soon , or delay his going ? that be all she seem capable 
 of feel . 

 Janet be trouble by her look and attitude , and be well aware that 
 the two have have a long _ tête- -tête _ the day before , wonder how thing 
 be go . but she say nothing ; and after breakfast Rachel join the 
 two girl in the potato - field , and work as hard as they , hour after 
 hour . but her usual gaiety be go , and the girl notice at once the 
 dark rim under her eye . they wonder secretly what Miss Henderson 's 
 " friend " have be do . for that the " Cap'n " be court their employer 
 have long be plain to they . Betty , of course , have a " friend , " the young 
 soldier whose sick leave be nearly up , and the child 's deep velvety eye 
 be look nearly as tired as Miss Henderson 's . while Jenny , too , the 
 timid , undeveloped Jenny have lately begin to take an interest in a 
 " friend , " a young fellow belong to Ellesborough 's forestry camp whom 
 she have meet in Millsborough the day of the Harvest Festival . they have 
 hardly exchange half an hour 's real conversation . but he have buy she 
 some sweet at Millsborough , and walk a bit of the way home with she . 
 then she have see he in the village once or twice . he have some relation 
 there -- there be some talk of he , and that old murder at the farm -- she 
 do not   know rightly what it be . but she feel somehow that Miss Henderson 
 would not   want to have he about -- Miss Henderson do not   like talk of the 
 murder -- so Jenny have never ask he to look she up . but her raw , 
 childish mind be full of he , and the ferment of sex be stir . 
 in the secret opinion of both girl , " friend " be quite as much pain as 
 pleasure . no girl could do without they ; but they be pretty certain to 
 cause heart - ache , to make a girl wish at some time or other that she have 
 never be bear . a London factory - girl would have express it in the 
 Cockney way : " bloke be no good -- but you must have a bloke ! " 

 the two girl then conclude that Captain Ellesborough have be cause 
 trouble , as all man do , at some point ; and be sympathetic little 
 soul , they work especially hard in the potato - field , and would not 
 allow Rachel to carry the heavy basket to the " clamp . " 

 meanwhile Janet have be wrestle with old Halsey , till he have very 
 reluctantly yield to her persuasion , and return to work . 

 " I be not the man I wor , " he confide to Peter Betts , as they be eat 
 their dinner under a hedge in the damp October sunshine . " when I wor a 
 young man , I would not   ha ' minded they thing , not if it be iver so . but 
 now they do give I the shiver in my inside . " 

 " what do ? " say Peter Betts , with a mouthful of cold bacon . he be still 
 greatly in the dark as to why Halsey have leave work so early in the 
 afternoon the day before , and why he be now in such a gruff and gloomy 
 mood . there be indeed a rumour in the village that old Halsey have see 
 ' summat , " but as Halsey have go to bed immediately after Miss Leighton 
 have have she say with he , and have refuse to be " interview " even by 
 his wife , there be a good deal of uncertainty even in the mind of his 
 old pal , Peter Betts . 

 " why -- ghostisse ! " say Halsey , with a frown , remove his pipe for a 
 moment to give emphasis to the word . " I do not   see as a man can be 
 expect to deal with ghostisse . Anythin ' else yer like in a small 
 way -- mad dog , or bull , or snake , where they keep them , which , thank the 
 Lord , they do not   in these part -- but not _ they _ . " 

 " what do yer see ? " say Betts , after a few ruminating pull . 

 " well , I see old Watson , the keeper , as be murder sixty year since , 
 ' at 's what I see , " say Halsey with slow decisiveness . 

 " An ' what might be like ? " ask Betts , with equal deliberation . the day 
 be mild and sunny ; the half - plough field on which they have be 
 working lie alternatively yellow in the stubble and a rich brown purple 
 in the new turn furrow under the autumn noon . a sense of well - being 
 have be diffuse in the two old man by food and rest . Halsey 's tongue 
 grow loose . 

 " well , I see a man come creepin ' an ' crouchin ' down yon grass road"--(it 
 be visible from where they sit , as a green streak on the side of the 
 hill)--'same as several people afore I ' as see ' um -- same as they allus 
 say old Watson must ha ' come after Dempsey shoot ' I m. he wor shoot in the 
 body . the doctor as come to look at ' I m fust foun ' that out . an ' if 
 ye're shoot in the body , I understan ' , yo naterally double up a bit if yo 
 try to walk . well -- that be jes ' how I see ' im -- crouchin ' along . yo 
 remember it wor a dull evenin ' yesterday -- an ' it wor gettin ' dark , though 
 it worn't   dark . it wor not much after fower , by my old watch -- but I 
 could not   see ' I m at all plain . I wor in top - end field -- you know?--as 
 lead up to that road . an ' I watch ' I m come along make for that 
 outside cart - shed -- that ' un that be back to back wi ' the shippen , where 
 they foun ' Watson lyin ' . an ' I wor much puzzle by the look on ' I m. I 
 do not   think nothink about old Watson , fust of all -- I do not   know what to 
 think . I be right under the hedge wi ' the horse ; ' ee couldna ' ha ' see 
 I -- an ' I watch ' I m. he stop , onst or twice , as though he wor 
 restin ' hisself -- pullin ' ' isself together -- and onst I ' eere ' I m cough-- " 

 Halsey look round suddenly on his companion as though dare he to 
 mock . 

 Betts , however , could not help himself . he give an interrupting and 
 sceptical chuckle . 

 " ghostisse do not   cough , as ever I ' eere on . " 

 " and why should not   they ? " say Halsey testily . " if they can do they 
 other thing they would use to do when livin'--walkin ' an ' seein ' an ' 
 such - like -- why not coughin ' ? " 

 Betts shake his head . 

 " never ' eere on it , " he say , with conviction . 

 " well , anyways I seed he come down to that shed , an ' then I lose ' I m. 
 but I ' ad the creep somehow and I call to Jenny to come an ' take the 
 ' orse . an ' then I go after ' I m. but there be all the field an ' the 
 lane to cross , and when I come to the shed , there be not   no one and 
 nothink to be see -- excep'-- " 

 the old man pause , and again look doubtfully at his companion . 

 " well ? " say Betts eagerly , his philosophic attitude give way a little . 

 " excep'--a large patch o ' blood--_fresh blood_--I touch it -- on one of 
 they ole sacks lyin ' near the cart , " say Halsey slowly . " an ' it worn't 
 there in the afternoon , for I move the sack mysel ' . " 

 Betts whistle softly . Halsey resumed,-- 

 " there be nothing move -- or take away -- nothing at all!--only that 
 patch . so then I go all round the farm , and there be nobody . I think 
 ' ee might ha ' turn back by the grass road , p'raps , without my seein ' 
 ' I m , so I go that way , and there be nothin'--until -- a little way up 
 the road -- there be blood again"--the old man 's voice dropped--"every 
 couple o ' yard or so -- a drop or two here -- an ' a drop or two there -- just 
 as they track old Watson by it , up the hill , and into yon wood -- where 
 Dempsey set on he . " 

 the two old man look at each other . Betts be evidently impressed . 

 " be you sure it be blood ? " 

 " sure . last night , Hastings say it be sheep - dip ! after I tole ' I m , when 
 ' ee go to look under the shed , it wor so dark ' ee could not   see nothing . 
 well , ' ee know well this mornin ' . ' Ee fetch I , an ' asst I if I would 
 say anythin ' to Miss Janet . and I say , no . so then he tole I I be not 
 to say nothing to the lady , nor the girl , nor anybody . an ' ' ee'd do 
 summat wi ' the sack -- I dunno what . but ' ee might ha ' hold ' be tongue last 
 night about sheep - dip ! who be be dippin ' sheep about here ? ' as Miss 
 Henderson get any ruddle anywhere about the farm ? I know she be not ! --an ' 
 Muster Hastings know she be not . " 

 " why do not   yer tell Miss Janet?--about the bleedin ' ? " 

 " well , I be a bit skeere . I think I would sleep on't , before I get 
 talkin ' any more . but on the way ' ome , as I tellt yer , I meet Hastings , 
 an ' tole ' _ I m _ , an ' then give ' I m notice . " 

 " that wor a bit hasty , worn't   it ? " say Betts after a moment , in a 
 judicial tone . but he have be clearly much exercise by his companion 's 
 account , and his pipe hang idly from his hand show that his 
 thought be active . 

 " well , it might ha ' bin , " Halsey admit , " but as I say afore , I be 
 gettin ' an old man , and I do not   want no truck wi ' thing as I do not 
 unnerstan ' . it give I the wust night as I have   have since I have that bad 
 turn wi ' the influenza ten year ago . " 

 " you do not   see his face ? " 

 " no . " 

 " An ' ' ee do not   mind you of anybody ? " 

 Halsey hesitate . 

 " well , onst I do think I would see one o ' the same build -- soomwhere . but I 
 can not   recolleck where . " 

 " as for the blood , " say Betts reflectively , " it be as curous as the 
 coughin ' . do you iver hear tell as ghost could bleed ? " 

 Hastings shake his head . steep in meditation , the two man smoke 
 silently for a while . then Betts say , with the explosiveness of one who 
 catch an idea,-- 

 " have yer think o ' tellin ' John Dempsey ? " 

 " I hain't   think o ' tellin ' nobody . an ' I should not   ha ' tell Miss 
 Leighton what I do tell she , if she ' adn't   come naggin ' about my givin ' 
 notice . " 

 " you might as well tell John Dempsey . why , it be his business , be old 
 Watson ! have not   yer see ' I m at all ? " 

 Halsey say " no , " hold his handsome old head rather high . have he 
 belong to a high station in life , his natural reticence , and a 
 fastidious personal dignity would have carry he far . to a modern 
 statesman they be at least as valuable as brain . in the small world 
 of Ipscombe they only mean that Halsey himself hold rather scornfully 
 aloof from the current village gossip , and get mock at for his pain . 
 the ordinary human instinct revenge itself , however , when he be 
 _ tête- -tête _ with his old chum Peter Betts . Betts divine at any rate 
 from the expression in the old man 's eye that _ he _ might talk , and 
 welcome . 

 so he pour out what he know about John Dempsey , a canadian lad work 
 in the Forestry Corps at Ralstone , who turn out to be the grandson of 
 the Dempsey who have always be suspect of the murder of Richard Watson 
 in the year 1859 . this young Dempsey , he say , have mean to come to 
 Ipscombe after the war , and put what he know before the police . but 
 find himself send to Ralstone , which be only five mile from 
 Ipscombe , he see no reason to wait , and he have already give all the 
 information he could to the superintendent of police at Millsborough . his 
 grandfather have sign a write confession before his death , and John 
 Dempsey have hand it over . the old man , it appear , have " turn pious " 
 during a long illness before his death , and have wish to square matter 
 with his conscience and the Almighty . when his grandson have volunteer 
 for the war , and be about to sail for Europe , old Dempsey have send for 
 he , have tell he the story , and charge he , when he be able , to place 
 his confession in the proper hand . and have do that , he die " very 
 quiet and comfortable"--so John Dempsey report . 

 " which be more than poor Jem Watson do , " growl Halsey . he feel neither 
 respect nor sympathy for a man who , have set up a secret , could not 
 keep it ; and the confession itself , rather than the crime confess , 
 confirm the poor opinion he have always hold of the eld Dempsey when 
 they be young man in the village together . but he agree to let Betts 
 bring " young John " to see he . and thereupon they go back to the sowing 
 of one of Miss Henderson 's big field with winter wheat . 

 when the milking be do , and work be nearly over for the day , a note 
 bring by messenger arrive at the farm for Miss Henderson . it be from 
 Ellesborough -- a few scribble word . " I be prevent from come this 
 evening . the Chief Forestry Officer of my district have just arrive , and 
 stay the night . I hope to come over to - morrow between six and seven . 
 shall I find you ? " 

 Rachel scribble an answer , which a small boy on a bicycle carry off . 
 then she go slowly back to the sitting - room , so disappointed and 
 unnerved that she be on the brink of tear . Janet who have just come in 
 from milk , be stand by the table , mend a rent in her 
 waterproof . she look up as Rachel enter , and the needle pause in her 
 hand . 

 " I say , Rachel!--you do look overdone ! you have   be go at it too hard . " 

 for all day long Rachel have be lift , and sorting , and carry , in 
 the potato - field , find in the severe physical exertion the only relief 
 from restlessness . she shake her head irritably and come to stand by the 
 wood fire which Janet have just light , a welcome brightness in the twilight 
 room . 

 " suppose you knock up-- " begin Janet in a tone of remonstrance . Rachel 
 cut her short . 

 " I want to speak to you -- please , Janet . " 

 Janet look round in astonishment and put down her work . Rachel be 
 stand by the fire , with her hand behind her back , her eye fix on 
 Janet . she be still in the graceful tunic and knee - breech , in which 
 her young and splendid youth seem always most at home . but she have 
 take off her cap , and her brown hair be fall round a pale face . 

 " Janet -- you know Captain Ellesborough and I have a long talk last night ? " 

 Janet smile . 

 " of course I do . and of course I have my own thought about it ! " 

 " I do not   know what they be , " say Rachel slowly . " but -- I'd well tell 
 you -- Captain Ellesborough ask I to marry he . " 

 she pause . 

 " do you think that would be news to any of we ? " say Janet , laughing , 
 and then stop . the sudden contraction of pain in Rachel 's face , and 
 something like a sob startle she . 

 " do not , Janet , please . I tell he something -- which make he 
 wonder -- whether he do want to marry I after all . " 

 Janet 's heart give an uncomfortable jump . a score of past conjecture and 
 misgiving rush back upon she . 

 " what do you tell he ? " 

 " what I see now I ought to have tell you -- as well as he -- long ago . 
 Henderson be my maiden name . I be a married woman for three year . I 
 have a child which die . I divorce my husband , and he be still alive . " 

 the colour have flame back into her cheek . Janet sit silent , her eye 
 fix on Rachel 's . 

 " I do tell you I have a story , do not   I ? " say Rachel insistently . 

 " you do . I take my chance . it be you who -- who bring the action ? " 

 " I bring the action . there be no defence . and the judge say -- i'd be 
 awfully badly treat -- it be no wonder I want -- to get free . well , 
 there it be . I be sorry I deceive you . I be sorry I deceive he . " 

 " you do not   deceive I , " say Janet . " I have practically guess it . " 
 she rise slowly , and go up to Rachel , she put her hand on her 
 shoulders,-- 

 " why do not   you tell I , you poor thing ! " her voice and eye be full of 
 emotion -- full of pity . but Rachel shrink away a little from her touch , 
 murmur under her breath , " because I want never to hear of it -- or 
 think of it again . " then , after a pause , she add , " but if you want to 
 know more , I will tell you . it be your right . my married name be Delane . " 

 " do not   tell I any more ! " say Janet peremptorily . " I do not   want to hear 
 it . but you ought to be -- quite frank -- with _ he _ . " 

 " I know that . naturally -- it be a great shock to he . " 

 there be something very touching in her attitude . she stand there like a 
 shameface boy , in her quasi - male dress ; and the contrast between her 
 strong young beauty , and the humility and depression of her manner 
 appeal with singular force to Janet 's mind , so constantly and secretly 
 preoccupy with spiritual thing . Rachel seem to she so much cleverer 
 and more vigorous than herself in all matter of ordinary life . only in 
 the region of religious experience do Janet know herself the superior . 
 but Rachel have never make any outward sign that she care in the least to 
 know more of that region , whether in Janet or other people . she have hold 
 entirely aloof from it . but self - reproach -- moral suffering -- be two of 
 the key that lead to it . and both be evident here . Janet 's heart go 
 out to her friend . 

 " when be he come ? " 

 " to - morrow evening . I dare say he will give I up . " 

 Janet marvel at the absence of self - assertion -- the touch of 
 despair -- in word and tone . so it have go as deep as this ! she blame 
 herself for lack of perception . an ordinary love - affair , about to end 
 in an ordinary way -- that be how it have appear to she . and suddenly it 
 seem to she she have stumble upon what might be tragedy . 

 no , no -- there should be no tragedy ! she put her arm round Rachel . 

 " my dear , he will not   give you up ! as if I have not   see ! he worship the 
 ground you tread upon ! " 

 Rachel say nothing . she let her face rest on Janet 's shoulder . when she 
 raise it , it be wet . but she kiss Janet quietly , and go away 
 without another word . 




 VIII 


 four grown - up and a child be gather in the living - room of Halsey 's 
 cottage . the cottage be old like its tenant and have all the 
 inconvenience of age ; but it be more spacious than the modern cottage 
 often be , since it and its neighbour represent a survive fragment 
 from an old jacobean house -- a house of gentlefolk -- which have once stand 
 on the site . Most of the house have be pull down , but Colonel 
 Shepherd 's grandfather have retain part of it , and turn it into two 
 cottage -- know as 1 and 2 Ipscombe Place -- which for all their drawback 
 be much in demand in the village , and confer a certain distinction 
 on their occupant . Mrs. Halsey 's living room possess a Tudor 
 mantelpiece in mould brick , into which a small modern kitchener have 
 be barbarously fit ; and three fine beam with a little incise 
 ornament run across the ceiling . 

 Mrs. Halsey have not long clear away the tea , and bring in a paraffin 
 lamp , small but cheerful . she be a middle - aged woman , much young than 
 her husband -- with an ironic half - dreamy eye , and a native intelligence 
 much superior to her surrounding . she be suffer from a chronic 
 abscess in the neck , which have strange periodic swelling and 
 subsidence , all of which be endlessly interesting to its possessor . 
 Mrs. Halsey , indeed , call the abscess ' she , " wrap it lovingly in red 
 flannel , describe the evening dressing of it as " put she to bed , " 
 and talk of " her " quality and oddity as though , in the phrase of 
 her next - door neighbour , " it would a be a christen child . " she have 
 decide view on politic , and be a match for any political agent who 
 might approach she with an eye to her vote , a commodity which she keep , 
 so to speak , like a new shilling in her pocket , turn it from time 
 to time to make sure it be there . 

 but independent as she be , she rarely interfere with the talk of Halsey 
 and his male friend . and on this occasion when the three man -- Halsey , 
 Peter Betts , and young Dempsey -- have gather smoking round the fire , she 
 settle herself with her knitting by the table and the lamp , throw in 
 every now and then a muttered and generally sarcastic comment , of which 
 her husband take no notice -- especially as he know very well that the 
 sarcasm be never aim at he , and that she be as proud of he as she 
 be generally contemptuous of the rest of the world . 

 Halsey have just finish a rather grudging description of his experience 
 two day before for John Dempsey 's benefit . he be conscious that each 
 time he repeat they , they sound more incredible . he do not   want to 
 repeat they ; he do not   mean to repeat they ; after this , nobody should get 
 any more out of he at all . 

 Young Dempsey 's attitude be certainly not encouraging . attentive at 
 first , he allow himself , as Halsey 's talk develop , a mild , 
 progressive grin , which spread gradually over his ugly but honest face , 
 and remain there . in face of it , Halsey 's speech become more and more 
 laconic , till at last he shut his mouth with a snap , and draw himself 
 up in his chair , re - light his pipe with the expression that mean , " all 
 right -- i've   do -- you may take it or leave it . " 

 " well , I do not   see that what you see , Mr. Halsey , be so very uncommon ! " 
 Dempsey begin , still smile , in spite of a warning look from Betts . 
 " you see a man come down that road ? well , in the first place , why 
 should not   a man come down that road -- it be a reg'lar right of way-- " 

 " it be the way , mind ye , as the ghost of old Watson have allus come ! " put 
 in Peter Betts , chivalrously anxious to support his friend Halsey , as far 
 as he could , against a sceptical stranger . " an ' it be be see twice on 
 that road already , as I can remember : once when I be a little boy , by 
 old Dan Holt , the postmaster , and once about ten year ago . " 

 Dempsey look at the speaker indulgently . to his sharpen transatlantic 
 sense , these old man , in this funny old village , seem to he a 
 curiously dim and feeble folk . he could hardly prevent himself from 
 talk to they as though they be child . he suppose his grandfather 
 would have be like that if he have stay on at Ipscombe . he thank 
 the star he have not ! 

 but since he have be summon to consult , as a person who have a vested 
 interest , of a rather blood - curdle sort , in the great end ghost , he have 
 to give his opinion ; and he give it , while Halsey listen and smoke in 
 a rather sulky silence . for it be soon evident that the murderer 's 
 grandson have no use at all for the suppose ghost - story . he tear it 
 ruthlessly to piece . in the first place , Halsey describe the man see 
 on the grass - road as tall and lanky . but accord to his grandfather 's 
 account , the murder gamekeeper , on the contrary , be a broadly - build , 
 stumpy man . in the next place -- the coughing and the bleeding!--he laugh 
 so long and loudly at these point in the story that Halsey 's still black 
 bushy eyebrow meet frowningly over a pair of angry eye , and Betts try 
 hurriedly to tame the young man 's mirth . 

 " well , if yer do not   think that man as Halsey see _ be _ the ghost , what do 
 you s'pose ' ee be do there ? " ask Betts , " and where do he go ? 
 Halsey go right round the farm . the hill just there be as bare as my 
 hand . he must ha ' see the man -- if it _ wor _ a man -- an ' he see nothing . 
 there be not   a tree or a bush where that man could ha ' hide hisself -- if 
 he _ wor _ a man . " 

 Dempsey declare he should have to go and examine the ground himself 
 before he could answer the question . but of course there be an answer 
 to it -- there must be . as to the man -- why Millsborough , and Ipscombe too , 
 have be full of outlandish East Enders , fly from the raid , Poles 
 and Russians , and such like -- thievin ' fellow by all account . why 
 could not   it be one of they -- prowl round the farm for anything he could 
 pick up -- and frighten off , when he see Halsey ? 

 Betts , smoke with prodigious energy , inquire what he make of the 
 _ blood _ . do not   he know the old story of how Watson be track down to 
 the cart - shed ? Dempsey laugh again . 

 " well , it be curious , grant ye . it be real funny ! but where be you go 
 to get blood without a body ? and if a thing be a body , it be not   a ghost ! " 

 the two old man be silent . Halsey be lose in a hopeless confusion of 
 idea , and Betts be determine not to give his pal away . 

 but here -- say what you like!--was a strange man , see , on the road , which 
 have be use , accord to village tradition , on several previous 
 occasion , by the authentic ghost of Watson ; his course be mark by 
 trace of blood , just as Watson 's path of pain have be mark on the 
 night of the murder ; and on reach the spot where Watson have breathe 
 his last , the apparition , whatever it be , have vanish . perplexity , 
 superstition , and common sense fight each other . Halsey who know much of 
 his Bible by heart be inwardly compare text . " a spirit hath not flesh 
 and blood"--True -- but on the other hand what about the " body of the 
 saints"--that " arise " ? while , perhaps , the strong motive of all in the 
 old man 's mind be the obstinate desire to prove himself right , and so to 
 confound young scoffer like Dempsey . 

 Dempsey , however , have as he think dispose of Halsey 's foolish tale 
 be determined to tell his own , which have already make a great impression 
 in certain quarter of the village , and rank indeed as the chief 
 sensation of the day . to be able to listen to the story of a murder tell 
 by the grandson of the murderer , to whom the criminal himself have 
 confess it , and that without any fear of unpleasant consequence to any 
 one , be a treat that Ipscombe have seldom enjoy , especially as the 
 village be still rich in kinsfolk of both murder and murderer . 

 Dempsey have already repeat the story so often that it be by now 
 perfect in every detail , and it produce the same effect in this lamplit 
 kitchen as in other . Halsey , forget his secret ill - humour , be 
 presently listen open - mouthed . Mrs. Halsey lay down her knitting , and 
 star at the speaker over the top of her spectacle ; while across 
 Betts 's gnome - like countenance smile go out and in , especially at the 
 more gruesome point of the tale . the light sparkle on the young 
 Canadian 's belt , the Maple Leaf in the khaki hat which lie across his 
 knee , on the badge of the Forestry Corps on his shoulder . the old 
 english cottage , with its Tudor brick - work , and its overhang beam , 
 the old english labourer with the stain of english soil upon they , make 
 the setting ; and in the midst , sit the " new man , " from the New World , 
 hold the stage , just as Ellesborough the New Englander be accustom 
 to hold it , at Great End Farm . all over England , all over unravaged 
 France and northern Italy similar scene at that moment be be 
 throw on the magic sheet of life ; and at any drop in the talk , the 
 observer could almost hear , in the stillness , the weaving of the Great 
 Loom on which the Ages come and go . 

 there be a pause , when Dempsey come to a dramatic end with the last 
 breath of his grandfather ; till Mrs. Halsey say dryly , fix the young 
 man with her small beady eyes,-- 

 " and you do not   mind tell on your own grandfather ? " 

 " why should not   I ? " laugh Dempsey , " when it be sixty year ago . they have 
 lose their chance of hang he anyhow . " 

 Mrs. Halsey shake her head in inarticulate protest . Betts say 
 reflectively,-- 

 " I would not   advise you to be tellin ' that tale to Miss Henderson . " 

 Dempsey 's expression change at the name . he bend forward eagerly . 

 " by the way , who be Miss Henderson ? do you know where she come from ? " 

 the other star . 

 " last winter , " say Betts at last , ' she wor on a farm down devonshire 
 way . and before that she wor at college -- with Miss Janet . " 

 " be she ever in Canada ? " 

 " yes ! " say Halsey with sudden decision , ' she wor -- for she tell I 
 one day when I wor mendin ' the new reaper and binder , that we in this 
 country do not   know what harvest mean . ' why , I have   help to reap a 
 field -- in Canada , ' she se , ' fower mile square , ' she se , ' six team o ' 
 horse -- an ' six horse to the team , ' she ses--'that be something like . ' so 
 I know she be be in Canada . " 

 " ah ! " say Dempsey , star at the carpet . " and she be not married ? you be 
 sure she be not marry ? " 

 " married ? " say all the other , look at he in disapprove 
 astonishment . 

 " well , if she be not , I see her sister -- or her double -- twice -- about 
 two - and - a - half year ago -- at a place thirty mile from Winnipeg . I could 
 ha ' swear I would see she before ! " 

 " well , you can not   ha ' see she before , " say Betts positively ; " cause 
 she be Miss , not missis . " 

 " ah ! " say Dempsey again in a non - committal voice , look hard this time 
 into the fire . 

 " where have you see she -- in these part ? " ask Mrs. Halsey . 

 " at the Harvest Festival , t'other day . but I must have be 
 mistaken -- that be all . I think I be go to call upon she some day . " 

 " whatever for ? " 

 " why -- to tell she about my grandfather ! " say Dempsey , look round at 
 Mrs. Halsey , with an air of astonishment that any one should ask he the 
 question . 

 " you will not   be welcome . " 

 " why not ? " 

 " because she do not   want to hear nothing about Watson 's murder . and 
 whatever be the good on it , anyhow ? " say Mrs. Halsey with sudden 
 emphasis . " you have   tell we a good tale , I will grant ye . but yer might as 
 well be pullin ' the old feller ' isself out of his grave , as go round 
 killin ' ' I m every night fresh , as you be do . let ' I m be . skelinton be 
 skelinton . " 

 Dempsey , feel rather indignantly that his pain have be waste , and 
 his audience be not worthy of he , rise to take his departure . Halsey 's 
 face clear . he turn to look at his wife , and she wink in return . 
 and when the young forester have take his departure , Mrs. Halsey stroke 
 the red flannel round her swollen neck complacently . 

 " I ' ad to pike ' I m out soomhow . it be ' igh time she wor put to bed ! " 

 that same evening , Ellesborough leave the ralstone camp behind he about 
 six o'clock , and hurry through the late October evening towards great 
 End Farm . during the forty - eight hour which have elapse since his 
 interview with Rachel he have pass through much suffering , and agony 
 of indecision . he have have to reconstruct all his idea of the woman he 
 love . instead of the proud and virginal creature he have imagine himself 
 to be woo , amid the beautiful setting of her harvest field , he have to 
 think of she as a woman dim and besmirch by an unhappy marriage with 
 a bad man . for himself , he certainly resent the concealment which have 
 be practise on he . yet at the same time he think he understand the 
 state of exasperation , of invincible revolt which have lead to it . and he 
 keep remind himself that , after all , her confession have anticipate 
 his proposal . 

 nevertheless such man as he have idea of marriage , both romantic and 
 austere . they be inclined to claim what they give -- a clean sheet , and 
 the first - fruit of body and soul . in Rachel 's case the first - fruit 
 have be waste on a marriage , of which the ugly and inevitable 
 incident haunt Ellesborough 's imagination . one moment he shrink from 
 the thought of they ; the next he could not restrain the protest rush 
 of passion -- the vow that his love should put she back on that pinnacle of 
 honour and respect from which fate should never have allow she to fall . 

 well , she have promise to tell he her story in full . he await it . 
 as to his own people , they be dear , good woman , his mother and 
 sister -- saint , but not Pharisees . 

 it be a dark and lower evening , with tempest gust of wind . but from 
 far away , after he have pass Ipscombe , a light from one of the window 
 of the farm shine out , as though beckon he to she . suddenly from the 
 mouth of the farm , he see a bicycle approach . the rider be Janet 
 Leighton . she pass he with a wave and a smile . 

 " go to a food meeting ! but Rachel 's at home . " 

 what a nice woman ! look back over the couple of month since he have 
 know the inmate of the farm , he realize how much he have come to like 
 Janet Leighton . so unselfish , so full of thought for other , so modest 
 for herself ! there could not   be a well friend for Rachel ; her friendship 
 itself be a testimonial ; he reassure himself by the mere thought of 
 she . 

 when he draw up at the farm , Hastings with a lantern in his hand be just 
 disappear towards the hill , and the two girl , Betty and Jenny , pass 
 he , each with a young man , two member , in fact , of his own Corps , John 
 Dempsey and another . they explain that they be off to a Red Cross 
 Concert in the village hall . Ellesborough 's pulse beat quick as he 
 part from they , for he realize that he would find Rachel alone in the 
 farm . 

 yes , there she be at the open door , greet he with a quiet face -- a 
 smile even . she lead the way into the sitting - room , where she have just 
 draw down the blind and close the curtain of the window look on 
 the farm - yard . but his arrival have interrupt she before she could do 
 the same for the window look on the Down . neither of they think of 
 it . each be absorb in the mere presence of the other . 

 Rachel be in her black Sunday dress of some silky stuff . her throat be 
 uncover , and her shapely arm show through the thin sleeve . the 
 black and white soften and refine something overblown and sensuous in 
 her beauty . her manner , too , have lose its confident , provocative note . 
 Ellesborough have never see she so adorable , so desirable . but her 
 self - command dictate his . he take the seat to which she point he ; 
 while she herself bring a chair to the other side of the fire , put 
 on another log with a steady hand , and a remark about the wind that be 
 whistle outside . then , one foot cross over the other , her cheek 
 redden by the fire , prop on her hand , and her eye on the fresh 
 flame that be begin to dance out of the wood , she ask him,--"you'd 
 like to hear it all ? " 

 he make a sign of assent . 

 so in a quiet , even voice , she begin with an account of her family and 
 early surrounding , more detailed than anything she have yet give he . 
 she describe her father ( the striking apostolic head of the old man hung 
 on the wall behind she ) and his missionary journey through the prairie 
 settlement in the early day of Alberta ; how , when he be old and weary , 
 he would sometimes take she , his late child , a small girl of ten or 
 twelve , on his pastoral round , for company , perch up beside he in his 
 buggy ; and how her mother be kill by the mere hardship of the prairie 
 life , sink into fretful invalidism for two year before her death . 

 " I nurse she for year . I never do anything else -- I could not . I never 
 have any amusement like other girl . there be no money and no time . she 
 die when I be twenty - four . and three month after , my father die . he 
 do not   leave a penny . then my brother ask I to go and live with he 
 and his wife . I be to have my board and a dress allowance , if I would 
 help she in the house . my brother 's an awfully good sort -- but I could not 
 get on with his wife . I just could not ! I expect it be my fault , just as 
 much as her . it be something we could not   help . very soon I hat the 
 sight of she , and she never miss a chance of make I feel a worm -- a 
 useless , greedy creature , live on other people 's work . if only there 
 have be some child , I dare say I could have bear it . but she and I 
 could never get away from each other . there be no distraction . our 
 nerve get simply raw -- at least mine do . " 

 there be a pause . she lift her brown eye , and look at Ellesborough 
 intently . 

 " I suppose my mother would have bear it . but girl nowadays can not . not 
 girl like I , anyway . mother be a Christian . I do not   suppose I be . I 
 do not   know what I be . I just _ have _ to live my own life . I could not   exist 
 without a bit of pleasure -- and be admire -- and see man -- and all 
 that ! " 

 her cheek have flush . her eye be very bright and defiant . 

 Ellesborough come near to she , put out a strong hand and enclose her 
 in it . 

 " well then -- this man Delane -- come to live near you ? " 

 he speak with the utmost gentleness , try to help she out . 

 she nod , draw her hand away . 

 " I meet he at a dance in Winnipeg first -- the day after I have have a horrid 
 row with my sister - in - law . he would just take a large farm , with a decent 
 house on it -- not a shack -- and everybody say his people be rich and 
 be back he . and he be very good - looking -- and a Cambridge man -- and 
 all that . we dance together almost all the evening . then he find out 
 where I live , and use to be always come to see I . my brother never 
 like he . he say to I often , ' why do you encourage that unprinciple 
 cad ? I be certain there be a screw loose about he ! ' and I be not   in love 
 with Roger -- not really -- for one moment . but I _ think _ he be in love with 
 I -- yes , I be sure he be -- at first . and he excite and interest I . I 
 be proud , too , of take he away from other girl , who be always 
 run after he . and my sister - in - law be just mad to get rid of I ! 
 do not   you understand ? " 

 " of course I do ! " 

 her eyelid waver a little under the emotion of his tone . 

 " well , then , we get marry . my brother try to get out of he what his 
 money - affair be . but he always evade everything . he talk a great 
 deal about this rich sister , and she do send he a wedding present . but 
 he never show I her letter , and that be the last we ever hear of 
 she while I know he .... " 

 her voice drop . she sit look at the fire -- a grey , pale woman , from 
 whom light and youth have momentarily go out . 

 " well , it be a hateful story -- and as common!--as common as dirt . we begin 
 to quarrel almost immediately . he be jealous and tyrannical , and I 
 always have a quick temper . I find that he drank , that he tell I all 
 sort of lie about his past life , that he presently only care about I 
 as -- well , as his mistress!"--and again she face Ellesborough with hard , 
 insistent eyes--"that he be hopelessly in debt -- a gambler -- and 
 everything else . when the baby come , I could only get the wife of a 
 neighbouring settler to come and look after I . and Roger behave so 
 abominably to she that she go home when the baby be a week old -- and I 
 be leave to manage for myself . then when baby be three month old , she 
 catch whooping - cough , and have bronchitis on the top . I have a few pound 
 of my own , and I give they to Roger to go in to Winnipeg and bring out a 
 doctor and medicine . he drink all the money on the way -- that I find out 
 afterwards -- he be a week away instead of two day -- and the baby die . 
 when he come back he tell I a lie about have be ill . but I never 
 live with he -- as a wife -- after that . then , of course , he hat I , and 
 one night he nearly kill I . next morning he apologize -- say that he 
 love I passionately -- and that kind of stuff -- that I be cruel to 
 he -- and what could he do to make up ? so then I suggest that he should 
 go away for a month -- and we should both think thing over . he be 
 rather frightened , because -- well -- he'd knock I about a good deal in 
 the horrible scene between we -- and he think I should bring my brother 
 down on he . so he agree to go , and I say I would have a girl friend to 
 stay with I . but , of course , as soon as he be go , I just leave the 
 house and depart . I have get evidence enough by then to set I 
 free -- about the italian girl . I meet my brother in Winnipeg . we go to 
 his lawyer together , and I begin proceedings-- " 

 she stop abruptly . " the rest I tell you.--_No!_--I've   tell you the 
 horrible thing -- now I will say something of the thing which -- have make 
 life worth live again . till the divorce be settle I go back to my 
 brother in Toronto . I drop my married name then and call myself 
 Henderson . and then I come home -- because my mother 's brother , who be a 
 manufacturer in Bradford , write to ask I . but when I arrive he be 
 dead , and he have leave I three thousand pound . then I go to Swanley 
 and get train for farm - work . and I find Janet Leighton , and we make 
 friend . and I love farm - work -- and I love Janet -- and the whole world 
 look so different to I ! why , of course , I do not   want to be remind of 
 that old horrible life ! I do not   want people to say , ' Mrs. Delane ? who 
 and where be her husband ? be he dead ? ' ' no -- she be divorce . ' ' why ? ' 
 there's!--don't   you see?--all the old vile business over again ! so I cut 
 it all ! " 

 she pause -- resume in another voice -- hesitate and uncertain,-- 

 " and yet -- it seem -- you can not   do a simple thing like that 
 without -- hurt somebody -- injure somebody . I can not   help it ! I do not 
 mean to deceive _ you _ . but I have a right to get free from the old life 
 if I could ! " 

 she throw back her head proudly . her eye be full of tear . then she 
 rise impetuously . 

 " There!--I've   tell you . I suppose you do not   want to be friend with I 
 any more . it be rotten of I , I know , for , of course -- I see -- you seem 
 to be get to care for I . I tell Janet when we set up work together 
 that I be not   a bad woman . and I be not . but I be weak . you would well not 
 trust I . and besides -- I fall into the mud -- and I expect it stick to I 
 still ! " 

 she speak with passionate animation -- almost fierceness . while through her 
 inner mind there run the thought , " I have   tell him!--I've   tell he ! if he 
 do not   understand , it be not my fault . I can always say , ' I _ do _ tell 
 you -- about roger--_and the rest_!--as much as I be bind to tell you . ' 
 why should I make he miserable -- and destroy my own chance with he for 
 _ nothing _ ? " 

 they stand front each other . over the fine bronzed face of the 
 forester there run a ripple of profound emotion -- nostril and lip -- and 
 eye . then she find herself in his arm -- with no power to resist or free 
 herself . two or three deep , involuntary sob -- sob of excitement -- shake 
 she , as she feel his kiss on her cheek . 

 " darling!--i'll try and make up to you -- for all you have   suffer . poor 
 child!--poor little Rachel ! " 

 she cling to he , a great wave of passion sweep through she also . she 
 think , " now I shall be happy!--and I shall make he happy , too . of 
 course I shall!--I'm do quite right . " 

 presently he put she back in her chair , and sit beside she on the low 
 fender stool , in front of the fire . his aspect be completely 
 transform . the triumphant joy which fill he have sweep away the 
 slightly stiff and reserved manner which be on the whole natural to he . 
 and it have sweep away at the same time all the doubt and hesitation of 
 his inner mind . she have tell her story , it seem to he , with complete 
 frankness , and a humility which appeal to all that be chivalrous and 
 generous in a strong man . he be ready now to make more excuse for she , 
 in the matter of his own misleading , than she seem to wish to make for 
 herself . how natural that she should act as she have act ! the thought of 
 her suffering , of her ill - treatment be intolerable to he -- and of the 
 brute who have inflict it . 

 " do you know where that man be now ? " he say to she presently . she have 
 fall back in her chair -- pale and shaken , but dress , for his eye , in 
 a loveliness , a pathos , that be every moment strengthen her hold upon 
 he . 

 " Roger ? no , I have no idea . I always suppose he be in Canada still . he 
 never appear when the case be try . but the summon have to be serve 
 on he , and my lawyer succeed in track he to a lodging in Calgary , 
 where he be live -- with the italian girl . but after that we never hear 
 any more of he -- except that I have a little pencil note -- unsigne , 
 undated , deliver by hand -- just before the trial come on . it say I 
 should repent cast he off -- that I have treat he shamefully -- that I 
 be a vile woman -- and though I have get the well of he for the time , he 
 would have his revenge before long . " 

 Ellesborough shrug his shoulder contemptuously . 

 " threat be cheap ! I hope you soon put that out of your mind ? " 

 she make a little restless movement . 

 " yes , I -- I suppose so . but I do tell you once , do not   I , that -- I often 
 have fear -- about nothing ? " 

 " yes , you do tell I , " he say , smile . " do not   have any more fear , 
 darling ! I will see to that . " 

 he take her hand again , and raise they to his lip and kiss they . it 
 astonish he to feel they so cold , and see she again so excited and 
 pale . be she really afraid of the villain she have escape from ? the 
 dear , foolish woman ! the man in his self - confident strength love she the 
 more for the vague terror he feel himself so well able to soothe . 

 for half an hour more they sit together , in that first intimacy of love , 
 which transfigure man and woman , so that when they pass back from it 
 into ordinary life they scarcely recognize life or themselves again . they 
 talk much less of the past than of the future -- and that in the light of 
 the glorious war news come in day by day . Austria be on the point of 
 surrender -- the german landslide might come at any moment -- then 
 _ peace_!--incredible word . Ellesborough would hardly now get to France . 
 they might be able to marry soon -- within a few week . as to the farm , he 
 ask she , laughing , whether she would take he in as a junior partner 
 for a time , till they could settle their plan . " I have   get a bit of money 
 of my own . but first you must let I go back , as soon as there be ship 
 to go in -- to see after my own humble business . we could launch out -- get 
 some fine stock -- try experiment . it be a go concern , and I have   get a 
 good share in it . why should not   you go , too ? " 

 he see her shrink . 

 " to Canada ? oh , no ! " 

 he scourge himself mentally for have take her thought back to the 
 old unhappy time . but she soon recover herself . then it be time for 
 he to go , and he stand up . 

 " I should like to have see Janet ! " he say joyously . " she will have to get 
 use to christian name . how soon will you tell she ? directly she 
 come in ? " 

 " certainly not . I shall wait -- till to - morrow morning . " 

 he laugh , whisper into her ear , as her soft , curly head lie against 
 his breast . 

 " you will not   wait ten minute -- you could not ! well , I must be go , or 
 they will shut I out of the camp . " 

 " why do you hurry so ? " 

 " hurry ? why , I shall be an hour late , anyway . I shall have to give myself 
 C.B. to - morrow . " 

 she laugh -- a sound of pure content . then she suddenly draw herself 
 away , frown at he . 

 " you do love I -- you do -- you will always!--whatever people may say ? " 

 he be surprised at the note almost of violence in her voice . he answer 
 it by a passionate caress , which she bear with trembling . then she 
 resolutely move away . 

 " do go ! " she say to he , imploringly . " I would like to be a few 
 minute -- alone -- before they come back . " 

 he see she settle herself by the fire , her hand stretch out to the 
 blaze . see that the fire be low , and remember the chill of her 
 hand in his , he look around for the wood - basket which be generally 
 keep in a corner behind the piano . 

 his movement be suddenly arrest . he be look towards the 
 uncurtained window . the night have grow pitch dark outside , and there 
 be splash of rain against the glass . but he distinctly see as he 
 turn a man 's face press against the glass -- a strained , sallow , face , 
 frame in straggle black hair , a face with regular feature , and eye 
 deeply set in blacken orbit . it be a face of hatred ; the lip tightly 
 draw over the tooth , seem to have a curse on they . 

 the vision last only a moment . Ellesborough 's train instinct , the 
 wary instinct of the man who have parse day and night with nature in 
 her wilder and lonely place , check the exclamation on his lip . and 
 before he could move again , the face have disappear . the old holly bush 
 grow against the farm wall , from which the apparition seem to have 
 spring , be still there , some of its glossy leaf visible in the bright 
 light of the paraffin lamp which stand on the table near the window . and 
 there be nothing else . 

 Ellesborough quietly walk to the window , draw down the blind , and 
 pull the curtain together . Rachel look around at the sound . 

 " do not   I do that ? " she say , half dreamily . 

 " we forgot ! " he smile at she . " now it be all cosy . ah , there they be ! 
 perhaps I will get Janet to come as far as the road with I . " for voice 
 be approach -- Janet talk to the girl . Rachel look up , 
 assenting . the colour have rush back to her face . Ellesborough take in 
 the picture of she , sit unconscious by the fire , while his own 
 pulse be thump under the excitement of what he have see . 

 with a last word to she , he close the sit - room door behind he , and 
 go out to meet Janet Leighton in the dark . 




 IX 


 it be a foggy October evening , and Berkeley Square , from which the 
 daylight have not yet depart , make a peculiarly dismal impression on 
 the passer - by , under the mingled illumination of its half - blind lamp , 
 and of a sunset which in the country be clear and golden , and here in 
 west London could only give a lurid coppery tinge to the fog , to the 
 eastern house - front , and to the great plane - tree hold the Square 
 garden , like giant encamp . Landsowne House , in its lordly seclusion 
 from the rest of the Square , seem specially to have gather the fog to 
 itself , and be almost lose from sight . not a ray of light escape the 
 closely - shutter window . the event of the _ mensis mirabilis _ be 
 rush on . Bulgaria , Austria , Turkey , have lay down their arm -- the 
 german cry for an armistice have ring through Europe . but still London lay 
 dark and muffle . her peril be not yet over . 

 in the drawing - room of one of the house on the eastern side , belong 
 to a Warwickshire baronet and M.P.--Sir Richard Winton by name -- a lady 
 be stand in front of a thrifty fire , which in view of the coal 
 restriction of the moment , she have be very unwilling to light at all . 
 the restriction irritate she ; so do the inevitable cold of the room ; 
 and most of all be she annoy and harass by the thought of a visitor 
 who might appear at any moment . she be tall , well - make , and plain . one 
 might have guess her age at about thirty - five . she have be out in the 
 early afternoon , attend a war meeting on behalf of some charity in 
 which she be interested , and she have not yet remove a high and stately 
 hat with two outstanding wing and much jet ornament , which she have wear 
 at the meeting , to the huge indignation of her neighbour . the black of 
 her silk dress be lighten by a rope of pearl , and various diamond 
 trinket . her dress fit she to perfection . competence and will be 
 write in her small , shrewd eye and in the play of a decide mouth . 

 there be a knock at the door . at Lady Winton 's " come in ! " a stout , 
 elderly maid appear . she come up to her mistress , and say in a lowered 
 voice,-- 

 " you will see Mr. Roger here ? " 

 " why , I tell you so , Nannie ! " be the impatient answer . " be everybody out 
 of the way ? " 

 the maid explain that all be ready . Jones the butler have be 
 send with a note to the City , and the housemaid be sit with the 
 kitchen - maid , who be recover from the flu . 

 " I tell they I would answer the bell . and I will keep an eye that no one come 
 down before he be go . there he be ! " 

 for the bell have rung , and the maid hasten to the hall door to answer 
 it . 

 a tall man enter -- cough . 

 " Beastly night , Nannie ! " he say , as soon as the cough would let he . 
 " do not   suit my style . well?--how be you ? have the flu , like everybody 
 else ? " 

 " not yet , Mr. Roger -- though it be be go through the house . shall I 
 take your coat ? " 

 " you would well not . I be too shabby underneath . " 

 " Sir Richard 's in the country , Mr. Roger . " 

 " oh , so her ladyship be alone ? well , that be how I generally find she , 
 be not   it ? " 

 but Nannie -- with her eye on the stair -- be not go to allow he any 
 linger in the hall . she lead he quickly to the drawing - room , open 
 it , and close it behind he . then she herself retreat into a small 
 smoking - den at the farth end of the hall , and sit there , without a 
 light , with the door open -- watch . 

 Roger Delane instinctively straighten himself to his full height as he 
 enter his sister 's drawing - room . his overcoat , though much worn , be of 
 an expensive make and cut ; he carry the Malacca cane which have be his 
 companion in the brookshire road ; and the eyeglass that he adjust as 
 he catch sight of his sister complete the general effect of shabby 
 fashion . his manner be jaunty and defiant . 

 " well , Marianne , " he say , pause some yard from she . " you do not   seem 
 particularly glad to see I . Hullo!--has Dick be buy some more 
 china ? " 

 and before his sister could say anything , he have walk over to a table 
 cover with various bric - a - brac , where , take up a fine Nankin vase , he 
 look closely at the mark on its base . 

 Lady Winton flush with anger . 

 " I think you have well leave the china alone , Roger . I have only get a 
 very few minute . what do you want ? money , I suppose -- as usual ! and yet I 
 warn you in my last letter that you would do this kind of thing once 
 too often , and that we be _ not _ go to put up with it ! " she strike 
 the table beside she with her glove . 

 delane put down the china and survey she . 

 " the vase be Ming all right -- well stuff than Dick generally buy . I 
 congratulate he . well , I be sorry for you , my dear Marianne -- but you 
 _ be _ my sister -- and you can not   help yourself ! " 

 he look at she , half - smile , with a quiet bravado which enrage she . 

 " do not   talk like that , Roger ! tell I directly what it be you want . you 
 seem to think you can force I to see you at any time , whatever I may be 
 do . But-- " 

 " your last letter be ' a bit thick'--you see -- it provoke I , " say 
 delane calmly . " of course you can get the police to chuck I out if you 
 like . you would be quite in your right . but I imagine the effect on the 
 aristocratic nerve of Berkeley Square would be amusing . however-- " 

 he look round him-- 

 " as Carlyle say to the old Queen , ' I be get old , madam , and with your 
 leave I will take a chair-- ' " 

 he push an arm - chair forward . 

 " and let I make up the fire . it be begin to freeze outside . " 

 Lady Winton move quickly to the fireplace , hold out a prohibiting 
 hand . 

 " there be quite enough fire , thank you . I be go out presently . " 

 Delane sit down , and extend a pair of still shapely foot to the slender 
 flame in the grate . 

 " Dick 's boot ! " he say , tap they with his cane , and look round at 
 his sister . " what a lot of wear I have   get out of they since he throw they 
 away ! his overcoat , too . and now that it be the thing to be shabby , Dick 's 
 clothe be really a godsend . I defraud Jones . but I have no doubt that 
 Jones get a good deal more than be good for he . " 

 " look here , roger!--suppose you stop talk this nonsense and come to 
 business , " say Marianne Winton , in pale exasperation . " I have   send Jones 
 out with a note -- but he will be back directly . and I have   get an appointment . 
 what be you do ? have you get any work to do ? " 

 she take a seat not far from her brother , who perceive from her tone 
 that he have perhaps go as far as be prudent . 

 " oh , dear , no , I have   get no work to do , " he say , smile . " that be not a 
 commodity that come my way . but I must somehow manage to keep a roof 
 over Anita and the child . so what can I do but count on your assistance , 
 my dear ? my father leave you a great deal of money which in equity 
 belong to I -- and I be bind to remind you of it . " 

 " you know very well why he leave you so little ! " say Lady Winton . " we 
 need not   go into that old story . I ask you again , what do you want ? " she 
 take out her watch . " I have just ten minute . " 

 " what do I want ? " he look at she with a slow , whimsical laugh . " money , 
 my dear , money ! money mean everything that I must have -- food , coal , 
 clothe , doctor , chemist , bus -- decent houseroom for Anita and myself-- " 

 a shiver of revulsion run through his sister . 

 " have you marry that woman ? " 

 he laugh . 

 " as you seem to think it desirable , Anita and I do take a trip to a 
 Registry Office about a month ago . it be all lawful now -- except for our 
 abominable english law that do not   legitimize the child . But"--he 
 spring to his foot with a movement which startle her--"whom do you think 
 I have   see lately ? " 

 his sister star at he , amazed at the change in he -- the animation , the 
 rush of colour in the hollow , emaciated face . 

 " _ rachel_!--my wife -- my former -- precious -- wife . I think she be in 
 Canada . no doubt she think the same of I . but I have   stumble upon she 
 quite by chance -- live close to the place where I have take lodging for 
 Anita and the babe , in September , in case there be more raid this 
 winter . what do you think of that ? " 

 " it do not   interest I at all , " say Lady Winton coldly . 

 " then you have no dramatic sense , my dear . just think ! I stroll out , for 
 want of anything well to do , with Anita , into the market - place of a 
 beastly little country town , to see a silly sort of show -- a mixture of a 
 Harvest Festival and a Land Girls ' beano -- when without a moment 's 
 warning -- stand up in a decorate wagon -- I behold--_rachel_!--handsomer 
 than ever!--in a kind of khaki dress -- tunic , breech , and 
 legging -- enormously becoming!--and , of course , the observed of all 
 observer . More than that!--I perceive a young man , in an american 
 uniform , dance attendance upon she -- take her order -- walk she off 
 to church -- oh , a perfectly clear case!--no doubt about it at all . and 
 there I stand -- within a few yard of she -- and she never see I ! " 

 he break off , star at his sister -- a wild , exultant look -- which strike 
 she uncomfortably . her face show she arrest , against her will . 

 " be you sure she do not   see you ? " 

 " sure . I put the child on my shoulder , and hide behind she . besides -- my 
 dear -- even Rachel might find it difficult to recognize her discard 
 husband -- in this individual ! " 

 he tap his chest lightly . Lady Winton could not withdraw she 
 own eye from he . yes , it be quite true . the change in he be 
 shocking -- ghastly . he have bring it entirely on himself . but she 
 could not help say , in a somewhat milder tone,-- 

 " have you see that doctor again ? " 

 " to whom you so obligingly send I ? yes , I see he yesterday . one lung 
 seem to have finally strike work--_caput _ ! as the Germans say . the other 
 will last a bit long yet . " 

 a fit of cough seize he . his sister instinctively move far away 
 from he , look at he with frightened and hostile eye . 

 " do not   be alarm , " he say , as soon as he have find his voice again , 
 " I be drench in disinfectant . I take all proper precaution -- for the 
 child 's sake . now then"--he rise with an effort to his feet--"what be 
 you go to do for I ? " 

 his aspect have alter , have assume a sinister and passionate intensity . 
 his sister be conscious of the menace in it , and hastily take up a 
 small hand - bag lie near she , she produce a purse from it . 

 " I have save twenty pound for you -- out of my own money -- with _ great _ 
 difficulty , " she say , with indignant emphasis . " if I be to tell 
 Richard , he would be furious . and I cannot -- do--_anything_--more for you , 
 beyond the allowance I give you . everything you suffer from , you have 
 bring upon , yourself . it be hopeless to try and help you . " 

 he laugh . 

 " well , then , I must try Rachel ! " he say carelessly , as he look for his 
 hat . 

 " that I think would be the low depth ! " say Lady Winton , breathing 
 quick , " to beg money from the wife who divorce you ! " 

 " I be ready to beg for money -- requisition be the well word -- from 
 anybody in the world who have more of it than I. I be a bolshevist . you 
 need not   talk to I about property , or right . I do not   acknowledge they . 
 I want something that you have   get , and I have not . I shall take it if I 
 find the opportunity -- civilly if I can , uncivilly , if I must . " 

 Lady Winton make no reply . she stand , a statue of angry patience wait 
 for he to go . he slowly button on his coat , and then step coolly 
 across the room to look at an enlarged photograph of a young soldier 
 stand on the piano . 

 " handsome chap ! you be in luck , Marianne . I suppose you manage to get 
 he into a staff job of some sort , out of harm 's way ? " 

 he turn to she with a sneer on his lip . his sister be still silent . 

 the man move about the room be perhaps the thing she fear and 
 hat most in the world . every scene of this kind -- and he force they 
 on she , in spite of her futile resistance , at fairly frequent 
 interval -- represent to she an hour of torture and humiliation . how to 
 hide the scene and the being who cause they , from her husband , her 
 servant , her friend , be become almost her chief preoccupation . 
 she be begin to be afraid of her brother . for some time she have 
 regard he as incipiently insane , and as she watch he this evening 
 he seem to she more than ever charge with sinister possibility . it 
 appear to be impossible to influence or frighten he ; and she realize 
 that as he seem not to care a fig whether she cause a scandal or not , 
 and she care with every pulse of she be , she be really in his power , 
 and it be no good struggle . 

 " well , good - night , Edith , " he say at last , take up his hat . " this will 
 last for a bit -- but not very long , I warn you -- price be what they 
 be . oh , by the way , my name just now be Wilson -- make a note of it ! " 

 " what be that for ? " she say disdainfully . 

 " some canadian creditor of mine get wind of I -- bad luck . I have to 
 change my quarter , and drop the old name -- for a bit . however -- what be 
 in a name ? " he laugh , and hold out his hand . 

 " go to shake hand , Edie ? you use to be awfully fond of I , when you 
 be small . " 

 she stand , apparently unmove , her hand hang . the pathetic note have 
 be try on she too often . 

 " good - night , Roger . Nannie will show you out . " 

 the door close on he , and Lady Winton drop on a sofa by the fire , 
 her face show white and middle - aged in the firelight . she be just 
 an ordinary woman , only with a strong will than most ; and as an 
 ordinary woman , amid all her anger and fear , she be not wholly proof 
 against such a spectacle as that now present by her once favourite 
 brother . it be not his word that affect she -- but a hundred little 
 personal fact which every time she see he burn a little more deeply 
 into her consciousness the irreparableness of his personal ruin -- physical 
 and moral . idleness , drink , disease -- the loss of shame , of self - respect , 
 of manner -- the sense of something vital go for ever -- all these fatal 
 thing star out upon she , from his slippery emaciated face , his 
 borrow clothe , his bullying voice -- the scent on he of the mew in 
 which he live ! 

 she cover her face with her hand and cry a little . she could 
 remember when he be the darling and pride of the family -- especially of 
 his father . how have it happen ? he have say to she once , " there must 
 have be a black drop somewhere in our forbear , Edie . it have reappear 
 in I . we be none of we responsible , my dear , for our precious self . I 
 may be a sinner and a loafer -- but that benevolent Almighty of yours make 
 I . " 

 that be wicked stuff , of course ; but there have be a twist in he from 
 the beginning . have _ she _ do she good for he ? there be time when her 
 conscience prick she . 

 the clock strike seven . the sound bring she to her foot . she must go 
 and dress . Richard would be home directly , and they be din out , to 
 meet a distinguished General , in London for a few day ' leave from the 
 front . Dick must , of course , know nothing of Roger 's visit ; and she must 
 hurriedly go and look up the distinguished General 's career in case she 
 have to sit next he . vehemently she put the precede hour out of her 
 mind . the dinner - party to which she be go flatter her vanity . it 
 turn she cold to think that Roger might some day do something which 
 would damage that " position " which she have build up for herself and her 
 husband , by ten year ' careful piloting of their joint life . she know 
 she be call a " climber . " she know also that she have " climb " 
 successfully , and that it be Roger 's knowledge of the fact , combine 
 with a horrid recklessness which seem to be grow in he , that make 
 the danger of the situation . 

 meanwhile Delane step out into the fog , which , however , be lift a 
 little . he make his way down into Piccadilly , which be crowd with 
 folk , man and woman hurry home from their office , and besiege the 
 omnibus -- with hundred of soldier too , most of they with a girl beside 
 they , and smart young officer of every rank and service -- while the whole 
 scene breathe an animation and excitement , which mean a common 
 consciousness , in the crowd , of great happening . all along the street 
 be man with newspaper , show the headline to passer - by . " President 
 Wilson 's answer to the german appeal expect to - morrow . " " the british 
 entry into Lille . " 

 Delane buy an _ Evening News _ , glance at the headline , and throw it 
 away . what do the war matter to him?--or the new world that fool 
 suppose to be come after it ? consumptive have a way , no doubt , of 
 live long than people expect -- or hop . still , he believe that a 
 couple of year or so would see he out . and that be so , he feel 
 a kind of malignant indifference towards this pushing , chatter world , 
 aimlessly go about its silly business , as though there be any real 
 interest or importance in it . 

 then , as he drift with the crowd , he find himself catch in a 
 specially dense bit of it , which have gather round some fall horse . a 
 thin slip of a girl beside he , who be attempt to get through the 
 crush , be roughly elbow by a burly artilleryman determine to see the 
 show . she protest angrily , and Delane suddenly feel angry , too . " you 
 brute , you,--let the lady pass ! " he call to the soldier , who turn 
 with a grin , and be instantly out of reach and sight . " take my arm , " 
 say Delane to the girl--"where be you go ? " the little thing look 
 up -- hesitate -- and take his arm . " I be go to get a bus at the Circus . " 
 " all right . I will see you there . " she laugh and flush , and they walk 
 on together . delane look at she with curiosity . high cheek - bone -- a red 
 spot of colour on they -- a sharp chin -- small , emaciated feature , and 
 beautiful deep eye . Phthisical!--like himself -- poor little wretch ! he 
 find out that she be a waitress in a cheap eating - house , and have very 
 long hour . " jolly good pay , though , compare to what it use to be ! why , 
 with tip , on a good day , I can make seven and eight shilling . that be 
 good , be not   it ? and now the war 's go to stop . do you think I want it 
 to stop ? I do not   think ! I and my sister'll be starvin ' again , I 
 suppose ? " 

 he find out she be an orphan , live with her sister , who be a typist , 
 in kentish town . but she refuse to tell he her address , which he idly 
 ask she . " what do you want with it ? " she say , with a sudden frown . 
 " I be straight , I be . there be my bus ! night ! night!--so long ! " and with a 
 half - sarcastic wave of her tiny hand , she leave he , and be soon engulf 
 in the swirl round a north - bind bus . 

 he wander on along Regent Street , and Waterloo Place , down the Duke of 
 York 's step into the Mall , where some capture gun be already in 
 position , with child swarm about they ; and so through St. James 's 
 Park to the Abbey . the fog be now all but clear , and there be frosty 
 star overhead . the Abbey tower rise out of a purple haze , etherially 
 pale and moon - touch . the House of Commons be sit , but there be 
 still no light on the Clock Tower , and no unmuffling of the lamp . London 
 be wait , as the world be wait , for the next step in the vast 
 drama which have three continent for its setting ; and meanwhile , save for 
 the add movement in the street , and a new something in the face of 
 the crowd hurry along the pavement , there be nothing to show that 
 all be in fact over , and the war win . 

 Delane follow a stream of people enter the Abbey through the north 
 transept . he be carry on by they , till a verger show he into a seat 
 near the choir , and he mechanically obey , and drop on his knee . 

 when he rise from they , the choir be file in , and the verger with 
 their poker be escort the officiating Canon to his seat . delane have 
 not be inside a church for two or three year , and it be a good deal 
 more since he have stand last in Westminster Abbey . but as he watch the 
 once familiar spectacle there flow back upon he , with startling force , 
 old impression and tradition . he be in Cambridge again , a King 's man , 
 attend King 's Chapel . he be think of his approach Schools , and 
 there rise in his mind a number of figure , move or at rest , Cambridge 
 man like himself , long since dismiss from recollection . suddenly memory 
 seem to open out -- to become full , and urgent , and emphatic . he appear 
 to be live at a great rate , to be think and feel with peculiar 
 force . perhaps it be fever . his hand burn . 

 " _ my soul doth magnify the Lord , and my spirit hath rejoice in God my 
 Saviour ! _ " 

 as the chant rise , and he recognize the word , he feel extraordinarily 
 exalted , release , purify . why not think away the past ? it have no 
 existence , except in thought . 

 " I be what I conceive myself to be -- who can prove I to be anything else ? 
 what be I then ! an educated man , with a mind -- an intelligence . I have 
 damage it , but there it be -- still mine . " 

 his eye wander , during the Lesson , to the line of sculptured Statesmen 
 in the north transept . he have take history honours , and his thought 
 begin to play with matter still store in they : an essay on Dizzy and 
 Cobden he have write for a Cambridge club -- or Gladstone 's funeral , which 
 he have see as a boy of seventeen . he have sit almost in this very place , 
 with his mother , who have take pain to bring he to see it as an 
 historic spectacle which he might wish to remember . a quiet , dull woman , 
 his mother -- taciturn , and something of a bookworm . she have never 
 understand he , nor he she . but she have occasionally show moment of 
 expansion and emotion , when the soul within glow a little through its 
 covering ; and he remember the look in her eye as the coffin 
 disappear into the earth , amid the black - coat throng of Lords and 
 Commons . she have be for year a great though silent worshipper of Mr. 
 Gladstone , to the constant amusement of her Tory husband and son . 

 then , suddenly , a face , a woman 's pretty face , in the bench of the 
 north transept , catch his eye , and with a leap , as of something 
 unchain , the beast within he awake . it have remind he of Rachel ; and 
 therewith the decent memory of the distant past disappear , engulf 
 by the seething , ugly , mud - stain present . he be again crouch on the 
 hill - side , in the shelter of the holly , watch the scene within : Rachel 
 in that man 's arm ! have the American see he ? he remember his own 
 backward start of alarm , as Ellesborough suddenly turn and walk 
 towards the window . he have allow himself , in his eagerness to see , to 
 press too near . he have expose himself ? he do not really believe that he 
 have be discover -- unless the American be an uncommonly cool hand ! any 
 way , his retreat to the woode cover of the hill have be prompt . once 
 arrive in the thick plantation on the crest , he have throw himself down 
 exhausted . but as he sit pant there , on the fringe of the wood , he have 
 fancy voice and the flash of a light in the hollow beneath he . these 
 slight sign of movement , however , have quickly disappear . darkness and 
 silence resume possession of the farm , and he have have no difficulty in 
 find his way unmoleste through the tree to the main road , and to the 
 little town , five mile near to London than Millsborough , at which he 
 have take a room , under his present name of Wilson . 

 the woode common , indeed , with its high , withered bracken , together with 
 the hill encircle the farm , have be the cover from which he have 
 carry out his pry campaign upon his former wife . as he sit or knelt , 
 mechanically , under the high and shadowy space of the Abbey , his mind 
 fill with excited recollection of that other evening when , after 
 tear his hand badly on some barbed wire surround one of Colonel 
 Shepherd 's game preserve , so that it bleed profusely , and he have nothing 
 to bandage it with , he have suddenly become aware of voice behind he , 
 and of a large party of man in khaki -- canadian forester , by the look 
 of they , from the ralstone timber camp , advance , at some distance , in a 
 long extend line through the tree ; so that they be bind to come 
 upon he if he remain in the wood . he turn back at once , face the 
 barbed wire again , with renew damage both to clothe and hand , and 
 run , crouch , down the green road lead to the farm , his wound 
 bleeding as he run . then he have perceive an old labourer make for he 
 with shout . but under the shelter of the cart - shed , he have first 
 succeed in tie his handkerchief so tightly round his wrist , with his 
 tooth and one hand , as to check the bleeding , which be begin to make 
 he feel faint . then , creep round the back of the farm , he see that 
 the upper half of the stable door be open , and leap over it , he have 
 hide among the horse , just as Halsey come past in pursuit . the old 
 man -- confound him!--had make the circuit of the farm , and have then go 
 up the grass road to the hill . delane , look out from the dark stable , 
 have be able to watch he through the dusk , keep an eye the while to 
 the opposite door open on the farm - yard . but the labourer disappear , 
 and in the dark roomy stable , with its beamed roof , nothing could be 
 hear but the champing and slow tramping movement of the splendid 
 cart - horse . Rachel 's horse ! delane pass his free hand over two of 
 they , and they turn their stately head and nose he in a quiet way . 
 then he vault again over the half door , and hurry up the hill , in the 
 gathering darkness . 

 he be aware of the ghost - story . he have hear it and the story of the 
 murder from a man cut bracken on the common ; and he have already 
 form some vague notion of make use of it for the blackmailing of 
 Rachel . it amuse he to think that perhaps his sudden disappearance 
 would lead to a new chapter of the old tale . 

 then at the recollection of Rachel 's prosperity and peace , of her sleek 
 horse and cow , her huge hay and corn stack , her comfortable home , and 
 her new lover , a fresh shudder of rage and hatred grip he . she have 
 once be his thing -- his chattel ; he seem to see her white neck and 
 breast , her unbound hair on the pillow beside he -- and she have escape 
 he , and dance on he . 

 of course she have betray he -- of course she have have a lover ! what other 
 explanation be there of her turn against him?--of her flight from his 
 house ? but she have be clever enough to hide all the trace of it . he 
 recall his own lame and baffled attempt to get hold of some evidence 
 against she , with gnashing of tooth .... 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " _ for the thing which be see be temporal , but the thing which be 
 not see be eternal ! _ " 

 he catch the word star at he from the page of the open prayer book 
 beside he , and automatically the greek equivalent suggest itself . he 
 have always do well in " divinner " ! then he become aware that the 
 blessing have be give , that the organ be play , and the congregation 
 be break up . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 twenty - four hour later , Delane find himself on a road lead up from 
 the town where he be lodge to the summit of the wide stretch of common 
 land on the western side of which lie great end Farm . half way up a long 
 hill , he come upon a young man in uniform , disconsolately kneel beside 
 a bicycle which he seem to be vainly try to mend . as Delane come up 
 with he , he look up and ask for a light . delane produce a match , 
 and the young man , by the help of it , inspect his broken machine . 

 " no go ! " he say with a shrug , " I shall have to walk . " 

 he rise from the ground , put up the tool he have be use , and button 
 up his coat . then he ask Delane where he be go . delane name a 
 little village on the farther edge of the common . 

 " oh , well , that be straight ahead . I turn off to the right , " say the 
 young soldier , " at the cross road . " 

 they walk on together , Delane rather unwillingly submit to the 
 companionship thus spring upon he . he see from the badge on the man 's 
 shoulder that he belong to one of the Canadian Forestry Corps in the 
 district , and be at once on his guard . they start in silence , till 
 Delane , pull his mind back with a jerk , ask his companion if he be 
 go to Ipscombe . 

 " no -- only to Great End Farm . " 

 darkness hide the sudden change in Delane 's countenance . 

 " you know some one there ? " 

 " no , but I want to see one of the lady about something . there be two of 
 they run the farm . but Miss Henderson 's the boss . " 

 cautiously , with assumed indifference , Delane begin to ask question . 

 he discover that his companion 's name be Dempsey ; and before many 
 minute have pass the murderer 's grandson be in the full swing of his 
 story . delane , despise the young man for a chatter fool , listen , 
 nevertheless , with absorb attention to every item of his tale . 
 presently Dempsey say with a laugh,-- 

 " there be be people in Ipscombe all these year as always would have it 
 old Watson walk . I know the name of three people at least as have 
 swear to seein ' ' I m. and there be an old fellow in Ipscombe now that 
 declare he be see he , only t'ther day . " 

 Delane light his pipe , and nonchalantly inquire particular . 

 Dempsey give a mocking account of Halsey 's story . 

 " he be an old fool ! do you ever hear of a ghost bleedin ' before ! " the 
 speaker throw back his head and laugh . " that be all rot ! besides , I 
 do not   believe in ghost -- never do . but as Miss Henderson 's farmin ' the 
 very land where old Watson be do in , I think she would like to have the 
 true story and first hand . and there be no one but I know it -- not first 
 hand . so I write to she , and say as I would call at six o'clock this 
 evening . " 

 " you know she ? " 

 " no -- o , " say the young man , hesitate . " but I somehow fancy as I may 
 have see she before . " 

 " where ? " 

 " why , in Canada . I be live on a farm , not far from Winnipeg"--he name 
 the place . delane suddenly drop his pipe , and stoop to pick it up . 

 " all right , " he say , " go on . " 

 " and there be a man -- a sort of gentleman -- his name be delane -- on 
 another farm about ten mile from where I be work . People talk 
 of he no end -- he be a precious bad lot ! I never see he that I know 
 of -- but I see his wife twice . they say he be a brute to she . and she be 
 awfully handsome . you could not   forget she when you would once come across 
 she . and when I see Miss Henderson drivin ' one of the wagon in the 
 Millsborough Harvest Festival , a fortnight ago , I could have swear it be 
 Mrs. Delane . but , of course , it be my mistake . " 

 " where do you see Mrs. Delane ? " 

 " once at her own place . I be deliver some poultry food that delane 
 have buy of my employer -- and once at a place belongin ' to a man 
 call Tanner . " 

 " Tanner ? " 

 " Tanner . he be something the same sort as Delane . we have   a lot of they in 
 Canada -- remittance man , we call they -- man as can not   get on in the old 
 country -- and their relation pay them to go -- and pay them to keep away . but 
 Tanner be a nice sort of fellow -- quite different from Delane . he paint 
 picture . I remember his showin ' some o ' they in Winnipeg . but he be 
 always down on his luck . he could not   make any money , and he could not 
 keep it . " 

 " you see Miss Henderson there ? " 

 Dempsey give a guffaw . 

 " oh , Lor , no ! I do not   say that . why , I would get into trouble -- shouldn't   I ? 
 but I see Mrs. Delane . I be drive past Tanner 's place , with two 
 horse , and a heavy load , November two year ago -- just before we pass 
 our Military Service Act , and I join up . and an awful storm come on -- a 
 regular blizzard . before I get to Tanner 's I be nearly wear out , an ' the 
 horse , too . so I stop to ask for a hot drink or something . you 
 could not   see the horse ' head for the snow . and Tanner bring I out 
 some hot coffee -- I'm a teetotaller , you see -- an ' a woman stand at the 
 door , and hand it to he . she be holdin ' a lamp , so I see her quite 
 plain . and I know she at once , though she be only there a minute . it be 
 Mrs. Roger Delane . " 

 he stop to light a cigarette . no sound come from his companion . all 
 round they spread the great common , with its old thorn , its clump of 
 fir , its hollow and girdle wood , faintly light by a ghostly moonlight 
 that be just begin to penetrate the misty November dusk . the 
 cheerful light of Dempsey 's cigarette shine a moment in the gloom . delane 
 be conscious of an excitement which it take all his will to master . but 
 he speak carelessly . 

 " and what be Mrs. Delane do there ? " 

 Dempsey chuckle . 

 " how should I know ? tanner use to have a sister stay with he 
 sometimes . perhaps she and Mrs. Delane be friend . but I see that woman 
 quite plain . it be Mrs. Delane -- that I will swear . and Miss Henderson be 
 as like she as two pea . it might have be her sister . Miss Henderson 's 
 very uncommon - look . you do not   often see that complexion and that hair . 
 and she have live in Canada . " 

 " how do you know ? " 

 " she tell old Halsey . well , there be my road , just ahead . and if you be 
 go to Moor End , you keep straight on . the moon be come up . it will not 
 be very dark . " and with a careless good - night , the Canadian turn a 
 corner , and disappear along a road which diverge at a right angle from 
 the main road , and lead , as Delane know , direct to Ipscombe . 

 he himself walk on , till he find a lane tunnel through one of the 
 deep wood that on their western side run down to Great end Farm . in the 
 heart of that wood there be a keeper 's hut , disuse entirely since the 
 war . delane have discover it , and be quite prepared to spend a night 
 there at a pinch . there be a rude fireplace in it , and some old sack . 
 with some of the fall wood lie about , a man could make a fire , and 
 pass a winter night in very tolerable comfort . 

 he make his way in , manage to prop a sack against the small cobwebbe 
 window , fasten the door with a rusty bolt , and bring out an electric 
 torch he always carry in his pocket . 

 there be not a house within a long distance . there be no keeper now 
 on Colonel Shepherd 's estate . darkness -- the wood -- and the wild creature 
 in they -- be his only companion . half a mile away , no doubt , Rachel in 
 her smart new parlour be talk to the canadian fellow . 

 _ tanner ! _ ye god ! at last he have the clue to it all . 




 X 


 Dempsey do not find Rachel Henderson at home when he call at Great End 
 Farm , after his meeting with his unknown companion on the common . 

 Ellesborough and Rachel have go to London for the day . Ellesborough 's 
 duty at the ralstone camp be in a state of suspend animation , 
 since , in these expectant day before the signing of the armistice , there 
 have be a general slackening , as though by silent and general consent , 
 in the timber felling due to the war throughout the beautiful district 
 in which Millsborough lay . enough damage have be do already to the 
 great wood - sanctuary . on one pretext or another man hold their hand . 

 Ellesborough then be free to take time off when he would , and to spend 
 it in love - making . the engagement have be announce , and Ellesborough 
 believe himself a very happy man -- with the slight drawback that may be 
 imagine . 

 in the first place -- although , as he become well acquaint with 
 Rachel 's vary mood and aspect , he fall more and more deeply under 
 the charm of her temperament -- a temperament at once passionate and 
 childish , crude , and subtle , with many sign , fugitive and surprising , of 
 a deep and tragic reflectiveness ; he become also more and more conscious 
 of what seem to he the last effect upon she of her miserable 
 marriage . the nervous effect above all ; show by the vague " fear " of 
 which she have speak to he , on one of their early walk together ; and by 
 the gulfs of depression and silence into which she would often fall , 
 after period of high , even wild spirit . 

 it be this constant perception of a state of nervous suffering and 
 irritability in this splendid physical creature -- a state explain , as he 
 think , by her story , which have put he instantly on his guard , when 
 that sinister vision at the window have spring for a moment out of the 
 darkness . before almost he could move towards it , it have go . and with a 
 farewell smile at the woman he have just be hold in his arm , a smile 
 which betray nothing , he have hurry away from she to investigate the 
 mystery . a hasty word to Janet Leighton in the kitchen , and he be make 
 a rapid circuit of the farm , and search the farm - yard ; with no result 
 whatever . 

 then he , Janet , and Hastings have hold a hurried and secret colloquy in a 
 corner of the great cow - shed , as far from Rachel 's sight and hearing as 
 possible . clearly some one be haunt the farm for some malicious 
 purpose . Hastings , for the first time , tell the story of the blood - mark , 
 and of two or three other suppose vision of a man , tall and stooping , 
 with a dark sallow face , which person work on the farm , or walk 
 near it on the hill , have either see or imagine . Ellesborough finally 
 have jump on his motor - bicycle and ride off to the police depot at 
 Millsborough . some wind of the happening at Great End Farm have already 
 reach the police , but they could throw no light on they . they arrange , 
 however , with Ellesborough to patrol the farm and the neighbourhood after 
 dark as often as their diminished force would allow . 

 they be inclined to believe that some half - witted person be concern , 
 draw , perhaps , from the alien population which have be float through 
 the district , and bend on mischief or robbery -- or a mixture of both . 

 Rachel meanwhile know nothing of these consultation . after she 
 engagement be make public , she begin to look so white , so tired and 
 tremulous , that both Ellesborough and Janet be alarm . overwork , 
 accord to Janet , with the threshing , and in the potato - field . never 
 have Rachel work with such a feverish energy as in these autumn week . 
 add the excitement of an engagement , say Janet , and you see the result . 

 she would have prescribe bed and rest ; but Rachel scout the advice . 
 the alternative be amusement -- change of scene -- in Ellesborough 's 
 company . here she be more docile , feverishly submissive and happy , 
 indeed , so long as Ellesborough make the plan , and Ellesborough watch 
 over she . Janet wonder at certain profound change in she . it be , she 
 see , the first real passion of Rachel 's life . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 so Dempsey call in vain . Miss Henderson be in town for a theatre and 
 shopping . but he see Janet Leighton , to whom with all the dramatic 
 addition and flourish he have now bestow upon it , he tell his story . 
 Janet , who , on a hint from Hastings , have expect the visitation , be at 
 any rate glad that Rachel be out of the way , see what a strong and 
 curious dislike she have to the ghost - story , and also to any talk of the 
 murder from which it originate . 

 Janet , however , listen , and with a grow and fascinated attention , to 
 the old tale . be there some real connection , she wonder , between it 
 and the creature who have be prowl round the farm ? be some one 
 personate the ghost , and for what reason ? the same query be 
 ardently in the mind of Dempsey . he report Halsey 's adventure , 
 comment on it indignantly . 

 " it be some one as know the story , and be playin ' the fool with it . it be 
 a very impudent thing to do ! it be not play fair , that be what it be not ; 
 and I would like to get hold of he . " 

 Janet 's mouth twitch . the young man 's proprietorial interest in his 
 grandfather 's crime , and annoyance that any one should interfere with it , 
 turn the whole thing to comedy . moreover , his fatuous absorption in 
 that side of the matter make he useless for any other purpose : so that 
 she soon cease from cross - examine he , and he rise to go . 

 " well , I be sorry not to have see Miss Henderson , " he say awkwardly , 
 twist his cap . " I would like to have have a talk with she about Canada . it 
 be old Halsey tell I she have live in Canada . " 

 " yes , " say Janet irresponsively . 

 Dempsey smile broadly and seem embarrassed . at last he say with a 
 jerk:-- 

 " I wonder if Miss Henderson ever know a man call Tanner -- who live near 
 Winnipeg ? " 

 " I never hear her speak of he . " 

 " Because"--he still twirled--"when I see Miss Henderson at Millsborough 
 that day of the rally , I think as I have see she before . " 

 " oh ? " say Janet ardently . but some instinct put she on her guard . 

 " Dick Tanner , they call he , be a man -- an artist chap -- who live not 
 far from the man I be with -- and I once see a lady there just like Miss 
 Henderson . " 

 " do you ? " 

 Dempsey grow bolder . 

 " only it could not   have be Miss Henderson , you see -- because this lady I 
 see be a Mrs. Delane . but be Mrs. Delane perhaps a relation of Miss 
 Henderson ? she be just like Miss Henderson . " 

 " I will ask Miss Henderson , " say Janet , move towards the door , as a 
 signal to he to take his leave . " but I expect you be confuse she with 
 some one else . " 

 Dempsey , however , begin rather eagerly to dot the i 's . the picture of the 
 snowstorm , of the woman at the door , various point in his description 
 of she , and of the solitary -- apparently bachelor -- owner of the farm , 
 begin to affect Janet uncomfortably . she get rid of the chatter - box as 
 soon as possible , and go slowly to the kitchen , to get supper ready . as 
 she fry the bacon , and take some vegetable out of the hay - box , she be 
 think fast . 

 tanner ? no -- she have never hear Rachel mention the name . but it happen 
 that Dempsey have give a precise date . it be in the " November before 
 they pass Conscription " in Canada , _ i.e. _ before he himself be call 
 up -- that he see Mrs. Delane , at night , in Dick Tanner 's house . and Janet 
 remember that , accord to the story which as they two sit by the fire 
 alone at night , when the girl be go to bed , Rachel have gradually 
 build up before she . it be in that same month that Rachel have be 
 desert by Delane ; who have go off to British Columbia with the italian 
 girl , as his wife afterwards know , leave Rachel alone on the farm -- with 
 one japanese servant . 

 why should not   she have be stay on Mr. Tanner 's farm ? there be no 
 doubt some one else there -- whom the boy do not   see . perhaps she have 
 herself take refuge there during the storm . but all the same Janet feel 
 vaguely troubled . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 it be nearly seven o'clock , and the moon , now at the full , be rise 
 over the eastern hill , and balance the stubble and the new - turn 
 plough - land in the upland cup to a pearly whiteness as they lie under 
 the dark wood and a fleecy sky . there be a sound of a motor in the 
 lane -- the village taxi bring the traveller home . 

 in a few more minute they be in the sitting - room , Rachel throw off 
 her thick coat with Ellesborough 's help , and declare that she be not 
 the least tired . 

 " do not   believe she ! " say Ellesborough , smile at Janet . " she be not a 
 truthful woman ! " 

 and his proud eye return to Rachel as though now that there be light 
 to see she by he have no other use for they . 

 Rachel , indeed , be in a radiant mood . Pallor and depression have 
 vanish ; she be full of chatter about the street , the crowd , the 
 shop . 

 " but it be hopeless to go shop with a man ! he can not   make up his mind 
 one bit ! " 

 " he have not   a mind to make up ! " murmur Ellesborough , look up at she 
 as she perch above he on a corner of the table . 

 she laugh . 

 " that , I suppose , be what make he want to buy the whole place ! if I have 
 take his advice , Janet , I should have be just clean out ! " 

 " what be the good of be economical when one be go to be marry ! " 
 say Ellesborough , joyously . " why-- " 

 Rachel interrupt he -- with a hand on his shoulder . 

 " and we have   settle our plan , Janet -- that be , if you be agreeable . will 
 you mind look after the farm for six month ? " 

 " you see , if the armistice be sign -- and we shall know to - morrow , " say 
 Ellesborough , " I shall be free in a month or so , and then we propose to 
 marry and get a passage before Christmas . I must go home , and she say 
 she will come with I ! " 

 a shadow have fall suddenly , it seem to Janet , over Rachel 's aspect , 
 but she at once endorse what Ellesborough have say . 

 " we can not   settle thing -- can we?--till we have   see his people . we have   get 
 to decide whether I will go to America , or he will come here . " 

 " but we want to say"--Ellesborough turn gravely to janet--"that first 
 and foremost , we wish to do the good for you . " 

 the sudden tear come into Janet 's eye . but they do not show . 

 " oh , that will be all right . do not   bother about I . " 

 " we shall bother ! " say Rachel with energy , " but I will tell you all about 
 it presently . he will not   stay to supper . " 

 she descend from the table , and Ellesborough rise . after a little more 
 chat about the day and its doing , he say good - night to Janet . 

 " how do you get back ? " 

 " oh , I leave my bike in the village . I shall walk and pick it up there . " 

 Rachel take up her thick coat and slip it on again . she would walk 
 with he to the road , she say -- there be some more thing to say . 

 Janet watch they go out into the wide frosty night , where the sky be 
 shed its cloud , and the temperature be fall rapidly . she 
 realize that they be in that stage of passion when everything be 
 unreal outside the one supreme thing , and all other life pass like a 
 show half - see . and all the while the name Tanner -- Dick Tanner -- echo 
 in her mind . such a simple thing to put a careless question to Rachel ! 
 yet perhaps -- after all -- not so simple . 

 meanwhile the two lover be together on the path through the stubble , 
 walk hand - in - hand through the magic of the moonlight . 

 " will you write a little line to my mother to - morrow ? " 

 " yes , of course . But-- " 

 he catch her long breath . 

 " I have prepare the way , darling . I promise you -- it will be all right . " 

 " but why -- why -- didn't   I see you first ? " it be a stifle cry , which 
 seem somehow to speak for they both . and she add , bitterly , " it be no 
 good talking -- it can not   ever be the same -- to you , or to your people . " 

 " it shall be the same ! or rather , we shall owe you a double share of love 
 to make up to you -- for that horrible time . forget it , dear -- make yourself 
 forget it . my mother would tell you so at once . " 

 " be not   she -- very strict about divorce ? " 

 Ellesborough hesitate -- just a moment . 

 " she could not   have any doubt about your case -- dearest -- who could ? you 
 fall among thief , and-- " 

 " and you be pick I up , and take I to the inn ? " 

 he press her hand passionately . they walk in silence till the gate 
 appear . 

 " go back , dearest . I shall be over on Sunday . " 

 " not till then ? " 

 " I be afraid not . if the peace news come tomorrow , the camp'll go mad , 
 and I shall have to look after they . " 

 they pause at the gate , and he kiss she . she lie passive in his arm , 
 the moonlight touch her brown hair , and the beautiful curve of her 
 cheek and throat . 

 " be not   it heavenly to - day ? " she whisper . 

 " heavenly ! go home ! " 

 she turn back towards the farm , draw her cloak and its fur collar 
 close round she , against the cold . and indeed Ellesborough be no soon 
 go , the rush of the motor cycle along the distant road have no soon 
 die away , than a shiver run through she which be more than physical . so 
 long as he be there , she be happy , excited , hopeful . and when he be 
 not there , the protect screen have fall , and she be expose to all 
 the stress and terror of the storm rag in her own mind . 

 " why can not   I forget it all--_everythe _ ! it be dead--_it be dead _ ! " she 
 say to herself again and again in an anguish , as she walk back through 
 the broad open field where the winter - sown corn be just spring in the 
 furrow -- the moon be so bright that she could see the tiny green spear 
 of it . 

 and yet in reality she perfectly understand why it be that , instead of 
 forget , memory be become more and more poignant , more and more 
 persecuting . it be because the searching process of love be go 
 deep and deep into her inmost soul . this good man who love she , who 
 be go to take her injure life into his keeping , to devote to she all 
 his future , and all the harvest of his upright and hard - work past -- she 
 be go to marry he with a lie between they , so that she could never 
 look he straight in the face , never be certain that , sometime or other , 
 something would not emerge like a drowned face from the dark , and ruin 
 all their happiness . it have seem , at the beginning , so easy to keep 
 silence , to tell everything but the one miserable fact that she could not 
 tell ! and now it be get intolerably hard , just because she know 
 for the first time what love really mean , with its ardour for 
 self - revelation , for an absolute union with the beloved . by marry he 
 without confession , she would not only be wrong he , she would be 
 lay up probable misery for herself -- and he -- through the mere action 
 of her own temperament . 

 for she know herself . among the girl and woman she have be throw with 
 during the precede year and a half , there be some moral anarchist , 
 with whose view she have become strikingly familiar . why , they say , make 
 so much of these physical fact ? accept they , and the incident that 
 spring from they . why all this weeping and wail over suppose shame 
 and disgrace ? the sex - life of the present be make its own new code . 
 who know what they will ultimately be ? and as for the indelible trace 
 and effect of an act of weakness or passion that the sentimental and 
 goody - goody people talk of , in the majority of case they do not   exist . 
 after it , the human being concern may be just the same as before . 

 Rachel be quite aware of this modern gospel . only she be shut out from 
 adopt it in her own case by an invincible heredity , by the spirit of 
 her father in she , the saintly old preacher , whose uncompromise faith 
 she have witness and share through all her young year . she might and 
 do protest that the faith be no long her . but it have stamp she . 
 she could never be wholly rid of its prejudice and repulsion . what 
 would her father have say to her divorce?--he with his mystical 
 conception of marriage ? she dread to think . and as to that other 
 fact which weigh on her conscience , she seem to hear herself 
 pleading -- with tears!--"Father!--it be not   my will -- it be my 
 _ weakness_!--don't   look at I so ! " 

 and now , in addition , there be the pressure upon she of Ellesborough 's 
 own high ideal and religious temper ; of the ideal , also , of his family , 
 as he be tenderly and unconsciously reveal they . and , finally , there 
 be the daily influence of Janet 's neighbourhood -- janet , so austere for 
 herself , so pitiful for other : janet , so like Ellesborough in the 
 unconscious sternness of her moral outlook , so full , besides , of an 
 infinite sorrow for the sinner . 

 and between these two stand this variable , sensuous , woman 's nature , so 
 capable both of good and evil . Rachel feel the burden of their virtue 
 too much for she , together with the sting of her own secret knowledge . 

 in some moment , even , she rebel against her own passion . she have such 
 a moment of revolt , in this moonlit dark , as her eye take in the farm , 
 the dim outline of the farm building , the stack , the new - plough 
 furrow . two month early her life have be absorb in simple , clear , 
 practical ambition : how to improve her stock -- how to grow another bushel 
 to the acre -- how and when to build a silo -- whether to try 
 electrification : a score of pleasant riddle that make the hour fly . and 
 now this old fever have creep again into her blood , and everything have 
 lose its savour . there be time when she bitterly , childishly , 
 regret it . she could almost have hat Ellesborough , because she love 
 he so well ; and because of the terror , the ceaseless preoccupation that 
 her love have begin to impose upon she . 

 Janet , watch she come in , see that the radiance have depart , and that 
 she creep about again like a tired woman . when , after nine o'clock , they 
 be alone by the fire , again and again it be on the tip of Janet 's 
 tongue to say , " tell I , who be Dick Tanner ? " then , in a sudden panic 
 fear , lest the word should slip out , and bring something irreparable , 
 she would get up , and make a restless pretence of some household work or 
 other , only to sit down and begin the same inward debate once more . but 
 she say nothing , and Rachel , too , be silent . she sit over the fire , 
 apparently half asleep . neither of they move to go to bed till nearly 
 midnight . 

 then they kiss each other , and Janet rake out the fire . 

 " to - morrow ! " she say , her eye on the red glow of the ember , 
 " _ to - morrow_!--Will it be peace ? " 

 and then Rachel remember that all the civilized world be wait for 
 the word that would end the war . somewhere in a french château there be 
 a group of man confer , and on the issue of this night depend the 
 life of thousand , and the peace of Europe . 

 Janet raise her clasp hand , and her plain , quiet face shine in the 
 candle - light . she murmur something . Rachel guess it be a prayer . but 
 her own heart seem dead and dumb . she could not free it from its load 
 of personal care ; she could not feel the patriotic emotion which have 
 suddenly seize on Janet . 

 the morning break grey and misty . the two labourer and the girl go 
 about their work -- raise their head now and then to listen . and at 
 eleven come the signal . Out ring the bell from Ipscombe Church tower . 
 labourer and girl throw down what they be do , and gather in the 
 farm - yard round Janet and Rachel , who be wave flag on the step of 
 the farm - house . then Rachel give they all a holiday for the rest of the 
 day , and very soon there be no one leave on the farm premise but the two 
 woman and the bailiff . 

 " do not   stay , Hastings , " say Rachel . " I will get the horse and cart 
 myself . " 

 for it be market day at Millsborough , and peace or no peace , she have 
 some business that must be do there . 

 " oh , I have   no call to go , Miss , " say Hastings . " I would rather stay and look 
 after thing . " 

 his eye meet Janet 's , and she nod imperceptibly . she be relieve to 
 think of Hastings -- good , faithful , unassuming creature!--remaine on 
 guard . the very desertion of the farm - house on this great day might 
 tempt marauder -- especially that thief or madman who have be haunt 
 their own premise . she hop the police would not forget they either . 
 but Hastings ' offer to stay till the girl come back from the 
 Millsborough crowd and band at about nine o'clock quite ease her mind . 
 and meanwhile she and Hastings , as have be agree , keep their anxiety 
 from Rachel . 

 Rachel go off at twelve o'clock in her khaki suit , drive a spirited 
 young horse in a high cart , which be fill with farm produce . she be 
 to take early dinner with some new friend , and then to go and look at a 
 Jersey cow which Janet covet , in a farm on the other side of 
 Millsborough . 

 " do not   wait tea for I , " she say to Janet , " I shall get some somewhere . " 
 and then with a smile to they both she be off . Janet stand look after 
 she , lose in a painful uncertainty . " can not   you let it alone ? " Lord 
 Melbourne be accustom to say suavely to those member of the Cabinet 
 who bring he grievance or scandal that want see to . one half of 
 Janet 's mind be say , " can not   you let it alone ? " to the other half . 




 XI 


 the daylight have all go when Rachel at last get into her cart in the 
 yard of the Rose and Thistle at Millsborough and take the rein . but 
 there be a faint moonrise struggle through the mist in which the 
 little town and countryside be shroud . and in the town , with its 
 laugh and sing crowd , its bright shop window , its moist , 
 straggle flag , the mist , lie gently over the old house , the move 
 people , the flash and streamer of light , be extraordinarily romantic 
 and beautifying . 

 Rachel drive slowly through the street , delight in the noise and 
 excitement , in the sheer new pleasure of everything , the world -- human 
 being -- live -- the end of the war . and out among the field , and in the 
 country road , the November sun be still beautiful ; what with the pearly 
 mist , and the purple shape of the forest - cover hill . she have be 
 much make of in Millsborough . People be anxious to talk to she , to 
 invite she , to do business with she . her engagement , she perceive , have 
 make she doubly interesting . she be go to be prosperous , to 
 succeed -- and all the world smile upon she . 

 so that her pulse be run fast as she reach Ipscombe , where , in 
 the mild fog , a few group be stand about , and a few door be 
 open . and now -- there be home!--in front of she . and -- Heavens ! what have 
 Janet do ? Rachel pull up the horse , and sit enchant , look at the 
 farm . for there it lay , prick out in light , its old georgian line 
 against the background of the hill . every window have a light in it -- every 
 blind be draw up -- it be Janet 's illumination for the peace . she have 
 make of the old house " an insubstantial faery place , " and Rachel laugh 
 for pleasure . 

 then she drive eagerly on into the dark tunnel of tree that lay between 
 she and the house . 

 suddenly a shape rush out of the hedge into the light of the lamp , and 
 a man lay a violent hand upon the horse 's rein . the horse rear , and 
 Rachel cry out,-- 

 " what be you do ? let go ! " 

 but the man hold the struggle horse , at once coerce and taming 
 it , with an expert hand . a voice!--that send a sudden horror through 
 rachel,-- 

 " sit where you be -- hold tight!--don't   be a fool!--he'll quiet down . " 

 she sit paralyse ; and , still hold the rein , though the trembling 
 horse be now quiet , a man advance into the light of the left - hand lamp . 

 " well -- do you know I ? " he say quietly . 

 she struggle for breath and self - control . 

 " let those rein alone!--what be you do here ? " 

 and snatch up her whip , she bend forward . but he make a spring at it , 
 snatch it easily with a laugh , and break it . 

 " you know you never be strong enough to get the well of I . why do 
 you try ? do not   be an idiot . I want to make an appointment with you . you 
 can not   escape I . I have   watch you for week . and see you alone , too . 
 without that fellow you be engage to . " 

 her passion rise , in spite of her deadly fear . 

 " he will take care of that , " she say , " and the police . I be not helpless 
 now -- as I use to be . " 

 " ah , but you would well see I . I have   get a great deal to say that concern 
 you . I suppose you have   tell that american chap a very pretty story about 
 our divorce ? well , it take I a long time to get to the bottom of it 
 myself . but now I'm -- well , disillusioned ! " 

 he come close , close to the rail of the cart and the lamp , so that she 
 see clearly the haggard wreck of what once have be Roger Delane , and the 
 evil triumph in his eye . 

 " who stay the night alone , with Dick Tanner , on his place , when I be 
 safely get rid of ? " he say , in a low but clear voice . " and then who 
 play the innocent -- who do ? " 

 " liar ! " 

 " not at all . I have   get some new evidence now -- some quite fresh light on 
 the scene -- which may be useful to I . I want money . you seem to have a 
 lot . and I want to be pay back a little of what I be owe . oh , I can hold 
 my tongue , if it be make worth my while . I do not   suppose you have   tell your 
 american young man anything about Dick Tanner -- eh ? " 

 " let go the horse ! " she say fiercely , try to recapture the rein . 
 " you have   nothing to do with I any more . " 

 " have not   I ? oh , by all mean tell your yankee that I have   waylay you . I 
 should not   at all object to an interview with he . in fact , I rather think 
 of ask for it . but if you want to prevent it , you have   get to do what 
 you be tell . " 

 he come close , and speak with slow emphasis . " you have   get to arrange a 
 time -- when I can see you--_alone ? _ when shall it be ? " 

 Silence . but far ahead there be sound as of some one approach . 
 delane leap on the step of the cart . 

 " this be Monday . Wednesday night -- get rid of everybody ! you can do it if 
 you like . I shall come at nine . you have   get to let I in . " 

 her white , quivering face be all his answer . 

 " do not   forget , " he say , jump down . " good - night ! " 

 and in a second he be go , where , she could not tell . 

 the rein fall from her grasp . she leant back in the cart , half faint . 
 the horse , find the rein on his neck , stray to the grassy side of 
 the road , and begin graze . a short time pass . in another minute or 
 two the left wheel would have go do into a deep ditch . 

 " Hallo ! " cry a man 's voice . " what the matter ? " 

 Rachel try to rouse herself , but could only murmur inarticulately . the 
 man jump off his bicycle , prop it against a tree , and come run 
 to she . 

 he see a woman , in a khaki feel hat and khaki dress , sit hunch up 
 in a fainting state on the seat of a light cart . he be just in time to 
 catch the horse and turn it back to the road . then in his astonishment 
 John Dempsey altogether forget himself . 

 " do not   be frightened , Mrs. Delane ! why , you have   have a faint . but never 
 mind . cheer up ! I will get you home safe . " 

 and Rachel , reviving , open her heavy eye to see stoop over her the 
 face of the lad in the hooded cart whom she have last see in the night of 
 that November snowstorm , two year before . 

 " what do you say ? " she ask stupidly . then , raise herself , with an 
 instinctive gesture she smooth back her hair from her face , and 
 straighten her hat . " thank you , I be all right . " 

 Dempsey 's mouth as he retreat from her shape itself to an involuntary 
 grin . 

 " I beg your pardon , ma'am -- but I think I have   see you in Canada . do not   I 
 once come to your place , with a parcel from Mr. Grimes -- that be my 
 employer -- of Redminster ? I remember you have a Jap servant . and there be 
 another time , I think"--the lad 's eye fix she , contract a little , 
 and sharp with curiosity--"when you and Mr. Dick Tanner give I that 
 fizzle hot coffee -- don't   you remember?--in that awful blizzard two 
 year ago ? and Mr. Tanner give the horse a feed , too . awfully good chap , 
 Mr. Tanner . I do not   know what I should have do without that coffee . " 

 Rachel be still deathly white , but she have recover possession of 
 herself , and her mind be work madly through a score of possibility . 

 " you be quite mistaken , " she say coldly , " I never see you before that I 
 be aware of . please let go the rein . I can manage now quite well . I 
 do not   know what make I feel ill . I be all right now . " 

 " you have   get the rein twist round the shaft , miss , " say Dempsey 
 officiously . " you would well let I put them right . " 

 and without wait for a reply , he begin to disentangle they , not 
 without a good deal of fidget from the horse , which delay he . his 
 mouth twitch with laughter as he bend over the shaft . deny that she be 
 Mrs. Delane ! that be a good one . why , now that he have see she close , he 
 could swear to she anywhere . 

 Rachel watch he , her sens sharpen rapidly . only a few minute 
 since Roger have be there -- and now , this man . have they meet ? be there 
 collusion between they ? there must be . how else could Roger know ? no one 
 else in the world but this youth could have give he the information . 
 she recall the utter solitude of the snow - bind farm -- the heavy 
 drift -- no human being but Dick and herself -- till that evening when the 
 new snow be all hard frozen , and they two have sleigh back under the 
 moon to her own door . 

 what to do ? she seem to see her course . 

 " what be your name ? " she ask he , endeavour to speak in her ordinary 
 voice , and bend over the front of the cart , she speak to the horse , 
 " quiet , Jack , quiet ! " 

 " my name 's John Dempsey , ma'am . " he look up , and then quickly withdraw 
 his eye . she see the twitching smile that he now could hardly restrain . 
 by this time he have straighten the rein , which she gather up . 

 " it be curious , " she say , " but you be not the first person who be mistaken 
 I for that Mrs. Delane . I know something about she . I do not   want to be 
 mistaken for she . " 

 " I see , " say Dempsey . 

 " I would rather you do not   speak about it in the village -- or anywhere . 
 you see , one do not   like to be confuse with some people . I do not   like 
 Mrs. Delane . " 

 the lad look up grin . 

 " she get divorce , do not   she ? " 

 " I dare say . I know very little about she . but , as I say , I do not   want 
 to be mistake for she . " 

 then , tie the rein to the cart , she jump down and stand beside he . 

 his hand go instinctively to the horse 's mouth , hold the restive 
 animal still . 

 " and I should be very much oblige to you if you would keep what you 
 think about I to yourself . I do not   want you to talk about it in the 
 village or anywhere . come up and see I -- at the farm -- and I will tell you 
 why I dislike be mix up with that woman -- why , in fact , I should mind 
 it dreadfully . I can not   explain now , but-- " 

 the young man be fairly dazzle by the beauty of the sudden flush on her 
 pale cheek , of her large plead eye , her soft voice . and this -- as old 
 Betts have only that afternoon tell he -- be the lady engage to his own 
 superior officer , Captain Ellesborough , the Commandant of Ralstone Camp , 
 whom he heartily admire , and stand in considerable awe of ! his vanity , 
 of which he possess so large a share , be much tickle ; but , also , his 
 feeling be touch . 

 " why , of course , ma'am , will not   say anything . I do not   mean any harm . " 

 " all right , " say Rachel , scramble back to her seat . " if you like to 
 come up to - morrow morning , I shall be pleased to see you . it be a bargain , 
 mind ! " 

 he salute , smile . she nod to he , and drive off . 

 " well , that be the rummi go ! " say the bewildered Dempsey to himself , 
 as he walk towards his bicycle . " Mistake be damn ! she _ be _ Mrs. 
 Delane , and what be she up to now with my captain ? and what the deuce be 
 she do at Tanner 's ? " 

 never do a person feel himself more vastly important than Dempsey as he 
 bicycle back to the ralstone camp , whence he have start in the morning , 
 after the peace news , to go and see a cousin live some distance beyond 
 great end Farm . to be his grandfather 's grandson be much -- but _ this _ ! 

 Rachel drive , with hand unconscious of the rein , along the road and up 
 the farm lane lead through her own field . the world swam around she 
 in the mist , but there , still in front of she , lie the illuminated farm , 
 a house of light stand in air . as she near it , the front door open 
 and sound of singing and laughter come out . 

 the " Marseillaise " ! _ allon , enfant de la patrie!_--janet be play 
 it , sing vigorously herself , and try to teach the two girl the 
 french word , a performance which break down every other minute in 
 helpless laughter from all three . meanwhile , Hastings , who have be 
 stand behind the singer , his hand in his pocket , a rare and 
 shamefaced pleasure shin from his care - wear face , think he hear the 
 cart , and look out . yes , it be the Missis , as he like to call Miss 
 Henderson , and he run down to meet she . 

 " well , I suppose there be fine doing at Millsborough , Miss , " he say , 
 as he hold the horse for she to get down . 

 " yes -- there be a lot of people . it be very noisy . " 

 " we think you would hear our noise , Miss , as far as the road ! Miss 
 Leighton , she be be keep we all alive . she take the girl to 
 church -- to the Thanksgiving Service , while I look after thing . " 

 " all right , Hastings , " say Miss Henderson , in a voice that strike his 
 ear strangely . " thank you . will you take the cart ? " 

 he think as he lead the horse away , " she be be overdoin ' it again . the 
 Cap'n will tell she so . " 

 Rachel climb the little slope to the front door . it seem an Alp . 
 presently she stand on the threshold of the sitting - room , in her thick 
 fur coat , look at the group round the piano . Janet glance round , 
 laugh . " come and join in ! " and they all strike up " God save the 
 King"--a comely group in the lamplight , Jenny and Betty lift their 
 voice lustily . but they seem to Rachel to be play some silly game 
 which she do not understand . she close the door and go upstairs to 
 her own room . it be cold and dark . she light a candle , and her own face , 
 transform , look at she from the glass on the dressing - table . she give 
 a weary , half - reflective sigh . " shall I be like that when I be old ? " 

 she take off her thing , and change mechanically into an afternoon 
 dress , her mind , like a hunt thing , run hither and thither all the 
 time . 

 presently she get up and lock the door . she must think--_think_--by 
 herself . 

 it would be quite easy to defy Roger -- quite easy to lie , and lie 
 successfully , if only she be sure of herself , and her own will to carry 
 thing through . Roger could prove nothing -- or that vulgar boy -- or 
 anybody . she have only to say , " I go to find Lucy Tanner , who be my 
 friend -- she be not   there -- I be overtake by the storm -- and Dick Tanner 
 look after I till I could get home . " 

 it be the most natural -- the most plausible story . if Delane force 
 himself on George with any vile tale , Ellesborough would probably give 
 he in charge for molest his former wife . there be absolutely nothing 
 to fear , if she handle the thing in a bold , common - sense way , and tell a 
 consistent and clever lie . 

 and yet , she have weakly make appointment with both her tormentors!--made 
 it plain to they that she be afraid ! she call herself a coward , and a 
 fool -- and then as she leant her head against the side of her bed , the 
 tear run down her face , and her heart cry out for Ellesborough . 

 " how _ can _ I go on lie to he -- now -- and all my life ? " it be the same 
 cry as before , but more intense , more passionate with every day 's living . 
 the need for lie have now double ; yet she will could less and less 
 steel itself to it , because of sheer love and remorse towards the man who 
 love she . 

 " he would forgive I . I know he would -- I know he would ! " she keep on 
 murmur to herself , while her eye rain in the semi - darkness . 

 yes , but it would change everything ! their love -- his feeling towards 
 she -- could never be the same again . after Roger Delane -- Dick Tanner . why 
 not another -- and another ? would he not always be watch she , dread 
 some new discovery ! suspect she , even while he love she ? 

 no . she must choke off Delane -- with money -- the only way . and invent some 
 story -- some bribe , too -- for that odious young man who have catch she 
 unawares . 

 so again she harden herself , despairingly . it could not be allow 
 she -- the balm and luxury of confession ! it be too dangerous . her all 
 be in it . 

 meanwhile , the singing continue below . Janet have strike up " tipperary , " 
 and the small flute - like voice of the girl , support by her harsh 
 one , mount joyously through every crevice of the slightly - build house . 

 " it be a long , long way to Tipperary , 
 and my heart be right there . " 

 the beautiful tune , interweave for our generation with all that be most 
 poignant in its life , beat on Rachel 's nerve . it be be sing all over 
 England that Armistice Day , as it have be sing in the first day of the 
 war , joyously , exultingly , yet with catch breath . there be in it more 
 than thousand of man and woman dare to probe , whether of joy or sorrow . 
 they sing it , with a sob in the throat . to Rachel , also , sink in her own 
 terror , it be almost unbearable . the pure unspoilt passion of it -- the 
 careless , confident joy -- seem to make an outcast of she , as she sit 
 there in the dark , drag back by the shock and horror of Delane 's 
 appearance into the slime and slough of old memory , and struggle with 
 they in vain . yes , she be " damaged goods"--she be unfit to marry George 
 Ellesborough . but she would marry he ! she set her tooth -- cling to he 
 with all the energy of a woman 's deepening and mature consciousness . 
 she have be a weak and self - willed child when she marry delane -- when 
 she spend those half miserable , half wild day and night with Dick 
 Tanner . now she trust a good man -- now she look up and adore . her 
 weakness be safe in the care of George Ellesborough 's strength . well , 
 then , let she fight for her love . 

 presently Janet knock at the door . the singing downstair have cease . 

 " be you tired , Rachel ? can not   I help you ? " 

 " just a bit tired . I be rest . I will be down directly . " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 but the interruption have start fresh anxiety in her mind . she have 
 pay the most perfunctory attention to the few word Janet have say about 
 Dempsey 's call at the farm , two night before . she understand at the time 
 that he have come to chatter about the murder , and be very glad that she 
 have be out of the way . 

 but now -- what be it that he have say to Janet -- and why have Janet say so 
 little about his visit ? 

 instead of rest she walk incessantly up and down . this uncertainty 
 about Janet tease she ; but after all it be nothing to that other 
 mystery -- how do Roger know?--and to the strange and bewildering effect 
 of the juxtaposition of the two man -- their successive appearance in the 
 darkness within -- what?--ten minutes?--a quarter of an hour?--while the 
 cloud be on her own brain -- without apparently any connection between 
 they -- and relevance to each other . there must have be some connection ! 
 and yet there have be no sign of any personal knowledge of Roger Delane 
 in Dempsey 's talk ; and no reference whatever to Dempsey in Delane 's . 

 she go down to supper , very flushed and on edge . little Jenny eye she 
 surreptitiously . for the first time the child 's raw innocence be 
 disturbed or jealous . what do John Dempsey want with call on Miss 
 Henderson -- and why have he make a rather teasing mystery of it to she , 
 Jenny ? " would not   you like to know , Miss Inquisitive ? " yes , Jenny would 
 like to know . of course Miss Henderson be engage to Captain 
 Ellesborough , and all that . but that be no reason why she should carry 
 off Jenny 's " friend , " as well as her own . Jenny 's heart swell within 
 she as she watch Miss Henderson from the other end of the table . yes , 
 of course , she be nice - looking , and her clothe be nice . Jenny think 
 that she would get a new good dress soon , now that peace be come ; and a 
 new hat with a high silk crown to match the dress . Dempsey have admire a 
 hat like that on a girl in the village . he have say it be " real smart . " 
 and to be ' smart " Jenny thought be to be happy . 

 after supper , Janet and the girl wash up and put all tidy for the 
 night . Rachel work at account in the sitting - room . she have sell the 
 last hay she have to spare wonderfully well , and potato show a good 
 profit . thresh charge be very high , and wage -- appalling ! but on 
 the whole , they be do very well . Janet 's Jersey cow have be 
 expensive , but they could afford she . 

 they have never yet draw out so good an interim balance sheet without 
 delight , and rosy dream for the future . now her mood be leaden , and she 
 push the paper aside impatiently . as she be sit with her hand 
 round her knee , star into the fire , or at the chair where 
 Ellesborough have sit while she tell her story , Janet come into the room . 
 she pause at the door , and Rachel do not see her look of sudden alarm 
 as she perceive Rachel 's attitude of depression . then she come up to the 
 fire . the two girl could be hear laugh overhead . 

 " so my cow be a good one ? " she say , with her pleasant voice and smile . 

 " a beauty , " say Rachel , look up , and recapitulate the point and 
 yield of the Jersey . 

 Janet give a shrug -- imply a proper scepticism . 

 " it do not   seem to be quite as easy to tell lie about cow as about 
 horse , " she say , laugh ; " that be about all one can say . we will hope 
 for the good . " then -- after a moment,-- 

 " I never tell you much about that man Dempsey 's visit . of course he come 
 to see you . he think when he see you at Millsborough that you be a 
 Mrs. Delane he have see in Canada . be you perhaps a relation of her ? I 
 say I would ask you . then I inquire how often he have see Mrs. Delane . 
 he say twice -- perhaps three time -- at her home -- at a railway 
 station -- and at a farm belong to a man call Tanner . " 

 " yes , " say Rachel , indifferently . " I know Lucy Tanner , his sister . she 
 be an artist like he . I like they both . " 

 there be silence . in Rachel 's breast there be beat a painful tide of 
 speech that long to find its way to freedom -- but it be grip and 
 thrust back by her will . there be something in Janet as in Ellesborough 
 that woo her heart , that seem to promise help . 

 but nothing more pass , of importance . Janet , possess by vague , yet , 
 as they seem to herself , quite unreasonable anxiety , give some 
 further scornful account of Dempsey 's murder talk , to which Rachel 
 scarcely listen ; then she say , as she turn to take up her 
 knitting,-- 

 " I be go over to - morrow to a little service -- a Thanksgiving service -- at 
 Millsborough . I take the girl to church to - day -- but I love my own 
 people ! " her face glow a little . 

 " unitarian service , you mean ? " 

 " yes -- we've   get a little 'cause ' there , and a minister . the service will 
 be about six , I think . the girl will manage . the minister and his wife 
 want I to stay to supper -- but I shall be back in good time . " 

 " about ten ? " 

 " oh , yes -- quite by then . I shall bicycle . " 

 through Rachel 's mind there pass a thrill of relief . so Janet would be 
 out of the way . one difficulty remove . now , to get rid of the girl ? 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Rachel scarcely sleep , and the November day break grey and misty as 
 before . after breakfast she go out into the field . Old Halsey be 
 mole - catch in one of they . but instead of go to inspect he and his 
 result , she slip through a tall hedge , and pace the road under its 
 shelter , look for Dempsey . 

 on the stroke of eleven she see he in the distance . he come up with the 
 same look , half embarrassed , half incline to laugh , that he have wear 
 the day before . Rachel , on the other hand , be entirely at her ease , and 
 the young man feel she at once his intellectual and social superior . 

 " you seem to have save I and my horse from a tumble into that ditch 
 last night , " she say , with a laugh , as she greet he . " why I turn 
 faint like that I can not   imagine . I do sometimes when I be tired . well , now 
 then -- let we walk up the road a little . " 

 with her hand in her pocket she lead the way . in her neat serge suit and 
 cap , she be the woman - farmer -- prosperous and competent -- all over . 
 Dempsey 's thought throw back in bewilderment to the fainting figure of 
 the night before . he walk on beside she in silence . 

 " I want to tell you , " say Miss Henderson calmly--"because I be sure 
 you be a nice fellow , and do not   want to hurt anybody 's feeling -- why 
 I ask you to hold your tongue about Mrs. Delane . in the first 
 place , you be quite mistaken about myself . I be never at Mr. Tanner 's 
 farm -- never in that part of Canada ; and the person you see there -- Mrs. 
 Delane -- be a very favourite cousin of mine , and extraordinarily like I . 
 when we be child everybody talk of the likeness . she have a very 
 sad story , and now -- she be dead . " the speaker 's voice drop . " I have   be 
 confused with she before -- and it be a great trouble to I . the confusion 
 have do I harm , more than once , and I be very sensitive about it . so , as 
 I say last night , I should be greatly oblige if you would not only not 
 spread the story , but deny it , whenever you can . " 

 she look at he sharply , and he colour crimson . 

 " of course , " he stammer , " I should like to do anything you wish . " 

 " I do wish it , and-- " she pause a moment , as though to think--"and 
 Captain Ellesborough wish it . I would not advise you , however , to say 
 anything at all about it to he . but if you do what we ask you , you may 
 be sure we shall find some way -- some substantial way -- of show that we 
 appreciate it . " 

 they walk on , she with her eye on the ground as though she be 
 think out some plan for his benefit -- he puzzle and speechless . 

 " what do you want to do , now the war be over ? " she say at last , with a 
 smile , look up . 

 " I suppose I want to settle down -- somewhere -- on land , if I have the 
 money . " 

 " Here?--or in Canada ? " 

 " oh , at home . " 

 " I think so . well , Mr. Dempsey , Captain Ellesborough and I shall be 
 quite ready to help you in any scheme you take up . you understand ? " 

 " that be awfully kind of you -- but-- " 

 " quite ready , " she repeat . " let I know what your plan be when you have 
 work they out -- and I will see what can be do . " then she stop . there 
 be a gate near into one of her own field . their eye meet -- her 
 absolutely cool and smile -- his wavering and excited . 

 " you understand ? " she repeat . 

 " oh , yes -- I understand . " 

 " and you agree ? " she add , emphasize the word . 

 " oh , yes , I -- I -- agree . " 

 " well , then , that be all right -- that be understand . a letter will always 
 find I here . and now I must get back to my work . good - morning . " 

 and with a nod , she slip through the gate , and be half way across the 
 fallow on the other side of it before he have realize that their strange 
 conversation be at an end . 




 XII 


 the vicar and his sister Eleanor be sit at breakfast in the small 
 georgian house , which , as the vicarage , play a still important 
 part in the village of Ipscombe . the Church may be in a bad way , as she 
 own child declare ; revolution may be in sight , as our English 
 bolshevist love to believe -- not too seriously ; but meanwhile , if a 
 stranger in any normal english village want to lay his finger on the 
 central ganglion of its various activity , he will still look for the 
 church and the vicarage -- or rectory , as the case may be . if the parson be 
 bad or feeble , the pulse of the village life will show it ; and if he be 
 energetic and self - devote , his position will give he a power in the 
 community -- power , temper of course by the necessary revolt and 
 reaction which keep the current of life flow -- not to be easily 
 attain by other energetic and self - devote person . the parson may 
 still easily make himself a tyrant , but only to find , in the language of 
 the greek poet , that it be " folly even to wish " to tyrannize . 

 the vicar have come downstairs that morning in a mood of depression , 
 irritable -- almost snappish depression . his sister Eleanor have seldom see 
 he so unlike himself . be an affectionate sister , she be sorry for 
 he ; though , as she rightly guess , it be that very news which have 
 bring such great relief of mind to herself which be almost certainly 
 responsible for her brother 's gloom . Miss Henderson be engage to 
 Captain Ellesborough . there be therefore no question of her become 
 Mrs. Shenstone , and a weight be lift from the spirit of the vicar 's 
 sister . towards Rachel , Eleanor Shenstone feel one of those instinctive 
 antipathy of life which be far more decisive than any of the ordinary 
 cause of quarrel . Miss Shenstone be thin , methodical , devoted ; of small 
 speech and great virtue . such person so securely anchored and 
 self - determined can have but small sympathy for the drifter of this 
 world . and that Rachel Henderson be -- at least as compare with herself 
 and her few cherish friend -- morally and religiously adrift , Miss 
 Shenstone have decide after half an hour 's conversation . 

 the vicar know perfectly well that his sister be relieve . it be that 
 which have secretly affect a naturally sweet temper . he be suffer 
 besides from a haunting sense of contrast between these rainy November 
 day , and the glowing harvest week in which he have work like a navvy 
 for and with Rachel Henderson . it be over , of course . none of the nice 
 thing of life ever come his way for long . but he do feel rather sorely 
 that during his short spell of favour with she , Miss Henderson have 
 encourage he a good deal . she have raise he up -- only to cast he down . 
 he think of her smile , and her sudden softness , of the warm grip of 
 her hand , and the half mocking , half invite look in her eye , with the 
 feeling of a child shut out from a garden where he well know the ripe 
 apple be hang ; only not for he . the atmosphere of sex which 
 environ she -- be it not that which have beguile the vicar , while it have 
 repel his sister ? and yet Eleanor Shenstone do most honestly wish 
 her brother to marry -- only not -- not anything so tempting , troubling , and 
 absorbing as Rachel Henderson . 

 " have not   we a tiresome meeting to - night ? " say the vicar with an 
 impatient sigh , as he sit languidly down to the couple of sardine which 
 be all his sister have allow he for breakfast . 

 " yes -- Miss Hall be come to speak . " 

 Miss Hall be a lady who speak prodigiously on infant welfare , and have a 
 way of produce a great , but merely temporary effect on the mother of 
 the village . they would listen in a frightened silence while she show 
 they on a blackboard the terrify creature that have their dwelling in 
 milk , and what a fly look like when it be hideously -- and in the mother ' 
 opinion most unnecessarily -- magnify . but when she be go come 
 reaction . " how can she know aught about it -- havin' none of her own ? " 
 say the village contemptuously . none the less the village way be 
 yield , insensibly , little by little ; and the Miss Halls be after all 
 build well than they know . 

 the vicar , however , always have to take the chair at Miss Hall 's meeting , 
 and he be secretly sick and tired of baby , their weight , their food , 
 their feeding - bottle , and everything concern with they . his sister 
 consider he and like a wise woman , offer he something sweet to 
 make up for the bitter . 

 " do you think you could possibly take a note for I to Miss Leighton this 
 morning -- when you go to see old frant ? " 

 " Old Frant " be a labourer on the point of death to whom the vicar be 
 minister . 

 he prick up his ear . 

 " Great end 's hardly in old Frant 's direction . " 

 _ Camouflage _ , of course . Miss Shenstone understand perfectly . 

 " it will not   take you far out of your way . I want Miss Leighton to send 
 those two girl to the Armistice dance to - night if they would like to come . 
 Lady Alicia write that several of her maid be down with the flu , and 
 she ask I to give away two or three more ticket . " 

 " why do not   Lady Alicia let the servant manage the thing themselves 
 when she give they a party ? _ they _ ought to invite . I would not   be boss 
 if I be they , " say the vicar , with vivacity . 

 " she be so particular about character , dear . " 

 " so would they be . she have not   be so very successful in her own case . " 

 for the Shepherds ' eld daughter have just be figure in a divorce 
 case to the distress of the Shepherds ' neighbour . 

 Miss Shenstone show patience . 

 " I will have the note ready directly . " 

 and when it be ready , the vicar take it like a lamb . he walk first to 
 Great End , meditate as he go on Miss Henderson 's engagement . he have 
 foresee it , of course , since the day of the Millsborough " rally . " a fine 
 fellow , no doubt -- with the great advantage of khaki . but it be to be 
 hop we be not go to be altogether overrun with Americans -- carry 
 off english woman . 

 at the gate of the farm stand a cart into which two young calf have just 
 be pack . Hastings be drive it , and Rachel Henderson , who have just 
 adjust the net over the fidgety frighten creature , be talk to 
 he . 

 she greet Shenstone rather shyly . it be quite true that in the early 
 stage of her acquaintance with Ellesborough she have amuse herself a 
 good deal with the vicar . and in his note of congratulation to she on her 
 engagement , she have detect just the slight touch of reproach . 

 " I wish I have guess it soon . " that meant , perhaps--"Why do you make 
 a fool of I ? " 

 meanwhile Miss Shenstone 's note be duly deliver , and Rachel , hold 
 it in her hand , open the wicket gate . 

 " will not   you come in ? " 

 " oh , no , I must not   waste your time , " say the vicar , with dignity . 
 " perhaps you will give I a verbal answer . " 

 Rachel open the note , and the vicar be puzzle by the look which 
 cross her face as she read it . it be a look of relief -- as though 
 something fit in . 

 " very kind of Lady Alicia . of course the girl shall come . they will be 
 delighted . you really will not   come in ? then I will walk to the road with 
 you . " 

 what be the change in she ? the vicar perceive something indefinable ; 
 and before they have walk half the distance to the road he have forget 
 his own grievance . she look ill . Janet Leighton , meet he in the 
 village a few day before , have talk of her partner as " do up . " be it 
 the excitement of fall in love?--combine perhaps with the worry of 
 leave her work and the career just begin ? 

 he ask a few question about her plan . she answer he very gently , 
 with a subtle note of apology in her voice ; but yet , as it seem to he , 
 from rather far away . and when they part , he realize that he have never 
 know more of she than an outer self , which offer but little clue to 
 the self within . 

 Rachel walk back to the farm with Miss Shenstone 's note in her pocket . 
 she have tell the vicar that her land - girl should certainly come to the 
 Shepherds ' servant ' party -- but she say nothing about it to they -- till 
 Janet Leighton have safely bicycle away in the early afternoon . the 
 invitation , however , be a godsend . for Rachel have begin to realize that 
 there be a good deal of watch go on -- watch of the farm , and 
 watch over herself . she understand that Halsey have be scar by some 
 tramp or other whom he take for the ghost ; and she see that Janet be 
 unwilling that any one should be alone after dark in the farm . nobody 
 have talk to she -- Rachel -- about it -- no doubt by Ellesborough 's 
 wish -- because she be suppose to be out of sort -- run down . she have 
 accept the little conspiracy of silence as a proof of his tenderness , 
 and have obediently ask no question . 

 and it have not yet occur to she to connect the story float 
 about the farm with Delane 's reappearance . the stunning fact of the 
 reappearance , with all that it might mean to she , absorb her mind -- for 
 a few hour yet . 

 but as soon as Janet be safely off the premise , she hurry across to 
 the shippen , where Betty and Jenny be milk . 

 " girls!--would you like to go to the Shepherds ' dance to - night ? I have   get 
 an invitation for you ? " 

 Stupefaction -- and delight ! the invitation have be very sparing and 
 select , and the two little maiden have feel themselves Cinderellas 
 indeed , all the sorer in their mind see that Dempsey and Betty 's 
 young man be both go . 

 but _ frock _ ! Jenny at least have nothing suitable . Rachel at once offer 
 a white frock . the milking and dairy work be hurry through , and then 
 come the dressing , as the dance begin at seven . Betty , know herself to 
 be a beauty , except for her tooth , have soon finish . a white blouse , a 
 blue cotton skirt , a blue ribbon in her mop of brown hair -- and she look 
 at herself exultantly in Miss Henderson 's glass . Jenny be much more 
 difficult to please . she be crimson with excitement , and the tip of her 
 little red tongue keep slip in and out . but Rachel pat and 
 pin -- in a kind of dream . Jenny 's red hair , generally wear in the 
 tight wisps and plait , be brush out till it stand like a halo 
 round her face and neck , and she be secretly afraid that Dempsey 
 would not   know she . 

 then Rachel wrap they up in their land - army waterproof , and see they 
 off , carry an electric torch to guide they safely through the bit of 
 lane under the tree . but there be a moon rise , and the fog be less . 

 " be not   she just kind?--don't   you just love she ? " say Jenny ecstatically 
 to Betty , as they turn back to wave their farewell again to the figure 
 stand in the doorway . 

 Betty assent . but they be both greatly astonish . for Rachel do not 
 in general take much personal notice of they . 

 they be no soon out of sight than Rachel go to look at the clock in 
 the kitchen . ten minute to seven . two hour to wait . how be they 
 go to be get through ? 

 she go out aimlessly into the farm - yard , where the farm building stand 
 in a faintly luminous mist , the hill - side behind they , and the climbing 
 wood . to she left , across the field run the road climb to the 
 miniature pass , whence it descend steeply to the plain beyond . and on 
 the further side of the road lie her own field , with alternate band 
 of plough - land and stubble , and the hedge - row tree stand ghostly and 
 separate in the light haze . 

 she be alone in the farm , in all that landscape the only live thing at 
 the moment , except for the animal . a tense energy of will seem to 
 possess she . she be defend herself -- defend Ellesborough -- and 
 their joint life . how be she go to do it ? she do not   know . but the 
 passion in her blood would give her strength -- would see she through . 

 in the old barn , the cow be munch peacefully . the air be sweet 
 with their breath , and with the hay pile in their crib . Rachel wander 
 noiselessly amongst they , and they turn their large eye slowly to look 
 at she , and the small lantern she carry . in the stable , too , not a 
 sound , but an occasional swishing and champing . Rachel hang up the 
 lantern , and sit down on a truss of hay , idly watch the ray of light 
 strike up into the cross - beam of the roof , and on the shin flank 
 of the horse . her mind be go at a great speed . and all in a 
 moment -- without any clear consciousness of the strange thought that have 
 be run through her brain -- an intuition strike through she . 

 _ Roger_!--it be he who have be play the ghost -- he who have be see 
 haunt the farm -- who have scar Halsey--_Roger _ ! come to spy upon 
 she and her lover ! once the idea suggest itself , she be certain of 
 it -- it must be true . 

 the appearance in the lane have be cleverly premeditate . she have be 
 watch for day , perhaps for week . 

 Ellesborough have be watch , too , no doubt . 

 she draw a shudder breath . she be afraid of Roger Delane . from the 
 early day of her marriage she have be afraid of he . there be about 
 he the incalculable something which mean moral insanity -- abnormal 
 process of mind work through uncontrolled will . you could never 
 reason with or influence he , where his appetite or his passion be 
 concern . a mocking spirit look out upon you , just before his blow 
 fall . he be a mere force -- inhuman and sinister . 

 well , she have get to fight it and tame it ! she shut up the cow - house and 
 stable , and stand out awhile in the farm - yard , let the mild wind play 
 on her bare head and hot cheek . the moon be rid overhead . the night 
 seem to her very silent and mysterious -- yet penetrate by something 
 divine to which she lift her heart . what would Ellesborough say over 
 there -- in his forester 's hut , five mile beyond the hill , if he know 
 what she be do -- whom she be expect ? she shut her eye , and see 
 his lean , strong face , his look-- 

 the church clock be strike , and surely -- in the distance , the sound of 
 an opening gate ? she hurry back to the house , and the sitting - room . the 
 lamp be low . she revive it . she make up the fire . she feel herself 
 shivering with excitement , and she stoop over the fire , warm her 
 hand . 

 she have purposely leave the front door unlocked . a hand try the handle , 
 turn it -- a slow step enter . 

 she go to the sitting - room door and throw it open-- 

 " come in here . " 

 Roger Delane come in and shut the door behind he . they confront each 
 other . 

 " you have   manage it uncommonly well , " he say , at last . " you have   dare it . 
 be not   you afraid of I ? " 

 " not the least . what do you want ? " 

 they survey each other -- with hatred , yet not without a certain 
 passionate curiosity on both side . when Delane have last see Rachel she 
 be a pale and care - wear creature , her youth darken by suffer and 
 struggle , her eye still heavy with the tear she have shed for her lost 
 baby . he behold she now rounded and full - blow , at the zenith of her 
 beauty , and breathe an energy , physical and mental , he have never yet 
 see in she . she have escape he , and her life have put out a new flower . 
 he be suddenly possess as he look at she , both by the poisonous 
 memory of old desire , and by an intolerable sense of his impotence , and 
 her triumph . and the physical fever in his vein make self - control 
 difficult . 

 on her side , she see the ruin of a man . when she marry he he have be 
 a moral wreck . but the physical envelope be still intact , still 
 splendid . now his clothe seem to hang upon a skeleton ; the hollow in 
 the temple and cheek , the emaciation of the face and neck , the scanty 
 grey hair , strike horror , but it be a horror in which there be not 
 a trace of sympathy or pity . he have destroy himself , and he would , if 
 he could , destroy she . she read in he the thirst for revenge . she have to 
 baffle it , if she could . 

 as she defy he , indeed , she see his hand steal to his coat - pocket , and 
 it occur to she that the pocket might contain a revolver . but the 
 thought only nerve she -- give she an almost exultant courage . 

 " what do I want ? " he repeat , at last with - draw his eye . " I will tell 
 you . I have   come -- like Foch -- to dictate to you certain term , which you 
 have only to accept . we have well sit down . it will take time . " 

 Rachel point to a chair . he take it , cross one knee over the other , 
 rest his arm on the table near , and watch she with a sneer smile , 
 while she seat herself . 

 he break the silence . 

 " I confess you be very clever about Dick Tanner -- and I be a precious 
 fool ! I never suspect . " 

 " I have not the least idea what you mean . " 

 " a lie ! " he say , impetuously . " you be in Dick Tanner 's house -- stay 
 with he alone -- at night -- after I leave you . you be see there -- by 
 a man -- a Canadian -- from whom I have the story -- only two day ago . he 
 do not   know my name , nor I his . we meet on the common , two night ago , 
 after dark . and by the mere chance he be come to the farm , and he 
 begin to talk of you . then this come out . but of course I always know 
 that it -- or something like it -- would come out . your puritanical air 
 never deceive I -- for a moment . " 

 " I suppose you be talk of John Dempsey ? " the scorn in her voice 
 enrage he . 

 " I know nothing about John Dempsey . of course I can track the man who 
 tell I , if I want to -- with the great ease . he be come here to 
 call . he see either you or your partner . and I shall track he -- if you 
 force I . " 

 she be silent -- and he smile . 

 " Assume , please , that I have my witness at hand . well , then , he see you 
 alone -- at night -- in Dick Tanner 's charge , a few day apparently , after 
 you and I quarrel . what be you do there ? " 

 " it be during that great snowstorm , I suppose , " she say , in her most 
 ordinary voice , take up her knitting . " I remember go over to the 
 Tanners ' to ask for something -- and be snow - bind . Lucy Tanner be 
 always ready to help I -- and be sorry for I . " 

 at this he laugh out , and the note of the laugh dismay she . 

 " Lucy Tanner ? yes , that be good . I think you would play she ! now , I will 
 tell you something . the day after I leave you , I be on the train go 
 to Regina . we stop a long time . I do not   remember why -- at Medicine 
 Hat -- and walk up and down the platform was--_lucy Tanner _ ! do that 
 surprise you ? she tell I she could not   stand the Manitoba climate , and 
 be go to a friend at Kamloops for the winter . be that news to you ? " 

 Rachel have turn white , but he see no other sign of discomposure . 

 " not at all . naturally , I go over expect to find she . but as you 
 say , she be go , and Mr. Tanner drive I back , when the storm go 
 down . " 

 then she throw down her knitting and face he . 

 " what be the use of talk like this , Roger ? you will not   make anything out 
 of this story you be so proud of . had not   you well come to business ? 
 why have you be spy on I , and dog I like this ? you know , of 
 course , I could give you in charge to - morrow , or I could get Captain 
 Ellesborough to do it . and I will -- unless you give I your solemn promise 
 to leave this place , to go out of my life altogether , and stop molest 
 I in this scandalous way . now , of course , I understand who it be that 
 have be prowl about the farm all these week . and I warn you the 
 police too know all about it , and be on the watch . they may have 
 track you here to - night for all I know . " 

 " not they ! I pass one bobby fellow on the hill , go safely away 
 north , as I come down . I be scarcely three yard from he , and he never 
 twig . and the other be go to Millsborough . you could hardly be more 
 alone , more entirely at my mercy -- than you be at this moment , Miss 
 Henderson ! " he lay an ironic emphasis on the name . 

 she shrug her shoulder . 

 " all the same the people who live with I in this house will soon be 
 back . I recommend you to make haste . I ask you again -- what be it you 
 want ? " 

 she have stand up pluckily -- he admit it . but , as he observe she 
 closely it seem to he that the strain on her nerve be tell . she 
 be begin to look pinch , and her hand as it lie beside she 
 knitting shake . 

 " well , I will tell you , " he say coolly . he take a half sheet of note - paper 
 out of the breast - pocket of his coat , draw the lamp on the table towards 
 he , and look at certain figure and note write on the paper . 

 " I go this morning in town to look up your uncle 's will . of course I 
 remember all about that old chap at Manchester . I often speculate on 
 what he be go to leave you . unfortunately for I he live just a 
 little too long . but I find from the copy of the will that he leave 
 you -- three -- thousand -- pound . not bad , consider that you be never at 
 all civil to he . but three thousand pound be more than you require to 
 run this small farm on . you owe I damage for the injury you inflict 
 on I by the loss of -- first , your society ; second , your financial 
 prospect . I assess it at five hundred pound . pay I that small sum , 
 and -- well , I engage to leave you henceforth to the Captain,--and 
 your conscience . " 

 he bend forward across the table , his mock eye fix intently upon 
 she . there be silence a moment -- till she said:-- 

 " and if I refuse ? " 

 " oh , well , then-- " he lift a paper - knife and balance it on his hand as 
 though considering--"i shall of course have to work up my case . what do 
 you call this man?--John Dempsey ? a great fool -- but I dare say I shall 
 get enough out of he . and then -- well , then I propose to present the 
 story to Captain Ellesborough -- for his future protection . " 

 " he will not   believe a word of it . " 

 but her lip have blanch -- her voice have begin to waver -- and with a cruel 
 triumph he see that he have win the day . 

 " I dare say not . that be for he to consider . but if I be you , I 
 would not   put he to the test . " 

 silence again . he see the fluttering of her breath . with a complete 
 change of tone , he say , smile , in a low voice:-- 

 " rachel!--when do you begin to prefer Dick Tanner to I ? no doubt you 
 have a jolly time with he . I suppose I can not   undo the divorce -- but you 
 would never have get it , if I have not   be such an innocent . " 

 she spring up , and he see that he have go too far . 

 " if you say any more such thing to I , you will get nothing from I -- and 
 you may either _ go_-- " she point passionately to the door--"or you may 
 sit there till my people come back -- which you like . " 

 he look at she , under his eyebrow , smile mechanically -- weigh the 
 relative advantage of prudence or violence . Prudence carry the day . 

 " you be just the same spitfire , I see , as you use to be ! all right . I 
 see you understand . well , now , how be I to get my money -- my damage ? " 
 she turn away , and go quickly to an old bureau that have be her 
 uncle 's . he watch she , exultant . it be all true , then . Dick Tanner have 
 be her lover , and Ellesborough know nothing . he do not know whether to 
 be the more triumphant in her tacit avowal , or the more enraged by the 
 testimony bear by her acquiescence to her love for Ellesborough . he 
 hat she ; yet he have never admire she so much , as his eye follow she 
 stoop over the drawer of the bureau , her beautiful head and neck 
 in a warm glow of firelight . 

 then , suddenly , he begin to cough . she , hunt for her cheque - book , take 
 no notice at first . but the paroxysm grow ; it shake the very life out of 
 he ; till at last she stand arrest and star - while he fall back in 
 his chair like a dead man , his eye shut , his handkerchief to his lip . 

 " shall I -- shall I get you some brandy ? " she say , coldly . he nod 
 assent . she hurriedly look for her key , and go to a cupboard in the 
 kitchen , where Janet keep a half bottle of brandy for medical use if 
 need . 

 he drink off what she bring -- but it be some time before he recover 
 speech . when he do it be in a low tone that make the word a curse:--- 

 " that be your doing ! " 

 her only answer be a gesture . 

 " it be , " he insist , speak in gasp . " you never show I any real 
 love -- any forbearance . you never care for I -- as you know I care for 
 you . you tell I so once . you marry I for a home -- and then you 
 desert -- and betray I . " 

 there be a guilty answer in her consciousness which make she speak 
 without anger . 

 " I know my own fault very well . and now you must go -- we can not   either of 
 we stand this any more . do you give I your solemn promise that you will 
 trouble I no more --- or the man I be go to marry -- if I do this for 
 you ? " 

 " give I a piece of paper-- " he say , huskily . 

 he write the promise , sign it , and push it to she . then he carefully 
 examine the self cheque " to bearer " which she have write . 

 " well , I dare say that will see I out -- and bury I decently . I shall 
 take my family down to the sea . you know I have   get a little girl -- about 
 three ? oh , I never tell any lie about Anita . I have   marry she now . " 

 Rachel stand like a stone , without a word . her one consume anxiety be 
 to see he go , to be do with he . 

 he rise slowly -- with difficulty . and the cough seize he again . Rachel 
 in a fevere exasperation watch he cling to the table for support . 
 would he die -- or faint -- then and there -- and be find by Janet , who must 
 now be on her way home ? she press brandy on he again . but he push 
 it away . " let I be ! " she could only wait . 

 when he could speak and move again , he put the cheque away in his pocket , 
 and button his coat over it . 

 " well , good - night . " then straighten himself , he fix she with a pair 
 of burn eye . " good - night . Anita will be kind to I -- when I die -- Anita 
 will be a woman to I . you be never kind -- you never think of any one 
 but yourself . good - bye . good luck ! " 

 and walk uncertainly to the door , he open it and be go . she hear 
 his slow step in the farmyard , and the opening of the wicket gate . then 
 all sound die away . 

 for a few minute she crouch sob over the fire , weep for sheer 
 nervous exhaustion . then the dread seize she of be catch in such a 
 state by Janet , and she go upstairs , lock her door , and throw herself 
 on her bed . the bruise of an intolerable humiliation seem to spread 
 through soul and body . she know that for the first time she have confess 
 her wretched secret which she have think so wholly her own -- and 
 confess it -- horrible and degrade thought!--to Roger Delane . not in 
 word indeed -- but in act . no innocent woman would have pay the 
 blackmail . the dark room in which she lie seem to be haunt by 
 Delane 's exultant eye . 

 and the silence be haunt too by his last word . there arise in her a 
 reluctant and torture pity for the wretched man who have be her 
 husband ; a pity , which pass on into a storm of moral anguish . her whole 
 past life look incredibly black to she as she lie there in the 
 dark -- stain with unkindness , and selfishness , and sin . 

 which see she the more truly?--rog , or ellesborough?--the man who hat 
 and curse she , or the man who adore she ? 

 she be struggle , manoeuvring , fighting , to keep the truth from George 
 Ellesborough . it be quite uncertain whether she would succeed . Roger 's 
 word be a poor safeguard ! but if she do , the truth itself would only 
 the more certainly pursue and beat she down . 

 and again , the utter yearn for confession and an unburdened soul come 
 upon she intolerably . the religious psychologist describe such a crisis 
 as " conversion , " or " conviction of sin , " or the " work of grace . " and 
 he know from long experience that it be the result in the human soul not 
 so much of a sense of evil , as of a vision of good . Goodness have be 
 bring near to Rachel in the personality -- the tender self - forget 
 trust -- of George Ellesborough . it be goodness , not fear -- goodness , 
 unconscious of any threatened wrong -- that have pierce her heart . then a 
 thought come to she . _ janet!_--janet whose pure and love life beside 
 she make yet another element in the spiritual force that be press 
 upon she . 

 she spring to her foot . she would tell Janet everything -- put her poor 
 secret -- her all -- in Janet 's hand . 




 xiii 


 it be again a very still and misty night,--extraordinarily mild for the 
 time of year . a singular brood silence hold all the woodland above 
 Great end Farm . there be not a breath of wind . every dead branch that 
 fall , every bird that move , every mouse scratch among the fall 
 beech leaf , produce sound disproportionately clear and startling , and 
 for the moment there would be a rustle of disturbance , as though 
 something or some one , in the forest heart , take alarm . then the deep 
 water of quiet close again , and everything -- except that watch 
 presence -- sleep . 

 the hut in Denman Wood , which have formerly play a hospitable part as 
 the scene of many a gargantuan luncheon to Colonel Shepherd 's shooting 
 party , have long be an abandon spot . all the Colonel 's keeper under 
 fifty have go to fight ; and there be leave only an old head keeper , with 
 one decrepit helper , who shoot the scanty game which still survive on 
 strict business principle , to eke out the household ration of the big 
 house . the Ipscombe wood be rarely visit . they be a long way from 
 the keeper 's cottage , and the old man , depress by the difference 
 between war and pre - war condition , find it quite enough to potter round 
 the stubble and turnip of the home farm when game have to be shoot . 

 the path lead through the underwood to the hut be now in these four 
 year largely over - grow . a place more hidden and forget it would 
 have be difficult to find . and for this reason , combine with its 
 neighbourhood to Rachel Henderson 's farm , Roger Delane have choose to 
 inhabit it . 

 it be the third night after his interview with his former wife . he 
 reach the hut after dark , by various by - path over the wide common 
 stretch between it and X -- the station at which he now generally 
 alight . he carry in his pocket some evening newspaper , a new 
 anthology , and a novel . owe to an injection of morphia -- a habit to 
 which he have only lately take -- he feel unusually fit , and his brain be 
 unusually alert . at the same time he have have a disagreeable interview 
 with a doctor that morning who have be insist on Sanatorium treatment 
 if the remain lung be to be preserve and his life prolong . he do 
 not want to prolong his life , but only to avoid the beastliness of pain . 
 it seem to he that morphia -- good stuff!--wa go to do that for he . 
 why have not   he begin it before ? but his brain be queer -- he be conscious 
 of that . he have ask the doctor about some curious mental symptom . the 
 reply be that phthisis be often accompany by they . 

 Obsession -- fix idea -- in the medical sense : half of he , 
 psychologically , be quite conscious that the other half be under their 
 influence . the sound self be observe the unsound self , but apparently 
 with no power over it . otherwise how be it that he be here again , 
 hide like a wild beast in a lair , less than a mile from Great End Farm , 
 and Rachel Henderson ? 

 he have find his way to London in the small hour of the day follow 
 his scene with Rachel , intend to keep his promise , and let his former 
 wife alone . the cashing of Rachel 's cheque have give he and Anita some 
 agreeable moment ; though Anita be grow disturb that he would not 
 tell she where the money come from . they have find fresh lodging in a 
 really respectable Bloomsbury street ; they have both buy clothe , and 
 little Netta have be rig out . delane have magnificently compound 
 with his most press creditor , and have take Anita to a theatre . but 
 he have be discontent with her appearance there . she have really lose 
 all her good look . if it have not   be for the kid-- 

 and now , after this interval , his obsession have swoop upon he again . 
 it be an obsession of hate -- which simply could not endure , when it come 
 to the point , that Rachel Henderson should vanish unscathed into the 
 future of a happy marriage , while he remain the doom failure and 
 outcast he know himself to be . Rachel 's imply confession rankle in he 
 like a burn . _ tanner!_--that wretched weakling , with his miserable daub 
 that nobody want to buy . so Rachel have go to he , as soon as she have 
 drive her husband away , no doubt to complain of her ill - treatment , to 
 air her woe . the fellow have philander round she some time , and have 
 show an insolent and interfere temper once or twice towards himself . 
 yes!--he could imagine it all!--her flight , and Tanner 's maudlin 
 sympathy -- tear -- caress -- the natural sequel . and then her pose of 
 complete innocence at the divorce proceeding -- the Judge 's remark . 
 revolt hypocrisy ! if Tanner have be still alive , he would somehow 
 have expose he -- somehow have make he pay . lucky for he he be drown 
 in that boat accident on Lake Nipissing ! and no doubt Rachel think that 
 the accident have make everything safe for she . 

 every incident now , every phase of his conversation with she be 
 assume a monstrous and distorted significance in his mind . how easily 
 she have yield on the subject of the money ! he might have ask a great 
 deal more -- and he would have get it . very likely Ellesborough be well 
 off -- Yankees generally be -- and she know that what she give Delane as 
 hush money would make very little difference to she . ellesborough no 
 doubt would not look very closely into her shekel , have sufficient of 
 his own . otherwise it might occur to he to wonder how she have get rid of 
 that £ 500 . would it pinch she ? probably , if all she have for capital be 
 the old chap 's legacy . well -- serve she right -- serve she , damned , doubly 
 right ! Ellesborough 's kiss would make up . 

 these thought , after a momentary respite , hold he in their grip as he 
 walk London street . suspicion of the past -- ugly and venomous -- flap 
 its black wing about he . have Rachel ever be faithful to he -- even in 
 the early day ? she have make acquaintance with the Tanners very soon 
 after their marriage . look back , a number of small incident and 
 scene poke their head out of the dead level of the past . Rachel 
 and Tanner , discuss the Watts photograph when Rachel first acquire 
 it -- Tanner 's eager denunciatory talk -- he call himself an 
 " impressionist"--the creature!--because he could not   draw worth a 
 cent -- Rachel all smile and deference . she have never give _ he _ that 
 sort of attention . or Rachel at a housewarming in the next farm to 
 his -- Rachel in a pale green dress , the handsome woman there , dance 
 with Tanner -- Rachel quarrel with he in the buggy on the way home , 
 because he call Tanner a milksop--"He care for beautiful thing , and 
 you do not ! --but that be no reason why you should abuse he . " 

 and what about those week not very long after that dance , when he have 
 go off to the land - sale at Edmonton ( that be the journey , by the way , 
 when he first see Anita ! ) , and Rachel have stay at home , with a girl 
 friend , a girl they know in Winnipeg ? but that girl have not   stay all 
 the time . to do her justice , Rachel have make no secret of that . he 
 remember she attack he when he come home for have leave she for 
 three or four day quite alone . why have he be so long away ? probably a 
 mere bluff -- though he have be take in by it at the time , and be 
 still in love with she , have do his good to appease she . but what have 
 she be do all the time she be alone ? in the light of what he know 
 now , she might have be do anything . _ be the child his _ ? 

 so , piece by piece , with no auditor but his own brain , shut in upon 
 himself by the isolation which his own life have forge for he , he build 
 up a hideous indictment against the woman he have once love . he wish he 
 have put off his interview with she till he have have time to think thing 
 out more . as he come to realize how she have trick and best he , her 
 offence become incredibly vile than it seem at first . he have let she 
 off far too cheaply that night at the farm . scene of past violence 
 return upon he , and the memory of they seem to satisfy a rise 
 thirst . especially the recollection of the divorce proceeding madden 
 he . his morbid brain take hold on they with a grip that his will could 
 not loosen . her evidence -- he have read it in the Winnipeg newspaper -- the 
 remark of the prating old judge -- and of her cad of a lawyer -- good God ! 
 and all the time it be _ she _ who ought to have be in the dock , and he 
 the accuser , if he have know -- if he have not   be a trust idiot , a 
 bleat fool . 

 a brooding intensity of rage , as this inward process go on , gradually 
 drown in he every other feeling and desire . the relief and amusement 
 of the money and its spending be soon over . he think no more of it . 
 Anita , and his child even -- the child for whom he really care -- pass out 
 of his mind . as he sit drink whisky in the dull respectable lodging , 
 at night after Anita have go to bed , he feel the sinister call of those 
 dark wood above Rachel 's farm , and taste the sweetness of his new power 
 to hurt she , now that she have pay he this blackmail , and damn herself 
 thereby -- past help . she have threaten he . but what could she do -- or the 
 Yankee fellow either ? she have give the show away . as for his promise , 
 when he have no right to make it,--no right to allow such a woman to get 
 off scot - free , with plenty of money and a new lover . 

 so on the Thursday evening he take train for x. it be still the 
 Armistice week . the London street be crowd with soldier and young 
 woman of every sort and kind . he buy a newspaper and read it in the 
 train . it give he a queer satisfaction -- for one half of he be still 
 always watch the other -- to discover that he could feel patriotic 
 emotion like anybody else and could be thrill by the elation of 
 Britain 's victory--_his _ victory . he read the telegram , the position on 
 the Rhine assign to the Second Army , and the Fourth,--General Plumer 
 General Rawlinson -- General F.--Gad ! he use to know the son of that last 
 old fellow at King 's . 

 then he fall to his old furtive watching of the people on the platform , 
 the man get in and out of the train . at any moment he might fall in 
 with one of his old Cambridge acquaintance , in one of these smart 
 officer , with their decoration and their red tab . but in the first 
 place they would not   travel in this third class where he be sit -- not 
 till the war be over . and in the next , he be so change -- have take 
 indeed such pain to be -- that it be long odd against his being 
 recognize . eleven year , be it , since he leave Cambridge ? about . 

 at X. he get out . the ticket collector notice he for that faint touch 
 of a past magnificence that still linger in his carriage and gait ; but 
 there be so many stranger about that he be soon forget . 

 he pass under a railway arch and climb a hill , the hill on which he 
 have meet Dempsey . at the top of the hill he leave the high - road for a grass 
 track across the common . there be just enough light from a decline 
 moon to show he where he be . the common be full of dark shape -- old 
 twisted thorn , and juniper , and mass of tall grass -- shape which 
 often seem to he to be strargely alive , the silent but conscious 
 witness of his passage . 

 the wood be very dark . he grope his way through it with difficulty 
 and find the hut . once inside it , he fasten the door with a wooden 
 bar he have himself make , and turn on his electric torch . bit by bit 
 in the course of his night visit he have accumulate a few necessary 
 store -- some firewood , a few grocery hide in a corner , a couple 
 of brown blanket , and a small box of tool . a heap of dry bracken in a 
 corner , raise on a substratum of old sack , have often serve he for a 
 bed ; and when he have kindle a wood fire in the rough grate of loose 
 brick where Colonel Shepherd 's keeper have be accustom to warm the 
 hot meat stew send up for the shooting luncheon , and have set out his 
 supper on the upturned fragment of an old box which have once hold meal 
 for pheasant , he have provide at least what be necessary for his night 
 sojourn . this food he have bring with he ; a thermo bottle full of hot 
 coffee , with slice of ham , cheese , and bread ; and he eat it with 
 appetite , sit on a log beside the fire , and pleasantly conscious as 
 he look round he , like the greek poet of long ago , of that " cuteness " 
 of man which conjure up housing , food , and fire in earth 's loneliest 
 place . outside that small firelit space lie the sheer silence of the 
 wood , break once or twice by the call and flight of an owl past the one 
 carefully darken window of the hut , or by the mysterious sighing 
 and shudder which , from time to time , would run through the crowd 
 stem and leafless branch . 

 a queer " hotel " this , for mid - November ! he might , if he have choose , have 
 be amusing himself , _ tant bien que mal _ , in one or other of those 
 shabby haunts,--bars , night - club , dancing - room , to which his poverty 
 and his _ moeur _ condemn he , while his old comrade , the lad he have 
 be bring up with at school and college , guardsman , Hussars , and the 
 rest , be hold high revel for the Peace at the Ritz or the Carlton ; 
 he might even , as far as money be concern , now that he have bag his 
 great haul from Rachel , have be sup himself at the Ritz , if he have 
 only have time to exchange his brother - in - law 's old dress suit , which 
 Marianne have pass on to he , for a new one , and if he could have make 
 up his mind to the possible recognition and rebuff such a step would 
 have entail . as it be , he prefer his warm hiding - place in the heart 
 of the wood , couple with this exultant sense of an unseen and 
 mysterious power which be run , like alcohol , through his nerve . 

 Real alcohol , however , be not want to his solitary meal . he drench 
 his coffee in the cognac he always carry about with he , and then , 
 cigarette in hand , he fall back on the heap of bracken to read a while . 
 the novel he sample and throw away ; the anthology soon bore he ; and he 
 spend the great part of two hour lie on his back , smoking and 
 thinking -- till it be safe to assume that the coast be clear round great 
 End Farm . about ten o'clock , he slip noiselessly out of the hut , after 
 cover up the fire to wait for his return , and hide as far as he 
 could the other trace of his occupation . the damp mist outside hold all 
 the wood stifle , and the darkness be profound . step as lightly as 
 possible , and use his torch with the utmost precaution , he gradually 
 make his way to the edge of the wood , and the lip of the basin beyond it . 
 on the bare down be enough faint moonlight to see by , and he 
 extinguish his little lantern before leave the wood . below he be 
 the dim outline of the farm , a shadowy line of road beyond , and , as it 
 be , a thick fold of darkness , to mark the wood on the horizon . there 
 be not a light anywhere ; the village be invisible , and he listen for 
 a long time without hear anything but the rush of a distant train . 

 ah!--yes , there be a sound down there in the hollow -- footstep , 
 reverberate in the silence . he bend his head listen intently . the 
 footstep seem to approach the farm , then the sound cease , till 
 suddenly , on the down slope below he , he see something move . he throw 
 back his head with a quiet laugh . 

 the Ipscombe policeman , no doubt , on his round . would he come up the 
 hill ? hardly , on such a misty night . if not , his retreating step on the 
 farm lane would soon tell his departure . 

 in a few minute , indeed , the click of an opening gate could be clearly 
 hear through the mist , and afterwards , step . they grow fainter and 
 fainter . all clear ! 

 choose a circuitous route , Delane creep down the hill , and reach a 
 spot on the down - side rather high than the farm enclosure , from which 
 the window of the farm - house could be see . there be a faint light in 
 one of the upper two -- in which he have some reason to think be that of 
 Rachel 's bedroom . it seem to he the window be open ; he perceive 
 something like the swaying of a blind inside it . the night be 
 marvellously mild for mid - November ; and he remember Rachel 's old 
 craving for air , winter and summer . 

 the light move , there be a shadow behind the blind , and suddenly the 
 window be throw up widely , and a pale figure -- a woman 's figure -- stand 
 in the opening . Rachel , no doubt ! delane slip behind a thorn growing 
 on the bare hill - side . his heart thump . instinctively his hand grope 
 for something in his pocket . if she have guess that he be there -- within 
 twenty yard of she ! 

 then , as he watch the faint apparition in the mist , it rouse in 
 he a fresh gust of rage . Rachel , the sentimental Rachel , unable to 
 sleep -- Rachel , happy and serene , think of her lover -- the lie of she 
 divorce all forget -- and the abominable Roger cut finally out of her 
 life!-- 

 the figure disappear ; he hear the closing of the window , which be 
 soon dark . then he creep down to the farm wall , and round the corner of 
 it to that outer cart - shed , where he have bind up his bleed hand on 
 the night when Halsey -- silly ass!--had see the ghost . he do not dare to 
 smoke lest spark or smell might betray he . sit on a heap of sack in 
 a sheltered corner , his hand hang over his knee , he spend some long 
 time brood and ponder -- conscious all the while of the hidden and 
 silent life of the house and farm at his back . by now he fancy he 
 understand the evening way of the place . the two girl go up to bed 
 first , about nine ; the two lady , about an hour later ; and the farm 
 bailiff as a rule do not sleep on the premise , though there be a bed 
 in the loft over the stable which could be use on occasion . that window , 
 too , through which he have watch the pair of lover , when the Yankee 
 discover he -- that also seem to fit into a scheme . 

 yes!--the Yankee have discover he . his start , his sudden movement as 
 though to make a rush at the window , have show it . meanwhile delane 
 have not wait for development . quick as think he have make for one of 
 those sink climbing lane in which the chalk down of the district 
 abound , a lane which lie to the south of the farm , while the green 
 terrace path connect with the ghost - story lie to the north of it . no 
 doubt there have be a hue and cry , a search of the farm and its 
 immediate neighbourhood . but the night be dark and the wood wide . once 
 in their shelter , he have laugh at pursuit . what have the Yankee say to 
 Rachel ? and since he have stop she in the lane , what have Rachel be 
 say to the Yankee ? have she yet explain that the face he have see at 
 the window -- suppose always that he have tell she what he have see -- and 
 why should not   he?--wa not the face of a casual tramp or lunatic , but the 
 face of a discard husband , to whom all the various haunting and 
 apparition at the farm have be really due ? 

 that be the question -- the all - important question . clearly some 
 one -- Ellesborough probably -- have give a warning to the police . on what 
 theory?--ghost?--tramp?--or husband ? 

 or have Rachel just hold her tongue , and have the Yankee be lead to 
 believe that the husband -- for Rachel must have own up about the husband 
 though she do call herself Miss henderson!--wa still some thousand of 
 mile away -- in Canada -- safely dead and bury , as far as Rachel be 
 concern ? 

 on the whole , he think it most probable that Rachel have hold her tongue 
 about his reappearance . if she have think it worth while to bribe he so 
 heavily , it be not very likely that she would now herself have set the 
 American on the track of a secret which she so evidently do not want an 
 expectant bridegroom to know . 

 the American -- d -- n he ! a furious and morbid jealousy rush upon the man 
 crouch under the cart - shed . the world be rapidly reduce itself 
 for he to these two figure -- figure of hate -- figure against whom he 
 feel himself drive by a kind of headlong force , a force of destruction . 

 how still the farm be , except for the movement of the cow inside the 
 shippen at his back , or of the horse in the stable ! Rachel , no doubt , 
 be now asleep . in the old day he have often -- enviously -- watch she 
 tumble asleep as soon as her bright head be on the pillow ; while in his 
 own case sleep have be for year a difficult business . 

 somebody else would watch she sleep now . 

 yes , if he , the outcast , allow it . and again the frenzied sense of 
 power sweep through he . _ if he allow it _ ! it rest with he . 

 the following day , Ellesborough set out in the early afternoon for great 
 End Farm , the bearer of much news . 

 the day be dark and rainy , with almost a gale blow , but his spirit 
 have never be high . the exultation of the great victory , the 
 incredible victory , seem to breathe upon he from the gusty wind , to be 
 drive the westerly cloud , and cry in all the noise of the wood . 
 be it really over?--over and done?--the agony of these four year -- the 
 hourly sacrifice of irreplaceable life -- the rack doubt as to the 
 end -- the torture question in every conscious mind--"is there a God in 
 Heaven -- a God who care for man -- or be there not ? " 

 he could have shout the answer aloud--"There be -- there be a God ! and he 
 be just . " 

 Faith be natural to he , and nourish on his new happiness no less than 
 on the marvellous issue of the war , it set his heart sing on this dull 
 winter 's day . how should he find she ? threshing , perhaps , in the big 
 barn , and he would turn to , and work with she and the girl till work be 
 do , and they could have the sitting - room to themselves , and he could 
 tell she all his news . janet -- the ever - kind and thoughtful Janet -- would 
 see to that . the more he see of the farm - life the more he admire Janet . 
 she be a little slow . she be not clever ; and she have plenty of small 
 prejudice which amuse he . but she be the salt of the earth . trust 
 she -- lean upon she -- she would never let you down . and now he be go to 
 trust his beloved to she -- for a while . 

 yes -- Rachel and the girl , they be all in the high barn , feed the 
 greedy maw of the threshing machine ; a business which strain muscle 
 and back , and choke nose and throat with infinitesimal particle of 
 oil and the fine fly chaff . he watch Rachel a few minute as she 
 lift and pitch -- a typical figure of a New Labour , which be also a New 
 Beauty , on this old earth . then he draw she away , fling off his tunic , 
 and take her place , while she , smile and panting , her hand on her 
 side , lean against the wall , and watch in her turn . 

 then when the engine stop , and the great hopper full of grain lie 
 ready for the miller , they find themselves alone in the barn for a 
 minute . the girl and Janet have go to milk , and Hastings with they . 
 there be a lantern in the barn , which show Rachel in the swirl of the 
 corn dust with which the barn be full , haloed and golden with it , like a 
 homeric goddess in a luminous cloud . her soft brown head , her smile , 
 show the glint of her white tooth , her eye , and all the beauty of her 
 young form , in its semi - male dress -- they set his blood on fire . just as 
 he be , in his khaki shirt - sleeve , he come to she , and take she in his 
 arm . she cling to he passionately . 

 " I think you be never come . " 

 it be one of the reproach that have no sting . 

 " I come at the first moment . I leave a score of thing undo . " 

 " have you be think of I ? " 

 " always -- always . and you ? " 

 " nearly always , " she say teasingly . " but I have be make up my 
 account . " 

 " avaricious woman!--thinking of nothing but money . dear -- I have several 
 bit of news for you . but let I wash ! " he hold out his hands--"i be 
 not fit to touch you ! " 

 she disengage herself quietly . 

 " what news ? " 

 " some letter first , " he say , smile . " a budget and a half -- mostly for 
 you , from all my home people . can you face it ? " 

 " in reply to your cable ? " 

 " my most extravagant cable ! on the top of course of sack of letter ! " 

 " before we be engage ? " 

 he laugh as he thrust his arm into his tunic . 

 " my mother seem to have guess from my very first mention of you . " 

 " but -- she do not   know yet ? " say Rachel , slowly . 

 they have pass out of the range of the lantern . he could not see she 
 face , could only just hear her voice . 

 " no , not yet , dear . my last long letter should reach she next week . " 

 her hand lie close in his as they grope their way to the door . when he 
 unlatche it they come out into the light of a stormy sunset . the rain 
 have momentarily cease , and there be fiery line of crimson burn 
 their way through the black cloud mass in the western sky . the red 
 light catch Rachel 's face and hair . but even so , it seem to he that 
 she be pale . 

 " I say -- you've   do too much threshing ! " he say with energy . " do not   do 
 any more -- get an extra man . " 

 " can not   find one , " she say , laugh at he , but rather languidly . " I will 
 go and get the tea ready . " 

 he go off to wash , and when he enter the sitting - room a little 
 later , she too be fresh and neat again , in a new frock of some soft 
 bluish - green stuff , which please his eye amazingly . outside , the sunset 
 be die rapidly , and at a sign from she , he draw down the blind over 
 the two window , and pull the curtain close . he stand at the window 
 look at the hill - side for a moment with the blind in his hand . he be 
 recall the face he have see , of which neither he nor any one else have 
 yet say a word to Rachel ; recall also his talk with one of the 
 Millsborough police the day before . " nothing more hear of he , Captain . 
 oh , we get queer people about these hill sometimes . it be a very 
 lonely bit of country . why , a year ago , we be hunt a couple of 
 german prisoner about these common for day ! " 

 " any more ghost ? " he say lightly , glance round at Rachel , as he draw 
 the curtain across . 

 " not that I know of . come and have your tea . " 

 he take a cup from her hand , and lean against the chimney survey the 
 room with a radiant face . then he stoop over she and said:-- 

 " I love this little room ! do not   you ? " 

 she make a restless movement . 

 " I do not   know . why do you love it ? " 

 " as if you do not   know ! " their eye meet , his intense and 
 passionate,--her , less easy to read . " darling , I have some other news 
 for you . I think you will like it -- though it will separate we for a little . " 

 and draw a letter from his pocket , he hand it to she . it be a 
 letter from the American Headquarters , offer he immediate work in the 
 American Intelligence Department at Coblentz . 

 " some friend of mine there , seem to have be get busy about I . you 
 see I know german pretty well . " 

 and he explain to she that as a boy he have spend a year in Germany 
 before go to Yale . she scarcely listen , so absorbed be she in the 
 official letter . 

 " when must you go ? " she say at last , look up . 

 " at the end of next week , I be afraid . " 

 " and how long will it be ? " 

 " that I do not   know . but three or four month certainly . it will put off 
 our wedding , dearest , a bit . but you would like I to go , would not   you ? I 
 should be at the hub of thing . " 

 the colour rush into her cheek . 

 " _ must you go _ ? " 

 her manner amaze he . he have expect that one so ambitious and 
 energetic in her own way of life would have greet his news with 
 eagerness . the proposal be really a great compliment to he -- and a great 
 chance . 

 " I do not   see how I could refuse it , " he say with an altered countenance . 
 " indeed -- I do not   think I could . " 

 she drop her face into her hand , and star into the fire . in some 
 trouble of mind , he kneel down beside she , and put his arm round she . 

 " I will write every day . it will not   be long , darling . " 

 she shake her head , and he feel a shudder run through she . 

 " it be silly of I -- I do not   know why -- but -- I'm just afraid-- " 

 " Afraid of what ? " 

 she smile at he tremulously -- but he see the tear in her eye . 

 " I tell you -- I can not   always help it . I be a fool , I suppose -- but-- " 

 then she throw her arm round his neck -- murmur in his ear : " you will 
 have time to think -- when you be away from I -- that it be a great 
 pity -- you ever ask I . " 

 he kiss and scold she , till she smile again . afterwards she make a 
 strong effort to discuss the thing reasonably . of course he must go -- it 
 would be a great opening -- a great experience . and they would have all the 
 more time to consider their own affair . but all the evening afterwards 
 he feel in some strange way that he have strike she a blow from which she 
 be try in vain to rally . be it all the effect of her suffering at 
 that brute 's hand -- aid by the emotion and strain of the recent scene 
 between herself and he ? 

 as for she , when she turn back from the gate where she have bid he 
 good - bye , she see Janet in the doorway wait for she almost with a 
 sense of exasperation . she have not yet say one word to Janet . that 
 plunge be all to take ! 




 XIV 


 Rachel wake the follow morning in that dreary mood when all the colour 
 and the glamour seem to have be wash out of life , and the hope and 
 dream which keep up a perpetual chatter in every normal mind be 
 suddenly dumb . 

 how be she go to face Ellesborough 's long absence ? it have be 
 recently assume between they that he would be very soon release from 
 his forestry post , that the infantry commission he have be promise 
 would come to nothing , now the Armistice be sign , and that in a very 
 few week they would be free to think only of themselves and their own 
 future . this offer of intelligence work at the American Headquarters have 
 change everything . 

 in ten day , if nothing happen , he would be go , and she would be leave 
 behind to grapple alone with Roger -- who might at any moment torment she 
 again ; with the presence of Dempsey , who be think of settle in the 
 village , and for whom she would be call upon very soon to fulfil the 
 hope she have raise in he ; and finally , with the struggle and misery in 
 her own mind . 

 but something must happen . as she be dress by candle - light in the 
 winter dawn , her thought be rush forward -- leap some unexplored 
 obstacle lie in the foreground -- to a possible marriage before 
 Ellesborough go to France ; just a quiet walk to a registry office , 
 without any fuss or any witness but Janet . if she could reach that 
 haven , she would be safe ; and this dumb fever of anxiety , this terrify 
 conviction that in the end fate would somehow take he from she , would be 
 soothe away . 

 but how to reach it ? for there be now between they , till they also be 
 reveal and confess , a whole new series of event : not only the Tanner 
 episode , but Delane 's reappearance , her interview with he , her rash 
 attempt to silence Dempsey . by what she have do in her bewilderment and 
 fear , in order to escape the penalty of frankness , she might only -- as 
 she be now begin to perceive -- have stumble into fresh danger . it 
 be as though she stand on the friable edge of some great crater , some 
 gulf of destruction , on which her foot be perpetually slip and 
 sinking , and only Ellesborough 's hold could ultimately save she . 

 and Janet's -- Janet 's first . Rachel 's think clung to she , as the 
 shipwreck southern sailor turn to his local saint to intercede for he 
 with the great spiritual light . Janet 's counsel and help -- she know she 
 must ask for they -- that it be the next step . yet she have be weakly 
 put it off day by day . and through this mist of doubt and dread , 
 there keep strike all the time , as though quite independent of it , the 
 natural thought of a woman in love . 

 during the farm breakfast , hurry through by candle - light , with rain 
 beat on the window , Rachel be thinking--"why do not   _ he _ propose 
 it?"--this scheme of marry before he go . be not   it a most natural 
 thing to occur to he ? she torment herself all the morning with the 
 problem of his silence . 

 then -- as though in rebuke of her folly -- at midday come a messenger , a boy 
 on a bicycle , with a letter . she take it up to her own room , and read it 
 with flutter breath -- laugh , yet with tear in her eye . 

 " my darling -- what an idiot I be last night ! this morning I have wake up 
 to a brilliant idea -- why I do not   propose it to you yesterday I can not 
 imagine ! let we marry before I go . meet I in London , a week to - day , and 
 let we go into the country , or to the sea , for a blessed forty - eight 
 hour , afterwards . then you will see I off -- and I shall know , wherever I 
 go , that you be my very , very own , and I be yours . I do not   want to hurry 
 you . take time to think , and write to I to - night , or wire I to - morrow 
 morning . but the very idea that you may say ' yes ' make I the happy 
 of man . take time to think -- but -- all the same -- don't   keep I too long 
 wait ! 

 " your own , 

 " G.E. " 

 all day she keep the letter hide in the loose front of her dress . " I will 
 wire to - morrow morning , " she think . but before that -- something have get 
 to happen . every now and then she would pause in her own work to watch 
 Janet -- Janet butter - making , Janet feed the calf , Janet cooking -- for 
 on that homely figure in white cap and apron everything seem to depend . 

 the frost have come , and clear sky with it . the day pass in various 
 miscellaneous business , under shelter , in the big barn . 

 and at night , after supper , Rachel stand on the front step look into 
 a wide starry heaven , moonless , cold , and still . Betty and Jenny have just 
 go up to bed . Janet be in the kitchen , put the porridge for the 
 morrow 's breakfast which she have just make into the hay - box , which would 
 keep it steam all night . but she would soon have do work . the moment 
 seem to have come . 

 Rachel walk into the kitchen and close the door behind she . the supper 
 have be clear away and the table on which they have eat it shine 
 spotlessly clean and bare . the fire would soon be rake out for the 
 night , and Janet would lay the breakfast before she leave the kitchen . 
 everything be in the neat possible order , and the brilliant polish of 
 a great stew - pan hanging on the wall particularly catch the eye . janet 
 be hum to herself -- one of the war tune -- when Rachel enter . 

 " Janet , I want to speak to you . " 

 Janet look up -- startle . and yet something in she be not startle ! she 
 have be strangely expectant all these day . it seem to she she have 
 already see Rachel come in like that -- have already hear she say those 
 word . 

 she shut up the hay - box , and come gently forward . 

 " here , Rachel ? " 

 " you have   nearly do ? " 

 " in a few minute . if you will go into the sitting - room , I will join you 
 directly . " 

 and while she hurry through the rest of her work , her mind be really 
 run forward in prophecy . she more or less know what she be go 
 to hear . and as she close the kitchen door behind she there be in her a 
 tremulous sense as though of some sacred responsibility . 

 Rachel be crouch over the fire as usual , and Janet draw up a stool 
 beside she , and lay a hand on her knee . 

 " what be it ? " 

 Rachel turn . 

 " I tell you one secret , Janet , the other day . now this be another . and 
 it's-- " she flush , and break off , begin again after a moment--"i 
 do not   mean to tell you , or any one . I can not   make up my mind whether I be 
 bind to or not . but I want you to advise I , Janet . I be awfully 
 troubled . " 

 and suddenly , she slip to the floor , and lay her head against Janet 's 
 knee , hide her face . 

 Janet bend over she , instinctively caress the brown hair . she be only 
 three or four year old than Rachel , but she look much old , and the 
 close linen cap she wear on butter - make afternoon , and have not yet 
 remove , give she a gently austere look , like that of a religious . 

 " tell I -- i'll do my good . " 

 " in the first place , " say Rachel , in a low voice , " who do you think be 
 the ghost ? " 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 " the ghost -- be Roger Delane ! " 

 Janet utter an exclamation of surprise and horror -- while fact after 
 fact rush together in her mind , fit into one explanatory whole . why 
 have she never think of that possibility , among all the other ? 

 " oh , Rachel , have you ever see he ? " 

 " twice . he stop I on the road , when I be come back from 
 Millsborough on Armistice Day . and he come to see I the day after . you 
 remember you be astonish to find I have send the girl to the 
 Shepherds ' dance ? I do it to get they out of the way -- and if you have not 
 say you be go to that service I should have have to invent something 
 to send you away . " 

 " I always think he be in Canada ? " say Janet , in bewilderment . " what 
 do he want ? have you tell Captain Ellesborough ? " 

 " no , I have not   tell George . I do not   know whether I shall . Roger want 
 money -- as usual . I give he some . " 

 " _ you give he some ! Rachel ! _ " 

 " I have to -- I have to buy he off . and I have   see John Dempsey also without 
 your knowing . and I have   have to bribe he too . " 

 Rachel be now sit up , very hard and erect , her hand round her 
 knee . her first object seem to be to avoid emotion , and to prevent 
 Janet from show any . Janet have go very pale . the name " Dick Tanner " 
 be drum in her ear . 

 " I know you can not   understand I , Janet , " say Rachel , after a pause , " you 
 could never do what I have   do . I dare say when you have   let I tell you the 
 story you will not be able to forgive I . you will think I ought never to 
 have let you settle with I -- that I tell a lie when I say I be not   a bad 
 woman -- that I have   disgrace you . I hope you will not . that -- that would about 
 finish it . " her voice shake at last . 

 Janet be speechless . but instinctively she lay a hand on Rachel 's 
 shoulder . and at the touch , in a moment , the story come out . 

 confuse and hardly intelligible ! for Rachel herself could scarcely now 
 disentangle all the thread and motif of it . but certain thing stand 
 out -- the figure of a young artist , sensitive , pure - minded , sincere , with 
 certain fatal weakness of judgment and will , which have make he a 
 rolling stone , and the despair of his good friend , but , as compare with 
 Roger Delane after six month of marriage -- Hyperion to a satyr ; then the 
 attraction of such a man for his neighbour , a young wife , bring up in a 
 refined home , the child of a saint and dreamer , outraged since her 
 marriage in every fibre by the conduct and way of her husband , and 
 smarting under the sense of her own folly ; their friendship , so 
 blameless till its last moment , with nothing to hide , and little to 
 regret , a woman 's only refuge indeed from hour of degradation and 
 misery ; and finally the triumph of something which be not passion , at 
 least on Rachel 's side , but of mere opportunity , strengthen , make 
 irresistible , by the woman 's pain and despair : so the tale , the common 
 tale , run . 

 " I do not   love he , " say Rachel at last , her hand over her eyes--"i 
 do not   pretend I do . I like he -- I be awfully sorry for he -- as he be 
 for I . but -- well , there it be ! I go over to his house . I honestly 
 think his sister be there ; but , above all , I want he to sympathize 
 with I -- and pity I -- because he know everything . and she be not 
 there -- and I stay three day and night with he . _ Voil _ ! " 

 there be silence a little . Janet 's thought be in a tumult . Rachel 
 begin again : 

 " now , why be I tell you all this ? I need never have tell anybody -- at 
 least up to a few day ago . Poor Dick be drown just before I get my 
 divorce , in a boat accident on Lake Nipissing . he have go there to 
 paint , and be camp out . if he have not   be drown , perhaps , he would 
 have make I marry he . so there be no one in the world who know I be 
 ever with he except-- " 

 she turn sharply upon janet-- 

 " except this man who turn up here in George 's own camp -- and in the 
 village , two month ago , but whom I never see till this week--_this 
 week_--Armistice Day -- John Dempsey . that be a queer chance , be not   it ? 
 the sort of thing nobody could have expect . I be come back from 
 Millsborough . I be -- well , just that evening , I be awfully happy . I 
 expect nothing . and then -- within twenty minutes-- " 

 she tell the story to Janet 's astounded ear , of the two apparition in 
 the road , of her two interview -- first with Dempsey , and the follow 
 evening with delane -- and of her own attempt to bribe they both . 

 and at that her composure break down . 

 " why do I do it ? " she say wildly , spring to her foot . " it be 
 idiotic ! why do not   I just accept the boy 's story , and say quietly , ' yes , 
 I be stay with the Tanners ' ? and why do not   I defy Roger -- go straight 
 to George , and hand he over to the police ? do not   you see why ? because it 
 be true!--_it 's true!_--and I be terrified . if I lose George , I should 
 kill myself . I never think I should be -- I could be -- in love with 
 anybody like this . but yet I suppose it be in I all the time . I be 
 always seek -- reach out -- to somebody I could love with every bit of 
 I , soul and body -- somebody I could follow -- for I can not   manage for 
 myself -- i'm not like you , Janet . and now I have   find he -- and -- do you know 
 what that be ? " 

 she pull a letter out of her pocket , and look at Janet through a mist 
 of despair tear . 

 " it be a letter from George . it come this morning . he want I to marry 
 he at once -- next week . he be get some new work in France , and he see that 
 I be miserable because he be go away . and why should not   I ? _ why 
 should not   I ? _ I love he . there be nothing wrong with I , except that 
 wretched story . well , there be two reason . First"--she speak with slow 
 and bitter emphasis--"i do not   believe for a moment Roger will keep his 
 word . I know he . he be frightfully ill . he say he be die . he may 
 die -- before he be get through this money . that would be the good thing 
 that could happen to I -- wouldn't   it ? but probably he will not   die -- and 
 certainly he will get through the money ! then he will come back -- and I shall 
 begin bribe he again -- and tell lie to hide it from George -- and 
 in the end it will be no use -- for Roger 's quite reckless -- you can not   appeal 
 to he through anything but money . he will see George , whatever I do , and 
 try it on with he . and then -- George will know how to deal with _ he _ , I 
 dare say -- but when we be alone -- and he ask _ me_-- " 

 she sink down again on the floor , kneeling , and put her hand on Janet 's 
 knee . 

 " you see , Janet , do not   you ? you see ? " 

 it be the cry of a soul in anguish . 

 " you poor , poor thing ! " 

 Janet , tremble from head to foot , bow her head on Rachel 's , and the 
 two clung together , in silence , break only by two deep sob from Rachel . 
 then Janet disengage herself . she be pale , but no long agitate , and 
 her blue eye which be her only beauty be clear and shin . 

 " you will let I say just what I feel , Rachel ? " 

 " of course . " 

 " you can not   marry he without tell he . no , no -- you could not   do that ! " 

 Rachel say nothing . she be , sit on the floor , her eye turn away 
 from Janet . 

 " you could not   do that , Rachel , " Janet resume , as though she be 
 urgently think her way ; " you would never have a happy moment . " 

 " oh , yes , of course , " say Rachel , throw up her head with a half 
 scornful gesture . " one say that -- but how do you know ? I might never 
 think of it again -- if Roger and that man Dempsey be out of the way . 
 it be dead -- it be _ dead _ ! why do we trouble about such thing ! " 

 " it would be dead , " say Janet in a low voice , " if you have tell he -- and 
 he would forgive ! " 

 " what have he to do with it ? " cry Rachel , stubbornly , " it be before he 
 know I . I be a different being . " 

 " no -- it be always the same self , which we be make , all the time . do not 
 you see -- dear , dear Rachel!--it 's your chance now to put it all behind 
 you -- just by be true . oh , I do not   want to preach to you -- but I see it 
 so clearly ! " 

 " but it be not   as a man would see it -- a man like George , " say Rachel , 
 shake her head . " look there"--she point to a little bundle of letter 
 lie on the table--"there be letter from his people which he bring 
 I this morning . it be awful!--how they take I at his valuation -- just 
 because he love I . I must be everything that be good , because he say 
 so . and you can see what kind of people they be -- what they think of 
 he -- and what they imagine about I -- what they think I _ must _ be -- for 
 he to love I . I do not   mean they be prig -- they be not   a bit . it be just 
 their life come out , quite naturally . you see what they be -- quite 
 simply -- what they can not   help be , and what they expect from he and the 
 woman he marry . and he be get to take I home to they -- some time -- to 
 present I to they . the divorce be difficult enough . even if they think 
 of I as quite innocent , it will be hard for they , that George should 
 marry a divorced woman . " 

 " what have they to do with it ? " interrupt Janet . " it be only George that 
 matter -- no other person have any right whatever to know ! you need not 
 consider anybody else . " 

 " yes -- but think of _ he _ . it be bad enough that I should know something he 
 do not   know -- but at least _ he be _ spar . he can take I home to his 
 mother -- whom he adore -- and if _ I _ know that I be a cheat and a sham -- he 
 do not --it will be all easy for he . " 

 Janet be silence for the moment by the sheer passion of the voice . she 
 sit , grope a little , under the stress of her own thought , and pray 
 inwardly -- without word -- for light and guidance . 

 " and think of _ I _ , please ! " Rachel go on . " if I tell he , it be 
 do -- for ever . he will forgive I , I think . he may be everything 
 that be dear , and good , and kind"--her voice broke--"but it would hit he 
 dreadfully hard . a man like that can not   forget such a thing . when I have 
 once say it , I shall have change everything between we . he must 
 think -- some time -- when he be alone -- when I be not there--'it be Dick 
 Tanner once -- it will be some one else another time ! ' I shall have be 
 pull down from the place where he put I now -- even after he know 
 all about Roger and the divorce -- pull down for good and all -- however 
 much he may pity I -- however good he may be to I . it will be love 
 perhaps -- but another kind of love . he can not   trust I again . no one could . 
 and it be that I can not   bear -- I can not   _ bear _ ! " 

 she look defiantly at Janet , and the little room with its simple 
 furnishing seem too small a stage for such an energy of fear and 
 distress . 

 " yes -- that you could bear , " say Janet quietly , " with he to help 
 you -- and God . it would all straighten out in the end -- because the first 
 step would be right . " 

 Rachel turn upon she . 

 " now that I have   tell you , " she cry , " can _ you _ ever think the same of I 
 again ? you know you can not ! " 

 Janet catch her cold hand , and hold they close , look up to she . 

 " not the same -- no , not the same ! but if I care for you before , Rachel -- I 
 care for you ten thousand time more now . do not   you see?--it will be the 
 same with he ? " 

 Rachel shake her head . 

 " no -- a _ man 's _ different , " she repeat , " a man 's different ! " 

 " anyway , you _ must _ , " say Janet resolutely , " you know you must . you 
 do not   need I to tell you . " 

 Rachel wrench herself away with a little moan and hide her face in her 
 hand as she lean against the mantelpiece . Janet , look up , and 
 transfigure by that spiritual energy , that ultimate instinctive faith 
 which be the root force in she , go on , plead . 

 " Dear Rachel , one go on live side by side -- do one 's daily 
 work -- and think just one 's ordinary thought -- and all the time one 
 never speak of the big thing of all -- the only thing that matter , 
 really . be not   it God that matter -- and the law in our heart ? if we break 
 it -- if we be not   true -- if we wrong those that love we -- if we injure and 
 deceive -- how will it be when we grow old -- when we come to die ? whatever 
 our gain -- we shall have lose our soul ? " 

 " you think I should injure he by marry he ? " cry Rachel . 

 " no -- no ! a thousand time , no ! but by deceive he -- by not trust 
 he -- with all your heart , and all your life -- that would be the bad 
 injury . " 

 " how do you know all there may have be in his life ? " say Rachel , 
 vehemently--"i do not   ask . " 

 " I think you do know . " 

 Rachel consider the word , finally drop her face again out of 
 sight . 

 " well , I dare say I do ! " she say wearily . " of course he be a hundred 
 time too good for I . " 

 " do not   turn it off like that ! it be for oneself one have to think -- one 's 
 own fulfilling of the law . Love--_is _ the fulfilling of the law . and love 
 mean trust -- and truth . " 

 Janet 's voice sink . she have say she say . Rachel be silent for some 
 time , and Janet sit motionless . the clock and the fire be the only 
 sound . at last Rachel move . with a long sigh , she press back the 
 ruffle hair from her temple , and standing tiptoe before a small mirror 
 that hang over the mantelpiece , she begin to pin up some coil that have 
 break loose . when that be do , she turn slowly towards Janet . 

 " very well . that be settle . how shall it be do ? shall I write it or say 
 it ? " 

 Janet gasp a little between laugh and crying . then she catch 
 Rachel 's cold unresisting hand , and lay it tenderly against her own 
 cheek . 

 " write it . " 

 " all right . " the voice be that of an automaton . " how shall I send it ? " 

 " would you -- would you trust I to take it ? " 

 " you mean -- you'd talk to he ? " 

 " if you give I leave . " 

 Rachel think a little , and then make a scarcely perceptible sign of 
 assent . a few more word pass as to the good time at which to find 
 Ellesborough at leisure . it be decide that Janet should aim at catch 
 he in the midday dinner hour . " I should bicycle , and get home before 
 dark . " 

 " and now let us talk of something else , " say Rachel , imperiously . 

 she find some business letter that have to be answer , and set to work 
 on they . Janet write up her milk record and dairy account . the fire 
 sink gently to its end . Janet 's cat come with tail outstretche , and 
 rub itself sociably , first against Janet 's skirt , and then against 
 Rachel . no trace remain in the little room , where the two woman sit at 
 their daily work , of the scene which have pass between they , except in 
 Rachel 's pallor , and the occasional shaking of her hand as it pass over 
 the paper . 

 then when Janet put up her paper with a look at the clock , which be 
 just go to strike ten o'clock , Rachel too clear away , and with that 
 instinct for air and the open which be a relic of her canadian life , and 
 make any closed room after a time an oppression to she , she throw a cloak 
 over her shoulder , and go out again to breathe the night . there be a 
 young horse who , on the previous day , have need the vet . she go across 
 the yard to the stable to look at he . 

 all be well with the horse , whose swollen hock have be comfortably 
 bandage by Hastings before he leave . but as she stand beside he , close 
 to the divided door , open on the hill , of which both the horizontal 
 half be now shut , she be aware of certain movement on the other 
 side of the door -- some one pass it -- footstep . her nerve give a 
 jump . could it be?--_again _ ! impetuously she go to the door , throw open 
 the upper half , and look out . nothing -- but the faint starlight on the 
 hill , and the wood crown it . 

 she call . 

 " who be there ? " but no one answer . 

 Fancy , of course . but with the knowledge she now have , she could not bring 
 herself to go round the farm . instead she carefully close the stable 
 shutter , and run back across the yard into the shelter of the house , 
 lock the front door behind she , and go into the sitting - room and 
 the kitchen , to see that the window be fasten . 

 Janet be wait for she at the top of the stair . they kiss each 
 other gravely , in silence , like those who feel that the time for speech 
 be do . then Rachel go into her room , and Janet hear she turn the 
 key . Janet herself sleep intermittently . but whenever she wake , it seem 
 to she that there be some slight sound in the next room -- a movement or 
 a rustle , which show that Rachel be still awake -- and up ? 

 it be a night indeed which leave Rachel with that sense of strange 
 illumination , of life painfully enlarge and deepen , which love and 
 suffering may always bring to the woman who be capable of love and 
 suffering . she have spend the hour in writing to Ellesborough , and in 
 that letter she have unpack her heart to its depth , Janet guess . when 
 she receive the letter from Rachel on the morrow , she handle it as a 
 sacred thing . 




 XV 


 the frost hold . a sun of pearl and fire rise over the hill , as the star 
 finally fade out in the winter morning , and a brilliant rime lay 
 sparkle on all the pasture and on the slope of the down . the 
 brilliance have partly vanish from the low ground when Janet start 
 on her way ; but on the high common , winter be at its gay and 
 lovely . the distant wood be a mist of brown and azure , encircle 
 the broad frost - whitened space ; the great single beech and oak under 
 which Spenser or Sidney -- the great Will himself -- might have walk , shoot 
 up , magnificent , into a clear sky , proudly shelter the gnarl thorn 
 and furze - bush which march beside and round they , like dwarf in a 
 pageant . 

 half way up the hill , Janet come across old Betts bring down a small 
 cart - full of furze for fodder , and she stop to speak to he . a little 
 later on , near to the camp she overtake Dempsey , who rather officiously 
 join she , and assume at once that she be in quest of the Camp 
 Commandant , direct she to a short cut lead straight to 
 Ellesborough 's quarter . there be a slight something in the manner of 
 both man that jar on Janet -- as though their lip say one thing and 
 their eye another -- furtive in the case of Betts , a trifle insolent 
 in that of Dempsey . she with her tragic knowledge guess uncomfortably 
 at what it mean . Dempsey -- as she have make up her mind after ten minute ' 
 talk with he -- be a vain gossip . it have be madness on Rachel 's part to 
 give he the small hold on she . very likely he have not yet actually 
 betray she -- his hope of favour to come might have be sufficient to 
 prevent that . but his self - importance would certainly show itself 
 somehow -- in a hint or a laugh . he have probably already rouse in the 
 village mind a pry curiosity , a suspicion of something underhand , 
 which might alter Rachel 's whole relation to her neighbour . for once 
 give an english country - side reason to suspect a scandal , and it will 
 pluck it bare in time , with a slow and secret persistence . 

 well , after all , if the situation become disagreeable , Rachel would only 
 have to choose Ellesborough 's country as her own , and begin her new life 
 there . 

 _ suppose that all go well ! _ Janet 's mind go through some painful 
 alteration of confidence and fear , as she walk her bicycle along the 
 rough forest - track lead to Ellesborough 's hut . she believe he to be 
 deeply in love with Rachel , and the spiritual passion in she seem to 
 realize in the man 's inmost nature , behind all his practical ability , 
 and his short business manner , power of pity and tenderness like she 
 own . but if she be wrong ? if this second revelation put too great a 
 strain upon one bring up in an exceptionally strict school where 
 certain standard of conduct be simply take for grant ? 

 Mystic , and puritan as she be , there be moment when Janet feel 
 her responsibility almost unbearable . Rachel desert -- Rachel in 
 despair -- Rachel turn on the woman who have advise she to she 
 undoing -- all these image be beat on Janet 's tremulous sense , as the 
 small military hut where Ellesborough and two of his junior officer 
 live come into view , together with that wide hollow of the forestry camp 
 where he and Rachel have first meet . the letter in her pocket seem a 
 living and sinister thing . she have still power to retain it -- to keep it 
 imprison . 

 a lady in the dress of the Women 's Forestry Corps appear on another 
 path lead to Ellesborough 's hut . Janet recognize Mrs. Fergusson , 
 and be soon greet by a shout of welcome . 

 " well , so Miss Henderson 's engaged to our Captain ! " say Mrs. Fergusson , 
 with a smile countenance , as they shake hand . " the girl here , and 
 I , be awfully interested . the camp begin it ! but do you want the 
 Captain ? I be afraid he be not   here . " 

 Janet 's countenance fall . 

 " I think I should be sure to find he in the dinner hour . " 

 " no , he go up to town by the first train this morning on some business 
 with the Ministry . we expect he back about three . " 

 it be not one o'clock . Janet ponder what to do . 

 " you want to see he ? " say Mrs. Fergusson , full of sympathy . 

 " I bring a letter for he . if I leave it , will he be sure to get it 
 directly he return ? " 

 " his servant be in the hut . let us talk to he . " 

 Mrs. Fergusson rap at the door of the hut , and walk in . an elderly 
 batman appear . 

 " I have a letter for Captain Ellesborough -- an important letter -- on 
 business , " say Janet . " I be to wait for an answer . but as he be not 
 here , where shall I leave it , so that he will be certain to get it ? " 

 " on his table , if you please , ma'am , " say the soldier , open the door 
 of the Captain 's small sitting - room--"I'll see that he get it . " 

 " it will be quite safe ? " say Janet anxiously , place it herself in a 
 prominent place on the writing - table . 

 " Lor , yes , ma'am . nobody come in here but I , when the Captain 's away . 
 I will tell he of it directly he come home . " 

 " may I just write a little note myself ? I expect to find Captain 
 Ellesborough in . " 

 the servant hand she a sheet of paper . she wrote--"i bring Rachel 's 
 letter , and be very disappointed not to see you . come at once . do not 
 delay . Janet Leighton . " 

 she slip it into an envelope , which she address and leave beside the 
 other . then she reluctantly leave the hut with Mrs. Fergusson . 

 " I be so sorry you do not   find he , " say that lady . " be it something 
 about the wedding ? " she add , smile , her feminine curiosity get 
 the well of she . 

 " oh , no -- not yet , " say Janet , startle . 

 " well , I suppose it will not   be long , " laugh Mrs. Fergusson . " he be 
 desperately in love , you know ! " 

 Janet smile in return , and Mrs. Fergusson , delight to have the chance , 
 break out into praise of her Commandant . 

 " you see , we woman who be do all this new work with man , we know a 
 jolly deal more about they than we ever do before . I can tell you , it 
 search we out , this joint life -- both woman and man . in this camp you 
 can not   hide what you be -- the sort of man -- or the sort of woman . and 
 there be not   a woman in this camp , if she be be here any time , who 
 would not   trust the Captain for all she be worth -- who would not   tell he her 
 love - affair , or her debt -- or march up to a machine - gun , if he tell she . 
 in a sense , they be in love with he , because -- as you have   no doubt find 
 out , he have a way with he ! but they all know that he be never be 
 anything to they but the good of commandant , and a good friend . oh , I 
 could never have run this camp but for he . he and I will go together ! of 
 course we be shut up very soon . " 

 so the pleasant Irishwoman run on , as she walk beside Janet and her 
 bicycle to the top of the hill . Janet listen and smile . her own mind 
 say ditto to it all . but nevertheless , the more Ellesborough be set on 
 a pinnacle by this enthusiastic friend and spectator of his daily life , 
 the more Rachel 's friend tremble for Rachel . a lover " not too bright and 
 good " to understand -- and forgive -- that be what be want . 

 she reach the farm - gate about two o'clock , and Rachel be there , 
 wait for she . but before they meet , Rachel watch her approach , see 
 that there be no news for she . 

 " he be not   there ? " she say , drearily , as Janet reach she . 

 Janet explain , and they walk up the farm lane together . 

 " I would have wait if I could , " she say in distress . " but it would 
 have look strange . Mrs. Fergusson would have suspect something 
 wrong . " 

 " oh no , you could not   have wait , " say Rachel , decidedly . " well!"--she 
 throw her arm out in a great stretch--"it 's do . in half an hour he will 
 be read the letter . it be like wait for one 's execution , be not   it ? 
 nothing can stop it ; I may be dead before tea ! " she give a wild laugh . 

 " Rachel ! " 

 " well , that be how I feel . if he give I up , it will be death -- though I 
 dare say I shall go on fuss round the farm , and people will still talk 
 to I as if I be alive . But!"--she shrug her shoulder . 

 " he will not   give you up-- " say Janet , much troubled--"because -- because 
 he be a good man . " 

 " all the more reason . if I be he , I should give I up . shall I tell you 
 a queer thing , Janet ? I hate Roger , as much as I can hate anybody . it 
 would be a great relief to I if I hear he be dead . and yet at the 
 same time I see -- oh yes , I see quite plainly -- that I treat he badly . 
 he tell I so the other night -- and it be so -- it be _ true _ . I never have the 
 least patience with he . and now he be die -- at least he say so -- and 
 though I hate he -- though I pray I may never , never see he again , yet 
 I be sorry for he . be not   that strange ? " 

 she look at Janet with a queer flickering defiance , which be also a 
 kind of remorse , in her eye . 

 " no , it be not   strange . " 

 " why not?--when I hate he ? " 

 " one can be sorry even for those one hate . I suppose God be , " Janet 
 add , after a pause . 

 Rachel make a little face of scorn . 

 " why should God hate any one ? he make we . he be responsible . he must have 
 know what he be do . if he really pity we , would he have make we at 
 all ? " 

 Janet make a little protest sound -- a sound of pain . 

 " do it give you the shiver , old woman , when I talk like that ? " Rachel 
 slip her hand affectionately through Janet 's arm . " well , I will not , 
 then . but if-- " she catch her breath a little--"if George cast I off , 
 do not   expect I to sing psalm and take it piously . I do not   know myself 
 just lately -- I seem quite strange to myself . " 

 and Janet , glance at her sideways , wonder indeed where all that 
 rosy - cheeked , ripe bloom have go , which so far have make the constant 
 charm of Rachel Henderson . instead a bloodless face , with pinched line , 
 and heavy - lidde eye ! what a formidable thing be this " love , " that she 
 herself have never know , though she have have her quiet dream of husband 
 and child , like her fellow . 

 Rachel , however , would not let herself be talk with or pity . she 
 walk resolutely to the house , and go off to the field to watch 
 Halsey cut and trim a hedge . 

 " if he do not   come before dark , " she say , under her breath , to Janet , 
 before set off--"it will be finish . if he does-- " 

 she hurry away without finish the sentence , and be presently take 
 a lesson from old Halsey , in what be fast become one of the rare of 
 the rural art . but in little more than half an hour , Janet bring in 
 the cow , see her return and go into the house . the afternoon be still 
 lovely -- the sky , a pale gold , with thin bar of grey cloud lie across 
 it , and the wood , all delicate shade of brown and purple , with their 
 topmost branch clear against the gold . the old red wall and tile 
 roof of the farm , the field , the great hay and straw stack , be all 
 drench in the soft winter light . 

 Rachel go up to her room , and sit down before the bare deal 
 dressing - table which hold her look - glass , and the very few article of 
 personal luxury she possess ; a pair of silver - back brush and a 
 hand - glass that have belong to an aunt , a small leather case in which 
 she keep some modest trinket -- a pearl brooch , a bracelet or two , and a 
 locket that have be her mother' -- and , stand on either side of the 
 glass , two photograph of her father and mother . 

 there be a clock on the mantelpiece . " nearly four o'clock-- " she 
 thought--"i'll give it an hour . he would send -- if he could not   come , and he 
 want to come -- but if nothing happen -- I shall know what to think . " 

 as this pass through her mind , she open one of the drawer of the 
 dressing - table , in which she keep her glove and handkerchief . suddenly 
 she perceive at the back of the drawer a small leathern case . the colour 
 rush into her face . she take it out and run quickly down the stair to 
 the kitchen . Janet and the girl be busy milk . the coast be clear . 

 a bright fire which Janet have just make up be burn in the kitchen . 
 Rachel go up to it and thrust the leathern case into the red core of 
 it . some crackling -- a disagreeable smell -- and the little thing have soon 
 vanish . Rachel go slowly upstairs again , and lock the door of her 
 room behind she . the drawer of the dressing - table be still open , and 
 there be visible in it the object she be really in search of , when the 
 little leathern case catch her eye -- a small cloth - bind book mark 
 " Diary . " 

 she take it out , and sit with it in her hand , think . how be it she 
 have never yet destroy that case ? the greek cameo brooch it hold -- Dick 
 Tanner 's gift to she -- how vividly she recall her first evening alone at 
 the farm , when she have drop it into the old well , and have listen to 
 the splash of it in the summer silence . she remember think vaguely , 
 and no doubt foolishly , that the cameo would drop more heavily and more 
 certainly without the case , which be wood , though cover with leather , 
 and she have therefore take the brooch out , and have probably put back the 
 case absently into her pocket . and thence it have find its way back among 
 her thing , how she do not know . 

 the little adventure have excite and unnerve she . it seem somehow of 
 evil omen that she should have come across that particular thing at this 
 moment . open the diary with a rather tremble hand , she look 
 through it . she be not orderly or systematic enough to keep a diary 
 regularly , and it only contain a few entry , at long interval , 
 relate mostly to her married life -- and to the death of her child . she 
 glance through they with that strange sense of unreality -- of stand 
 already outside her life , of which she have speak to Janet . there be 
 some blank page at the end of the book ; and , in her restlessness , just 
 to pass the time and to find some outlet for the storm of feel within , 
 she begin to write , at first slowly , and then very rapidly . 

 " he must have get my letter by now . I send it by Janet this morning . he 
 be not   there -- but by now he must have get home -- he be probably read 
 it at this moment . whatever happen to I -- I want just to say this -- to 
 write it down now , while I can -- I shall never blame George , and I shall 
 always love he -- with all my heart , with all my soul . he have the right to 
 say he can not   trust I -- I tell he so in my letter this morning -- that I be 
 not fit to be his wife . he have the right -- and very likely he will say it . 
 the terrible thing be that I do not   trust myself . if I look forward and 
 ask myself -- shall I always feel as I do now?--i can not   honestly be sure . 
 there be something in I that want change -- always something new -- some 
 fresh experience . I can not   even imagine the time when I should not   love 
 George . the mere thought of lose he be awful -- unspeakable . but yet -- I 
 will write it down frankly!--nothe have ever last with I very long . 
 it be like the farm . I use to love every minute of the day , every bit of 
 the work , however dull and dirty it be ; and now -- I love it still -- but I 
 seem already -- sometimes -- to be look forward to the day when I shall be 
 tired of it . 

 " why be I make like that ? I do not   know . but I can not   feel that I be 
 responsible . 

 " perhaps if George forgive I , I shall be so happy that everything will 
 change -- my own character first of all . that be my hope . for though I 
 suppose I be vain -- though I like people to admire I and make much of 
 I -- I be not really in love with myself at all . if I be , I could not   be 
 in love with George -- we be so different . 

 " I do not   feel yet that I know he . perhaps now I never shall . I often 
 find myself wish that he have something to confess to I . I would 
 hardly let he -- he should never humble himself to I . but to feel that I 
 _ could _ forgive he something , and that he would owe I something -- would 
 be very sweet , very heavenly . I would make it so easy for he . be he 
 feel like that towards I ? ' poor child -- she be very young -- and so 
 miserable ! ' 

 " I must not   write like this -- it make I cry . there be a beautiful yellow 
 sunset outside , and the world seem very still . he must be here soon -- or 
 a messenger . Janet ask he not to wait . 

 " after all , I do not   think I be so changeable . I have just be run 
 myself down -- but I do not   really believe I could ever change -- towards he . 
 oh , george!--george!--my george!--come to me!--don't   give I up . George , 
 darling , you could do anything with I you like -- don't   despair of I ! 
 in the Gospel , it be the bad woman who be forgive because they love 
 ' much . ' now I understand why . because love make new . it be so terribly 
 _ strong _ . it be either a poison -- or life -- immortal life . I have never 
 be able to believe in the thing Janet believe in . but I think I do 
 now believe in immortality -- in something within you that can not   die -- when 
 once it have begin to live . " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 and then she lay her pencil down -- and sit with the book on her 
 knee -- look towards the gold and grey of the sky -- the tear run 
 quietly down her cheek . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 meanwhile , Hastings have come hurriedly into the shippen , where Janet and 
 the two girl be milk . he come to stand beside she , silent , but 
 fidget so , that she presently look up in astonishment . 

 " do you want I ? " 

 " I want to tell you something , " he say in a low voice , stoop over 
 her--"Don't   let the girl hear . but that man be be see again . the 
 tramp . " 

 Janet start . she jump up , ask Betty , who have finish , to take she 
 place , and go with Hastings out of the barn . 

 " there be two or three people think they have   see he lately , " he say 
 hurriedly . " a man from Dobson 's farm"--(the farm which lie between 
 Great end and the village)--"who be on the hill yesterday evening , just 
 before dark , be certain he see somebody hang about the back of the 
 farm in a queer way-- " 

 " last night ? " echo Janet . 

 " yes . and there be two people who remember meet a man on the x -- road 
 who say he be go to Walton End . and the police have be inquire , 
 but nobody at Walton End know anything about such a man . however , they 
 have a description of he at last . a tall , dark fellow -- gentlemanly 
 manner -- seem delicate . I do not   like the look of it , Miss Janet . seem 
 to I as though it be not   just a tramp , hang about for what he can 
 steal . do you know of anybody who have a down on Miss Henderson -- who'd 
 like to frighten she , or put blackmail on she ? " 

 Janet consider . she be tempt to take the faithful fellow to some 
 extent into her confidence , but she rapidly decide against it . she 
 suggest that he should himself sleep for a few night at the 
 farm , and carefully examine the neighbourhood of it , last thing ; and that 
 she should bicycle over to Millsborough at once , and have some further 
 talk with the Superintendent of Police there . 

 " besides -- I'd like to be out of the way , " she think . " they will not   want 
 anybody hang round ! " 

 for there be steadily grow up in she a blissful confidence that all 
 would be once more settle and settle for good , before the night fall . 
 spectator be entirely out of place ! nor would she disturb Rachel 's 
 mind by any talk just then of what seem to be a fresh attempt at 
 terrorism on the part of her wretched husband . Hastings would be in 
 charge for the moment , and Ellesborough would be on the spot for 
 consultation before darkness have really set in . 

 so as before , she tell Hastings not to alarm Miss Henderson . but he be 
 not to leave the farm - building , and possibly the Superintendent of 
 Police would return with she . " and then -- either Rachel or the Captain 
 will have to tell the police the truth ! " just as she be start , Rachel 
 come downstairs in some surprise . 

 " where be you off to ? " 

 " I have forget something I want from Millsborough . I shall be back 
 in an hour or so . " 

 Rachel abstractedly nod assent . the golden light from the west 
 transfigure she , as she stand in the doorway . she be pale , but it 
 seem to Janet that she be no long excite -- that there be in she 
 too something of the confidence which have spring up in the heart of her 
 friend . she have the look of one for whom the Valley of the Shadow be 
 past , and her beauty have never strike Janet as it strike she at that 
 moment . its gross element seem all refine away . the girlish look 
 be quite go ; she seem old and graver ; but there breathe about 
 she " a diviner air . " 

 Janet , who be much the short , mount on the step to kiss she . 
 Caresses be not at all common between they , but Rachel return it , and 
 their eye meet in a quiet look which say what her lip forbore . then 
 Janet depart , and Rachel wave to she as she pass through the gate . 

 Hastings cross the yard , and Rachel call to he . 

 " be you off soon ? " 

 " no , Miss. I shall sleep over the stable . that horse want look 
 after . " 

 Rachel acquiesce , with a vague feeling of satisfaction , and Hastings 
 disappear within the stable opposite . 

 she go back into the sitting - room , which be still flood with the 
 last reflection from the western sky beyond the field , though the light 
 be fade rapidly , and the star be come out . what a strange effect 
 it be -- she suddenly notice it afresh -- that of the two large window 
 exactly face each other in so small a room ! one have an odd sense of 
 be indoor and out , at the same time ; the down on one side , the 
 farm - yard on the other , and in the midst , the fire , the table and chair , 
 the picture , and the red carpet , seem all part of the same scene . 

 she make up the fire . she bring in a few Xmas rose , from a border 
 under the kitchen window , and arrange they in a glass on the table . it 
 be then time to draw the blind . but she could not make up her mind to 
 shut out the saffron sky , or the view of the road . 

 something in the distance!--an approach figure , and the noise of a 
 motor - bicycle . she catch at a chair a moment , as though to steady 
 herself ; and then she go to the window , and stand there watch . he 
 see she quite plainly in the level light , and leave his bicycle at the 
 gate , he come towards she . there be no one in the yard , and before he 
 enter he stand a moment , bare - headed , gaze at she , as she stand 
 frame in the window . everything that she wish to know be write in 
 his face . a little sob break the silence of the sitting - room . 

 then he open the door and close they behind he . without a word she 
 seem to glide over the room towards he ; and now , she be on his 
 breast , gather close against the man 's passionately beat heart . 
 neither speak -- neither be able to speak . 

 then -- suddenly -- a crash of break glass -- a shot . the woman he be 
 hold fall from Ellesborough 's arm ; he only just catch she . another 
 shot -- which graze his own coat . 

 " Rachel ! " 

 it be a cry of horror . her eye be close . but she still smile at 
 he , as he lay she on the floor , implore she to speak . there be a 
 stain of blood on the lip , and through they come a few shudder 
 gasp . 

 Hastings rush into the room-- 

 " Good God , Sir ! " 

 " a doctor!--go for a doctor ! " say Ellesborough hoarsely--"no -- she be 
 go ! " 

 he sink down beside she , put his ear to her lip . in vain . no sound 
 be there . the smile mouth have settle and shut . without a murmur or 
 a sigh , Rachel have pass for ever from this warm world and the arm of 
 her lover , at the bidding of the " fierce workman Death . " 

 when Janet , a doctor , and the Superintendent of Police arrive , it be 
 to find Ellesborough sit motionless beside the body , while the two 
 girl , a blanched and shiver pair , watch for Janet at 
 the door . 

 " can you throw any light upon it , Sir ? " say the Superintendent , 
 respectfully , at last , when the Doctor have finish his examination , and 
 still Ellesborough do not speak . 

 the Captain look up . 

 " her husband do it"--he say , quietly--"the man who be her husband . " 

 a shudder of surprise run through the room . 

 " do I hear you right , Sir ? " say the Superintendent . " Miss Henderson 
 pass for unmarried . " 

 " she marry a man call Roger Delane in Canada , " say Ellesborough , 
 in the same monotonous voice . " she divorce he -- for cruelty and 
 adultery -- two year ago . a few day since he waylay she in the dark , and 
 threaten she . I do not   know this till she write to I to - day . she say 
 that she be afraid of he -- that she think he be mad -- and I come over 
 at once to see how I could protect she . we be engage to be marry . " 

 the Superintendent draw a furtive hand across his eye . then he produce 
 his note - book , and take the evidence in order . Hastings come in from a 
 lantern search of the farm - building , the hill - side , and the near 
 fringe of wood , to report that he have find no trace of the murderer . 
 the news , however , have by this time spread through the village , and the 
 kitchen be full of person who have hurry to the farm -- Old Halsey and 
 John Dempsey among they -- to tell what they know , and have see . 
 Ellesborough rouse himself from his stupor , and come to assist the 
 police in the preliminary examination of witness and inspection of the 
 farm . once he and Janet pass each other , but they do not attempt to 
 speak . each indeed shrink from the other . a word of pity would have be 
 merely a deepen agony . 

 but the farm empty at last . a body of police have be send out to scout 
 the wood , to watch the road and the railway station . Ellesborough and 
 Hastings have lift the dead woman upon a temporary bier which have be 
 raise in the sitting - room . then Hastings have draw Ellesborough 
 away , and Janet , with a village mother , have render the last office . 

 when Ellesborough re - enter , he find a white vision , lie in a bare 
 room , from which all trace of ordinary living have be as far as 
 possible clear away . only the Christmas rose which Rachel have 
 gather that afternoon be now on her breast . her hand be fold 
 over they . her beautiful hair lie unbound on the pillow -- Janet 's 
 tremble hand have refuse to cut it . 

 at sight of Ellesborough , Janet rise from her kneeling posture beside the 
 dead , as white and freeze almost as Rachel herself -- with something in her 
 hand -- a small book . she hold it out to Ellesborough . 

 " the Superintendent ask my leave to go into her room -- in case there be 
 anything which could help they . he bring I this . she have be write 
 in it -- he ask I to look at it . I do -- just enough to see -- that no one 
 have any right to it -- but you . she write it I think about an hour before 
 you come . it be her last word . " 

 " I have her letter also"--said Ellesborough , almost inaudibly , as he 
 take the book--"you bring it -- you kind woman ! you be her good 
 angel -- God reward you ! " 

 then at last a convulsion of weeping show in Janet 's face . she lay she 
 hand in his , and go noiselessly away . 

 Ellesborough sit beside his dead love all night . the farm be peaceful 
 again after that rush of the Furies through it , which have leave this wreck 
 behind . Rachel 's diary and letter lie before he . they be as she still 
 live voice in his ear , and as the word sink into memory they pierce 
 through all the rigidity of a noble nature , rend and knead as 
 they go . he recall his own solitary hour of bitterness after her 
 letter reach he . the story it contain have go very hard with he , 
 though never for one moment have he even in thought forsake she . there 
 be some comfort in that . but the memory which uphold he , which 
 alone keep he from despair , be the memory of her face at the window , 
 the sense still linger in his own physical pulse of her young 
 cling life in his arm , of the fluttering of her poor heart against 
 his breast , the exquisite happiness of her kiss -- the kiss which death cut 
 short . 

 no -- he have not fail she . that be all he have to live by . and without 
 it , it seem to he , he could not have endure to live . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the two girl have sob themselves to sleep at last . but Janet do not 
 sleep . tear come naturally as the hour go by -- tear and the agonized 
 relief of prayer to one for whom prayer be a daily need of the soul . and 
 in the early morning there flood in upon she a strange consciousness of 
 Rachel 's spirit in her -- a strange suspicion that after all the god have 
 not work so hardly with Rachel . a few day before she have attend the 
 funeral in the village church , of a young wife just happily marry , who 
 have die in three day , of virulent influenza . never have the word of the 
 anglican service please she so little . what mockery -- what fulsome 
 mockery -- to thank God because " it hath please Thee to deliver this our 
 sister , out of the misery of this troublesome world . " but the word 
 recur to she now -- mysteriously -- with healing power . have it be after 
 all " deliverance " for Rachel , from this " troublesome world , " and the 
 temptation that surround those who be not strong enough for the 
 wrestle that Fate set they -- that a God appoint they ? she have meet she 
 lover -- after fear and anguish ; and have know he her , utterly and wholly 
 her , for one supreme moment . and from that height -- that perfection -- God 
 have call she . no less thing could ever touch she now . 

 such be the moment of religious exaltation which cheat even the 
 sharp grief of man and woman . Janet would decline from her Pisgah 
 height only too soon ; but , for the time , thought like these give she the 
 strength to bear . 

 when the house begin to move again , she go down to Ellesborough . she 
 draw he into the kitchen -- make a fire , and bring he food . presently 
 she find calm enough to tell he many detail of the previous day . and 
 the man 's sound nature respond . once he grasp her hand , and kiss 
 it -- as though he thank she dumbly again , for himself and Rachel . it 
 seem to Janet indeed , as she sit by he , that Rachel have leave she a 
 trust . she take it up instinctively -- from this first desolate morning . 
 for there be woman set apart for friendship -- Janet be one of they -- as 
 other be set apart for love . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 and with the first break of light on the new November day , the search 
 party in the hill come upon what they seek . some one remember the 
 desert hut -- and from that moment the hunt be easy . finally in the 
 dripping heart of the wood the pursuer find the murderer lie face 
 downward in front of the dead fire , with the revolver beside he with 
 which he have take first Rachel 's life , and then his own . some sheet of 
 paper be scatter near he , on which he have write an incoherent and 
 grandiloquent confession . but of such act there be no real explanation . 
 they be the product of that black seed in human nature which be bear 
 with a man , and flower in due time , through devious stage , into such a 
 deed as that which destroy Rachel Henderson . 
