THE LEGACY of CAIN 
 by Wilkie Collins 
 to 
 MRS . HENRY POWELL BARTLEY : 
 permit I to add your name to my name , in publish this novel . the 
 pen which have write my book can not be more agreeably employ than in 
 acknowledge what I owe to the pen which have skillfully and patiently 
 help I , by copy my manuscript for the printer . 
 First Period : 1858 - 1859 . event in the prison , relate by the GOVERNOR . 
 CHAPTER I. the GOVERNOR explain . 
 at the request of a person who have claim on I that I must not disown , 
 I consent to look back through a long interval of year and to describe 
 event which take place within the wall of an english prison during the 
 early period of my appointment as Governor . 
 view my task by the light which later experience cast on it , I think 
 I shall act wisely by exercise some control over the freedom of my 
 pen . 
 I propose to pass over in silence the name of the town in which be 
 situate the prison once confide to my care . I shall observe a similar 
 discretion in allude to individual - some dead , some living , at the 
 present time . 
 be oblige to write of a woman who deservedly suffer the extreme 
 penalty of the law , I think she will be sufficiently identify if I 
 call she the Prisoner . of the four person present on the evening before 
 her execution three may be distinguish one from the other by allusion 
 to their vocation in life . I here introduce they as the Chaplain , the 
 Minister , and the Doctor . the fourth be a young woman . she have no claim 
 on my consideration ; and , when she be mention , her name may appear . 
 if these reserve excite suspicion , I declare beforehand that they 
 influence in no way the sense of responsibility which command an honest 
 man to speak the truth . 
 CHAPTER II . the MURDERESS ASKS QUESTIONS . 
 the first of the event which I must now relate be the conviction of 
 the Prisoner for the murder of her husband . 
 they have live together in matrimony for little more than two year . the 
 husband , a gentleman by birth and education , have mortally offend his 
 relation in marry a woman of an inferior rank of life . he be 
 fast decline into a state of poverty , through his own reckless 
 extravagance , at the time when he meet with his death at his wife 's hand . 
 without attempt to excuse he , he deserve , to my mind , some tribute 
 of regret . it be not to be deny that he be profligate in his 
 habit and violent in his temper . but it be equally true that he be 
 affectionate in the domestic circle , and , when move by wisely apply 
 remonstrance , sincerely penitent for sin commit under temptation 
 that overpower he . if his wife have kill he in a fit of jealous 
 rage - under provocation , be it remember , which the witness 
 prove - she might have be convict of manslaughter , and might have 
 receive a light sentence . but the evidence so undeniably reveal 
 deliberate and merciless premeditation , that the only defense attempt 
 by her counsel be madness , and the only alternative leave to a righteous 
 jury be a verdict which condemn the woman to death . those mischievous 
 member of the community , whose topsy - turvy sympathy feel for the 
 living criminal and forget the dead victim , attempt to save she by 
 mean of high - fly petition and contemptible correspondence in the 
 newspaper . but the Judge hold firm ; and the Home Secretary hold firm . 
 they be entirely right ; and the public be scandalously wrong . 
 our Chaplain endeavor to offer the consolation of religion to the 
 condemn wretch . she refuse to accept his ministration in language 
 which fill he with grief and horror . 
 on the evening before the execution , the reverend gentleman lay on my 
 table his own write report of a conversation which have pass between 
 the Prisoner and himself . 
 " I see some hope , sir , " he say , " of incline the heart of this woman 
 to religious belief , before it be too late . will you read my report , and 
 say if you agree with I ? " 
 I read it , of course . it be call " A Memorandum , " and be thus 
 write : 
 " at his last interview with the Prisoner , the Chaplain ask she if she 
 have ever enter a place of public worship . she reply that she have 
 occasionally attend the service at a Congregational Church in this 
 town ; attract by the reputation of the Minister as a preacher . ' he 
 entirely fail to make a Christian of I , ' she say ; ' but I be strike 
 by his eloquence . besides , he interest I personally - he be a fine 
 man . ' 
 " in the dreadful situation in which the woman be place , such language 
 as this shock the Chaplain ; he appeal in vain to the Prisoner 's 
 sense of propriety . ' you do not   understand woman , ' she answer . ' the 
 great saint of my sex that ever live like to look at a preacher as 
 well as to hear he . if he be an agreeable man , he have all the great 
 effect on she . this preacher 's voice tell I he be kind - hearted ; and 
 I have only to look at his beautiful eye to see that he be trustworthy 
 and true . ' 
 " it be useless to repeat a protest which have already fail . recklessly 
 and flippantly as she have describe it , an impression have be produce 
 on she . it occur to the Chaplain that he might at least make the 
 attempt to turn this result to her own religious advantage . he ask 
 whether she would receive the Minister , if the reverend gentleman come 
 to the prison . ' that will depend , ' she say , ' on whether you answer some 
 question which I want to put to you first . ' the Chaplain consent ; 
 provide always that he could reply with propriety to what she ask of 
 he . her first question only relate to himself . 
 " she say : ' the woman who watch I tell I that you be a widower , and 
 have a family of child . be that true ? ' 
 " the Chaplain answer that it be quite true . 
 " she allude next to a report , current in the town , that the Minister 
 have resign the pastorate . be personally acquaint with he , the 
 Chaplain be able to inform she that his resignation have not yet be 
 accept . on hear this , she seem to gather confidence . her next 
 inquiry succeed each other rapidly , as follow : 
 " ' be my handsome preacher marry ? ' 
 " ' yes . ' 
 " ' has he get any child ? ' 
 " ' he have never have any child . ' 
 " ' how long have he be marry ? ' 
 " ' as well as I know , about seven or eight year . 
 " ' what sort of woman be his wife ? ' 
 " ' a lady universally respect . ' 
 " ' I do not   care whether she be respect or not . be she kind ? ' 
 " ' certainly ! ' 
 " ' be her husband well off ? ' 
 " ' he have a sufficient income . ' 
 " after that reply , the Prisoner 's curiosity appear to be satisfied . 
 she say , ' bring your friend the preacher to I , if you like ' - and there 
 it end . 
 " what her object could have be in put these question , it seem to 
 be impossible to guess . have accurately report all that take place , 
 the Chaplain declare , with heartfelt regret , that he can exert no 
 religious influence over this obdurate woman . he leave it to the 
 Governor to decide whether the Minister of the Congregational Church may 
 not succeed , where the Chaplain of the Jail have fail . Herein be the 
 one last hope of save the soul of the Prisoner , now under sentence of 
 death ! " 
 in those serious word the Memorandum end . although not personally 
 acquaint with the Minister I have hear of he , on all side , as an 
 excellent man . in the emergency that confront we he have , as it seem 
 to I , his own sacred right to enter the prison ; assume that he 
 be willing to accept , what I myself feel to be , a very serious 
 responsibility . the first necessity be to discover whether we might 
 hope to obtain his service . with my full approval the Chaplain leave I , 
 to state the circumstance to his reverend colleague . 
 CHAPTER III . the child appear . 
 during my friend 's absence , my attention be claim by a sad 
 incident - not unforeseen . 
 it be , I suppose , generally know that near relative be admit to 
 take their leave of criminal condemn to death . in the case of the 
 Prisoner now wait for execution , no person apply to the authority 
 for permission to see she . I myself inquire if she have any relation 
 living , and if she would like to see they . she answer : " none that 
 I care to see , or that care to see I - except the near relation of 
 all . " 
 in those last word the miserable creature allude to her only child , a 
 little girl   an infant , I should say , who have pass she first year 's 
 birthday by a few month . the farewell interview be to take place on 
 the mother 's last evening on earth ; and the child be now bring into 
 my room , in charge of her nurse . 
 I have seldom see a bright or pretty little girl . she be just able 
 to walk alone , and to enjoy the first delight of move from one place 
 to another . quite of her own accord she come to I , attract I daresay 
 by the glitter of my watch - chain . help she to climb on my knee , I 
 show the wonder of the watch , and hold it to her ear . at that past 
 time , death have take my good wife from I ; my two boy be away at 
 Harrow School ; my domestic life be the life of a lonely man . whether 
 I be remind of the bygone day when my son be infant on my knee , 
 listen to the ticking of my watch - or whether the friendless position 
 of the poor little creature , who have lose one parent and be soon to 
 lose the other by a violent death , move I in depth of pity not easily 
 reach in my later experience - I be not able to say . this only I know : 
 my heart ache for the child while she be laugh and listen ; and 
 something fall from I on the watch which I do not   deny might have be 
 a tear . a few of the toy , mostly break now , which my two child 
 use to play with be still in my possession ; kept , like my poor wife 's 
 favorite jewel , for old remembrance ' sake . these I take from their 
 repository when the attraction of my watch show sign of fail . the 
 child pounce on they with her chubby hand , and scream with pleasure . 
 and the hangman be wait for her mother - and , more horrid still , the 
 mother deserve it ! 
 my duty require I to let the Prisoner know that her little daughter 
 have arrive . do that heart of iron melt at last ? it might have be so , 
 or it might not ; the message send back keep her secret . all that it say 
 to I be : " let the child wait till I send for she . " 
 the Minister have consent to help we . on his arrival at the prison , I 
 receive he privately in my study . 
 I have only to look at his face - pitiably pale and agitated - to see 
 that he be a sensitive man , not always able to control his nerve on 
 occasion which try his moral courage . a kind , I might almost say a 
 noble face , and a voice unaffectedly persuasive , at once prepossess 
 I in his favor . the few word of welcome that I speak be intend 
 to compose he . they fail to produce the impression on which I have 
 count . 
 " my experience , " he say , " have include many melancholy duty , and have 
 try my composure in terrible scene ; but I have never yet find myself 
 in the presence of an unrepentant criminal , sentence to death - and 
 that criminal a woman and a mother . I own , sir , that I be shake by the 
 prospect before I . " 
 I suggest that he should wait a while , in the hope that time and quiet 
 might help he . he thank I , and refuse . 
 " if I have any knowledge of myself , " he say , " terror of anticipation 
 lose their hold when I be face to face with a serious call on I . the 
 long I remain here , the less worthy I shall appear of the trust that 
 have be place in I - the trust which , please God , I mean to deserve . " 
 my own observation of human nature tell I that this be wisely say . I 
 lead the way at once to the cell . 
 CHAPTER IV . the MINISTER say yes . 
 the Prisoner be seat on her bed , quietly talk with the woman 
 appoint to watch she . when she rise to receive we , I see the Minister 
 start . the face that confront he would , in my opinion , have take any 
 man by surprise , if he have first happen to see it within the wall of 
 a prison . 
 visitor to the picture - gallery of Italy , grow weary of Holy 
 Families in endless succession , observe that the idea of the Madonna , 
 among the rank and file of Italian Painters , be limit to one 
 changeless and familiar type . I can hardly hope to be believe when I 
 say that the personal appearance of the murderess recall that type . 
 she present the delicate light hair , the quiet eye , the finely - shape 
 low feature and the correctly oval form of face , repeat in hundred 
 on hundred of the conventional work of Art to which I have venture to 
 allude . to those who doubt I , I can only declare that what I have 
 here write be undisguise and absolute truth . let I add that daily 
 observation of all class of criminal , extend over many year , have 
 considerably diminish my faith in physiognomy as a safe guide to the 
 discovery of character . nervous trepidation look like guilt . guilt , 
 firmly sustain by insensibility , look like innocence . one of the 
 vilest wretch ever place under my charge win the sympathy   while he 
 be wait for his trial   of every person who see he , include even 
 the person employ in the prison . only the other day , lady and 
 gentleman come to visit I pass a body of man at work on the road . 
 judge of physiognomy among they be horrify at the criminal atrocity 
 betray in every face that they notice . they condole with I on the 
 near neighborhood of so many convict to my official place of residence . 
 I look out of the window and see a group of honest laborer   whose 
 only crime be poverty   employ by the parish ! 
 have instruct the female warder to leave the room - but to take care 
 that she wait within call - I look again at the Minister . 
 confront by the serious responsibility that he have undertake , he 
 justify what he have say to I . still pale , still distressed , he be 
 now nevertheless master of himself . I turn to the door to leave he 
 alone with the Prisoner . she call I back . 
 " before this gentleman try to convert I , " she say , " I want you to 
 wait here and be a witness . " 
 find that we be both willing to comply with this request , she 
 address herself directly to the Minister . " suppose I promise to listen 
 to your exhortation , " she begin , " what do you promise to do for I in 
 return ? " 
 the voice in which she speak to he be steady and clear ; a marked 
 contrast to the tremulous earnestness with which he answer she . 
 " I promise to urge you to repentance and the confession of your crime . I 
 promise to implore the divine blessing on I in the effort to save your 
 poor guilty soul . " 
 she look at he , and listen to he , as if he be speak to she in 
 an unknown tongue , and go on with what she have to say as quietly as 
 ever . 
 " when I be hang to - morrow , suppose I die without confessing , without 
 repenting - be you one of those who believe I shall be doom to eternal 
 punishment in another life ? " 
 " I believe in the mercy of God . " 
 " answer my question , if you please . be an impenitent sinner eternally 
 punish ? do you believe that ? " 
 " my Bible leave I no other alternative . " 
 she pause for a while , evidently consider with special attention 
 what she be about to say next . 
 " as a religious man , " she resume , " would you be willing to make some 
 sacrifice , rather than let a fellow - creature go - after a disgraceful 
 death - to everlaste torment ? " 
 " I know of no sacrifice in my power , " he say , fervently , " to which I 
 would not rather submit than let you die in the present dreadful state 
 of your mind . " 
 the Prisoner turn to I . " be the person who watch I wait 
 outside ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " will you be so kind as to call she in ? I have a message for she . " 
 it be plain that she have be lead the way to the delivery of 
 that message , whatever it might be , in all that she have say up to the 
 present time . so far my poor power of penetration help I , and no 
 far . 
 the warder appear , and receive her message . " tell the woman who have 
 come here with my little girl that I want to see the child . " 
 take completely by surprise , I sign to the attendant to wait for 
 further instruction . 
 in a moment more I have sufficiently recover myself to see the 
 impropriety of permit any obstacle to interpose between the Minister 
 and his errand of mercy . I gently remind the Prisoner that she would 
 have a later opportunity of see her child . " your first duty , " I tell 
 she , " be to hear and to take to heart what the clergyman have to say to 
 you . " 
 for the second time I attempt to leave the cell . for the second time 
 this impenetrable woman call I back . 
 " take the parson away with you , " she say . " I refuse to listen to he . " 
 the patient Minister yield , and appeal to I to follow his example . 
 I reluctantly sanction the delivery of the message . 
 after a brief interval the child be bring to we , tired and sleepy . 
 for a while the nurse rouse she by set she on her foot . she 
 happen to notice the Minister first . her bright eye rest on he , 
 gravely wonder . he kiss she , and , after a momentary hesitation , 
 give she to her mother . the horror of the situation overpower he : 
 he turn his face away from we . I understand what he feel ; he almost 
 overthrow my own self - command . 
 the Prisoner speak to the nurse in no friendly tone : " you can go . " 
 the nurse turn to I , ostentatiously ignore the word that have be 
 address to she . " be I to go , sir , or to stay ? " I suggest that she 
 should return to the waiting - room . she return at once in silence . the 
 Prisoner look after she as she go out , with such an expression of 
 hatred in her eye that the Minister notice it . 
 " what have that person do to offend you ? " he ask . 
 " she be the last person in the whole world whom I should have choose 
 to take care of my child , if the power of choose have be mine . but 
 I have be in prison , without a living creature to represent I or to 
 take my part . no more of that ; my trouble will be over in a few hour 
 more . I want you to look at my little girl , whose trouble be all to 
 come . do you call she pretty ? do you feel interested in she ? " 
 the sorrow and pity in his face answer for he . 
 quietly sleep , the poor baby rest on her mother 's bosom . be the 
 heart of the murderess soften by the divine influence of maternal 
 love ? the hand that hold the child tremble a little . for the first 
 time it seem to cost she an effort to compose herself , before she 
 could speak to the Minister again . 
 " when I die to - morrow , " she say , " I leave my child helpless and 
 friendless - disgrace by her mother 's shameful death . the workhouse 
 may take she - or a charitable asylum may take she . " she pause ; a first 
 tinge of color rise on her pale face ; she break into an outburst of 
 rage . " think of my daughter be bring up by charity ! she may 
 suffer poverty , she may be treat with contempt , she may be employ by 
 brutal people in menial work . I can not   endure it ; it madden I . if she 
 be not save from that wretched fate , I shall die despairing , I shall 
 die cursing - " 
 the Minister sternly stop she before she could say the next word . 
 to my astonishment she appear to be humble , to be even ashamed : she 
 ask his pardon : " forgive I ; I will not   forget myself again . they tell 
 I you have no child of your own . be that a sorrow to you and your 
 wife ? " 
 her altered tone touch he . he answer sadly and kindly : " it be the 
 one sorrow of our life . " 
 the purpose which she have be keep in view from the moment when 
 the Minister enter her cell be no mystery now . ought I to have 
 interfere ? let I confess a weakness , unworthy perhaps of my office . I 
 be so sorry for the child - I hesitate . 
 my silence encourage the mother . she advance to the Minister with the 
 sleep infant in her arm . 
 " I daresay you have sometimes think of adopt a child ? " she say . 
 " perhaps you can guess now what I have in my mind , when I ask if you 
 would consent to a sacrifice ? will you take this wretched innocent 
 little creature home with you ? " she lose her self - possession once more . 
 " a motherless creature to - morrow , " she burst out . " think of that . " 
 God know how I still shrunk from it ! but there be no alternative now ; 
 I be bind to remember my duty to the excellent man , whose critical 
 position at that moment be , in some degree at least , due to my 
 hesitation in assert my authority . could I allow the Prisoner to 
 presume on his compassionate nature , and to hurry he into a decision 
 which , in his calm moment , he might find reason to regret ? I speak 
 to he . do the man live who - have to say what I have to say - could 
 have speak to the doomed mother ? 
 " I be sorry to have allow this to go on , " I say . " in justice to 
 yourself , sir , do not   answer ! " 
 she turn on I with a look of fury . 
 " he shall answer , " she cry . 
 I see , or think I see , sign of yield in his face . " take time , " I 
 persist - " take time to consider before you decide . " 
 she step up to I . 
 " take time ? " she repeat . " be you inhuman enough to talk of time , in 
 my presence ? " 
 she lay the sleep child on her bed , and fall on her knee before the 
 Minister : " I promise to hear your exhortation - I promise to do all 
 a woman can to believe and repent . oh , I know myself ! my heart , once 
 harden , be a heart that no human creature can touch . the one way to 
 my well nature - if I have a well nature - be through that poor babe . 
 save she from the workhouse ! do not   let they make a pauper of she ! " she 
 sink prostrate at his foot , and beat her hand in frenzy on the floor . 
 " you want to save my guilty soul , " she remind he furiously . " there be 
 but one way of do it . save my child ! " 
 he raise she . her fierce tearless eye question his face in a mute 
 expectation dreadful to see . suddenly , a foretaste of death - the death 
 that be so near now ! - strike she with a shivering fit : her head drop 
 on the Minister 's shoulder . other man might have shrink from the contact 
 of it . that true Christian let it rest . 
 under the madden sting of suspense , her sink energy rally for 
 an instant . in a whisper , she be just able to put the supreme question 
 to he . 
 " yes ? or no ? " 
 he answer : " yes . " 
 a faint breath of relief , just audible in the silence , tell I that she 
 have hear he . it be her last effort . he lay she , insensible , on the 
 bed , by the side of her sleep child . " look at they , " be all he say 
 to I ; " how could I refuse ? " 
 CHAPTER V. MISS CHANCE ASSERTS HERSELF . 
 the service of our medical officer be require , in order to hasten 
 the recovery of the Prisoner 's sens . 
 when the Doctor and I leave the cell together , she be compose , and 
 ready   in the performance of her promise   to listen to the exhortation 
 of the Minister . the sleep child be leave undisturbed , by the 
 mother 's desire . if the Minister feel tempt to regret what he have 
 do , there be the artless influence which would check he ! as we 
 step into the corridor , I give the female warder her instruction to 
 remain on the watch , and to return to her post when she see the Minister 
 come out . 
 in the meantime , my companion have walk on a little way . 
 possess of ability and experience within the limit of his profession , 
 he be in other respect a man with a crotchety mind ; bold to the verge 
 of recklessness in the expression of his opinion ; and possess of a 
 command of language that carry everything before it . let I add that 
 he be just and merciful in his intercourse with other , and I shall 
 have sum he up fairly enough . when I join he he seem to be 
 absorb in reflection . 
 " think of the Prisoner ? " I say . 
 " think of what be go on , at this moment , in the condemn cell , " 
 he answer , " and wonder if any good will come of it . " 
 I be not without hope of a good result , and I say so . 
 the Doctor disagree with I . " I do not   believe in that woman 's 
 penitence , " he remark ; " and I look upon the parson as a poor weak 
 creature . what be to become of the child ? " 
 there be no reason for conceal from one of my colleague the 
 benevolent decision , on the part of the good Minister , of which I have 
 be a witness . the Doctor listen to I with the first appearance of 
 downright astonishment that I have ever observe in his face . when I have 
 do , he make an extraordinary reply : 
 " Governor , I retract what I say of the parson just now . he be one of 
 the bold man that ever step into a pulpit . " 
 be the doctor in earnest ? strongly in earnest ; there could be no doubt 
 of it . before I could ask he what he mean , he be call away to a 
 patient on the other side of the prison . when we part at the door of 
 my room , I make it a request that my medical friend would return to I 
 and explain what he have just say . 
 " consider that you be the governor of a prison , " he reply , " you 
 be a singularly rash man . if I come back , how do you know I shall not 
 bore you ? " 
 " my rashness run the risk of that , " I rejoin . 
 " tell I something , before I allow you to run your risk , " he say . 
 " be you one of those people who think that the temper of child be 
 form by the accidental influence which happen to be about they ? or do 
 you agree with I that the temper of child be inherit from their 
 parent ? " 
 the doctor   as I conclude   be still strongly impressed by the 
 Minister 's resolution to adopt a child whose wicked mother have commit 
 the most atrocious of all crime . be some serious foreboding in secret 
 possession of his mind ? my curiosity to hear he be now increase 
 tenfold . I reply without hesitation : 
 " I agree with you . " 
 he look at I with his sense of humor twinkle in his eye . " do you 
 know I rather expect that answer ? " he say , slyly . " all right . I will 
 come back . " 
 leave by myself , I take up the day 's newspaper . 
 my attention wander ; my thought be in the cell with the Minister 
 and the Prisoner . how would it end ? sometimes , I be inclined to doubt 
 with the Doctor . sometimes , I take refuge in my own more hopeful view . 
 these idle reflection be agreeably interrupt by the appearance of 
 my friend , the Chaplain . 
 " you be always welcome , " I say ; " and doubly welcome just now . I be 
 feel a little worried and anxious . " 
 " and you be naturally , " the Chaplain add , " not at all dispose to 
 receive a stranger ? " 
 " be the stranger a friend of your ? " I ask . 
 " oh , no ! have occasion , just now , to go into the waiting - room , I find 
 a young woman there , who ask I if she could see you . she think you 
 have forget she , and she be tired of wait . I merely undertake , of 
 course , to mention what she have say to I . " 
 the nurse have be in this way recall to my memory , I feel some 
 little interest in see she , after what have pass in the cell . in 
 plainer word , I be desirous of judge for myself whether she deserve 
 the hostile feeling which the Prisoner have show toward she . I thank 
 the Chaplain before he leave I , and give the servant the necessary 
 instruction . when she enter the room , I look at the woman 
 attentively for the first time . 
 Youth and a fine complexion , a well - make figure and a natural grace of 
 movement - these be her personal attraction , so far as I could 
 see . her defect be , to my mind , equally noticeable . under a heavy 
 forehead , her pierce eye look out at person and thing with an 
 expression which be not to my taste . her large mouth - another defect , 
 in my opinion - would have be recommend to mercy , in the estimation 
 of many man , by her magnificent tooth ; white , well - shape , cruelly 
 regular . believer in physiognomy might perhaps have see the betrayal 
 of an obstinate nature in the lengthy firmness of her chin . while I be 
 try to describe she , let I not forget her dress . a woman 's dress 
 be the mirror in which we may see the reflection of a woman 's nature . 
 bear in mind the melancholy and impressive circumstance under which 
 she have bring the child to the prison , the gayety of color in her gown 
 and her bonnet imply either a total want of feeling , or a total want 
 of tact . as to her position in life , let I confess that I feel , after 
 a close examination , at a loss to determine it . she be certainly not 
 a lady . the Prisoner have speak of she as if she be a domestic servant 
 who have forfeit her right to consideration and respect . and she have 
 enter the prison , as a nurse might have enter it , in charge of a 
 child . I do what we all do when we be not clever enough to find the 
 answer to a riddle - I give it up . 
 " what can I do for you ? " I ask . 
 " perhaps you can tell I , " she answer , " how much long I be to be 
 keep wait in this prison . " 
 " the decision , " I remind she , " do not   depend on I . " 
 " then who do it depend on ? " 
 the Minister have undoubtedly acquire the sole right of decide . it 
 be for he to say whether this woman should , or should not , remain 
 in attendance on the child whom he have adopt . in the meanwhile , the 
 feeling of distrust which be gain on my mind warn I to remember 
 the value of reserve in hold intercourse with a stranger . 
 she seem to be irritate by my silence . " if the decision do not   rest 
 with you , " she ask , " why do you tell I to stay in the waiting - room ? " 
 " you bring the little girl into the prison , " I say ; " be it not 
 natural to suppose that your mistress might want you - " 
 " stop , sir ! " 
 I have evidently give offense ; I stop directly . 
 " no person on the face of the earth , " she declare , loftily , " have ever 
 have the right to call herself my mistress . of my own free will , sir , I 
 take charge of the child . " 
 " because you be fond of she ? " I suggest . 
 " I hate she . " 
 it be unwise on my part - I protest . " hate a baby little more than a 
 year old ! " I say . 
 " her baby ! " 
 she say it with the air of a woman who have produce an unanswerable 
 reason . " I be accountable to nobody , " she go on . " if I consent 
 to trouble myself with the child , it be in remembrance of my 
 friendship - notice , if you please , that I say friendship - with the 
 unhappy father . " 
 put together what I have just hear , and what I have see in the cell , 
 I draw the right conclusion at last . the woman , whose position in life 
 have be thus far an impenetrable mystery to I , now stand reveal 
 as one , among other object of the Prisoner 's jealousy , during her 
 disastrous married life . a serious doubt occur to I as to the 
 authority under which the husband 's mistress might be act , after the 
 husband 's death . I instantly put it to the test . 
 " do I understand you to assert any claim to the child ? " I ask . 
 " claim ? " she repeat . " I know no more of the child than you do . I 
 hear for the first time that such a creature be in existence , when 
 her murder father send for I in his die moment . at his entreaty I 
 promise to take care of she , while her vile mother be out of the house 
 and in the hand of the law . my promise have be perform . if I be 
 expect   have bring she to the prison   to take she away again , 
 understand this : I be under no obligation   even if I could afford it 
 to burden myself with that child ; I shall hand she over to the workhouse 
 authority . " 
 I forget myself once more - I lose my temper . 
 " leave the room , " I say . " your unworthy hand will not touch the poor 
 baby again . she be provide for . " 
 " I do not   believe you ! " the wretch burst out . " who have take the child ? " 
 a quiet voice answer : " I have take she . " 
 we both look round and see the Minister stand in the open doorway , 
 with the child in his arm . the ordeal that he have go through in the 
 condemn cell be visible in his face ; he look miserably haggard and 
 break . I be eager to know if his merciful interest in the Prisoner have 
 purify her guilty soul - but at the same time I be afraid , after what 
 he have but too plainly suffer , to ask he to enter into detail . 
 " only one word , " I say . " be your anxiety at rest ? " 
 " God 's mercy have help I , " he answer . " I have not speak in vain . 
 she believe ; she repent ; she have confess the crime . " 
 after hand the write and sign confession to I , he approach 
 the venomous creature , still linger in the room to hear what pass 
 between we . before I could stop he , he speak to she , under a natural 
 impression that he be address the Prisoner 's servant . 
 " I be afraid you will be disappoint , " he say , " when I tell you that 
 your service will no long be require . I have reason for place the 
 child under the care of a nurse of my own choosing . " 
 she listen with an evil smile . 
 " I know who furnish you with your reason , " she answer . " apology 
 be quite needless , so far as I be concern . if you have propose to I 
 to look after the new member of your family there , I should have feel it 
 my duty to myself to have refuse . I be not a nurse - I be an independent 
 single lady . I see by your dress that you be a clergyman . allow I to 
 present myself as a mark of respect to your cloth . I be Miss Elizabeth 
 Chance . may I ask the favor of your name ? " 
 too weary and too preoccupied to notice the insolence of her manner , the 
 Minister mention his name . " I be anxious , " he say , " to know if the 
 child have be baptize . perhaps you can enlighten I ? " 
 still insolent , Miss Elizabeth Chance shake her head carelessly . " I 
 never hear - and , to tell you the truth , I never care to hear - whether 
 she be christen or not . call she by what name you like , I can tell 
 you this - you will find your adopt daughter a heavy handful . " 
 the Minister turn to I . " what do she mean ? " 
 " I will try to tell you , " Miss Chance interpose . " be a clergyman , 
 you know who Deborah be ? very well . I be Deborah now ; and I 
 prophesy . " she point to the child . " remember what I say , reverend sir ! 
 you will find the tigress - cub take after its mother . " 
 with those parting word , she favor we with a low curtsey , and leave 
 the room . 
 CHAPTER VI . the doctor DOUBTS . 
 the Minister look at I in an absent manner ; his attention seem to 
 have be wander . " what be it Miss Chance say ? " he ask . 
 before I could speak , a friend 's voice at the door interrupt we . the 
 Doctor , return to I as he have promise , answer the Minister 's 
 question in these word : 
 " I must have pass the person you mean , sir , as I be come in here ; 
 and I hear she say : ' you will find the tigress - cub take after its 
 mother . ' if she have know how to put she meaning into good English , Miss 
 Chance - that be the name you mention , I think - might have tell you 
 that the vice of the parent be inherit by the child . and the 
 one particular parent she have in her mind , " the Doctor continue , gently 
 pat the child 's cheek , " be no doubt the mother of this unfortunate 
 little creature - who may , or may not , live to show you that she come of 
 a bad stock and inherit a wicked nature . " 
 I be on the point of protest against my friend 's interpretation , 
 when the Minister stop I . 
 " let I thank you , sir , for your explanation , " he say to the Doctor . 
 " as soon as my mind be free , I will reflect on what you have say . 
 forgive I , Mr. Governor , " he go on , " if I leave you , now that I have 
 place the Prisoner 's confession in your hand . it have be an effort to 
 I to say the little I have say , since I first enter this room . I can 
 think of nothing but that unhappy criminal , and the death that she must 
 die to - morrow . " 
 " do she wish you to be present ? " I ask . 
 " she positively forbid it . ' after what you have do for I , ' she 
 say , ' the least I can do in return be to prevent your being needlessly 
 distressed . ' she take leave of I ; she kiss the little girl for the 
 last time - oh , do not   ask I to tell you about it ! I shall break down 
 if I try . come , my darling ! " he kiss the child tenderly , and take she 
 away with he . 
 " that man be a strange compound of strength and weakness , " the doctor 
 remark . " do you notice his face , just now ? nine man out of ten , 
 suffering as he suffer , would have fail to control themselves . such 
 resolution as his may conquer the difficulty that be in store for 
 he yet . " 
 it be a trial of my temper to hear my clever colleague justify , in 
 this way , the ignorant prediction of an insolent woman . 
 " there be exception to all rule , " I insist . " and why be the 
 virtue of the parent not just as likely to descend to the child as 
 the vice ? there be a fund of good , I can tell you , in that poor baby 's 
 father - though I do not   deny that he be a profligate man . and even the 
 horrible mother - as you hear just now - have virtue enough leave in she 
 to feel grateful to the man who have take care of her child . these be 
 fact ; you can not   dispute they . " 
 the Doctor take out his pipe . " do you mind my smoking ? " he ask . 
 " tobacco help I to arrange my idea . " 
 I give he the mean of arrange his idea ; that be to say , I give 
 he the match - box . he blow some preliminary cloud of smoke and then he 
 answer I : 
 " for twenty year past , my friend , I have be study the question 
 of hereditary transmission of quality ; and I have find vice and 
 disease descend more frequently to child than virtue and health . 
 I do not   stop to ask why : there be no end to that sort of curiosity . what 
 I have observe be what I tell you ; no more and no less . you will say 
 this be a horribly discouraging result of experience , for it tend to 
 show that child come into the world at a disadvantage on the day of 
 their birth . of course they do . child be bear deform ; child be 
 bear deaf , dumb , or blind ; child be bear with the seed in they of 
 deadly disease . who can account for the cruelty of creation ? why be 
 we endow with life - only to end in death ? and do it ever strike you , 
 when you be cut your mutton at dinner , and your cat be catch its 
 mouse , and your spider be suffocate its fly , that we be all , big 
 and little together , bear to one certain inheritance - the privilege of 
 eat each other ? " 
 " very sad , " I admit . " but it will all be set right in another world . " 
 " be you quite sure of that ? " the Doctor ask . 
 " quite sure , thank God ! and it would be well for you if you feel about 
 it as I do . " 
 " we will not   dispute , my dear Governor . I do not   scoff at comfort hope ; 
 I do not   deny the existence of occasional compensation . but I do see , 
 nevertheless , that Evil have get the upper hand among we , on this curious 
 little planet . judge by my observation and experience , that ill - fat 
 baby 's chance of inherit the virtue of her parent be not to be 
 compare with her chance of inherit their vice ; especially if she 
 happen to take after her mother . there the virtue be not conspicuous , 
 and the vice be one enormous fact . when I think of the growth of that 
 poisonous hereditary taint , which may come with time - when I think of 
 passion let loose and temptation lie in ambush - I see the smooth 
 surface of the Minister 's domestic life with danger lurk under it 
 which make I shake in my shoe . God ! what a life I should lead , if I 
 happen to be in his place , some year hence . suppose I say or do 
 something   in the just exercise of my parental authority   which offend 
 my adopt daughter . what figure would rise from the dead in my memory , 
 when the girl bounce out of the room in a rage ? the image of her mother 
 would be the image I should see . I should remember what her mother do 
 when she be provoke ; I should lock my bedroom door , in my own house , 
 at night . I should come down to breakfast with suspicion in my cup of 
 tea , if I discover that my adopt daughter have pour it out . oh , 
 yes ; it be quite true that I might be do the girl a cruel injustice 
 all the time ; but how be I to be sure of that ? I be only sure that her 
 mother be hang for one of the most merciless murder commit in our 
 time . pass the match - box . my pipe 's out , and my confession of faith have 
 come to an end . " 
 it be useless to dispute with a man who possess his command of 
 language . at the same time , there be a bright side to the poor 
 Minister 's prospect which the Doctor have fail to see . it be barely 
 possible that I might succeed in put my positive friend in the 
 wrong . I try the experiment , at any rate . 
 " you seem to have forget , " I remind he , " that the child will have 
 every advantage that education can offer to she , and will be accustom 
 from her early year to restrain and purify influence , in a 
 clergyman 's household . " 
 now that he be enjoy the fume of tobacco , the doctor be as placid 
 and sweet - temper as a man could be . 
 " quite true , " he say . 
 " do you doubt the influence of religion ? " I ask sternly . 
 he answer , sweetly : " not at all " 
 " or the influence of kindness ? " 
 " oh , dear , no ! " 
 " or the force of example ? " 
 " I would not   deny it for the world . " 
 I have not expect this extraordinary docility . the Doctor have get the 
 upper hand of I again - a state of thing that I might have find it 
 hard to endure , but for a call of duty which put an end to our sitting . 
 one of the female warder appear with a message from the condemn 
 cell . the Prisoner wish to see the Governor and the Medical Officer . 
 " be she ill ? " the Doctor inquire . 
 " no , sir . " 
 " Hysterical ? or agitate , perhaps ? " 
 " as easy and compose , sir , as a person can be . " 
 we set forth together for the condemn cell . 
 CHAPTER VII . the MURDERESS consult the AUTHORITIES . 
 there be a considerate side to my friend 's character , which show 
 itself when the warder have leave we . 
 he be especially anxious to be careful of what he say to a woman in 
 the Prisoner 's terrible situation ; especially in the event of she have 
 be really subject to the influence of religious belief . on the 
 Minister 's own authority , I declare that there be every reason to 
 adopt this conclusion ; and in support of what I have say I show he 
 the confession . it only contain a few line , acknowledge that she 
 have commit the murder and that she deserve her sentence . " from the 
 planning of the crime to the commission of the crime , I be in my 
 right sens throughout . I know what I be do . " with that remarkable 
 disavowal of the defense set up by her advocate , the confession end . 
 my colleague read the paper , and hand it back to I without make any 
 remark . I ask if he suspect the Prisoner of feign conversion to 
 please the Minister . 
 " she shall not discover it , " he answer , gravely , " if I do . " 
 it would not be true to say that the Doctor 's obstinacy have shake 
 my belief in the good result of the Minister 's interference . I may , 
 however , acknowledge that I feel some misgiving , which be not 
 dispel when I find myself in the presence of the Prisoner . 
 I have expect to see she employ in read the Bible . the good book 
 be close and be not even place within her reach . the occupation to 
 which she be devote herself astonish and repel I . 
 some carelessness on the part of the attendant have leave on the table the 
 writing material that have be need for her confession . she be use 
 they now - when death on the scaffold be literally within a few hour 
 of she - to sketch a portrait of the female warder , who be on the watch ! 
 the Doctor and I look at each other ; and now the sincerity of her 
 repentance be something that I begin to question , too . 
 she lay down the pen , and proceed quietly to explain herself . 
 " even the little time that be leave to I prove to be a weary time 
 to get through , " she say . " I be make a last use of the talent for 
 draw and catch a likeness , which have be one of my gift since I 
 be a girl . you look as if you do not   approve of such employment as this 
 for a woman who be go to be hang . well , sir , I have no doubt you 
 be right . " she pause , and tear up the portrait . " if I have misbehave 
 myself , " she resume , " I make amend . to find you in an indulgent frame 
 of mind be of importance to I just now . I have a favor to ask of you . 
 may the warder leave the cell for a few minute ? " 
 give the woman permission to withdraw for a while , I wait with some 
 anxiety to hear what the Prisoner want of I . 
 " I have something to say to you , " she proceed , " on the subject of 
 execution . the face of a person who be go to be hang be hide , as 
 I have be tell , by a white cap draw over it . be that true ? " 
 how another man might have feel , in my place , I can not , of course , 
 say . to my mind , such a question - on her lip - be too shocking to be 
 answer in word . I bow . 
 " and the body be bury , " she go on , " in the prison ? " 
 I could remain silent no long . " be there no human feeling leave in 
 you ? " I burst out . " what do these horrid question mean ? " 
 " do not   be angry with I , sir ; you shall hear directly . I want to know 
 first if I be to be bury in the prison ? " 
 I reply as before , by a bow . 
 " now , " she say , " I may tell you what I mean . in the autumn of last 
 year I be take to see some waxwork . portrait of criminal be 
 among they . there be one portrait - " she hesitate ; her infernal 
 self - possession fail she at last . the color leave her face ; she be no 
 long able to look at I firmly . " there be one portrait , " she resume , 
 " that have be take after the execution . the face be so hideous ; it 
 be swollen to such a size in its frightful deformity - oh , sir , do not 
 let I be see in that state , even by the stranger who bury I ! Use 
 your influence - forbid they to take the cap off my face when I be 
 dead - order they to bury I in it , and I swear to you I will meet death 
 tomorrow as coolly as the bold man that ever mount the scaffold ! " 
 before I could stop she , she seize I by the hand , and wring it with 
 a furious power that leave the mark of her grasp on I , in a bruise , for 
 day afterward . " will you do it ? " she cry . " you be an honorable man ; 
 you will keep your word . give I your promise ! " 
 I give she my promise . 
 the relief to her torture spirit express itself horribly in a burst 
 of frantic laughter . " I can not   help it , " she gasp ; " I be so happy . " 
 my enemy say of I , when I get my appointment , that I be too 
 excitable a man to be governor of a prison . perhaps they be not 
 altogether wrong . anyhow , the quick - witted Doctor see some change in I , 
 which I be not aware of myself . he take my arm and lead I out of the 
 cell . " leave she to I , " he whisper . " the fine edge of my nerve be 
 wear off long ago in the hospital . " 
 when we meet again , I ask what have pass between the Prisoner and 
 himself . 
 " I give her time to recover , " he tell I ; " and , except that she look a 
 little paler than usual , there be no trace leave of the frenzy that you 
 remember . ' I ought to apologize for trouble you , ' she say ; ' but it be 
 perhaps natural that I should think , now and then , of what be to happen 
 to I to - morrow morning . as a medical man , you will be able to enlighten 
 I . be death by hang a painful death ? ' she have put it so politely 
 that I feel bind to answer she . ' if the neck happen to be break , ' I 
 say , ' hang be a sudden death ; fright and pain   if there be any pain 
 be both over in an instant . as to the other form of death which be also 
 possible   I mean death by suffocation , I must own as an honest man that 
 I know no more about it than you do . ' after consider a little , she 
 make a sensible remark , and follow it by an embarrassing request . ' a 
 great deal , ' she say , ' must depend on the executioner . I be not afraid 
 of death , Doctor . why should I be ? my anxiety about my little girl be 
 set at rest ; I have nothing leave to live for . but I do not   like pain . 
 would you mind tell the executioner to be careful ? or would it be 
 well if I speak to he myself ? ' I say I think it would come with 
 a well grace from herself . she understand I directly ; and we drop 
 the subject . be you surprised at her coolness , after your experience of 
 she ? " 
 I confess that I be surprised . 
 " think a little , " the Doctor say . " the one sensitive place in that 
 woman 's nature be the place occupy by her self - esteem . " 
 I object to this that she have show fondness for her child . 
 my friend dispose of the objection with his customary readiness . 
 " the maternal instinct , " he say . " a cat be fond of her kitten ; a cow 
 be fond of her calf . no , sir , the one cause of that outbreak of passion 
 which so shock you - a genuine outbreak , beyond all doubt - be to be 
 find in the vanity of a fine feminine creature , overpower by a horror 
 of look hideous , even after her death . do you know I rather like that 
 woman ? " 
 " be it possible that you be in earnest ? " I ask . 
 " I know as well as you do , " he answer , " that this be neither a time 
 nor a place for jest . the fact be , the Prisoner carry out an idea 
 of mine . it be my positive conviction that the bad murder - I mean 
 murder deliberately plan - be commit by person absolutely 
 deficient in that part of the moral organization which feel . the 
 night before they be hang they sleep . on their last morning they 
 eat a breakfast . incapable of realize the horror of murder , they be 
 incapable of realize the horror of death . do you remember the last 
 murderer who be hang here - a gentleman 's coachman who kill his 
 wife ? he have but two anxiety while he be wait for execution . one 
 be to get his allowance of beer double , and the other be to be hang 
 in his coachman 's livery . no ! no ! these wretch be all alike ; they be 
 human creature bear with the temperament of tiger . take my word for 
 it , we need feel no anxiety about to - morrow . the Prisoner will face the 
 crowd round the scaffold with composure ; and the people will say , ' she 
 die game . ' " 
 CHAPTER VIII . the MINISTER say good - BY . 
 the Capital Punishment of the Prisoner be in no respect connect with 
 my purpose in write the present narrative . neither do I desire 
 to darken these page by describe in detail an act of righteous 
 retribution which must present , by the nature of it , a scene of horror . 
 for these reason I ask to be excuse , if I limit what I must need say 
 of the execution within the compass of a few word - and pass on . 
 the one self - possess person among we be the miserable woman who 
 suffer the penalty of death . 
 not very discreetly , as I think , the Chaplain ask she if she have truly 
 repent . she answer : " I have confess the crime , sir . what more do 
 you want ? " to my mind - still hesitate between the view that believe 
 with the Minister , and the view that doubt with the Doctor - this reply 
 leave a way open to hope of her salvation . her last word to I , as she 
 mount the step of the scaffold , be : " remember your promise . " it be 
 easy for I to be true to my word . at that bygone time , no difficulty 
 be place in my way by such precaution as be now observe in the 
 conduct of execution within the wall of the prison . from the time of 
 her death to the time of her burial , no living creature see her face . 
 she rest , veil in her prison grave . 
 let I now turn to living interest , and to scene remove from the 
 thunder - cloud of crime . 
 ....... 
 on the next day I receive a visit from the Minister . 
 his first word entreat I not to allude to the terrible event of 
 the previous day . " I can not escape thinking of it , " he say , " but I may 
 avoid speak of it . " this seem to I to be the misplaced confidence 
 of a weak man in the refuge of silence . by way of change the subject , 
 I speak of the child . there would be serious difficulty to contend 
 with   as I venture to suggest , if he remain in the town , and allow 
 his new responsibility to become the subject of public talk . 
 his reply to this agreeably surprise I . there be no difficulty to 
 be fear . 
 the state of his wife 's health have oblige he   act under medical 
 advice   to try the influence of her native air . an interval of 
 some month might elapse before the good effect of the change have 
 sufficiently declare itself ; and a return to the peculiar climate 
 of the town might bring on a relapse . there have consequently be no 
 alternative to but resign his charge . only on that day the resignation 
 have be accept - with expression of regret sincerely reciprocate 
 by himself . he propose to leave the town immediately ; and one of the 
 object of his visit be to bid I good - by . 
 " the next place I live in , " he say , " will be more than a hundred mile 
 away . at that distance I may hope to keep event conceal which must 
 be know only to ourselves . so far as I can see , there be no risk of 
 discovery lurking in this place . my servant   only two in number   have 
 both be bear here , and have both tell my wife that they have no wish 
 to go away . as to the person who introduce herself to I by the name of 
 Miss Chance , she be trace to the railway station yesterday afternoon , 
 and take her ticket for London . " 
 I congratulate the Minister on the good fortune which have befriend 
 he , so far . 
 " you will understand how carefully I have provide against be 
 deceive , " he continue , " when I tell you what my plan be . the person 
 among whom my future lot be cast - and the child herself , of course - must 
 never suspect that the new member of my family be other than my own 
 daughter . this be deceit , I admit ; but it be deceit that injure no one . 
 I hope you see the necessity for it , as I do . " 
 there could be no doubt of the necessity . 
 if the child be describe as adopt , there would be curiosity about 
 the circumstance , and inquiry relate to the parent . prevaricating 
 reply lead to suspicion , and suspicion to discovery . but for the wise 
 course which the Minister have decide on take , the poor child 's life 
 might have be darken by the horror of the mother 's crime , and the 
 infamy of the mother 's death . 
 have quiet my friend 's needless scruple by this perfectly sincere 
 expression of opinion , I venture to approach the central figure in his 
 domestic circle , by mean of a question relate to his wife . how have 
 that lady receive the unfortunate little creature , for whose appearance 
 on the home - scene she must have be entirely unprepared ? 
 the Minister 's manner show some embarrassment ; he preface what he have 
 to tell I with praise of his wife , equally creditable no doubt to both 
 of they . the beauty of the child , the pretty way of the child , he say , 
 fascinate the admirable woman at first sight . it be not to be deny 
 that she have feel , and have express , misgiving , on be inform 
 of the circumstance under which the Minister 's act of mercy have be 
 perform . but her mind be too well balanced to incline to this 
 state of feeling , when her husband have address she in defense of 
 his conduct . she then understand that the true merit of a good action 
 consist in patiently face the sacrifice involve . her interest in 
 the new daughter be , in this way , ennoble by a sense of Christian 
 duty , there have be no further difference of opinion between the 
 married pair . 
 I listen to this plausible explanation with interest , but , at the 
 same time , with doubt of the last nature of the lady 's submission to 
 circumstance ; suggest , perhaps , by the constraint in the Minister 's 
 manner . it be well for both of we when we change the subject . he 
 remind I of the discouraging view which the Doctor have take of the 
 prospect before he . 
 " I will not attempt to decide whether your friend be right or wrong , " 
 he say . " trust , as I do , in the mercy of God , I look hopefully to 
 a future time when all that be bright and good in the nature of 
 my adopt child will be develop under my fostering care . if evil 
 tendency show themselves , my reliance will be confidently place on 
 pious example , on religious instruction , and , above all , on intercession 
 by prayer . repeat to your friend , " he conclude , " what you have just 
 hear I say . let he ask himself if he could confront the uncertain 
 future with my cheerful submission and my steadfast hope . " 
 he intrust I with that message , and give I his hand . so we part . 
 I agree with he , I admire he ; but my faith seem to want sustain 
 power , as compare with his faith . on his own showing   as it appear 
 to I , there would be two force in a state of conflict in the child 's 
 nature as she grow up - inherit evil against inculcated good . try as I 
 might , I fail to feel the Minister 's comforting conviction as to which 
 of the two would win . 
 CHAPTER IX . the GOVERNOR receive a visit . 
 a few day after the good man have leave we , I meet with a serious 
 accident , cause by a false step on the stone stair of the prison . 
 the long illness which follow this misfortune , and my removal 
 afterward   in the interest of my recovery   to a milder climate than the 
 climate of England , oblige I to confide the duty of governor of the 
 prison to a representative . I be absent from my post for rather more 
 than a year . during this interval no news reach I from my reverend 
 friend . 
 have return to the duty of my office , I think of write to the 
 Minister . while the propose letter be still in contemplation , I be 
 inform that a lady wish to see I . she send in her card . my visitor 
 prove to be the Minister 's wife . 
 I observe she with no ordinary attention when she enter the room . 
 her dress be simple ; her scanty light hair , so far as I could see it 
 under her bonnet , be dress with taste . the paleness of her lip , and 
 the faded color in her face , suggest that she be certainly not in 
 good health . two peculiarity strike I in her personal appearance . 
 I never remember have see any other person with such a singularly 
 narrow and slanting forehead as this lady present ; and I be 
 impressed , not at all agreeably , by the flashing shift expression in 
 her eye . on the other hand , let I own that I be powerfully attract 
 and interested by the beauty of her voice . its fine variety of compass , 
 and its musical resonance of tone , fall with such enchantment on the 
 ear , that I should have like to put a book of poetry into her hand , and 
 to have hear she read it in summer - time , accompany by the music of a 
 rocky stream . 
 the object of her visit - so far as she explain it at the 
 outset - appear to be to offer her congratulation on my recovery , 
 and to tell I that her husband have assume the charge of a church in a 
 large town not far from her birthplace . 
 even those commonplace word be make interesting by her delicious 
 voice . but however sensitive to sweet sound a man may be , there be 
 limit to his capacity for deceive himself - especially when he happen 
 to be enlighten by experience of humanity within the wall of a 
 prison . I have , it may be remember , already doubt the lady 's good 
 temper , judge from her husband 's over - wrought description of her 
 virtue . her eye look at I furtively ; and her manner , gracefully 
 self - possess as it be , suggest that she have something of a 
 delicate , or disagreeable , nature to say to I , and that she be at a 
 loss how to approach the subject so as to produce the right impression 
 on my mind at the outset . there be a momentary silence between we . for 
 the sake of say something , I ask how she and the Minister like 
 their new place of residence . 
 " our new place of residence , " she answer , " have be make interesting 
 by a very unexpected event - an event   how shall I describe it ?   which 
 have increase our happiness and enlarge our family circle . " 
 there she stop : expect I , as I fancy , to guess what she 
 mean . a woman , and that woman a mother , might have fulfil she 
 anticipation . a man , and that man not listen attentively , be simply 
 puzzle . 
 " pray excuse my stupidity , " I say ; " I do not   quite understand you . " 
 the lady 's temper look at I out of the lady 's shift eye , and 
 hide itself again in a moment . she set herself right in my estimation 
 by take the whole blame of our little misunderstanding on her own 
 innocent shoulder . 
 " I ought to have speak more plainly , " she say . " let I try what I can 
 do now . after many year of disappointment in my married life , it have 
 pleased Providence to bestow on I the happiness - the inexpressible 
 happiness - of be a mother . my baby be a sweet little girl ; and my one 
 regret be that I can not nurse she myself . " 
 my languid interest in the Minister 's wife be not stimulate by the 
 announcement of this domestic event . 
 I feel no wish to see the ' sweet little girl " ; I be not even remind 
 of another example of long - defer maternity , which have occur 
 within the limit of my own family circle . all my sympathy attach 
 themselves to the sad little figure of the adopt child . I remember 
 the poor baby on my knee , enchant by the ticking of my watch - I 
 think of she , peacefully and prettily asleep under the horrid shelter 
 of the condemn cell - and it be hardly too much to say that my heart 
 be heavy , when I compare her prospect with the prospect of her 
 baby - rival . kind as he be , conscientious as he be , could the Minister 
 be expect to admit to an equal share in his love the child endear 
 to he as a father , and the child who merely remind he of an act of 
 mercy ? as for his wife , it seem the mere waste of time to put 
 her state of feeling   place between the two child   to the test of 
 inquiry . I try the useless experiment , nevertheless . 
 " it be pleasant to think , " I begin , " that your other daughter - " 
 she interrupt I , with the utmost gentleness : " do you mean the child 
 that my husband be foolish enough to adopt ? " 
 " say rather fortunate enough to adopt , " I persist . " as your own 
 little girl grow up , she will want a playfellow . and she will find a 
 playfellow in that other child , whom the good Minister have take for his 
 own . " 
 " no , my dear sir - not if I can prevent it . " 
 the contrast between the cruelty of her intention , and the musical 
 beauty of the voice which politely express it in those word , really 
 startle I . I be at a loss how to answer she , at the very time when I 
 ought to have be most ready to speak . 
 " you must surely understand , " she go on , " that we do not   want another 
 person 's child , now we have a little darling of our own ? " 
 " do your husband agree with you in that view ? " I ask . 
 " oh dear , no ! he say what you say just now , and   oddly enough   almost 
 in the same word . but I do not   at all despair of persuade he to 
 change his mind - and you can help I . " 
 she make that audacious assertion with such an appearance of feel 
 perfectly sure of I , that my politeness give way under the strain lay 
 on it . " what do you mean ? " I ask sharply . 
 not in the least impressed by my change of manner , she take from the 
 pocket of her dress a print paper . " you will find what I mean there , " 
 she reply - and put the paper into my hand . 
 it be an appeal to the charitable public , occasion by the enlargement 
 of an orphan - asylum , with which I have be connect for many year . 
 what she mean be plain enough now . I say nothing : I only look at 
 she . 
 pleased to find that I be clever enough to guess what she mean , on 
 this occasion , the Minister 's wife inform I that the circumstance 
 be all in our favor . she still persist in take I into 
 partnership - the circumstance be in our favor . 
 " in two year more , " she explain , " the child of that detestable 
 creature who be hang - do you know , I can not even look at the little 
 wretch without thinking of the gallow ? - will be old enough   with your 
 interest to help we   to be receive into the asylum . what a relief 
 it will be to get rid of that child ! and how hard I shall work at 
 canvass for subscriber ' vote ! your name will be a tower of 
 strength when I use it as a reference . pardon I - you be not look so 
 pleasantly as usual . do you see some obstacle in our way ? " 
 " I see two obstacle . " 
 " what can they possibly be ? " 
 for the second time , my politeness give way under the strain lay on it . 
 " you know perfectly well , " I say , " what one of the obstacle be . " 
 " be I to understand that you contemplate any serious resistance on the 
 part of my husband ? " 
 " certainly ! " 
 she be unaffectedly amuse by my simplicity . 
 " be you a single man ? " she ask . 
 " I be a widower . " 
 " then your experience ought to tell you that I know every weak point in 
 the Minister 's character . I can tell he , on your authority , that the 
 hateful child will be place in competent and kindly hand - and I have 
 my own sweet baby to plead for I . with these advantage in my favor , do 
 you actually suppose I can fail to make my way of think his way 
 of think ? you must have forget your own married life ! suppose 
 we go on to the second of your two obstacle . I hope it will be well 
 worth consider than the first . " 
 " the second obstacle will not disappoint you , " I answer ; " I be the 
 obstacle , this time . " 
 " you refuse to help I ? " 
 " positively . " 
 " perhaps reflection may alter your resolution ? " 
 " reflection will do nothing of the kind . " 
 " you be rude , sir ! " 
 " in speak to you , madam , I have no alternative but to speak plainly . " 
 she rise . her shift eye , for once , look at I steadily . 
 " what sort of enemy have I make of you ? " she ask . " a passive enemy who 
 be content with refuse to help I ? or an active enemy who will write 
 to my husband ? " 
 " it depend entirely , " I tell she , " on what your husband do . if he 
 question I about you , I shall tell he the truth . " 
 " and if not ? " 
 " in that case , I shall hope to forget that you ever favor I with a 
 visit . " 
 in make this reply I be guiltless of any malicious intention . what 
 evil interpretation she place on my word it be impossible for I to 
 say ; I can only declare that some intolerable sense of injury hurry 
 she into an outbreak of rage . her voice , strain for the first time , 
 lose its tuneful beauty of tone . 
 " come and see we in two year ' time , " she burst out - " and discover the 
 orphan of the gallow in our house if you can ! if your Asylum will not 
 take she , some other Charity will . ha , Mr. Governor , I deserve my 
 disappointment ! I ought to have remember that you be only a jailer 
 after all . and what be a jailer ? proverbially a brute . do you hear that ? 
 a brute ! " 
 her strength suddenly fail she . she drop back into the chair from 
 which she have rise , with a faint cry of pain . a ghastly pallor stole 
 over her face . there be wine on the sideboard ; I fill a glass . 
 she refuse to take it . at that time in the day , the Doctor 's duty 
 require his attendance in the prison . I instantly send for he . after 
 a moment 's look at she , he take the wine out of my hand , and hold the 
 glass to her lip . 
 " drink it , " he say . she still refuse . " drink it , " he reiterate , " or 
 you will die . " 
 that frighten she ; she drink the wine . the Doctor wait for a while 
 with his finger on her pulse . " she will do now , " he say . 
 " can I go ? " she ask . 
 " go wherever you please , madam - so long as you do not   go upstairs in a 
 hurry . " 
 she smile : " I understand you , sir - and thank you for your advice . " 
 I ask the Doctor , when we be alone , what make he tell she not to go 
 upstairs in a hurry . 
 " what I feel , " he answer , " when I have my finger on her pulse . you 
 hear she say that she understand I . " 
 " yes ; but I do not   know what she mean . " 
 " she mean , probably , that her own doctor have warn she as I do . " 
 " something seriously wrong with her health ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " what be it ? " 
 " heart . " 
 CHAPTER x. MISS CHANCE reappear . 
 a week have pass , since the Minister 's wife have leave I , when I 
 receive a letter from the Minister himself . 
 after surprise I , as he innocently suppose , by announce the birth 
 of his child , he mention some circumstance connect with that event , 
 which I now hear for the first time . 
 " within an easy journey of the populous scene of my present labor , " he 
 write , " there be a secluded country village call Low Lanes . the rector 
 of the place be my wife 's brother . before the birth of our infant , he 
 have ask his sister to stay for a while at his house ; and the doctor 
 think she might safely be allow to accept the invitation . through 
 some error in the customary calculation , as I suppose , the child 
 be bear unexpectedly at the rectory ; and the ceremony of baptism be 
 perform at the church , under circumstance which I be not able to 
 relate within the limit of a letter : let I only say that I allude to 
 this incident without any sectarian bitterness of feeling - for I be 
 no enemy to the Church of England . you have no idea what treasure of 
 virtue and treasure of beauty maternity have reveal in my wife 's sweet 
 nature . other mother , in her proud position , might find their love 
 cool toward the poor child whom we have adopt . but my household be 
 irradiate by the presence of an angel , who give an equal share in her 
 affection to the two little one alike . " 
 in this semi - hysterical style of writing , the poor man unconsciously 
 tell I how cunningly and how cruelly his wife be deceive he . 
 I long to exhibit that wicked woman in her true character - but what 
 could I do ? she must have be so favor by circumstance as to be able 
 to account for her absence from home , without exciting the slight 
 suspicion of the journey which she have really take , if I declare in my 
 reply to the Minister 's letter that I have receive she in my room , 
 and if I repeat the conversation that have take place , what would 
 the result be ? she would find an easy refuge in positive denial of 
 the truth - and , in that case , which of we would her infatuated husband 
 believe ? 
 the one part of the letter which I read with some satisfaction be the 
 end of it . 
 I be here inform that the Minister 's plan for conceal the 
 parentage of his adopt daughter have prove to be entirely successful . 
 the member of the new domestic household believe the two child to 
 be infant - sister . neither be there any danger of the adopt child 
 be identify   as the old child of the two   by consultation of the 
 register . 
 before he leave our town , the Minister have see for himself that no 
 baptismal name have be add , after the birth of the daughter of the 
 murderess have be register , and that no entry of baptism exist in 
 the register keep in place of worship . he draw the inference - in 
 all probability a true inference , consider the character of the 
 parent - that the child have never be baptize ; and he perform the 
 ceremony privately , abstain , for obvious reason , from add her 
 christian name to the imperfect register of her birth . " I be not aware , " 
 he write , " whether I have , or have not , commit an offense against the 
 Law . in any case , I may hope to have make atonement by obedience to the 
 Gospel . " 
 six week pass , and I hear from my reverend friend once more . 
 his second letter present a marked contrast to the first . it be 
 write in sorrow and anxiety , to inform I of an alarming change 
 for the bad in his wife 's health . I show the letter to my medical 
 colleague . after read it he predict the event that might be 
 expect , in two word : - sudden death . 
 on the next occasion when I hear from the Minister , the Doctor 's grim 
 reply prove to be a prophecy fulfil . 
 when we address expression of condolence to bereaved friend , the 
 principle of popular hypocrisy sanction indiscriminate lying as a 
 duty which we owe to the dead - no matter what their life may have 
 be - because they be dead . within my own little sphere , I have always 
 be silent , when I could not offer to afflict person expression of 
 sympathy which I honestly feel . to have condole with the Minister on 
 the loss that he have sustain by the death of a woman , self - betray to 
 I as shamelessly deceitful , and pitilessly determine to reach her own 
 cruel end , would have be to degrade myself by tell a deliberate 
 lie . I express in my answer all that an honest man naturally feel , 
 when he be write to a friend in distress ; carefully abstain from 
 any allusion to the memory of his wife , or to the place which she 
 death have leave vacant in his household . my letter , I be sorry to say , 
 disappoint and offend he . he write to I no more , until year have 
 pass , and time have exert its influence in produce a more indulgent 
 frame of mind . these letter of a later date have be preserve , and 
 will probably be use , at the right time , for purpose of explanation 
 with which I may be connect in the future . 
 ....... 
 the correspondent whom I have now lose be succeed by a gentleman 
 entirely unknown to I . 
 those reason which induce I to conceal the name of person , while I 
 be relate event in the prison , do not apply to correspondence with a 
 stranger writing from another place . I may , therefore , mention that Mr. 
 Dunboyne , of Fairmount , on the west coast of Ireland , be the writer of 
 the letter now address to I . he prove , to my surprise , to be one of 
 the relation whom the Prisoner under sentence of death have not care to 
 see , when I offer she the opportunity of say farewell . Mr. Dunboyne 
 be a brother - in - law of the murderess . he have marry her sister . 
 his wife , he inform I , have die in childbirth , leave he but one 
 consolation - a boy , who already recall all that be bright and good 
 in his lost mother . the father be naturally anxious that the son should 
 never become acquainted with the disgrace that have befall the family . 
 the letter then proceed in these term : 
 " I hear yesterday , for the first time , by mean of an old 
 newspaper - cutting send to I by a friend , that the miserable woman who 
 suffer the ignominy of public execution have leave an infant child . can 
 you tell I what have become of the orphan ? if this little girl be , as I 
 fear , not well provide for , I only do what my wife would have do if 
 she have live , by offer to make the child 's welfare my especial care . 
 I be willing to place she in an establishment well know to I , in which 
 she will be kindly treat , well educate , and fit to earn her own 
 live honorably in later life . 
 " if you feel some surprise at find that my good intention toward 
 this ill - fat niece of mine do not go to the length of receive she as 
 a member of my own family , I beg to submit some consideration which may 
 perhaps weigh with you as they have weigh with I . 
 " in the first place , there be at least a possibility - however carefully 
 I might try to conceal it - that the child 's parentage would soon 
 or later be discover . in the second place   and assume that the 
 parentage have be successfully conceal , if this girl and my boy 
 grow up together , there be another possibility to be reckon with : 
 they might become attach to each other . do the father live who would 
 allow his son ignorantly to marry the daughter of a convict murderess ? 
 I should have no alternative but to part they cruelly by reveal the 
 truth . " the letter end with some complimentary expression address 
 to myself . and the question be : how ought I to answer it ? 
 my correspondent have strongly impress I in his favor ; I could not 
 doubt that he be an honorable man . but the interest of the Minister 
 in keep his own benevolent action secure from the risk of 
 discovery - increase as that interest be by the filial relation of the 
 two child toward he , now publicly establish - have , as I could not 
 doubt , the paramount claim on I . the absolutely safe course to take 
 be to admit no one , friend or strange , to our confidence . I reply , 
 express sincere admiration of Mr. Dunboyne 's motif , and merely 
 inform he that the child be already provide for . 
 after that , I hear no more of the irish gentleman . 
 it be perhaps hardly necessary to add that I keep the Minister in 
 ignorance of my correspondence with Mr. Dunboyne . I be too well 
 acquainted with my friend 's sensitive and self - torment nature to let 
 he know that a relative of the murderess be live , and be aware that 
 she have leave a child . 
 a last event remain to be relate , before I close these page . 
 during the year of which I be now write , our Chaplain add one more 
 to the many example that I have see of his generous readiness to serve 
 his friend . he have arrange to devote his annual leave of absence to a 
 tour among the English Lakes , when he receive a letter from a clergyman 
 resident in London , whom he have know from the time when they have 
 be school - fellow . this old friend write under circumstance of the 
 severe domestic distress , which make it absolutely necessary that he 
 should leave London for a while . have fail to find a representative 
 who could relieve he of his clerical duty , he apply to the Chaplain 
 to recommend a clergyman who might be in a position to help he . my 
 excellent colleague give up his holiday - plan without hesitation , and 
 go to London himself . 
 on his return , I ask if he have see anything of some acquaintance 
 of his and of mine , who be then visitor to the metropolis . he smile 
 significantly when he answer I . 
 " I have a card to deliver from an acquaintance whom you have not 
 mention , " he say ; " and I rather think it will astonish you . " 
 it simply puzzle I . when he give I the card , this be what I find 
 print on it : 
 " MRS . TENBRUGGEN   of south BEVELAND . " 
 " well ? " say the Chaplain . 
 " well , " I answer ; " I never even hear of Mrs. Tenbruggen , of South 
 Beveland . who be she ? " 
 " I marry the lady to a foreign gentleman , only last week , at my 
 friend 's church , " the Chaplain reply . " perhaps you may remember she 
 maiden name ? " 
 he mention the name of the dangerous creature who have first present 
 herself to I , in charge of the Prisoner 's child - otherwise Miss 
 Elizabeth Chance . the reappearance of this woman on the scene - although 
 she be only represent by her card - cause I a feeling of vague 
 uneasiness , so contemptibly superstitious in its nature that I now 
 remember it with shame . I ask a stupid question : 
 " how do it happen ? " 
 " in the ordinary course of such thing , " my friend say . " they be 
 marry by license , in their parish church . the bridegroom be a 
 fine tall man , with a bold eye and a dash manner . the bride and 
 I recognize each other directly . when Miss Chance have become Mrs. 
 Tenbruggen , she take I aside , and give I her card . ' ask the governor 
 to accept it , ' she say , ' in remembrance of the time when he take I for 
 a nursemaid . tell he I be married to a dutch gentleman of high 
 family . if he ever come to Holland , we shall be glad to see he in our 
 residence at South Beveland . ' there be her message to you , repeat word 
 for word . " 
 " I be glad she be go to live out of England . " 
 " why ? surely you have no reason to fear she ? " 
 " none whatever . " 
 " you be think , perhaps , of somebody else ? " 
 I be think of the Minister ; but it seem to be safe not to say 
 so . - - 
 my pen be lay aside , and my many page of writing have be send 
 to their destination . what I undertake to do , be now do . to take a 
 metaphor from the stage - the curtain fall here on the Governor and the 
 Prison . 
 Second Period : 1875 . the girl and the JOURNALS . 
 CHAPTER XI . HELENA 'S DIARY . 
 we both say good - night , and go up to our room with a new object in 
 view . by our father 's advice we have resolve on keep diary , for the 
 first time in our life , and have pledge ourselves to begin before we 
 go to bed . 
 slowly and silently and lazily , my sister saunter to her end of the 
 room and seat herself at her writing - table . on the desk lie a nicely 
 bind book , full of blank page . the word " Journal " be print on it in 
 gold letter , and there be fit to the cover a bright brass lock and 
 key . a second journal , exactly similar in every respect to the first , 
 be place on the writing - table at my end of the room . I open my book . 
 the sight of the blank leaf irritate I ; they be so smooth , so 
 spotless , so entirely ready to do their duty . I take too deep a dip 
 of ink , and begin the first entry in my diary by make a blot . this be 
 discourage . I get up , and look out of window . 
 " Helena ! " 
 my sister 's voice could hardly have address I in a more weary tone , 
 if her pen have be at work all night , relate domestic event . " well ! " 
 I say . " what be it ? " 
 " have you do already ? " she ask . 
 I show she the blot . my sister Eunice   the strange as well as the 
 dearest of girl   always blurt out what she have in her mind at the 
 time . she fix her eye gravely on my spoiled page , and say : " that 
 comfort I . " I cross the room , and look at her book . she have not 
 even summon energy enough to make a blot . " what will papa think of 
 we , " she say , " if we do not   begin to - night ? " 
 " why not begin , " I suggest , " by write down what he say , when he 
 give we our journal ? those wise word of advice will be in their proper 
 place on the first page of the new book . " 
 not at all a demonstrative girl naturally ; not ready with her tear , not 
 liberal with her caress , not fluent in her talk , Eunice be affect 
 by my proposal in a manner wonderful to see . she suddenly develop into 
 an excitable person - I declare she kiss I . " oh , " she burst out , " how 
 clever you be ! the very thing to write about ; I will do it directly . " 
 she really do it directly ; without once stop to consider , without 
 once wait to ask my advice . line after line , I hear her noisy pen 
 hurrying to the bottom of a first page , and get three - part of the 
 way toward the end of a second page , before she close her diary . I 
 remind she that she have not turn the key , in the lock which be 
 intend to keep she write private . 
 " it be not worth while , " she answer . " anybody who care to do it may 
 read what I write . good - night . " 
 the singular change which I have notice in she begin to disappear , when 
 she set about her preparation for bed . I notice the old easy indolent 
 movement again , and that regular and deliberate method of brush 
 her hair , which I can never contemplate without feel a stupefy 
 influence that have help I to many a delicious night 's sleep . she say 
 her prayer in her favorite corner of the room , and lay her head on 
 the pillow with the luxurious little sigh which announce that she 
 be fall asleep . this reappearance of her usual habit be really a 
 relief to I . eunice in a state of excitement be eunice exhibit an 
 unnatural spectacle . 
 the next thing I do be to take the liberty which she have already 
 sanction - I mean the liberty of read what she have write . here it 
 be , copy exactly : 
 " I be not half so fond of anybody as I be of papa . he be always kind , he 
 be always right . I love he , I love he , I love he . 
 " but this be not how I mean to begin . I must tell how he talk to we ; 
 I wish he be here to tell it himself . 
 " he say to I : ' you be get lazy than ever , Eunice . ' he say to 
 Helena : ' you be feel the influence of Eunice 's example . ' he say to 
 both of we : ' you be too ready , my dear child , to sit with your hand 
 on your lap , look at nothing and thinking of nothing ; I want to try 
 a new way of employ your leisure time . ' 
 " he open a parcel on the table . he make each of we a present of a 
 beautiful book , call ' Journal . ' he say : ' when you have nothing to do , 
 my dear , in the evening , employ yourself in keep a diary of the 
 event of the day . it will be a useful record in many way , and a good 
 moral discipline for young girl . ' Helena say : ' oh , thank you ! ' I say 
 the same , but not so cheerfully . 
 " the truth be , I feel out of spirit now if I think of papa ; I be not 
 easy in my mind about he . when he be very much interested , there be a 
 quivering in his face which I do not   remember in past time . he seem to 
 have get old and thin , all on a sudden . he shout   which he never 
 use to do   when he threaten sinner at sermon - time . be in dreadful 
 earnest about our soul , he be of course oblige to speak of the devil ; 
 but he never use to hit the harmless pulpit cushion with his fist as he 
 do now . nobody seem to have see these thing but I ; and now I have 
 notice they what ought I to do ? I do not   know ; I be certain of nothing , 
 except what I have put in at the top of page one : I love he , I love 
 he , I love he . " 
 ....... 
 there this very curious entry end . it be easy enough to discover the 
 influence which have make my slow - minded sister so ready with her memory 
 and her pen - so ready , in short , to do anything and everything , provide 
 her heart be in it , and her father be in it . 
 but Eunice be wrong , let I tell she , in what she say of myself . 
 I , too , have see the sad change in my father ; but I happen to know 
 that he dislike have it speak of at home , and I have keep my painful 
 discovery to myself . unhappily , the good medical advice be beyond our 
 reach . the one really competent doctor in this place be know to be an 
 infidel . but for that shocking obstacle I might have persuade my father 
 to see he . as for the other two doctor whom he have consult , at 
 different time , one talk about suppress gout , and the other tell 
 he to take a year 's holiday and enjoy himself on the continent . 
 the clock have just strike twelve . I have be write and copy till 
 my eye be heavy , and I want to follow Eunice 's example and sleep 
 as soundly as she do . we have make a strange beginning of this 
 journalizing experiment . I wonder how long it will go on , and what will 
 come of it . 
 SECOND DAY . 
 I begin to be afraid that I be as stupid - no ; that be not a nice word to 
 use - let I say as simple as dear Eunice . a diary mean a record of the 
 event of the day ; and not one of the event of yesterday appear in my 
 sister 's journal or in mine . well , it be easy to set that mistake right . 
 our life be so dull   but I would not say so in my father 's hearing 
 for the world   that the record of one day will be much the same as 
 the record of another . after family prayer and breakfast I suffer my 
 customary persecution at the hand of the cook . that be to say , I be 
 oblige , be the housekeeper , to order what we have to eat . oh , how I 
 hate invent dinner ! and how I admire the enviable slowness of 
 mind and laziness of body which have save Eunice from undertake the 
 worry of housekeeping in her turn ! she can go and work in her garden , 
 while I be rack my invention to discover variety in dish without 
 overstep the limit of economy . I suppose I may confess it privately 
 to myself - how sorry I be not to have be bear a man ! 
 my next employment lead I to my father 's study , to write under his 
 dictation . I do not   complain of this ; it flatter my pride to feel that I 
 be help so great a man . at the same time , I do notice that here again 
 Eunice 's little defect have relieve she of another responsibility . 
 she can neither keep dictate word in her memory , nor have she ever be 
 able to learn how to put in her stop . 
 after the dictation , I have an hour 's time leave for practice music . 
 my sister come in from the garden , with her pencil and paint - box , and 
 practice draw . then we go out for a walk - a delightful walk , if my 
 father go too . he have something always new to tell we , suggest by 
 what we pass on the way . then , dinner - time come - not always a pleasant 
 part of the day to I . sometimes I hear paternal complaint   always 
 gentle complaint   of my housekeeping ; sometimes my sister   I will not   say 
 the greedy sister   tell I I have not give she enough to eat . poor 
 father ! Dear Eunice ! 
 Dinner have reach its end , we stroll in the garden when the weather 
 be fine . when it rain , we make flannel petticoat for poor old woman . 
 what a horrid thing old age be to look at ! to be ugly , to be helpless , 
 to be miserably unfit for all the pleasure of life - I hope I shall not 
 live to be an old woman . what would my father say if he see this ? for 
 his sake , to say nothing of my own feeling , I shall do well if I make 
 it a custom to use the lock of my journal . our next occupation be to 
 join the Scripture class for girl , and to help the teacher . this be a 
 good discipline for Eunice 's temper , and - oh , I do not   deny it ! - for my 
 temper , too . I may long to box the ear of the whole class , but it be 
 my duty to keep a smile face and to be a model of patience . from the 
 Scripture class we sometimes go to my father 's lecture . at other time , 
 we may amuse ourselves as well as we can till the tea be ready . after 
 tea , we read book which instruct we , poetry and novel be forbid . 
 when we be tired of the book we talk . when supper be over , we have 
 prayer again , and we go to bed . there be our day . oh , dear I ! there be 
 our day . 
 ....... 
 and how have Eunice succeed in her second attempt at keep a diary ? 
 here be what she have write . it have one merit that nobody can deny - it 
 be soon read : 
 " I hope papa will excuse I ; I have nothing to write about to - day . " 
 over and over again I have try to point out to my sister the absurdity 
 of call her father by the infantile nickname of papa . I have remind 
 she that she be   in year , at least   no long a child . " why do not   you 
 call he father , as I do ? " I ask only the other day . 
 she make an absurd reply : " I use to call he papa when I be a little 
 girl . " 
 " that , " I remind she , " do not   justify you in call he papa now . " 
 and she actually answer : " yes it do . " what a strange state of mind ! 
 and what a charming girl , in spite of her mind ! 
 THIRD day . 
 the morning post have bring with it a promise of some little variety in 
 our life - or , to speak more correctly , in the life of my sister . 
 our new and nice friend , the staveley , have write to invite eunice 
 to pay they a visit at their house in London . I do not   complain at be 
 leave at home . it would be unfilial , indeed , if we both of we forsook our 
 father ; and last year it be my turn to receive the first invitation , 
 and to enjoy the change of scene . the staveley be excellent 
 people - strictly pious member of the Methodist Connection - and 
 exceedingly kind to my sister and I . but it be just as well for my 
 moral welfare that I end my visit to our friend when I do . with my 
 fondness for music , I feel the temptation of the Evil One try I , 
 when I see placard in the street announce that the Italian Opera be 
 open . I have no wish to be a witness of the shameful and sinful dancing 
 which go on   I be tell   at the opera ; but I do feel my principle 
 shake when I think of the wonderful singer and the entrancing music . 
 and this , when I know what an atmosphere of wickedness people breathe 
 who enter a theater ! I reflect with horror on what might have happen 
 if I have remain a little long in London . 
 help Eunice to pack up , I put her journal into the box . " you 
 will find something to write about now , " I tell she . " while I record 
 everything that happen at home , you will keep your diary of all that 
 you do in London , and when you come back we will show each other what we 
 have write . " my sister be a dear creature . " I do not   feel sure of be 
 able to do it , " she answer ; " but I promise to try . " Good Eunice ! 
 CHAPTER XII . EUNICE 's DIARY . 
 the air of London feel very heavy . there be a nasty smell of smoke 
 in London . there be too many people in London . they seem to be mostly 
 people in a hurry . the head of a country girl , when she go into the 
 street , turn giddy - I suppose through not be use to the noise . 
 I do hope that it be London that have put I out of temper . otherwise , it 
 must be I myself who be ill - temper . I have not yet be one whole day 
 in the Staveleys ' house , and they have offend I already . I do not 
 want Helena to hear of this from other people , and then to ask I why I 
 conceal it from she . we be to read each other 's journal when we be 
 both at home again . let she see what I have to say for myself here . 
 there be seven staveley in all : Mr. and Mrs.   two ; three young 
 Masters   five ; two young Misses   seven . an eld miss and the second 
 young Master be the only one at home at the present time . 
 Mr. , Mrs. , and Miss kiss I when I arrive . Young Master only shake 
 hand . he look as if he would have like to kiss I too . why should not 
 he ? it would not   have matter . I do not   myself like kiss . what be the 
 use of it ? where be the pleasure of it ? 
 Mrs. be so glad to see I ; she take hold of I by both hand . she say : 
 " my dear child , you be improve . you be wretchedly thin when I see 
 you last . now you be almost as well - developed as your sister . I think 
 you be pretty than your sister . " Mr. do not   agree to that . he and 
 his wife begin to dispute about I before my face . I do call that an 
 aggravating thing to endure . 
 Mr. say : " she have not   get her sister 's pretty gray eye . " 
 Mrs. say ; " she have get pretty brown eye , which be just as good . " 
 Mr. say : " you can not   compare her complexion with Helena 's . " 
 Mrs. say : " I like Eunice 's pale complexion . so delicate . " 
 Young Miss strike in : " I admire Helena 's hair - light brown . " 
 Young Master take his turn : " I prefer Eunice 's hair - dark brown . " 
 Mr. open his great big mouth , and ask a question : " which of you two 
 sister be the old ? I forget . " 
 Mrs. answer for I : " Helena be the old ; she tell we so when she be 
 here last . " 
 I really could not stand that . " you must be mistake , " I burst out . 
 " certainly not , my dear . " 
 " then Helena be mistaken . " I be unwilling to say of my sister that she 
 have be deceive they , though it do seem only too likely . 
 Mr. and Mrs. look at each other . Mrs. say : " you seem to be very 
 positive , Eunice . surely , Helena ought to know . " 
 I say : " Helena know a good deal ; but she do not   know which of we be 
 the old of the two . " 
 Mr. put in another question : " do you know ? " 
 " no more than Helena do . " 
 Mrs. say : " do not   you keep birthday ? " 
 I say : " yes ; we keep both our birthday on the same day . " 
 " on what day ? " 
 " the first day of the New Year . " 
 Mr. try again : " you can not   possibly be twin ? " 
 " I do not   know . " 
 " perhaps Helena know ? " 
 " not she ! " 
 Mrs. take the next question out of her husband 's mouth : " come , come , my 
 dear ! you must know how old you be . " 
 " yes ; I do know that . I be eighteen . " 
 " and how old be Helena ? " 
 " Helena 's eighteen . " 
 Mrs. turn round to Mr. : " do you hear that ? " 
 Mr. say : " I shall write to her father , and ask what it mean . " 
 I say : " papa will only tell you what he tell we - year ago . " 
 " what do your father say ? " 
 " he say he have add our two age together , and he mean to divide 
 the product between we . it be so long since , I do not   remember what the 
 product be then . but I will tell you what the product be now . our two 
 age come to thirty - six . half thirty - six be eighteen . I get one half , 
 and Helena get the other . when we ask what it mean , and when friend 
 ask what it mean , papa have get the same answer for everybody , ' I have 
 my reason . ' that be all he say - and that be all I say . " 
 I have no intention of make Mr. angry , but he do get angry . he leave 
 off speak to I by my christian name ; he call I by my surname . he 
 say : " let I tell you , Miss Gracedieu , it be not become in a young 
 lady to mystify her elder . " 
 I have hear that it be respectful in a young lady to call an old 
 gentleman , Sir , and to say , if you please . I take care to be respectful 
 now . " if you please , sir , write to papa . you will find that I have 
 speak the truth . " 
 a woman open the door , and say to Mrs. Staveley : " Dinner , ma'am . " 
 that stop this nasty exhibition of our temper . we have a very good 
 dinner . 
 ....... 
 the next day I write to Helena , ask she what she have really say to 
 the Staveleys about her age and mine , and tell she what I have say . 
 I find it too great a trial of my patience to wait till she could see 
 what I have write about the dispute in my journal . the day , since 
 then , have pass , and I have be too lazy and stupid to keep my diary . 
 to - day it be different . my head be like a dark room with the light let 
 into it . I remember thing ; I think I can go on again . 
 we have religious exercise in this house , morning and evening , just as 
 we do at home .   not to be compare with papa 's religious exercise .   two 
 day ago his answer come to Mr. Staveley 's letter . he do just what I 
 have expect - say I have speak truly , and disappoint the family by 
 ask to be excuse if he refrain from enter into explanation . 
 Mr. say : " very odd ; " and Mrs. agree with he . Young Miss be not quite 
 as friendly now as she be at first . and young Master be impudent 
 enough to ask I if " I have get religion . " to conclude the list of 
 my worry , I receive an angry answer from Helena . " nobody but a 
 simpleton , " she write , " would have contradict I as you do . who but 
 you could have fail to see that papa 's strange objection to let it be 
 know which of we be the elder make we ridiculous before other people ? 
 my presence of mind prevent that . you ought to have be grateful , and 
 hold your tongue . " perhaps Helena be right - but I do not   feel it so . 
 on Sunday we go to chapel twice . we also have a sermon read at home , 
 and a cold dinner . in the evening , a hot dispute on religion between Mr. 
 Staveley and his son . I do not   blame they . after be pious all day long 
 on Sunday , I have myself feel my piety give way toward evening . 
 there be something pleasant in prospect for to - morrow . all London be 
 go just now to the exhibition of picture . we be go with all 
 London . 
 ....... 
 I do not   know what be the matter with I tonight . I have positively be 
 to bed , without go to sleep ! after toss and twisting and try 
 all sort of position , I be so angry with myself that I have get up 
 again . rather than do nothing , I have open my ink - bottle , and I mean 
 to go on with my journal . now I think of it , it seem likely that the 
 exhibition of work of art may have upset I . 
 I find a dreadfully large number of picture , match by a dreadfully 
 large number of people to look at they . it be not possible for I to 
 write about what I see : there be too much of it . besides , the show 
 disappoint I . I would rather write about a disagreement   oh , dear , 
 another dispute !   I have with Mrs. Staveley . the cause of it be a famous 
 artist ; not himself , but his work . he exhibit four picture - what 
 they call figure subject . Mrs. Staveley have a pencil . at every one of 
 the great man 's four picture , she make a big mark of admiration on her 
 catalogue . at the fourth one , she speak to I : " perfectly beautiful , 
 Eunice , be not   it ? " 
 I say I do not   know . she say : " you strange girl , what do you mean by 
 that ? " 
 it would have be rude not to have give the good answer I could find . 
 I say : " I never see the flesh of any person 's face like the flesh in 
 the face which that man paint . he remind I of wax - work . why do he 
 paint the same waxy flesh in all four of his picture ? I do not   see the 
 same colored flesh in all the face about we . " Mrs. Staveley hold up her 
 hand , by way of stop I . she say : " do not   speak so loud , Eunice ; you 
 be only expose your own ignorance . " 
 a voice behind we join in . the voice say : " excuse I , Mrs. Staveley , 
 if I expose my ignorance . I entirely agree with the young lady . " 
 I feel grateful to the person who take my part , just when I be at a 
 loss what to say for myself , and I look round . the person be a young 
 gentleman . 
 he wear a beautiful blue frock - coat , button up . I like a frock - coat 
 to be button up . he have light - color trouser and gray glove and a 
 pretty cane . I like light - color trouser and gray glove and a pretty 
 cane . what color his eye be be more than I can say ; I only know they 
 make I hot when they look at I . not that I mind be make hot ; it 
 be surely well than be make cold . he and Mrs. Staveley shake hand . 
 they seem to be old friend . I wish I have be an old friend - not 
 for any bad reason , I hope . I only want to shake hand , too . what Mrs. 
 Staveley say to he escape I , somehow . I think the picture escape 
 I also ; I do not   remember notice anything except the young gentleman , 
 especially when he take off his hat to I . he look at I twice before 
 he go away . I get hot again . I say to Mrs. Staveley : " who be he ? " 
 she laugh at I . I say again : " who be he ? " she say : " he be young Mr. 
 Dunboyne . " I say : " do he live in London ? " she laugh again . I say 
 again : " do he live in London ? " she say : " he be here for a holiday ; he 
 live with his father at Fairmount , in Ireland . " 
 young Mr. Dunboyne - here for a holiday - life with his father at 
 Fairmount , in Ireland . I have say that to myself fifty time over . and 
 here it be , say itself for the fifty - first time in my Journal . I must 
 indeed be a simpleton , as Helena say . I have well go to bed again . 
 CHAPTER XIII . EUNICE 's DIARY . 
 not long before I leave home , I hear one of our two servant tell the 
 other about a person who have be " bewitch . " be you bewitch when 
 you do not   understand your own self ? that have be my curious case , 
 since I return from the picture show . this morning I take my drawing 
 material out of my box , and try to make a portrait of young Mr. 
 Dunboyne from recollection . I succeed pretty well with his frock - coat 
 and cane ; but , try as I might , his face be beyond I . I have never 
 draw anything so badly since I be a little girl ; I almost feel ready 
 to cry . what a fool I be ! 
 this morning I receive a letter from papa - it be in reply to a letter 
 that I have write to he - so kind , so beautifully express , so like 
 himself , that I feel inclined to send he a confession of the strange 
 state of feeling that have come over I , and to ask he to comfort and 
 advise I . on second thought , I be afraid to do it . Afraid of papa ! I 
 be far away from understand myself than ever . 
 Mr. Dunboyne pay we a visit in the afternoon . fortunately , before we 
 go out . 
 I think I would have a good look at he ; so as to know his face well 
 than I have know it yet . another disappointment be in store for I . 
 without intend it , I be sure , he do what no other young man have ever 
 do - he make I feel confused . instead of look at he , I sit with 
 my head down , and listen to his talk . his voice - this be high 
 praise - remind I of papa 's voice . it seem to persuade I as papa 
 persuade his congregation . I feel quite at ease again . when he go 
 away , we shake hand . he give my hand a little squeeze . I give he back 
 the squeeze - without know why . when he be go , I wish I have not 
 do it - without know why , either . 
 I hear his christian name for the first time to - day . Mrs. Staveley 
 say to I : " we be go to have a dinner - party . shall I ask Philip 
 Dunboyne ? " I say to Mrs. Staveley : " oh , do ! " 
 she be an old woman ; her eye be dim . at time , she can look 
 mischievous . she look at I mischievously now . I wish I have not be 
 so eager to have Mr. Dunboyne ask to dinner . 
 a fear have come to I that I may have degrade myself . my spirit be 
 depressed . this , as papa tell we in his sermon , be a miserable world . 
 I be sorry I accept the Staveleys ' invitation . I be sorry I go to 
 see the picture . when that young man come to dinner , I shall say I 
 have get a headache , and shall stop upstairs by myself . I do not   think I 
 like his christian name . I hate London . I hate everybody . 
 what I write up above , yesterday , be nonsense . I think his Christian 
 name be perfect . I like London . I love everybody . 
 he come to dinner to - day . I sit next to he . how beautiful a dress - coat 
 be , and a white cravat ! we talk . he want to know what my christian 
 name be . I be so pleased when I find he be one of the few people who 
 like it . his hair curl naturally . in color , it be something between my 
 hair and Helena 's . he wear his beard . how manly ! it curl naturally , 
 like his hair ; it smell deliciously of some perfume which be new to I . 
 he have white hand ; his nail look as if he polish they ; I should like 
 to polish my nail if I know how . whatever I say , he agree with I ; I 
 feel satisfied with my own conversation , for the first time in my life . 
 Helena will not   find I a simpleton when I go home . what exquisite thing 
 dinner - party be ! 
 my sister tell I   when we say good - by   to be particular in write 
 down my true opinion of the Staveleys . Helena wish to compare what she 
 think of they with what I think of they . 
 my opinion of Mr. Staveley be - I do not   like he . my opinion of Miss 
 Staveley be - I can not   endure she . as for Master Staveley , my clever 
 sister will understand that he be beneath notice . but , oh , what a 
 wonderful woman Mrs. Staveley be ! we go out together , after luncheon 
 today , for a walk in Kensington Gardens . never have I hear any 
 conversation to compare with Mrs. Staveley 's . Helena shall enjoy it 
 here , at second hand . I be quite change in two thing . first : I think 
 more of myself than I ever do before . second : writing be no long a 
 difficulty to I . I could fill a hundred journal , without once stop 
 to think . 
 Mrs. Staveley begin nicely ; " I suppose , Eunice , you have often be tell 
 that you have a good figure , and that you walk well ? " 
 I say : " Helena think my figure be well than my face . but do I really 
 walk well ? nobody ever tell I that . " 
 she answer : " Philip Dunboyne think so . he say to I , ' I resist the 
 temptation because I might be want in respect if I give way to 
 it . but I should like to follow she when she go out - merely for the 
 pleasure of see her walk . ' " 
 I stand stockstill . I say nothing . when you be as proud as a peacock 
  which never happen to I before , I find you can not   move and can not 
 talk . you can only enjoy yourself . 
 Kind Mrs. Staveley have more thing to tell I . she say : " I be 
 interested in Philip . I live near Fairmount in the time before I 
 be marry ; and in those day he be a child . I want he to marry a 
 charming girl , and be happy . " 
 what make I think directly of Miss Staveley ? what make I mad to know 
 if she be the charming girl ? I be bold enough to ask the question . 
 Mrs. Staveley turn to I with that mischievous look which I have 
 notice already . I feel as if I have be run at the top of my speed , 
 and have not get my breath again , yet . 
 but this good motherly friend set I at my ease . she explain herself : 
 " Philip be not much like , poor fellow , in our house . my husband 
 consider he to be weak and vain and fickle . and my daughter agree 
 with her father . there be time when she be barely civil to Philip . he 
 be too good - natured to complain , but I see it . tell I , my dear , do 
 you like Philip ? " 
 " of course I do ! " out it come in those word , before I could stop it . 
 be there something unbecoming to a young lady in say what I have just 
 say ? Mrs. Staveley seem to be more amused than angry with I . she 
 take my arm kindly , and lead I along with she . " my dear , you be as 
 clear as crystal , and as true as steel . you be a favorite of mine 
 already . " 
 what a delightful woman ! as I say just now . I ask if she really like 
 I as well as she like my sister . 
 she say : " well . " 
 I do not   expect that , and do not   want it . Helena be my superior . she be 
 pretty than I be , clever than I be , well worth like than I be . 
 Mrs. Staveley shift the talk back to Philip . I ought to have say Mr. 
 Philip . no , I will not ; I shall call he Philip . if I have a heart of stone , 
 I should feel interested in he , after what Mrs. Staveley have tell I . 
 such a sad story , in some respect . mother dead ; no brother or sister . 
 only the father leave ; he live a dismal life on a lonely stormy coast . 
 not a severe old gentleman , for all that . his reason for take to 
 retirement be reason   so Mrs. Staveley say   which nobody know . he 
 bury himself among his book , in an immense library ; and he appear 
 to like it . his son have not be bring up like other young man , 
 at school and college . he be a great scholar , educate at home by his 
 father . to hear this account of his learning depress I . it seem to 
 put such a distance between we . I ask Mrs. Staveley if he think I 
 ignorant . as long as I live I shall remember the reply : " he think you 
 charming . " 
 any other girl would have be satisfied with this . I be the miserable 
 creature who be always make mistake . my stupid curiosity spoil 
 the charm of Mrs. Staveley 's conversation . and yet it seem to be a 
 harmless question ; I only say I should like to know what profession 
 Philip belong to . 
 Mrs. Staveley answer : " no profession . " 
 I foolishly put a wrong meaning on this . I say : " be he idle ? " 
 Mrs. Staveley laugh . " my dear , he be an only son - and his father be a 
 rich man . " 
 that stop I - at last . 
 we have enough to live on in comfort at home - no more . Papa have tell we 
 himself that he be not   and can never hope to be   a rich man . this be 
 not the bad of it . last year , he refuse to marry a young couple , both 
 belong to our congregation . this be very unlike his usual kind self . 
 Helena and I ask he for his reason . they be reason that do not 
 take long to give . the young gentleman 's father be a rich man . he have 
 forbid his son to marry a sweet girl - because she have no fortune . 
 I have no fortune . and Philip 's father be a rich man . 
 the good thing I can do be to wipe my pen , and shut up my Journal , and 
 go home by the next train . 
 ....... 
 I have a great mind to burn my Journal . it tell I that I have well 
 not think of Philip any more . 
 on second thought , I will not   destroy my Journal ; I will only put it away . 
 if I live to be an old woman , it may amuse I to open my book again , and 
 see how foolish the poor wretch be when she be young . 
 what be this ache pain in my heart ? 
 I do not   remember it at any other time in my life . be it trouble ? how can 
 I tell ? - I have have so little trouble . it must be many year since I be 
 wretched enough to cry . I do not   even understand why I be cry now . my 
 last sorrow , so far as I can remember , be the toothache . other 
 girl ' mother comfort they when they be wretched . if my mother have 
 live - it be useless to think about that . we lose she , while I and my 
 sister be too young to understand our misfortune . 
 I wish I have never see Philip . 
 this seem an ungrateful wish . see he at the picture - show be a new 
 enjoyment . sit next to he at dinner be a happiness that I do not 
 recollect feeling , even when Papa have be most sweet and kind to I . 
 I ought to be ashamed of myself to confess this . shall I write to my 
 sister ? but how should she know what be the matter with I , when I do not 
 know it myself ? besides , Helena be angry ; she write unkindly to I when 
 she answer my last letter . 
 there be a dreadful loneliness in this great house at night . I have 
 well say my prayer , and try to sleep . if it do not   make I feel 
 happy , it will prevent I spoil my Journal by drop tear on it . 
 ....... 
 what an evening of evening this have be ! last night it be cry that 
 keep I awake . to - night I can not   sleep for joy . 
 Philip call on we again to - day . he bring with he ticket for the 
 performance of an Oratorio . sacred music be not forbid music among 
 our people . Mrs. Staveley and Miss Staveley go to the concert with we . 
 Philip and I sit next to each other . 
 my sister be a musician - I be nothing . that sound bitter ; but I do not 
 mean it so . all I mean be , that I like simple little song , which I 
 can sing to myself by remember the tune . there , my musical enjoyment 
 end . when voice and instrument burst out together by hundred , I feel 
 bewildered . I also get attack by fidget . this last misfortune be sure 
 to overtake I when chorus be be perform . the unfortunate people 
 employ be make to keep sing the same word , over and over and over 
 again , till I find it a perfect misery to listen to they . the chorus 
 be unendurable in the performance to - night . this be one of they : " here 
 we be all alone in the wilderness - alone in the wilderness - in the 
 wilderness alone , alone , alone - here we be in the wilderness - alone in 
 the wilderness - all all alone in the wilderness , " and soon , till I feel 
 inclined to call for the learn person who write oratorio , and beg 
 he to give the poor music a more generous allowance of word . 
 whenever I look at Philip , I find he look at I . perhaps he see 
 from the first that the music be weary music to my ignorant ear . 
 with his usual delicacy he say nothing for some time . but when he 
 catch I yawn   though I do my good to hide it , for it look like 
 be ungrateful for the ticket , then he could restrain himself no 
 long . he whisper in my ear : 
 " you be get tired of this . and so be I. " 
 " I be try to like it , " I whisper back . 
 " do not   try , " he answer . " let us talk . " 
 he mean , of course , talk in whisper . we be a good deal 
 annoyed - especially when the character be all alone in the 
 wilderness - by burst of singing and playing which interrupt we at the 
 most interesting moment . Philip persevere with a manly firmness . what 
 could I do but follow his example - at a distance ? 
 he say : " be it really true that your visit to Mrs. Staveley be come 
 to an end ? " 
 I answer : " it come to an end the day after to - morrow . " 
 " be you sorry to be leave your friend in London ? " 
 what I might have say if he have make that inquiry a day early , when I 
 be the most miserable creature living , I would rather not try to guess . 
 be quite happy as thing be , I could honestly tell he I be sorry . 
 " you can not   possibly be as sorry as I be , Eunice . may I call you by your 
 pretty name ? " 
 " yes , if you please . " 
 " Eunice ! " 
 " yes . " 
 " you will leave a blank in my life when you go away - " 
 there another chorus stop he , just as I be eager for more . it be 
 such a delightfully new sensation to hear a young gentleman tell I 
 that I have leave a blank in his life . the next change in the Oratorio 
 bring up a young lady , sing alone . some people behind we grumble 
 at the smallness of her voice . we think her voice perfect . it seem 
 to lend itself so nicely to our whisper . 
 he say : " will you help I to think of you while you be away ? I want 
 to imagine what your life be at home . do you live in a town or in the 
 country ? " 
 I tell he the name of our town . when we give a person information , I 
 have always hear that we ought to make it complete . so I mention our 
 address in the town . but I be trouble by a doubt . perhaps he prefer 
 the country . be anxious about this , I say : " would you rather have 
 hear that I live in the country ? " 
 " live where you may , Eunice , the place will be a favorite place of mine . 
 besides , your town be famous . it have a public attraction which bring 
 visitor to it . " 
 I make another of those mistake which no sensible girl , in my position , 
 would have commit . I ask if he allude to our new market - place . 
 he set I right in the sweetest manner : " I allude to a building 
 hundred of year old than your market - place - your beautiful 
 cathedral . " 
 Fancy my not have thought of the cathedral ! this be what come of 
 be a Congregationalist . if I have belong to the Church of England , 
 I should have forget the market - place , and remember the cathedral . 
 not that I want to belong to the Church of England . Papa 's chapel be 
 good enough for I . 
 the song sing by the lady with the small voice be so pretty that the 
 audience encore it . do not   Philip and I help they ! with the sweetest 
 smile the lady sing it all over again . the people behind we leave the 
 concert . 
 he say : " do you know , I take the great interest in cathedral . I 
 propose to enjoy the privilege and pleasure of see your cathedral 
 early next week . " 
 I have only to look at he to see that I be the cathedral . it be no 
 surprise to hear next that he think of " pay his respect to Mr. 
 Gracedieu . " he beg I to tell he what sort of reception he might 
 hope to meet with when he call at our house . I get so excited in do 
 justice to papa that I quite forgot to whisper when the next question 
 come . Philip want to know if Mr. Gracedieu dislike stranger . when 
 I answer , " oh dear , no ! " I say it out loud , so that the people hear 
 I . cruel , cruel people ! they all turn round and star . one hideous 
 old woman actually say , " Silence ! " Miss Staveley look disgusted . even 
 kind Mrs. Staveley lift her eyebrow in astonishment . 
 Philip , dear Philip , protect and compose I . 
 he hold my hand devotedly till the end of the performance . when he put 
 we into the carriage , I be last . he whisper in my ear : " expect I 
 next week . " Miss Staveley might be as ill - natured as she please , on the 
 way home . it do not   matter what she say . the Eunice of yesterday might 
 have be mortify and offend . the Eunice of to - day be indifferent 
 to the sharp thing that could be say to she . 
 ....... 
 all through yesterday 's delightful evening , I never once think of 
 Philip 's father . when I wake this morning , I remember that old Mr. 
 Dunboyne be a rich man . I could eat no breakfast for thinking of the 
 poor girl who be not allow to marry her young gentleman , because she 
 have no money . 
 Mrs. Staveley wait to speak to I till the rest of they have leave we 
 together . I have expect she to notice that I look dull and dismal . 
 no ! her cleverness get at my secret in quite another way . 
 she say : " how do you feel after the concert ? you must be hard to please 
 indeed if you be not satisfied with the accompaniment last night . " 
 " the accompaniment of the Oratorio ? " 
 " no , my dear . the accompaniment of Philip . " 
 I suppose I ought to have laugh . in my miserable state of mind , it be 
 not to be do . I say : " I hope Mr. Dunboyne 's father will not hear how 
 kind he be to I . " 
 Mrs. Staveley ask why . 
 my bitterness overflow at my tongue . I say : " because papa be a poor 
 man . " 
 " and Philip 's papa be a rich man , " say Mrs. Staveley , put my 
 own thought into word for I . " where do you get these idea , Eunice ? 
 surely , you be not allow to read novel ? " 
 " oh no ! " 
 " and you have certainly never see a play ? " 
 " never . " 
 " clear your head , child , of the nonsense that have get into it - I can not 
 think how . Rich Mr. Dunboyne have teach his heir to despise the base act 
 of marry for money . he know that Philip will meet young lady at my 
 house ; and he have write to I on the subject of his son 's choice of a 
 wife . ' let Philip find good principle , good temper , and good look ; and 
 I promise beforehand to find the money . ' there be what he say . be you 
 satisfied with Philip 's father , now ? " 
 I jump up in a state of ecstasy . just as I have throw my arm round 
 Mrs. Staveley 's neck , the servant come in with a letter , and hand it 
 to I . 
 Helena have write again , on this last day of my visit . her letter be 
 full of instruction for buy thing that she want , before I leave 
 London . I read on quietly enough until I come to the postscript . the 
 effect of it on I may be tell in two word : I scream . Mrs. Staveley 
 be naturally alarmed . " bad news ? " she ask . be quite unable to 
 offer an opinion , I read the postscript out loud , and leave she to judge 
 for herself . 
 this be Helena 's news from home : 
 " I must prepare you for a surprise , before your return . you will find a 
 strange lady establish at home . do not   suppose there be any prospect 
 of her bid we good - by , if we only wait long enough . she be already 
  with father 's full approval   as much a member of the family as we 
 be . you shall form your own unbiased opinion of she , Eunice . for the 
 present , I say no more . " 
 I ask Mrs. Staveley what she think of my news from home . she say : 
 " your father approve of the lady , my dear . I suppose it be good news . " 
 but Mrs. Staveley do not look as if she believe in the good news , for 
 all that . 
 CHAPTER XIV . HELENA 'S DIARY . 
 to - day I go as usual to the scripture - class for girl . it be hard 
 work than ever , teach without Eunice to help I . indeed , I feel 
 lonely all day without my sister . when I get home , I rather hop that 
 some friend might have come to see we , and have be ask to stay to 
 tea . the housemaid open the door to I . I ask Maria if anybody have 
 call . 
 " yes , miss ; a lady , to see the master . " 
 " a stranger ? " 
 " never see she before , miss , in all my life . " I put no more question . 
 many lady visit my father . they call it consult the Minister . 
 he advise they in their trouble , and guide they in their religious 
 difficulty , and so on . they come and go in a sort of secrecy . so far 
 as I know , they be mostly old maid , and they waste the Minister 's 
 time . 
 when my father come in to tea , I begin to feel some curiosity about the 
 lady who have call on he . visitor of that sort , in general , never 
 appear to dwell on his mind after they have go away ; he see too many 
 of they , and be too well accustomed to what they have to say . on 
 this particular evening , however , I perceive appearance that set I 
 thinking ; he look worried and anxious . 
 " have anything happen , father , to vex you ? " I say . 
 " yes . " 
 " be the lady concern in it ? " 
 " what lady , my dear ? " 
 " the lady who call on you while I be out . " 
 " who tell you she have call on I ? " 
 " I ask Maria - " 
 " that will do , Helena , for the present . " 
 he drink his tea and go back to his study , instead of stay a while , 
 and talk pleasantly as usual . my respect submit to his want of 
 confidence in I ; but my curiosity be in a state of revolt . I send for 
 Maria , and proceed to make my own discovery , with this result : 
 no other person have call at the house . nothing have happen , except 
 the visit of the mysterious lady . " she look between young and old . 
 and , oh dear I , she be certainly not pretty . not dress nicely , to my 
 mind ; but they do say dress be a matter of taste . " 
 try as I might , I could get no more than that out of our stupid young 
 housemaid . 
 later in the evening , the cook have occasion to consult I about supper . 
 this be a person possess the advantage of age and experience . I 
 ask if she have see the lady . the cook 's reply promise something new : 
 " I can not   say I see the lady ; but I hear she . " 
 " do you mean that you hear she speak ? " 
 " no , miss - crying . " 
 " where be she cry ? " 
 " in the master 's study . " 
 " how do you come to hear she ? " 
 " be I to understand , miss , that you suspect I of listen ? " 
 be a lie tell by a look as bad as a lie tell by word ? I look shocked 
 at the bare idea of suspect a respectable person of listen . the 
 cook 's sense of honor be satisfy ; she readily explain herself : " I 
 be pass the door , miss , on my way upstairs . " 
 here my discovery come to an end . it be certainly possible that an 
 afflict member of my father 's congregation might have call on he 
 to be comfort . but he see plenty of afflicted lady , without look 
 worried and anxious after they leave he . still suspect something 
 out of the ordinary course of event , I wait hopefully for our next 
 meeting at supper - time . nothing come of it . my father leave I by myself 
 again , when the meal be over . he be always courteous to his daughter ; 
 and he make an apology : " excuse I , Helena , I want to think . " 
 ....... 
 I go to bed in a vile humor , and sleep badly ; wonder , in the long 
 wakeful hour , what new rebuff I should meet with on the next day . 
 at breakfast this morning I be agreeably surprised . no sign of anxiety 
 show themselves in my father 's face . instead of retire to his study 
 when we rise from the table , he propose take a turn in the garden : 
 " you be look pale , Helena , and you will be the well for a little 
 fresh air . besides , I have something to say to you . " 
 Excitement , I be sure , be good for young woman . I see in his face , I 
 hear in his last word , that the mystery of the lady be at last to be 
 reveal . the sensation of languor and fatigue which follow a disturbed 
 night leave I directly . 
 my father give I his arm , and we walk slowly up and down the lawn . 
 " when that lady call on I yesterday , " he begin , " you want to know 
 who she be , and you be surprised and disappoint when I refuse to 
 gratify your curiosity . my silence be not a selfish silence , Helena . I 
 be think of you and your sister ; and I be at a loss how to act for 
 the good . you shall hear why my child be in my mind , presently . 
 I must tell you first that I have arrive at a decision ; I hope and 
 believe on reasonable ground . ask I any question you please ; my 
 silence will be no long an obstacle in your way . " 
 this be so very encouraging that I say at once : " I should like to know 
 who the lady be . " 
 " the lady be relate to I , " he answer . " we be cousin . " 
 here be a disclosure that I have not anticipate . in the little that I 
 have see of the world , I have observe that cousin - when they happen 
 to be bring together under interesting circumstance - can remember 
 their relationship , and forget their relationship , just as it suit 
 they . " be your cousin a married lady ? " I venture to inquire . 
 " no . " 
 short as it be , that reply might perhaps mean more than appear on 
 the surface . the cook have hear the lady cry . what sort of tender 
 agitation be answerable for those tear ? be it possible , barely 
 possible , that Eunice and I might go to bed , one night , a widower 's 
 daughter , and wake up the next day to discover a stepmother ? 
 " have I or my sister ever see the lady ? " I ask . 
 " never . she have be live abroad ; and I have not see she myself since 
 we be both young people . " 
 my excellent innocent father ! not the faint idea of what I have be 
 thinking of be in his mind . little do he suspect how welcome be the 
 relief that he have afford to his daughter 's wicked doubt of he . but 
 he have not say a word yet about his cousin 's personal appearance . there 
 might be remain of good look which the housemaid be too stupid to 
 discover . 
 " after the long interval that have pass since you meet , " I say , " I 
 suppose she have become an old woman ? " 
 " no , my dear . let we say , a middle - aged woman . " 
 " perhaps she be still an attractive person ? " 
 he smile . " I be afraid , Helena , that would never have be a very 
 accurate description of she . " 
 I now know all that I want to know about this alarming person , 
 except one last morsel of information which my father have strangely 
 forget . 
 " we have be talk about the lady for some time , " I say ; " and you 
 have not yet tell I her name . " 
 Father look a little embarrassed " it be not a very pretty name , " he 
 answer . " my cousin , my unfortunate cousin , be - Miss Jillgall . " 
 I burst out with such a loud " oh ! " that he laugh . I catch the 
 infection , and laugh louder still . bless Miss Jillgall ! the interview 
 promise to become an easy one for both of we , thank to her name . I be 
 in good spirit , and I make no attempt to restrain they . " the next time 
 Miss Jillgall honor you with a visit , " I say , " you must give I an 
 opportunity of be present to she . " 
 he make a strange reply : " you may find your opportunity , Helena , soon 
 than you anticipate . " 
 do this mean that she be go to call again in a day or two ? I be 
 afraid I speak flippantly . I say : " oh , father , another lady fascinate 
 by the popular preacher ? " 
 the garden chair be near we . he sign to I gravely to be seat by 
 his side , and say to himself : " this be my fault . " 
 " what be your fault ? " I ask . 
 " I have leave you in ignorance , my dear , of my cousin 's sad story . it 
 be soon tell ; and , if it check your merriment , it will make amend by 
 deserve your sympathy . I be indebted to her father , when I be a boy , 
 for act of kindness which I can never forget . he be twice marry . the 
 death of his first wife leave he with one child - once my playfellow ; now 
 the lady whose visit have excite your curiosity . his second wife be a 
 Belgian . she persuade he to sell his business in London , and to invest 
 the money in a partnership with a brother of her , establish as a 
 sugar - refiner at Antwerp . the little daughter accompany her father to 
 Belgium . be you attend to I , Helena ? " 
 I be wait for the interesting part of the story , and be wonder 
 when he would get to it . 
 " as time go on , " he resume , " the new partner find that the value 
 of the business at Antwerp have be greatly overrate . after a long 
 struggle with adverse circumstance , he decide on withdraw from 
 the partnership before the whole of his capital be lose in a failing 
 commercial speculation . the end of it be that he retire , with his 
 daughter , to a small town in East Flanders ; the wreck of his property 
 have leave he with an income of no more than two hundred pound a 
 year . " 
 I show my father that I be attend to he now , by inquire what 
 have become of the belgian wife . those nervous quivering , which Eunice 
 have mention in her diary , begin to appear in his face . 
 " it be too shameful a story , " he say , " to be tell to a young girl . the 
 marriage be dissolve by law ; and the wife be the person to blame . I 
 be sure , Helena , you do not   wish to hear any more of this part of the 
 story . " 
 I do wish . but I see that he expect I to say no - so I say it . 
 " the father and daughter , " he go on , " never so much as thought of 
 return to their own country . they be too poor to live comfortably 
 in England . in Belgium their income be sufficient for their want . on 
 the father 's death , the daughter remain in the town . she have friend 
 there , and friend nowhere else ; and she might have live abroad to the 
 end of her day , but for a calamity to which we be all liable . a 
 long and serious illness completely prostrate she . skilled medical 
 attendance , cost large sum of money for the doctor ' travel 
 expense , be imperatively require . experienced nurse , summon from a 
 distant hospital , be in attendance night and day . luxury , far beyond 
 the reach of her little income , be absolutely require to support she 
 waste strength at the time of her tedious recovery . in one word , her 
 resource be sadly diminish , when the poor creature have pay she 
 debt , and have regain her hold on life . at that time , she unhappily 
 meet with the man who have ruin she . " 
 it be get interesting at last . " ruin she ? " I repeat . " do you 
 mean that he rob she ? " 
 " that , Helena , be exactly what I mean - and many and many a helpless 
 woman have be rob in the same way . the man of whom I be now speak 
 be a lawyer in large practice . he bear an excellent character , and 
 be highly respected for his exemplary life . my cousin   not at all a 
 discreet person , I be bind to admit   be induce to consult he on her 
 pecuniary affair . he express the most generous sympathy - offer to 
 employ her little capital in his business - and pledge himself to pay 
 her double the interest for her money , which she have be in the habit 
 of receive from the sound investment choose by her father . " 
 " and of course he get the money , and never pay the interest ? " eager to 
 hear the end , I interrupt the story in those inconsiderate word . my 
 father 's answer quietly reprove I . 
 " he pay the interest regularly as long as he live . " 
 " and what happen when he die ? " 
 " he die a bankrupt ; the secret profligacy of his life be at last 
 expose . nothing , actually nothing , be leave for his creditor . the 
 unfortunate creature , whose ugly name have amuse you , must get help 
 somewhere , or must go to the workhouse . " 
 if I have be in a state of mind to attend to trifle , this would have 
 explain the reason why the cook have hear Miss Jillgall cry . but 
 the prospect before I - the unendurable prospect of have a strange 
 woman in the house - have show itself too plainly to be mistake . 
 I could think of nothing else . with infinite difficulty I assume a 
 momentary appearance of composure , and suggest that Miss Jillgall 's 
 foreign friend might have do something to help she . 
 my father defend her foreign friend . " my dear , they be poor people , 
 and do all they could afford to do . but for their kindness , my cousin 
 might not have be able to return to England . " 
 " and to cast herself on your mercy , " I add , " in the character of a 
 helpless woman . " 
 " no , Helena ! not to cast herself on my mercy - but to find my house open 
 to she , as her father 's house be open to I in the bygone time . I 
 be her only survive relative ; and , while I live , she shall not be a 
 helpless woman . " 
 I begin to wish that I have not speak out so plainly . my father 's sweet 
 temper - I do so sincerely wish I have inherit it ! - make the kind 
 allowance for I . 
 " I understand the momentary bitterness of feeling that have escape you , " 
 he say ; " I may almost say that I expect it . my only hesitation in 
 this matter have be cause by my sense of what I owe to my child . it 
 be put your endurance , and your sister 's endurance , to a trial to 
 expect you to receive a stranger   and that strange not a young girl 
 like yourself   as one of the household , live with you in the close 
 intimacy of family life . the consideration which have decide I do 
 justice , I hope , to you and Eunice , as well as to myself . I think that 
 some allowance be due from my daughter to the father who have always 
 make love allowance for they . be I wrong in believe that my good 
 child have not forget this , and have only wait for the occasion 
 to feel the pleasure of reward I ? " 
 it be beautifully put . there be but one thing to be do - I kiss 
 he . and there be but one thing to be say . I ask at what time we 
 might expect to receive Miss Jillgall . " she be stay , Helena , at a 
 small hotel in the town . I have already send to say that we be wait 
 to see she . perhaps you will look at the spare bedroom ? " 
 " it shall be get ready , father , directly . " 
 I run into the house ; I rush upstairs into the room that be Eunice 's 
 and mine ; I lock the door , and then I give way to my rage , before it 
 stifle I . I stamp on the floor , I clinch my fist , I cast myself 
 on the bed , I revile that hateful woman by every hard word that I could 
 throw at she . oh , the luxury of it ! the luxury of it ! 
 cold water and my hairbrush soon make I fit to be see again . 
 as for the spare room , it look a great deal too comfortable for an 
 incubus from foreign part . the one improvement that I could have 
 make , if a friend of mine have be expect , be suggest by the 
 window - curtain . I be look at a torn place in one of they , and 
 determine to leave it unrepaire , when I feel an arm slip round 
 my waist from behind . a voice , so close that it tickle my neck , say : 
 " dear girl , what friend we shall be ! " I turn round , and confront 
 Miss Jillgall . 
 CHAPTER XV . HELENA 'S DIARY . 
 if I be not a good girl , where be a good girl to be find ? this be in 
 Eunice 's style . it sometimes amuse I to mimic my simple sister . 
 I have just tear three page out of my diary , in deference to the 
 expression of my father 's wish . he take the first opportunity which 
 his cousin permit he to enjoy of speak to I privately ; and his 
 object be to caution I against hastily rely on first impression of 
 anybody - especially of Miss Jillgall . " wait for a day or two , " he say ; 
 " and then form your estimate of the new member of our household . " 
 the stormy state of my temper have pass away , and have leave my 
 atmosphere calm again . I could feel that I have receive good advice ; but 
 unluckily it reach I too late . 
 I have form my estimate of Miss Jillgall , and have put it in write for 
 my own satisfaction , at least an hour before my father find himself 
 at liberty to speak to I . I do not   agree with he in distrust first 
 impression ; and I have propose to put my opinion to the test , by 
 refer to what I have write about his cousin at a later time . 
 however , after what he have say to I , I feel bind in filial duty 
 to take the page out of my book , and to let two day pass before I 
 presume to enjoy the luxury of hat Miss Jillgall . on one thing I 
 be determine : eunice shall not form a hasty opinion , either . she shall 
 undergo the same severe discipline of self - restraint to which her sister 
 be oblige to submit . let we be just , as somebody say , before we be 
 generous . no more for to - day . 
 ....... 
 I open my diary again - after the prescribed interval have elapse . the 
 first impression produce on I by the new member of our household 
 remain entirely unchanged . 
 have I already make the remark that , when one remove a page from 
 a book , it do not necessarily follow that one destroy the page 
 afterward ? or do I leave this to be infer ? in either case , my course 
 of proceeding be the same . I order some paste to be make . then I 
 unlock a drawer , and find my poor ill - use leaf , and put they back 
 in my Journal . an act of justice be surely not the less praiseworthy 
 because it be an act of justice do to one 's self . 
 my father have often tell I that he revise his writing on religious 
 subject . I may harmlessly imitate that good example , by revise my 
 restore entry . it be now a sufficiently remarkable performance to be 
 distinguish by a title . let I call it : 
 impression of Miss Jillgall . my first impression be a strong one - it 
 be produce by the state of this lady 's breath . in other word , I be 
 oblige to let she kiss I . it be a duty to be considerate toward human 
 infirmity . I will only say that I think I should have faint . 
 my second impression draw a portrait , and produce a striking likeness . 
 figure , little and lean - hair of a dirty drab color which we see in 
 string - small light gray eye , sly and restless , and deeply sink in 
 the head - prominent cheekbone , and a florid complexion - an 
 inquisitive nose , turn up at the end - a large mouth and a servile 
 smile - raw - look hand , decorate with black mitten - a misfitting 
 white jacket and a limp skirt - manner familiar - temper cleverly 
 hide - voice too irritate to be mention . whose portrait be this ? it 
 be the portrait of Miss Jillgall , take in word . 
 her true character be not easy to discover ; I suspect that it will 
 only show itself little by little . that she be a bear meddler in other 
 people 's affair , I think I can see already . I also find out that she 
 trust to flattery as the easy mean of make herself agreeable . 
 she try her first experiment on myself . 
 " you charming girl , " she begin , " your bright face encourage I to ask 
 a favor . pray make I useful ! the one aspiration of my life be to be 
 useful . unless you employ I in that way , I have no right to intrude 
 myself into your family circle . yes , yes , I know that your father 
 have open his house and his heart to I . but I dare not find any 
 claim - your name be Helena , be not   it ? Dear Helena , I dare not find any 
 claim on what I owe to your father 's kindness . " 
 " why not ? " I inquire . 
 " because your father be not a man - " 
 I be rude enough to interrupt she : " what be he , then ? " 
 " an angel , " Miss Jillgall answer , solemnly . " a destitute earthly 
 creature like I must not look up as high as your father . I might be 
 dazzle . " 
 this be rather more than I could endure patiently . " let we try , " I 
 suggest , " if we can not   understand each other , at start . " 
 Miss Jillgall 's little eye twinkle in their bony cavern . " the very 
 thing I be go to propose ! " she burst out . 
 " very well , " I go on ; " then , let I tell you plainly that flattery be 
 not relish in this house . " 
 " Flattery ? " she put her hand to her head as she repeat the word , and 
 look quite bewildered . " Dear Helena , I have live all my life in East 
 Flanders , and my own language be occasionally strange to I . can you 
 tell I what flattery be in Flemish ? " 
 " I do not   understand Flemish . " 
 " how very provoking ! you do not   understand Flemish , and I do not 
 understand Flattery . I should so like to know what it mean . ah , I see 
 book in this lovely room . be there a dictionary among they ? " she dart 
 to the bookcase , and discover a dictionary . " now I shall understand 
 Flattery , " she remark - " and then we shall understand each other . 
 oh , let I find it for myself ! " she run her raw red finger along the 
 alphabetical heading at the top of each page . " ' FAD . ' that will not   do . 
 ' fie . ' far on still . ' FLE . ' too far the other way . ' FLA . ' here we 
 be ! ' flattery : false praise . commendation bestow for the purpose of 
 gain favor and influence . ' oh , Helena , how cruel of you ! " she drop 
 the book , and sink into a chair - the picture , if such a thing can be , of 
 a break - hearted old maid . 
 I should most assuredly have take the opportunity of leave she to her 
 own device , if I have be free to act as I please . but my interest 
 as a daughter forbid I to make an enemy of my father 's cousin , on the 
 first day when she have enter the house . I make an apology , very neatly 
 express . 
 she jump up - let I do her justice ; Miss Jillgall be as nimble as a 
 monkey - and   Faugh !   she kiss I for the second time . if I have be a 
 man , I be afraid I should have call for that deadly poison   we be all 
 temperance people in this house   know by the name of Brandy . 
 " if you will make I love you , " Miss Jillgall explain , " you must 
 expect to be kiss . dear girl , let we go back to my poor little 
 petition . oh , do make I useful ! there be so many thing I can do : you 
 will find I a treasure in the house . I write a good hand ; I understand 
 polishing furniture ; I can dress hair   look at my own hair ; I play and 
 sing a little when people want to be amuse ; I can mix a salad and knit 
 stocking - who be this ? " the cook come in , at the moment , to consult 
 I ; I introduce she . " and , oh , " cry Miss Jillgall , in ecstasy , " I can 
 cook ! do , please , let I see the kitchen . " 
 the cook 's face turn red . she have come to I to make a confession ; 
 and she have not   as she afterward say   bargain for the presence of 
 a stranger . for the first time in her life she take the liberty 
 of whispering to I : " I must ask you , miss , to let I send up the 
 cauliflower plain boil ; I do not   understand the direction in the book 
 for do it in the foreign way . " 
 Miss Jillgall 's ear - perhaps because they be so large - possess a 
 quickness of hear quite unparalleled in my experience . not one word 
 of the cook 's whisper confession have escape she . 
 " here , " she declare , " be an opportunity of make myself useful ! what 
 be the cook 's name ? Hannah ? take I downstairs , Hannah , and I will show 
 you how to do the cauliflower in the foreign way . she seem to hesitate . 
 be it possible that she do not   believe I ? listen , Hannah , and judge 
 for yourself if I be deceive you . have you boil the cauliflower ? 
 very well ; this be what you must do next . take four ounce of grated 
 cheese , two ounce of good butter , the yolk of four egg , a little bit 
 of glaze , lemon - juice , nutmeg - dear , dear , how black she look . what 
 have I say to offend she ? " 
 the cook pass over the lady who have presume to instruct she , as if no 
 such person have be present , and address herself to I : " if I be 
 to be interfere with in my own kitchen , miss , I will ask you to suit 
 yourself at a month 's notice . " 
 Miss Jillgall wring her hand in despair . 
 " I mean so kindly , " she say ; " and I seem to have make mischief . 
 with the good intention , Helena , I have set you and your servant at 
 variance . I really do not   know you have such a temper , Hannah , " she 
 declare , follow the cook to the door . " I be sure there be nothing I 
 be not ready to do to make it up with you . perhaps you have not get the 
 cheese downstairs ? I be ready to go out and buy it for you . I could 
 show you how to keep egg sweet and fresh for week together . your gown 
 do not   fit very well ; I shall be glad to improve it , if you will leave 
 it out for I after you have go to bed . there ! " cry Miss Jillgall , 
 as the cook majestically leave the room , without even look at she , 
 " I have do my good to make it up , and you see how my advance be 
 receive . what more could I have do ? I really ask you , dear , as a 
 friend , what more could I have do ? " 
 I have it on the tip of my tongue to say : " the cook do not   ask you to 
 buy cheese for she , or to teach she how to keep egg , or to improve the 
 fit of her gown ; all she want be to have her kitchen to herself . " but 
 here again it be necessary to remember that this odious person be my 
 father 's guest . 
 " pray do not   distress yourself , " I begin ; " I be sure you be not to 
 blame , Miss Jillgall - " 
 " oh , do not ! " 
 " do not   - what ? " 
 " do not   call I Miss Jillgall . I call you Helena . call I Selina . " 
 I have really not suppose it possible that she could be more unendurable 
 than ever . when she mention her christian name , she succeed 
 nevertheless in produce that result . in the whole list of woman 's 
 name , be there any one to be find so absolutely sicken as " Selina " ? 
 I force myself to pronounce it ; I make another neatly - express 
 apology ; I say english servant be so very peculiar . Selina be more 
 than satisfied ; she be quite delighted . 
 " be that it , indeed ? an explanation be all I want . how good of you ! 
 and now tell I - be there no chance , in the house or out of the house , 
 of my make myself useful ? oh , what be that ? do I see a chance ? I do ! I 
 do ! " 
 Miss Jillgall 's eye be more than mortal . at one time , they be 
 microscope . at another time , they be telescope . she discover   right 
 across the room   the torn place in the window - curtain . in an instant , 
 she snatch a dirty little leather case out of her pocket , thread she 
 needle and begin darn the curtain . she sing over her work . " my heart 
 be light , my will be free - " I can repeat no more of it . when I hear 
 her singing voice , I become reckless of consequence , and run out of the 
 room with my hand over my ear . 
 CHAPTER XVI . HELENA 'S DIARY . 
 when I reach the foot of the stair , my father call I into his 
 study . 
 I find he at his writing - table , with such a heap of tear - up paper in 
 his waste - basket that it overflow on to the floor . he explain to I 
 that he have be destroy a large accumulation of old letter , and 
 have end   when his employment begin to grow wearisome   in examine his 
 correspondence rather carelessly . the result be that he have tear up a 
 letter , and a copy of the reply , which ought to have be set aside as 
 worthy of preservation . after collect the fragment , he have heap 
 they on the table . if I could contrive to put they together again on 
 fair sheet of paper , and fasten they in their right place with gum , I 
 should be do he a service , at a time when he be too busy to set his 
 mistake right for himself . 
 here be the good excuse that I could desire for keep out of Miss 
 Jillgall 's way . I cheerfully set to work on the restoration of the 
 letter , while my father go on with his writing . 
 have put the fragment together - except a few gap cause by 
 morsel that have be lose - I be unwilling to fasten they down with 
 gum , until I could feel sure of not have make any mistake ; especially 
 in regard to some of the lose word which I have be oblige to restore 
 by guess - work . so I copy the letter , and submit they , in the first 
 place , to my father 's approval . he praise I in the prettiest 
 manner for the care that I have take . but , when he begin , after some 
 hesitation , to read my copy , I notice a change . the smile leave his 
 face , and the nervous quivering show themselves again . 
 " quite right , my child , " he say , in low sad tone . 
 on return to my side of the table , I expect to see he resume his 
 writing . he cross the room to the window and stand   with his back to 
 I   look out . 
 when I have first discover the sense of the letter , they fail 
 to interest I . a tiresome woman , presume on the kindness of a 
 good - natured man to beg a favor which she have no right to ask , and 
 receive a refusal which she have richly deserve , be no remarkable 
 event in my experience as my father 's secretary and copyist . but the 
 change in his face , while he read the correspondence , alter my opinion 
 of the letter . there be more in they evidently than I have discover . 
 I keep my manuscript copy - here it be : 
 from Miss Elizabeth Chance to the Rev. Abel Gracedieu . 
  Date of year , 1859 . date of month , miss . 
 " DEAR SIR - you have , I hope , not quite forget the interesting 
 conversation that we have last year in the Governor 's room . I be afraid 
 I speak a little flippantly at the time ; but I be sure you will believe 
 I when I say that this be out of no want of respect to yourself . my 
 pecuniary position be far from prosperous , I be endeavor to 
 obtain the vacant situation of housekeeper in a public institution the 
 prospectus of which I inclose . you will see it be a rule of the place 
 that a candidate must be a single woman   which I be , and must be 
 recommend by a clergyman . you be the only reverend gentleman whom it 
 be my good fortune to know , and the thing be of course a mere formality . 
 pray excuse this application , and oblige I by act as my reference . 
 " sincerely your , 
 " ELIZABETH CHANCE . " 
 " P. S. - Please address : Miss E. Chance , Poste Restante , St. 
 Martin's - le - Grand , London . " 
 " from the Rev. Abel Gracedieu to Miss Chance . 
  Copy . 
 " MADAM - the brief conversation to which your letter allude , take place 
 at an accidental meeting between we . I then see you for the first time , 
 and I have not see you since . it be impossible for I to assert the 
 claim of a perfect stranger , like yourself , to fill a situation of 
 trust . I must beg to decline act as your reference . 
 " your obedient servant , 
 " ABEL GRACEDIEU . " 
 ....... 
 my father be still at the window . 
 in that idle position he could hardly complain of I for interrupt 
 he , if I venture to talk about the letter which I have put together . 
 if my curiosity displease he , he have only to say so , and there would 
 be an end to any allusion of mine to the subject . my first idea be to 
 join he at the window . on reflection , and still perceive that he keep 
 his back turn on I , I think it might be more prudent to remain at 
 the table . 
 " this Miss Chance seem to be an impudent person ? " I say . 
 " yes . " 
 " be she a young woman , when you meet with she ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " what sort of a woman to look at ? ugly ? " 
 " no . " 
 here be three answer which Eunice herself would have be quick 
 enough to interpret as three warning to say no more . I feel a little 
 hurt by his keep his back turn on I . at the same time , and 
 naturally , I think , I find my interest in Miss Chance   I do not   say my 
 friendly interest   considerably increase by my father 's unusually rude 
 behavior . I be also animate by an irresistible desire to make he turn 
 round and look at I . 
 " Miss Chance 's letter be write many year ago , " I resume . " I wonder 
 what have become of she since she write to you . " 
 " I know nothing about she . " 
 " not even whether she be alive or dead ? " 
 " not even that . what do these question mean , Helena ? " 
 " nothing , father . " 
 I declare he look as if he suspect I ! 
 " why do not   you speak out ? " he say . " have I ever teach you to conceal 
 your thought ? have I ever be a hard father , who discourage you when 
 you wish to confide in he ? what be you think about ? do you know 
 anything of this woman ? " 
 " oh , father , what a question ! I never even hear of she till I put the 
 tear letter together . I begin to wish you have not ask I to do it . " 
 " so do I. it never strike I that you would feel such extraordinary - I 
 have almost say , such vulgar - curiosity about a worthless letter . " 
 this rouse my temper . when a young lady be tell that she be vulgar , 
 if she have any self - conceit - I mean self - respect - she feel insult . I 
 say something sharp in my turn . it be in the way of argument . I do 
 not know how it may be with other young person , I never reason so well 
 myself as when I be angry . 
 " you call it a worthless letter , " I say , " and yet you think it worth 
 preserving . " 
 " have you nothing more to say to I than that ? " he ask . 
 " nothing more , " I answer . 
 he change again . after have look unaccountably angry , he now look 
 unaccountably relieve . 
 " I will soon satisfy you , " he say , " that I have a good reason for 
 preserve a worthless letter . Miss Chance , my dear , be not a woman to 
 be trust . if she see her advantage in make a bad use of my reply , 
 I be afraid she would not hesitate to do it . even if she be no long 
 living , I do not   know into what vile hand my letter may not have fall , 
 or how it might be falsify for some wicked purpose . do you see now how 
 a correspondence may become accidentally important , though it be of no 
 value in itself ? " 
 I could say " yes " to this with a safe conscience . 
 but there be some perplexity still leave in my mind . it seem 
 strange that Miss Chance should   apparently   have submit to the 
 severity of my father 's reply . " I should have think , " I say to he , 
 " that she would have send you another impudent letter - or perhaps have 
 insist on see you , and use her tongue instead of her pen . " 
 " she could do neither the one nor the other , Helena . Miss Chance will 
 never find out my address again ; I have take good care of that . " 
 he speak in a loud voice , with a flushed face - as if it be quite a 
 triumph to have prevent this woman from discover his address . what 
 reason could he have for be so anxious to keep she away from he ? 
 could I venture to conclude that there be a mystery in the life of a 
 man so blameless , so truly pious ? it shock one even to think of it . 
 there be a silence between we , to which the housemaid offer a welcome 
 interruption . dinner be ready . 
 he kiss I before we leave the room . " one word more , Helena , " he say , 
 " and I have do . let there be no more talk between we about Elizabeth 
 Chance . " 
 CHAPTER XVII . HELENA 'S DIARY . 
 Miss Jillgall join we at the dinner - table , in a state of excitement , 
 carry a book in her hand . 
 I be incline , on reflection , to suspect that she be quite clever enough 
 to have discover that I hate she - and that many of the aggravate 
 thing she say and do be assume , out of retaliation , for the 
 purpose of make I angry . that ugly face be a double face , or I be 
 much mistaken . 
 to return to the dinner - table , Miss Jillgall address herself , with an 
 air of playful penitence , to my father . 
 " dear cousin , I hope I have not do wrong . Helena leave I all by 
 myself . when I have finish darn the curtain , I really do not   know 
 what to do . so I open all the bedroom door upstairs and look into 
 the room . in the big room with two bed - oh , I be so ashamed - I find 
 this book . please look at the first page . " 
 my father look at the title - page : " Doctor Watts 's Hymns . well , Selina , 
 what be there to be ashamed of in this ? " 
 " oh , no ! no ! it be the wrong page . do look at the other page - the one 
 that come first before that one . " 
 my patient father turn to the blank page . 
 " ah , " he say quietly , " my other daughter 's name be write in it - the 
 daughter whom you have not see . well ? " 
 Miss Jillgall clasp her hand distractedly . " it be my ignorance I be so 
 ashamed of . dear cousin , forgive I , enlighten I . I do not   know how to 
 pronounce your other daughter 's name . do you call she Euneece ? " 
 the dinner be get cold . I be provoke into say : " no , we do not . " 
 she have evidently not forgive I for leave she by herself . " Pardon 
 I , Helena , when I want information I do not   apply to you : I sit , as it 
 be , at the foot of your learn father . dear cousin , be it - " 
 even my father decline to wait for his dinner any long . " pronounce it 
 as you like , Selina . here we say Euni'ce - with the accent on the ' I ' and 
 with the final ' e ' sound : Eu - ni'-see . let I give you some soup . " 
 Miss Jillgall groan . " oh , how difficult it seem to be ! quite beyond 
 my poor brain ! I shall ask the dear girl 's leave to call she Euneece . 
 what very strong soup ! be not   it rather a waste of meat ? give I a little 
 more , please . " 
 I discover another of Miss Jillgall 's peculiarity . her appetite 
 be enormous , and her way be greedy . you hear she eat her soup . she 
 devour the food on her plate with her eye before she put it into 
 her mouth ; and she criticise our english cookery in the most impudent 
 manner , under pretense of ask humbly how it be do . there be , 
 however , some temporary compensation for this . we have less of her talk 
 while she be eat her dinner . 
 with the removal of the cloth , she recover the use of her tongue ; and 
 she hit on the one subject of all other which prove to be the sore 
 trial to my father 's patience . 
 " and now , dear cousin , let we talk of your other daughter , our absent 
 Euneece . I do so long to see she . when be she come back ? " 
 " in a few day more . " 
 " how glad I be ! and do tell I - which be she ? your old girl or your 
 young ? " 
 " neither the one nor the other , Selina . " 
 " oh , my head ! my head ! this be even bad than the accent on the ' I ' and 
 the final ' e. ' stop ! I be clever than I think I be . you mean that 
 the girl be twin . be they both so exactly like each other that I 
 shall not   know which be which ? what fun ! " 
 when the subject of our age be unluckily start at Mrs. Staveley 's , 
 I have slip out of the difficulty easily by assume the character of 
 the eld sister - an example of ready tact which my dear stupid eunice 
 do not   understand . in my father 's presence , it be needless to say that 
 I keep silence , and leave it to he . I be sorry to be oblige to 
 do this . owe to his sad state of health , he be easily 
 irritated - especially by inquisitive stranger . 
 " I must leave you , " he answer , without take the slight notice of 
 what Miss Jillgall have say to he . " my work be wait for I . " 
 she stop he on his way to the door . " oh , tell I - can not   I help you ? " 
 " thank you ; no . " 
 " well - but tell I one thing . be I right about the twin ? " 
 " you be wrong . " 
 Miss Jillgall 's demonstrative hand fly up into the air again , and 
 express the climax of astonishment by quiver over her head . " this 
 be positively madden , " she declare . " what do it mean ? " 
 " take my advice , cousin . do not   attempt to find out what it mean . " 
 he leave the room . Miss Jillgall appeal to I . I imitate my father 's 
 wise brevity of expression : " sorry to disappoint you , Selina ; I know no 
 more about it than you do . come upstairs . " 
 every step of the way up to the drawing - room be mark by a protest or 
 an inquiry . do I expect she to believe that I could not   say which of 
 we be the elder of the two ? that I do not   really know what my father 's 
 motive be for this extraordinary mystification ? that my sister and I 
 have submit to be rob , as it be , of our own age , and have not 
 insist on discover which of we have come into the world first ? that 
 our friend have not put an end to this sort of thing by compare we 
 personally , and discover which be the eld sister by investigation 
 of our face ? to all this I reply : first , that I do certainly expect 
 she to believe whatever I might say : secondly , that what she be please 
 to call the " mystification " have begin when we be both child ; that 
 habit have make it familiar to we in the course of year ; and above all , 
 that we be too fond of our good father to ask for explanation which 
 we know by experience would distress he : thirdly , that friend do try 
 to discover , by personal examination , which be the eld sister , and 
 differ perpetually in their conclusion ; also that we have amuse 
 ourselves by try the same experiment before our look - glass , and 
 that Eunice think Helena be the old , and Helena think Eunice be 
 the old : fourthly   and finally , that the Reverend Mr. Gracedieu 's 
 cousin have well drop the subject , unless she be bent on make she 
 presence in the house unendurable to the Reverend Mr. Gracedieu himself . 
 I write it with a sense of humiliation ; Miss Jillgall listen 
 attentively to all I have to say - and then take I completely by 
 surprise . this inquisitive , meddlesome , restless , impudent woman 
 suddenly transform herself into a perfect model of amiability and 
 decorum . she actually say she agree with I , and be much oblige for 
 my good advice ! 
 a stupid young woman , in my place , would have discover that this be 
 not natural , and that Miss Jillgall be present herself to I in 
 disguise , to reach some secret end of her own . I be not a stupid young 
 woman ; I ought to have have at my service penetration enough to 
 see through and through Cousin Selina . well ! Cousin Selina be an 
 impenetrable mystery to I . 
 the one thing to be do be to watch she . I be at least sly enough to 
 take up a book , and pretend to be read it . how contemptible ! 
 she look round the room , and discover our pretty writing - table ; 
 a present to my father from his congregation . after a little 
 consideration , she sit down to write a letter . 
 " when do the post go out ? " she ask . 
 I mention the hour ; and she begin her letter . before she could have 
 write more than the first two or three line , she turn round on her 
 seat , and begin talk to I . 
 " do you like write letter , my dear ? " 
 " yes - but then I have not many letter to write . " 
 " only a few friend , Helena , but those few worthy to be love ? my own 
 case exactly . have your father tell you of my trouble ? ah , I be glad of 
 that . it spar I the sad necessity of confess what I have suffer . 
 oh , how good my friend , my new friend , be to I in that dull little 
 belgian town ! one of they be generosity personify - ah , she have 
 suffer , too ! a vile husband who have deceive and desert she . oh , 
 the man ! when she hear of the loss of my little fortune , that noble 
 creature get up a subscription for I , and go round herself to 
 collect . think of what I owe to she ! ought I to let another day pass 
 without write to my benefactress ? be I not bind in gratitude to make 
 she happy in the knowledge of my happiness - I mean the refuge open 
 to I in this hospitable house ? " 
 she twist herself back again to the writing - table , and go on with 
 her letter . 
 I have not attempt to conceal my stupidity . let I now record a 
 partial recovery of my intelligence . 
 it be not to be deny that Miss Jillgall have discover a good reason 
 for write to her friend ; but I be at a loss to understand why 
 she should have be so anxious to mention the reason . be it 
 possible - after the talk which have pass between we - that she have 
 something mischievous to say in her letter , relate to my father or 
 to I ? be she afraid I might suspect this ? and have she be so 
 communicative for the purpose of lead my suspicion astray ? these 
 be vague guess ; but , try as I might , I could arrive at no clear 
 view of what be pass in Miss Jillgall 's mind . what would I not have 
 give to be able to look over her shoulder , without discovery ! 
 she finish her letter , and put the address , and close the envelope . 
 then she turn round toward I again . 
 " have you get a foreign postage stamp , dear ? " 
 if I could look at nothing else , I be resolve to look at her envelope . 
 it be only necessary to go to the study , and to apply to my father . I 
 return with the foreign stamp , and I stick it on the envelope with my 
 own hand . 
 there be nothing to interest I in the address , as I ought to have 
 foresee , if I have not be too much excited for the exercise of 
 a little common sense . Miss Jillgall 's wonderful friend be only 
 remarkable by her ugly foreign name - MRS . TENBRUGGEN . 
 CHAPTER XVIII . EUNICE 's DIARY . 
 here I be , write my history of myself , once more , by my own bedside . 
 some unexpected event have happen while I have be away . one of they 
 be the absence of my sister . 
 Helena have leave home on a visit to a northern town by the seaside . she 
 be stay in the house of a minister   one of papa 's friend , and be 
 occupy a position of dignity in which I should certainly lose my 
 head . the minister and his wife and daughter propose to set up a girl ' 
 Scripture Class , on the plan devise by papa ; and they be at a loss , 
 poor helpless people , to know how to begin . Helena have volunteer to 
 set the thing go . and there she be now , advise everybody , govern 
 everybody , encourage everybody - issue direction , find fault , 
 reward merit - oh , dear , let I put it all in one word , and say : 
 thoroughly enjoy herself . 
 another event have happen , relate to papa . it so distress I that I 
 even forget to think of Philip - for a little while . 
 travel by railway   I suppose because I be not use to it   give I 
 the headache . when I get to our station here , I think it would do 
 I more good to walk home than to ride in the noisy omnibus . half - way 
 between the railway and the town , I meet one of the doctor . he be a 
 member of our congregation ; and he it be who recommend papa , some 
 time since , to give up his work as a minister and take a long holiday in 
 foreign part . 
 " I be glad to have meet with you , " the doctor say . " your sister , I 
 find , be away on a visit ; and I want to speak to one of you about your 
 father . " 
 it seem that he have be observe papa , in chapel , from what he 
 call his own medical point of view . he do not conceal from I that he 
 have draw conclusion which make he feel uneasy . " it may be anxiety , " 
 he say , " or it may be overwork . in either case , your father be in 
 a state of nervous derangement , which be likely to lead to serious 
 result - unless he take the advice that I give he when he last 
 consult I . there must be no more hesitation about it . be careful not 
 to irritate he - but remember that he must rest . you and your sister 
 have some influence over he ; he will not   listen to I . " 
 poor dear papa ! I do see a change in he for the bad - though I have 
 only be away for so short a time . 
 when I put my arm round his neck , and kiss he , he turn pale , and 
 then flush up suddenly : the tear come into his eye . oh , it be hard 
 to follow the doctor 's advice , and not to cry , too ; but I succeed in 
 control myself . I sit on his knee , and make he tell I all that I 
 have write here about Helena . this lead to our talk next of the new 
 lady , who be to live with we as a member of the family . I begin to feel 
 less uneasy at the prospect of be introduce to this stranger , when 
 I hear that she be papa 's cousin . and when he mention her name , and 
 see how it amuse I , his poor wear face brighten into a smile . " go 
 and find she , " he say , " and introduce yourself . I want to hear , Eunice , 
 if you and my cousin be likely to get on well together . " 
 the servant tell I that Miss Jillgall be in the garden . 
 I search here , there , and everywhere , and fail to find she . the 
 place be so quiet , it look so deliciously pure and bright , after 
 smoky dreary London , that I sit down at the further end of the garden 
 and let my mind take I back to Philip . what be he do at that 
 moment , while I be think of he ? perhaps he be in the company of 
 other young lady , who draw all his thought away to themselves ? or 
 perhaps he be write to his father in Ireland , and say something 
 kindly and prettily about I ? or perhaps he be look forward , as 
 anxiously as I do , to our meeting next week . 
 I have have my plan , and I have change my plan . 
 on the railway journey , I think I would tell papa at once of the new 
 happiness which seem to have put a new life into I . it would have be 
 delightful to make my confession to that first and good and dearest of 
 friend ; but my meeting with the doctor spoil it all . after what he 
 have say to I , I discover a risk . if I venture to tell papa that my 
 heart be set on a young gentleman who be a stranger to he , could I be 
 sure that he would receive my confession favorably ? there be a chance 
 that it might irritate he - and the fault would then be mine of do 
 what I have be warn to avoid . it might be safe in every way to wait 
 till Philip pay his visit , and he and papa have be introduce to each 
 other and charm with each other . could Helena herself have arrive at 
 a wise conclusion ? I declare I feel proud of my own discretion . 
 in this enjoyable frame of mind I be disturb by a woman 's voice . the 
 tone be a tone of distress , and the word reach my ear from the end 
 of the garden : " please , miss , let I in . " 
 a shrubbery mark the limit of our little bit of pleasure - ground . on the 
 other side of it there be a cottage stand on the edge of the 
 common . the most good - natured woman in the world live here . she be our 
 laundress - married to a stupid young fellow name Molly , and bless 
 with a plump baby as sweet - temper at herself . think it likely that 
 the piteous voice which have disturb I might be the voice of Mrs. 
 Molly , I be astonish to hear she appeal to anybody   perhaps to 
 I ?   to " let she in . " so I pass through the shrubbery , wonder 
 whether the gate have be lock during my absence in London . no ; it be 
 as easy to open as ever . 
 the cottage door be not close . 
 I see our amiable laundress in the passage , on her knee , try to open 
 an inner door which seem to be lock . she have her eye at the keyhole ; 
 and , once again , she call out : " please , miss , let I in . " I wait to 
 see if the door would be open - nothing happen . I wait again , to 
 hear if some person inside would answer - nobody speak . but somebody , 
 or something , make a sound of splash water on the other side of the 
 door . 
 I show myself , and ask what be the matter . 
 Mrs. Molly look at I helplessly . she say : " Miss Eunice , it be the 
 baby . " 
 " what have the baby do ? " I inquire . 
 Mrs. Molly get on her foot , and whisper in my ear : " you know he be a 
 fine child ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " well , miss , he be bewitch a lady . " 
 " what lady ? " 
 " Miss Jillgall . " 
 the very person I have be try to find ! I ask where she be . 
 the laundress point dolefully to the locked door : " in there . " 
 " and where be your baby ? " 
 the poor woman still point to the door : " I be begin to doubt , miss , 
 whether it be my baby . " 
 " Nonsense , Mrs. Molly . if it be not   your , whose baby can it be ? " 
 " Miss Jillgall 's . " 
 her puzzled face make this singular reply more funny still . the 
 splashing of water on the other side of the door begin again . " what be 
 Miss Jillgall do now ? " I say . 
 " wash the baby , miss . a week ago , she come in here , one morning ; 
 very pleasant and kind , I must own . she find I put on the baby 's 
 thing . she say : ' what a cherub ! ' which I take as a compliment . she 
 say : ' I shall call again to - morrow . ' she call again so early that 
 she find the baby in his crib . ' you be a good soul , ' she say , ' and 
 go about your work , and leave the child to I . ' I say : ' yes , miss , but 
 please to wait till I have   make he fit to be see . ' she say : ' that be 
 just what I mean to do myself . ' I star ; and I think any other person 
 would have do the same in my place . ' if there be one thing more than 
 another I enjoy , ' she say , ' it be make myself useful . Mrs. Molly , I have 
 take a fancy to your boy - baby , ' she say , ' and I mean to make myself 
 useful to he . ' if you will believe I , Miss Jillgall have only let 
 I have one opportunity of put my own child tidy . she be late 
 this morning , and I get my chance , and have the boy on my lap , dry 
 he - when in she burst like a blast of wind , and snatch the baby away 
 from I . ' this be your nasty temper , ' she say ; ' I declare I be ashamed 
 of you ! ' and there she be , with the door lock against I , wash the 
 child all over again herself . twice I have   knock , and ask she to let 
 I in , and can not   even get an answer . they do say there be luck in odd 
 number ; suppose I try again ? " Mrs. Molly knock , and the proverb 
 prove to be true ; she get an answer from Miss Jillgall at last : " if you 
 do not   be quiet and go away , you shall not   have the baby back at all . " who 
 could help it ? - I burst out laugh . Miss Jillgall   as I suppose from 
 the tone of her voice   take severe notice of this act of impropriety . 
 " who be that laugh ? " she call out ; " give yourself a name . " I give 
 my name . the door be instantly throw open with a bang . Papa 's cousin 
 appear , in a dishevel state , with splash of soap and water all 
 over she . she hold the child in one arm , and she throw the other arm 
 round my neck . " Dearest Euneece , I have be long to see you . how do 
 you like our baby ? " 
 to the curious story of my introduction to Miss Jillgall , I ought 
 perhaps to add that I have get to be friend with she already . I be the 
 friend of anybody who amuse I . what will Helena say when she read 
 this ? 
 CHAPTER XIX . EUNICE 's DIARY . 
 when people be interested in some event that be come , do they find 
 the dull day , pass in wait for it , day which they be not able to 
 remember when they look back ? this be my unfortunate case . night after 
 night , I have go to bed without so much as open my Journal . there 
 be nothing worth write about , nothing that I could recollect , until 
 the postman come to - day . I run downstairs , when I hear his ring at the 
 bell , and stop Maria on her way to the study . there , among papa 's 
 usual handful of letter , be a letter for I . 
 " DEAR MISS eunice : 
 ....... 
 " your ever truly . " 
 I quote the passage in Philip 's letter which most deeply interested 
 I - I be his dear miss ; and he be mine ever truly . the other part of the 
 letter tell I that he have be detain in London , and he lament it . 
 at the end be a delightful announcement that he be come to I by the 
 afternoon train . I run upstairs to see how I look in the glass . 
 my first feeling be regret . for the thousandth time , I be oblige to 
 acknowledge that I be not as pretty as Helena . but this pass off . a 
 cheering reflection occur to I . Philip would not have find , in my 
 sister 's face , what seem to have interest he in my face . besides , 
 there be my figure . 
 the pity of it be that I be so ignorant about some thing . if I have be 
 allow to read novel , I might   judge by what papa say against they 
 in one of his sermon   have feel sure of my own attraction ; I might 
 even have understand what Philip really think of I . however , my mind 
 be quite unexpectedly set at ease on the subject of my figure . the 
 manner in which it happen be so amusing - at least , so amusing to 
 I - that I can not resist mention it . 
 my sister and I be forbid to read newspaper , as well as novel . but 
 the teacher at the girl ' Scripture Class be too old to be treat in 
 this way . when the morning lesson be over , one of they be read 
 the newspaper to the other , in the empty schoolroom ; I be in the 
 passage outside , put on my cloak . 
 it be a report of " an application make to the magistrate by the lady 
 of his worship the Mayor . " hear this , I stop to listen . the 
 lady of his worship   what a funny way of describe a man 's wife !   be 
 report to be a little too fond of notoriety , and to like hear the 
 sound of her own voice on public occasion . but this be only my writing ; 
 I have well get back to the report . " in her address to the magistrate , 
 the Mayoress state that she have see a disgusting photograph in the 
 shop window of a stationer , lately establish in the town . she desire 
 to bring this person within reach of the law , and to have all his 
 copy of the shameless photograph destroy . the usher of the court 
 be thereupon send to purchase the photograph . " - on second thought , 
 I prefer go back to my own writing again ; it be so uninteresting to 
 copy other people 's writing . two of the magistrate be do justice . 
 they look at the photograph - and what do it represent ? the famous 
 statue call the Venus de ' Medici ! one of the magistrate take this 
 discovery indignantly . he be shock at the gross ignorance which could 
 call the classic ideal of beauty and grace a disgusting work . the other 
 one make polite allowance . he think the lady be much to be pity ; 
 she be evidently the innocent victim of a neglect education . Mrs. 
 Mayor leave the court in a rage , tell the justice she know where to 
 get law . " I shall expose Venus , " she say , " to the Lord Chancellor . " 
 when the Scripture Class have break up for the day , duty ought to 
 have take I home . Curiosity lead I astray - I mean , lead I to the 
 stationer 's window . 
 there I find our two teacher , absorb in the photograph ; have get 
 to the shop first by a short cut . they seem to think I have take a 
 liberty whom I join they . " we be here , " they be careful to explain , 
 " to get a lesson in the ideal of beauty and grace . " there be quite 
 a little crowd of townsfolk collect before the window . some of they 
 giggle ; and some of they wonder whether it be take from the life . 
 for my own part , gratitude to Venus oblige I to own that she effect 
 a great improvement in the state of my mind . she encourage I . if 
 that stumpy little creature - with no waist , and oh , such uncertain 
 leg ! - represent the ideal of beauty and grace , I have reason indeed to 
 be satisfied with my own figure , and to think it quite possible that my 
 sweetheart 's favorable opinion of I be not ill - bestow . 
 I be at the bedroom window when the time approach for Philip 's 
 arrival . quite at the far end of the road , I discover he . he be on 
 foot ; he walk like a king . not that I ever see a king , but I have my 
 ideal . ah , what a smile he give I , when I make he look up by wave 
 my handkerchief out of the window ! " ask for papa , " I whisper as he 
 ascend the house - step . 
 the next thing to do be to wait , as patiently as I could , to be send 
 for downstair . Maria come to I in a state of excitement . " oh , miss , 
 what a handsome young gentleman , and how beautifully dress ! be he - ? " 
 instead of finish what she have to say , she look at I with a sly 
 smile . I look at she with a sly smile . we be certainly a couple of 
 fool . but , dear I , how happy sometimes a fool can be ! 
 my enjoyment of that delightful time be check when I go into the 
 drawing - room . 
 I have expect to see papa 's face make beautiful by his win smile . 
 he be not only serious ; he actually seem to be ill at ease when he 
 look at I . at the same time , I see nothing to make I conclude that 
 Philip have produce an unfavorable impression . the truth be , we be all 
 three on our good behavior , and we show it . Philip have bring with 
 he a letter from Mrs. Staveley , introduce he to papa . we speak of 
 the Staveleys , of the weather , of the Cathedral - and then there seem 
 to be nothing more left to talk about . 
 in the silence that follow - what a dreadful thing silence be ! - papa 
 be send for to see somebody who have call on business . he make his 
 excuse in the sweetest manner , but still seriously . when he and Philip 
 have shake hand , would he leave we together ? no ; he wait . poor Philip 
 have no choice but to take leave of I . Papa then go out by the door 
 that lead into his study , and I be leave alone . 
 can any word say how wretched I feel ? 
 I have hop so much from that first meeting - and where be my hope 
 now ? a profane wish that I have never be bear be find its way into 
 my mind , when the door of the room be open softly , from the side of 
 the passage . Maria , dear Maria , the good friend I have , peep in . she 
 whisper : " go into the garden , miss , and you will find somebody there 
 who be die to see you . mind you let he out by the shrubbery gate . " 
 I squeeze her hand ; I ask if she have try the shrubbery gate with a 
 sweetheart of her own . " hundred of time , miss . " 
 be it wrong for I to go to Philip , in the garden ? oh , there be no end 
 to objection ! perhaps I do it because it be wrong . perhaps I have 
 be keep on my good behavior too long for human endurance . 
 how sadly disappointed he look ! and how rashly he have place himself 
 just where he could be see from the back window ! I take his arm and 
 lead he to the end of the garden . there we be out of the reach of 
 inquisitive eye ; and there we sit down together , under the big mulberry 
 tree . 
 " oh , Eunice , your father do not   like I ! " 
 those be his first word . in justice to papa   and a little for my 
 own sake too   I tell he he be quite wrong . I say : " trust my father 's 
 goodness , trust his kindness , as I do . " 
 he make no reply . his silence be sufficiently expressive ; he look at 
 I fondly . 
 I may be wrong , but fond look surely require an acknowledgment of some 
 kind ? be a young woman guilty of boldness who only follow her impulse ? 
 I slip my hand into his hand . Philip seem to like it . we return 
 to our conversation . 
 he begin : " tell I , dear , be Mr. Gracedieu always as serious as he be 
 to - day ? " 
 " oh no ! " 
 " when he take exercise , do he ride ? or do he walk ? " 
 " papa always walk . " 
 " by himself ? " 
 " sometimes by himself . sometimes with I . do you want to meet he when 
 he go out ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " when he be out with I ? " 
 " no . when he be out by himself . " 
 be it possible to tell I more plainly that I be not want ? I do my 
 good to express indignation by snatch my hand away from he . he be 
 completely take by surprise . 
 " Eunice ! do not   you understand I ? " 
 I be as stupid and as disagreeable as I could possibly be : " no ; I 
 do not ! " 
 " then let I help you , " he say , with a patience which I have not 
 deserve . 
 up to that moment I have be lean against the back of a garden 
 chair . something else now get between I and my chair . it steal round 
 my waist - it hold I gently - it strengthen its hold - it improve my 
 temper - it make I fit to understand he . all do by what ? only an arm ! 
 Philip go on : 
 " I want to ask your father to do I the great of all favor - and 
 there be no time to lose . every day , I expect to get a letter which may 
 recall I to Ireland . " 
 my heart sink at this horrid prospect ; and in some mysterious way my 
 head must have feel it too . I mean that I find my head rest on his 
 shoulder . he go on : 
 " how be I to get my opportunity of speak to Mr. Gracedieu ? I must not 
 call on he again as soon as to - morrow or next day . but I might meet 
 he , out walk alone , if you will tell I how to do it . a note to my 
 hotel be all I want . do not   tremble , my sweet . if you be not present at 
 the time , do you see any objection to my owning to your father that I 
 love you ? " 
 I feel his delicate consideration for I - I do indeed feel it 
 gratefully . if he only speak first , how well I should get on with papa 
 afterward ! the prospect before I be exquisitely encouraging . I agree 
 with Philip in everything ; and I wait   how eagerly be only know to 
 myself   to hear what he would say to I next . he prophesy next : 
 " when I have tell your father that I love you , he will expect I to tell 
 he something else . can you guess what it be ? " 
 if I have not be confuse , perhaps I might have find the answer to 
 this . as it be , I leave he to reply to himself . he do it , in word 
 which I shall remember as long as I live . 
 " Dearest Eunice , when your father have hear my confession , he will 
 suspect that there be another confession to follow it - he will want to 
 know if you love I . my angel , will my hope be your hope too , when I 
 answer he ? " 
 what there be in this to make my heart beat so violently that I feel as 
 if I be be stifle , be more than I can tell . he lean so close to 
 I , so tenderly , so delightfully close , that our face nearly touch . 
 he whisper : " say you love I , in a kiss ! " 
 his lip touch my lip , press they , dwelt on they - oh , how can I 
 tell of it ! some new enchantment of feeling run deliciously through 
 and through I . I forget my own self ; I only know of one person in the 
 world . he be master of my lip ; he be master of my heart . when he 
 whisper , " kiss I , " I kiss . what a moment it be ! a faintness stole 
 over I ; I feel as if I be go to die some exquisite death ; I lay 
 myself back away from he - I be not able to speak . there be no need 
 for it ; my thought and his thought be one - he know that I be 
 quite overcome ; he see that he must leave I to recover myself alone . I 
 point to the shrubbery gate . we take one long last look at each other 
 for that day ; the tree hide he ; I be leave by myself . 
 CHAPTER XX . EUNICE 's DIARY . 
 how long a time pass before my composure come back to I , I can not 
 remember now . it seem as if I be wait through some interval of my 
 life that be a mystery to myself . I be content to wait , and feel the 
 light evening air in the garden waft happiness over I . and all this 
 have come from a kiss ! I can call the time to mind when I use to wonder 
 why people make such a fuss about kissing . 
 I have be indebted to Maria for my first taste of Paradise . I be 
 recall by Maria to the world that I have be accustom to live in ; 
 the world that be begin to fade away in my memory already . she have 
 be send to the garden in search of I ; and she have a word of advice 
 to offer , after notice my face when I step out of the shadow of the 
 tree : " try to look more like yourself , miss , before you let they see you 
 at the tea - table . " 
 Papa and Miss Jillgall be sit together talk , when I open the 
 door . they leave off when they see I ; and I suppose , quite correctly 
 as it turn out , that I have be one of the subject in their course 
 of conversation . my poor father seem to be sadly anxious and out of 
 sort . Miss Jillgall , if I have be in the humor to enjoy it , would have 
 be more amusing than ever . one of her funny little eye persist in 
 wink at I ; and her heavy foot have something to say to my foot , under 
 the table , which mean a great deal perhaps , but which only succeed in 
 hurt I . 
 my father leave we ; and Miss Jillgall explain herself . 
 " I know , dearest Euneece , that we have only be acquaint for a day or 
 two and that I ought not perhaps to have expect you to confide in 
 I so soon . can I trust you not to betray I if I set an example of 
 confidence ? ah , I see I can trust you ! and , my dear , I do so enjoy 
 tell secret to a friend . hush ! your father , your excellent father , 
 have be talk to I about young Mr. Dunboyne . " 
 she provokingly stop there . I entreat she to go on . she invite 
 I to sit on her knee . " I want to whisper , " she say . it be too 
 ridiculous - but I do it . Miss Jillgall 's whisper tell I serious news . 
 " the minister have some reason , Euneece , for disapprove of Mr. 
 Dunboyne ; but , mind this , I do not   think he have a bad opinion of the 
 young man himself . he be go to return Mr. Dunboyne 's call . oh , I do 
 so hate formality ; I really can not   go on talk of Mr. Dunboyne . tell 
 I his christian name . ah , what a noble name ! how I long to be useful 
 to he ! tomorrow , my dear , after the one o'clock dinner , your papa will 
 call on Philip , at his hotel . I hope he will not   be out , just at the wrong 
 time . " 
 I resolve to prevent that unlucky accident by write to Philip . if 
 Miss Jillgall would have allow it , I should have begin my letter at 
 once . but she have more to say ; and she be strong than I be , and 
 still keep I on her knee . 
 " it all look bright enough so far , do not   it , dear sister ? will you 
 let I be your second sister ? I do so love you , Euneece . thank you ! 
 thank you ! but the gloomy side of the picture be to come next ! the 
 minister - no ! now I be your sister I must call he papa ; it make I 
 feel so young again ! well , then , papa have ask I to be your companion 
 whenever you go out . ' Euneece be too young and too attractive to be 
 walk about this great town   in Helena 's absence   by herself . ' that 
 be how he put it . slyly enough , if one may say so of so good a man . and 
 he use your sister   do not   he ?   as a kind of excuse . I wish your sister 
 be as nice as you be . however , the point be , why be I to be your 
 companion ? because , dear child , you and your young gentleman be not to 
 make appointment and to meet each other alone . oh , yes - that be it ! 
 your father be quite willing to return Philip 's call ; he propose   as a 
 matter of civility to Mrs. Staveley   to ask Philip to dinner ; but , mark 
 my word , he do not   mean to let Philip have you for his wife . " 
 I jump off her lap ; it be horrible to hear she . " oh , " I say , " can 
 you be right about it ? " Miss Jillgall jump up too . she have foreign 
 way of shrug her shoulder and make sign with her hand . on this 
 occasion she lay both hand on the upper part of her dress , just below 
 her throat , and mysteriously shake her head . 
 " when my view be direct by my affection , " she assure I , " I never 
 see wrong . my bosom be my strong point . " 
 she have no bosom , poor soul - but I understand what she mean . it fail 
 to have any soothing effect on my feeling . I feel grieved and angry and 
 puzzle , all in one . Miss Jillgall stand look at I , with her hand 
 still on the place where her bosom be suppose to be . she make my 
 temper hot than ever . 
 " I mean to marry Philip , " I say . 
 " certainly , my dear Euneece . but please do not   be so fierce about it . " 
 " if my father do really object to my marriage , " I go on , " it must be 
 because he dislike Philip . there can be no other reason . " 
 " oh , yes , dear - there can . " 
 " what be the reason , then ? " 
 " that , my sweet girl , be one of the thing that we have get to find 
 out . " 
 ....... 
 the post of this morning bring a letter from my sister . we be to 
 expect her return by the next day 's train . this be good news . Philip 
 and I might stand in need of clever Helena 's help , and we might be sure 
 of get it now . 
 in write to Philip , I have ask he to let I hear how papa and he have 
 get on at the hotel . I will not   say how often I consult my watch , or how 
 often I look out of the window for a man with a letter in his hand . it 
 will be well to get on at once to the discouraging end of it , when the 
 report of the interview reach I at last . twice Philip have attempt 
 to ask for my hand in marriage - and twice my father have " deliberately , 
 obstinately "   Philip 's own word   change the subject . even this be not 
 all . as if he be determined to show that Miss Jillgall be perfectly 
 right , and I perfectly wrong , papa   civil to Philip as long as he do 
 not talk of I   have ask he to dine with we , and Philip have accept 
 the invitation ! 
 what be we to think of it ? what be we to do ? 
 I write back to my dear love   so cruelly use   to tell he that Helena 
 be expect to return on the next day , and that her opinion would be of 
 the great value to both of we . in a postscript I mention the hour 
 at which we be go to the station to meet my sister . when I say 
 " we , " I mean Miss Jillgall as well as myself . 
 ....... 
 we find he wait for we at the railway . I be afraid he resent 
 papa 's incomprehensible resolution not to give he a hearing . he be 
 silent and sullen . I could not conceal that to see this state of feeling 
 distress I . he show how truly he deserve to be love - he beg 
 my pardon , and he become his own sweet self again directly . I be more 
 determined to marry he than ever . 
 when the train enter the station , all the carriage be full . I go 
 one way , think I have see Helena . Miss Jillgall go the other way , 
 under the same impression . Philip be a little way behind I . 
 not see my sister , I have just turn back , when a young man jump 
 out of a carriage , opposite Philip , and recognize and shake hand with 
 he . I be just near enough to hear the strange say , " look at the girl 
 in our carriage . " Philip look . " what a charming creature ! " he say , 
 and then check himself for fear the young lady should hear he . she 
 have just hand her travel bag and wrap to a porter , and be get 
 out . Philip politely offer his hand to help she . she look my way . 
 the charming creature of my sweetheart 's admiration be , to my infinite 
 amusement , Helena herself . 
 CHAPTER XXI . HELENA 'S DIARY . 
 the day of my return mark an occasion which I be not likely to forget . 
 hour have pass since I come home - and my agitation still forbid the 
 thought of repose . 
 as I sit at my desk I see Eunice in bed , sleep peacefully , except 
 when she be murmur enjoyment in some happy dream . to what end have my 
 sister be advance blindfold , and   who know ?   drag I with she , 
 since that disastrous visit to our friend in London ? strange that there 
 should be a leaven of superstition in my nature ! strange that I should 
 feel fear of something - I hardly know what ! 
 I have meet somewhere   perhaps in my historical reading   with the 
 expression : " a chain of event . " be I at the beginning of that chain , 
 when I enter the railway carriage on my journey home ? 
 among the other passenger there be a young gentleman , accompany by 
 a lady who prove to be his sister . they be both well - breed people . 
 the brother evidently admire I , and do his good to make himself 
 agreeable . time pass quickly in pleasant talk , and my vanity be 
 flattered - and that be all . my fellow - traveler be go on to 
 London . when the train reach our station the young lady send 
 her brother to buy some fruit , which she see in the window of the 
 refreshment - room . the first man whom he encounter on the platform be 
 one of his friend ; to whom he say something which I fail to hear . 
 when I hand my travel bag and my wrap to the porter , and show 
 myself at the carriage door , I hear the friend say : " what a charming 
 creature ! " have nothing to conceal in a journal which I protect by a 
 lock , I may own that the stranger 's personal appearance strike I , 
 and that what I feel this time be not flattered vanity , but 
 gratify pride . he be young , he be remarkably handsome , he be a 
 distinguish - look man . 
 all this happen in one moment . in the moment that follow , I find 
 myself in Eunice 's arm . that odious person , Miss Jillgall , insist on 
 embrace I next . and then I be conscious of an indescribable feeling 
 of surprise . Eunice present the distinguished - look gentleman to I 
 as a friend of hers - Mr. Philip Dunboyne . 
 " I have the honor of meet your sister , " he say , " in London , at Mr. 
 Staveley 's house . " he go on to speak easily and gracefully of the 
 journey I have take , and of his friend who have be my fellow - traveler ; 
 and he attend we to the railway omnibus before he take his leave . I 
 observe that Eunice have something to say to he confidentially , before 
 they part . this be another example of my sister 's childish character ; 
 she be instantly familiar with new acquaintance , if she happen to like 
 they . I anticipate some amusement from hear how she have contrive to 
 establish confidential relation with a highly - cultivate man like Mr. 
 Dunboyne . but , while Miss Jillgall be with we , it be just as well to 
 keep within the limit of commonplace conversation . 
 before we get out of the omnibus I have , however , observe one 
 undesirable result of my absence from home . Eunice and Miss 
 Jillgall - the latter having , no doubt , finely flatter the 
 former - appear to have take a strong liking to each other . 
 two curious circumstance also catch my attention . I see a change to , 
 what I call self - assertion , in my sister 's manner ; something seem to 
 have raise she in her own estimation . then , again , Miss Jillgall be 
 not like her customary self . she have delightful moment of silence ; and 
 when Eunice ask how I like Mr. Dunboyne , she listen to my reply 
 with an appearance of interest in her ugly face which be quite a new 
 revelation in my experience of my father 's cousin . 
 these little discovery   after what I have already observe at the 
 railway - station   ought perhaps to have prepare I for what be to come , 
 when my sister and I be alone in our room . but Eunice , whether she 
 mean to do it or not , baffle my customary penetration . she look as 
 if she have plenty of news to tell I - with some obstacle in the way of 
 do it , which appear to amuse instead of annoy she . if there be 
 one thing more than another that I hate , it be be puzzle . I ask 
 at once if anything remarkable have happen during Eunice 's visit to 
 London . 
 she smile mischievously . " I have get a delicious surprise for you , my 
 dear ; and I do so enjoy prolong it . tell I , Helena , what do you 
 propose we should both do when we find ourselves at home again ? " 
 my memory be at fault . Eunice 's good spirit become absolutely 
 boisterous . she call out : " catch ! " and toss her journal into my 
 hand , across the whole length of the room . " we be to read each 
 other 's diary , " she say . " there be mine to begin with . " 
 Innocent of any suspicion of the true state of affair , I begin the 
 reading of Eunice 's journal . if I have not see the familiar handwriting , 
 nothing would have induce I to believe that a girl bring up in 
 a pious household , the well - beloved daughter of a distinguished 
 Congregational Minister , could have write that shameless record of 
 passion unknown to young lady in respectable english life . what to 
 say , what to do , when I have close the book , be more than I feel myself 
 equal to decide . my wretched sister spar I the anxiety which I might 
 otherwise have feel . it be she who first open her lip , after the 
 silence that have fall on we while I be read . these be literally 
 the word that she say : 
 " my darling , why do not   you congratulate I ? " 
 no argument could have persuade I , as this persuade I , that all 
 sisterly remonstrance on my part would be completely throw away . 
 " my dear eunice , " I say , " let I beg you to excuse I . I be wait - " 
 there she interrupt I - and , oh , in what an impudent manner ! she take 
 my chin between her finger and thumb , and lift my downcast face , and 
 look at I with an appearance of eager expectation which I be quite 
 at a loss to understand . 
 " you have be away from home , too , " she say . " do I see in this serious 
 face some astonishing news wait to overpower I ? have you find a 
 sweetheart ? be you engaged to be marry ? " 
 I only put her hand away from I , and advise she to return to her 
 chair . this perfectly harmless proceeding seem absolutely to frighten 
 she . 
 " oh , my dear , " she burst out , ' surely you be not jealous of I ? " 
 there be but one possible reply to this : I laugh at it . be Eunice 's 
 head turn ? she kiss I ! 
 " now you laugh , " she say , " I begin to understand you again ; I ought to 
 have know that you be superior to jealousy . but , do tell I , would it 
 be so very wonderful if other girl find something to envy in my good 
 luck ? just think of it ! such a handsome man , such an agreeable man , 
 such a clever man , such a rich man - and , not the least of his merit , 
 by - the - by , a man who admire you . come ! if you will not   congratulate I , 
 congratulate yourself on have such a brother - in - law in prospect ! " 
 her head be turn . I draw the poor soul 's attention compassionately 
 to what I have say a moment since . 
 " pardon I , dear , for remind you that I have not yet refuse to offer 
 my congratulation . I only tell you I be wait . " 
 " for what ? " 
 " wait , of course , to hear what my father think of your wonderful 
 good luck . " 
 this explanation , offer with the kind intention , produce another 
 change in my very variable sister . I have extinguish her good spirit 
 as I might have extinguish a light . she sit down by I , and sigh in 
 the sad manner . the heart must be hard indeed which can resist the 
 distress of a person who be dear to we . I put my arm round she ; she be 
 become once more the Eunice whom I so dearly love . 
 " my poor child , " I say , " do not   distress yourself by speak of it ; I 
 understand . your father object to your marry Mr. Dunboyne . " 
 she shake her head . " I can not   exactly say , Helena , that papa do that . 
 he only behave very strangely . " 
 " be I indiscreet , dear , if I ask in what way father 's behavior have 
 surprise you ? " 
 she be quite willing to enlighten I . it be a simple little story 
 which , to my mind , sufficiently explain the strange behavior that have 
 puzzle my unfortunate sister . 
 there could indeed be no doubt that my father consider Eunice far too 
 childish in character , as yet , to undertake the duty of matrimony . 
 but , with his customary delicacy , and dread of cause distress to 
 other , he have defer the disagreeable duty of communicate his 
 opinion to Mr. Dunboyne . the adverse decision must , however , be soon 
 or later announce ; and he have arrange to inflict disappointment , as 
 tenderly as might be , at his own table . 
 considerately leave Eunice in the enjoyment of any vain hope which 
 she may have found on the event of the dinner - party , I pass the 
 evening until supper - time come in the study with my father . 
 our talk be mainly devoted to the worthy people with whom I have be 
 stay , and whose new school I have help to found . not a word be 
 say relate to my sister , or to Mr. Dunboyne . poor father look so 
 sadly weary and ill that I venture , after what the doctor have say 
 to Eunice , to hint at the value of rest and change of scene to an 
 overwork man . oh , dear I , he frown , and wave the subject away from 
 he impatiently , with a wan , pale hand . 
 after supper , I make an unpleasant discovery . not have completely 
 finish the unpacking of my box , I leave Miss Jillgall and Eunice in 
 the drawing - room , and go upstairs . in half an hour I return , and 
 find the room empty . what have become of they ? it be a fine moonlight 
 night ; I step into the back drawing - room , and look out of the 
 window . there they be , walk arm - in - arm with their head close 
 together , deep in talk . with my knowledge of Miss Jillgall , I call this 
 a bad sign . 
 an odd thought have just come to I . I wonder what might have happen , 
 if I have be visit at Mrs. Staveley 's , instead of Eunice , and if Mr. 
 Dunboyne have see I first . 
 Absurd ! if I be not too tired to do anything more , those last line 
 should be scratch out . 
 CHAPTER XXII . EUNICE 's DIARY . 
 I say so to Miss Jillgall , and I say it again here . nothing will induce 
 I to think ill of Helena . 
 my sister be a good deal tired , and a little out of temper after the 
 railway journey . this be exactly what happen to I when I go to 
 London . I attribute her refusal to let I read her journal , after she 
 have read mine , entirely to the disagreeable consequence of travel 
 by railway . Miss Jillgall account for it otherwise , in her own funny 
 manner : " my sweet child , your sister 's diary be full of abuse of poor 
 I . " I humor the joke : " Dearest Selina , keep a diary of your own , and 
 fill it with abuse of my sister . " this seem to be a droll say at 
 the time . but it do not   look particularly amusing , now it be write 
 down . we have ginger wine at supper , to celebrate Helena 's return . 
 although I only drink one glass , I daresay it may have get into my head . 
 however that may be , when the lovely moonlight tempt we into the 
 garden , there be an end to our joke . we have something to talk about 
 which still dwell disagreeably on my mind . 
 Miss Jillgall begin it . 
 " if I trust you , dearest Euneece , with my own precious secret , shall I 
 never , never , never live to repent it ? " 
 I tell my good little friend that she might depend on I , provide she 
 secret do no harm to any person whom I love . 
 she clasp her hand and look up at the moon - I can only suppose that 
 her sentiment overpower she . she say , very prettily , that her heart 
 and my heart beat together in heavenly harmony . it be needless to add 
 that this satisfy I . 
 Miss Jillgall 's generous confidence in my discretion be , I be afraid , 
 not reward as it ought to have be . I find she tiresome at first . 
 she speak of an excellent friend   a lady , who have help she , at 
 the time when she lose her little fortune , by raise a subscription 
 privately to pay the expense of her return to England . her friend 's 
 name - not very attractive to english ear - be Mrs. Tenbruggen ; they have 
 first become acquainted under interesting circumstance . Miss Jillgall 
 happen to mention that my father be her only live relative ; and 
 it turn out that Mrs. Tenbruggen be familiar with his name , and 
 reverence his fame as a preacher . when he have generously receive his 
 poor helpless cousin under his own roof , Miss Jillgall 's gratitude and 
 sense of duty impel she to write and tell Mrs. Tenbruggen how happy 
 she be as a member of our family . 
 let I confess that I begin to listen more attentively when the 
 narrative reach this point . 
 " I draw a little picture of our domestic circle here , " Miss Jillgall 
 say , describe her letter ; " and I mention the mystery in which 
 Mr. Gracedieu conceal the age of you two dear girl . Mrs. 
 Tenbruggen - shall we shorten her ugly name and call she Mrs. T. ? very 
 well - Mrs. T. be a remarkably clever woman , and I look for interesting 
 result , if she would give her opinion of the mysterious circumstance 
 mention in my letter . " 
 by this time , I be all eagerness to hear more . 
 " have she write to you ? " I ask . 
 Miss Jillgall look at I affectionately , and take the reply out of her 
 pocket . 
 " listen , Euneece ; and you shall hear her own word . thus she write : 
 " ' your letter , dear Selina , especially interest I by what it say 
 about the two Miss Gracedieus . ' - look , dear ; she underline the word 
 Two . why , I can not   explain . can you ? ah , I think not . well , let we get 
 back to the letter . my accomplished friend continue in these term : 
 " ' I can understand the surprise which you have feel at the strange 
 course take by their father , as a means of conceal the difference 
 which there must be in the age of these young lady . many year since , 
 I happen to discover a romantic incident in the life of your popular 
 preacher , which he have his reason , as I suspect , for keep strictly 
 to himself . if I may venture on a bold guess , I should say that any 
 person who could discover which be the old of the two daughter , 
 would be also likely to discover the true nature of the romance in Mr. 
 Gracedieu 's life . ' - be not   that very remarkable , Euneece ? you do not   seem 
 to see it - you funny child ! pray pay particular attention to what come 
 next . these be the close sentence in my friend 's letter : 
 " ' if you find anything new to tell I which relate to this interesting 
 subject , direct your letter as before - provide you write within a week 
 from the present time . afterward , my letter will be receive by the 
 English physician whose card I inclose . you will be pleased to hear that 
 my professional interest call I to London at the early moment that 
 I can spare . ' - there , dear child , the letter come to an end . I daresay 
 you wonder what Mrs. T. mean , when she allude to her professional 
 interest ? " 
 no : I be not wonder about anything . it hurt I to hear of a strange 
 woman exercise her ingenuity in guess at mystery in papa 's life . 
 but Miss Jillgall be too eagerly bent on set forth the merit 
 of her friend to notice this . I now hear that Mrs. T. 's marriage have 
 turn out badly , and that she have be reduce to earn her own bread . 
 her manner of do this be something quite new to I . she go 
 about , from one place to another , cure people of all sort of painful 
 malady , by a way she have of rub they with her hand . in Belgium 
 she be call a " Masseuse . " when I ask what this mean in English , 
 I be tell , " Medical Rubber , " and that the fame of Mrs. T. 's wonderful 
 cure have reach some of the medical newspaper publish in London . 
 after listen   I must say for myself   very patiently , I be bold 
 enough to own that my interest in what I have just hear be not quite so 
 plain to I as I could have wish it to be . 
 Miss Jillgall look shocked at my stupidity . she remind I that 
 there be a mystery in Mrs. Tenbruggen 's letter and a mystery in papa 's 
 strange conduct toward Philip . " put two and two together , darling , " she 
 say ; " and , one of these day , they may make four . " 
 if this mean anything , it mean that the reason which make papa keep 
 Helena 's age and my age unknown to everybody but himself , be also the 
 reason why he seem to be so strangely unwilling to let I be Philip 's 
 wife . I really could not endure to take such a view of it as that , and 
 beg Miss Jillgall to drop the subject . she be as kind as ever . 
 " with all my heart , dear . but do not   deceive yourself - the subject will 
 turn up again when we least expect it . " 
 CHAPTER XXIII . eunice 's DIARY . 
 only two day now , before we give our little dinner - party , and Philip 
 find his opportunity of speak to papa . oh , how I wish that day have 
 come and go ! 
 I try not to take gloomy view of thing ; but I be not quite so happy as 
 I have expect to be when my dear be in the same town with I . if papa 
 have encourage he to call again , we might have have some precious time 
 to ourselves . as it be , we can only meet in the different show - place 
 in the town - with Helena on one side , and Miss Jillgall on the other , 
 to take care of we . I do call it cruel not to let two young people love 
 each other , without set third person to watch they . if I be Queen 
 of England , I would have pretty private bower make for lover , in the 
 summer , and nice warm little room to hold two , in the winter . why not ? 
 what harm could come of it , I should like to know ? 
 the cathedral be the place of meeting which we find most convenient , 
 under the circumstance . there be delightful nook and corner about 
 this celebrated building in which lover can lag behind . if we have be 
 in papa 's chapel I should have hesitate to turn it to such a profane 
 use as this ; the cathedral do not   so much matter . 
 shall I own that I feel my inferiority to Helena a little keenly ? she 
 could tell Philip so many thing that I should have like to tell he 
 first . my clever sister teach he how to pronounce the name of the 
 bishop who begin build the cathedral ; she lead he over the crypt , and 
 tell he how old it be . he be interested in the crypt ; he talk 
 to Helena   not to I   of his ambition to write a work on cathedral 
 architecture in England ; he make a rough little sketch in his book of 
 our famous tomb of some king . Helena know the late royal personage 's 
 name , and Philip show his sketch to she before he show it to I . how 
 can I blame he , when I stand there the picture of stupidity , try 
 to recollect something that I might tell he , if it be only the Dean 's 
 name ? Helena might have whisper it to I , I think . she remember it , 
 not i - and mention it to Philip , of course . I keep close by he all 
 the time , and now and then he give I a look which raise my spirit . he 
 might have give I something well than that - I mean a kiss - when we 
 have leave the cathedral , and be by ourselves for a moment in a corner 
 of the Dean 's garden . but he miss the opportunity . perhaps he be 
 afraid of the Dean himself come that way , and happen to see we . 
 however , I be far from think the bad of Philip . I give his arm a 
 little squeeze - and that be well than nothing . 
 ....... 
 he and I take a walk along the bank of the river to - day ; my sister and 
 Miss Jillgall look after we as usual . on our way through the town , 
 Helena stop to give an order at a shop . she ask we to wait for she . 
 that good of good creature , Miss Jillgall , whisper in my ear : " go on 
 by yourself , and leave I to wait for she . " Philip interpret this 
 act of kindness in a manner which would have vex I , if I have not 
 understand that it be one of his joke . he say to I : " Miss Jillgall 
 see a chance of annoy your sister , and enjoy the prospect . " 
 well , away we go together ; it be just what I want ; it give I an 
 opportunity of say something to Philip , between ourselves . 
 I could now beg of he , in his interest and mine , to make the good of 
 himself when he come to dinner . clever people , I tell he , be people 
 whom papa like and admire . I say : " let he see , dear , how clever 
  you be , and how many thing you know - and you can not   imagine what a 
 high place you will have in his opinion . I hope you do not   think I be 
 take too much on myself in tell you how to behave . " 
 he relieve that doubt in a manner which I despair of describing . his 
 eye rest on I with such a look of exquisite sweetness and love that 
 I be oblige to hold by his arm , I tremble so with the pleasure of 
 feel it . 
 " I do sincerely believe , " he say , " that you be the most innocent girl , 
 the sweetest , true girl that ever live . I wish I be a well man , 
 Eunice ; I wish I be good enough to be worthy of you ! " 
 to hear he speak of himself in that way jarred on I . if such word have 
 fall from any other man 's lip , I should have be afraid that he have 
 do something , or think something , of which he have reason to feel 
 ashamed . with Philip this be impossible . 
 he be eager to walk on rapidly , and to turn a corner in the path , 
 before we could be see . " I want to be alone with you , " he say . 
 I look back . we be too late ; Helena and Miss Jillgall have nearly 
 overtake we . my sister be on the point of speak to Philip , when she 
 seem to change her mind , and only look at he . instead of look 
 at she in return , he keep his eye cast down and draw figure on the 
 pathway with his stick . I think Helena be out of temper ; she suddenly 
 turn my way . " why do not   you wait for I ? " she ask . 
 Philip take she up sharply . " if Eunice like see the river well 
 than wait in the street , " he say , " be not   she free to do as she 
 please ? " 
 Helena say nothing more ; Philip walk on slowly by himself . not 
 know what to make of it , I turn to Miss Jillgall . " surely Philip 
 can not   have quarrel with Helena ? " I say . 
 Miss Jillgall answer in an odd off - hand manner : " not he ! he be a great 
 deal more likely to have quarrel with himself . " 
 " why ? " 
 " suppose you ask he why ? " 
 it be not to be think of ; it would have look like pry into his 
 thought . " Selina ! " I say , " there be something odd about you to - day . 
 what be the matter ? I do not   understand you . " 
 " my poor dear , you will find yourself understand I before long . " I 
 think I see something like pity in her face when she say that . 
 " my poor dear ? " I repeat . " what make you speak to I in that way ? " 
 " I do not   know - I be tired ; I be an old fool - I will go back to the house . " 
 without another word , she leave I . I turn to look for Philip , and 
 see that my sister have join he while I have be speak to Miss 
 Jillgall . it please I to find that they be talk in a friendly way 
 when I join they . a quarrel between Helena and my husband that be to 
 be - no , my husband that shall be - would have be too distressing , too 
 unnatural I might almost call it . 
 Philip look along the backward path , and ask what have become of Miss 
 Jillgall . " have you any objection to follow she example ? " he say to I , 
 when I tell he that Selina have return to the town . " I do not   care for 
 the bank of this river . " 
 Helena , who use to like the river at other time , be as ready as 
 Philip to leave it now . I fancy they have both be kindly wait to 
 change our walk , till I come to they , and they could study my wish 
 too . of course I be ready to go where they please . I ask Philip if 
 there be anything he would like to see , when we get into the street 
 again . 
 Clever Helena suggest what seem to be a strange amusement to offer 
 to Philip . " let us take he to the girl ' school , " she say . 
 it appear to be a matter of perfect indifference to he ; he be , what 
 they call , ironical . " oh , yes , of course . deeply interesting ! deeply 
 interesting ! " he suddenly break into the wild good spirit , and 
 tuck my hand under his arm with a gayety which it be impossible 
 to resist . " what a boy you be ! " Helena say , enjoy his delightful 
 hilarity as I do . 
 CHAPTER XXIV . eunice 's DIARY . 
 on enter the schoolroom we lose our gayety , all in a moment . 
 something unpleasant have evidently happen . 
 two of the eld girl be sit together in a corner , separate 
 from the rest , and look most wickedly sulky . the teacher be at the 
 other end of the room , appear to be ill at ease . and there , stand 
 in the midst of they , with his face flush and his eye angry - there 
 be papa , sadly unlike his gentle self in the day of his health and 
 happiness . on former occasion , when the exercise of his authority be 
 require in the school , his forbear temper always set thing right . 
 when I see he now , I think of what the doctor have say of his health , 
 on my way home from the station . 
 Papa advance to we the moment we show ourselves at the door . 
 he shake hand - cordially shake hand - with Philip . it be delightful to 
 see he , delightful to hear he say : " pray do not   suppose , Mr. Dunboyne , 
 that you be intrude ; remain with we by all mean if you like . " then 
 he speak to Helena and to I , still excited , still not like himself : 
 " you could not   have come here , my dear , at a time when your presence 
 be more urgently need . " he turn to the teacher . " tell my 
 daughter what have happen ; tell they why they see I here - shock and 
 distressed , I do not   deny it . " 
 we now hear that the two girl in disgrace have break the rule , and in 
 such a manner as to deserve severe punishment . 
 one of they have be discover hide a novel in her desk . the other 
 have misbehave herself more seriously still - she have go to the 
 theater . instead of express any regret , they have actually dare to 
 complain of have to learn papa 's improved catechism . they have even 
 accuse he of treat they with severity , because they be poor 
 girl bring up on charity . " if we have be young lady , " they be 
 audacious enough to say , " more indulgence would have be show to we ; 
 we should have be allow to read story and to see play . " 
 all this time I have be ask myself what papa mean , when he tell we 
 we could not have come to the schoolroom at a well time . his meaning 
 now appear . when he speak to the offend girl , he point to Helena 
 and to I . 
 " here be my daughter , " he say . " you will not deny that they be young 
 lady . now listen . they shall tell you themselves whether my rule make 
 any difference between they and you . Helena ! Eunice ! do I allow you to 
 read novel ? do I allow you to go to the play ? " 
 we say , " no " - and hop it be over . but he have not do yet . he turn 
 to Helena . 
 " answer some of the question , " he go on , " from my Manual of Christian 
 Obligation , which the girl call my catechism . " he ask one of the 
 question : " if you be tell to do unto other as you would they should 
 do unto you , and if you find a difficulty in obey that Divine 
 Precept , what do your duty require ? " 
 it be my belief that Helena have the material in she for make another 
 Joan of Arc . she rise , and answer without the slight sign of 
 timidity : " my duty require I to go to the minister , and to seek for 
 advice and encouragement . " 
 " and if these fail ? " 
 " then I be to remember that my pastor be my friend . he claim no 
 priestly authority or priestly infallibility . he be my fellow - christian 
 who love I . he will tell I how he have himself fail ; how he have 
 struggle against himself ; and what a blessed reward have follow his 
 victory - a purified heart , a peaceful mind . " 
 then papa release my sister , after she have only repeat two out of all 
 the answer in Christian Obligation , which we first begin to learn when 
 we be child . he then address himself again to the girl . 
 " be what you have just hear a part of my catechism ? have my daughter 
 be excuse from repeat it because she be a young lady ? where be 
 the difference between the religious education which be give to my own 
 child , and that give to you ? " 
 the wretched girl still sit silent and obstinate , with their head 
 down . I tremble again as I write of what happen next . Papa fix his 
 eye on I . he say , out loud : " Eunice ! " - and wait for I to rise and 
 answer , as my sister have do . 
 it be entirely beyond my power to get on my foot . 
 Philip have   innocently , I be sure   discourage I ; I see displeasure , 
 I see contempt in his face . there be a dead silence in the room . 
 everybody look at I . my heart beat furiously , my hand turn cold , 
 the question and answer in Christian Obligation all leave my memory 
 together . I look imploringly at papa . 
 for the first time in his life , he be hard on I . his eye be as 
 angry as ever ; they show I no mercy . oh , what have come to I ? 
 what evil spirit possess I ? I feel resentment ; horrid , undutiful 
 resentment , at be treat in this cruel way . my fist clinch 
 themselves in my lap , my face feel as hot as fire . instead of ask my 
 father to excuse I , I say : " I can not   do it . " he be astounded , as well 
 he might be . I go on from bad to bad . I say : " I will not   do it . " 
 he stoop over I ; he whisper : " I be go to ask you something ; 
 I insist on your answering , yes or no . " he raise his voice , and draw 
 himself back so that they could all see I . 
 " have you be teach like your sister ? " he ask . " have the catechism 
 that have be her religious lesson , for all her life , be your 
 religious lesson , for all your life , too ? " 
 I say : " yes " - and I be in such a rage that I say it out loud . if 
 Philip have hand I his cane , and have advise I to give the young 
 hussy who be answerable for this dreadful state of thing a good 
 beating , I believe I should have do it . Papa turn his back on I and 
 offer the girl a last chance : " do you feel sorry for what you have 
 do ? do you ask to be forgive ? " 
 neither the one nor the other answer he . he call across the room to 
 the teacher : " those two pupil be expel the school . " 
 both the woman look horrified . the elder of the two approach he , 
 and try to plead for a milder sentence . he answer in one stern 
 word : " silence ! " - and leave the schoolroom , without even a pass bow to 
 Philip . and this , after he have cordially shake hand with my poor dear , 
 not half an hour before . 
 I ought to have make affectionate allowance for his nervous misery ; 
 I ought to have run after he , and beg his pardon . there must be 
 something wrong , I be afraid , in girl love anybody but their father . 
 when Helena lead the way out by another door , I run after Philip ; and I 
 ask he to forgive I . 
 I do not   know what I say ; it be all confusion . the fear of have 
 forfeit his fondness must , I suppose , have shake my mind . I remember 
 entreat Helena to say a kind word for I . she be so clever , she 
 have behave so well , she have deserve that Philip should listen to she . 
 " oh , " I cry out to he desperately , " what must you think of I ? " 
 " I will tell you what I think of you , " he say . " it be your father who 
 be in fault , Eunice - not you . nothing could have be in bad taste 
 than his management of that trumpery affair in the schoolroom ; it be 
 a complete mistake from begin to end . make your mind easy ; I do not 
 blame you . " 
 " be you , really and truly , as fond of I as ever ? " 
 " yes , to be sure ! " 
 Helena seem to be hardly as much interested in this happy ending of my 
 anxiety as I might have anticipate . she walk on by herself . perhaps 
 she be think of poor papa 's strange outbreak of excitement , and 
 grieve over it . 
 we have only a little way to walk , before we pass the door of Philip 's 
 hotel . he have not yet receive the expect letter from his father - the 
 cruel letter which might recall he to Ireland . it be then the hour of 
 delivery by our second post ; he go to look at the letter - rack in the 
 hall . Helena see that I be anxious . she be as kind again as ever ; she 
 consent to wait with I for Philip , at the door . 
 he come out to we with an open letter in his hand . 
 " from my father , at last , " he say - and give I the letter to read . it 
 only contain these few line : 
 " do not be alarm , my dear boy , at the change for the bad in my 
 handwriting . I be suffer for my devotion to the studious habit of a 
 lifetime : my right hand be attack by the malady call Writer 's Cramp . 
 the doctor here can do nothing . he tell I of some foreign woman , 
 mention in his newspaper , who cure nervous derangement of all kind 
 by hand - rubbing , and who be come to London . when you next hear from 
 I , I may be in London too . " - there the letter end . 
 of course I know who the foreign woman , mention in the newspaper , be . 
 but what do Miss Jillgall 's friend matter to I ? the one important 
 thing be , that Philip have not be call back to Ireland . here be a 
 fortunate circumstance , which perhaps mean more good luck . I may be 
 Mrs. Philip Dunboyne before the year be out . 
 CHAPTER XXV . HELENA 'S DIARY . 
 they all notice at home that I be look wear and haggard . that hideous 
 old maid , Miss Jillgall , have her malicious welcome ready for I when 
 we meet at breakfast this morning : " Dear Helena , what have become of your 
 beauty ? one would think you have leave it in your room ! " Poor delude 
 Eunice show her sisterly sympathy : " do not   joke about it , Selina : can not 
 you see that Helena be ill ? " 
 I have be ill ; ill of my own wickedness . 
 but the recovery to my tranquillity will bring with it the recovery 
 of my good look . my fatal passion for Philip promise to be the utter 
 destruction of everything that be good in I . well ! what be good in 
 I may not be worth keep . there be a fate in these thing . if I be 
 destine to rob Eunice of the one dear object of her love and hope - how 
 can I resist ? the one kind thing I can do be to keep she in ignorance of 
 what be come , by act of affectionate deceit . 
 besides , if she suffer , I suffer too . in the length and breadth of 
 England , I doubt if there be a much more wicked young woman to be find 
 than myself . be it nothing to feel that , and to endure it as I do ? 
 upon my word , there be no excuse for I ! 
 be this sheer impudence ? no ; it be the bent of my nature . I have a 
 tendency to self - examination , accompany by one merit - I do not   spare 
 myself . 
 there be excuse for Eunice . she live in a fool ' paradise ; and she 
 see in her lover a radiant creature , shin in the halo throw over 
 he by her own self - delusion , nothing of this sort be to be say for I . 
 I see Philip as he be . my penetration look into the low depth 
 of his character - when I be not in his company . there seem to be a 
 foundation of good , somewhere in his nature . he despise and hat 
 himself   he have confess it to I , when Eunice be with he - still 
 believe in her false sweetheart . but how long do these well 
 influence last ? I have only to show myself , in my sister 's absence , 
 and Philip be mine body and soul . his vanity and his weakness take 
 possession of he the moment he see my face . he be one of those 
 man - even in my little experience I have meet with they - who be bear to 
 be lead by woman . if Eunice have possess my strength of character , he 
 would have be true to she for life . 
 ought I not , in justice to myself , to have lift my heart high above 
 the reach of such a creature as this ? certainly I ought ! I know it , I 
 feel it . and yet , there be some fascination in have he which I be 
 absolutely unable to resist . 
 what , I ask myself , have feed the new flame which be burn in I ? do it 
 begin with gratified pride ? I might well feel proud when I find 
 myself admire by a man of his beauty , set off by such manner and such 
 accomplishment as his . or , have the growth of this masterful feeling 
 be encourage by the envy and jealousy stir in I , when I find 
 Eunice   my inferior in every respect   distinguish by the devotion of 
 a handsome lover , and have a brilliant marriage in view - while I be 
 leave neglect , with no prospect of change my title from Miss to Mrs. ? 
 vain inquiry ! my wicked heart seem to have secret of its own , and to 
 keep they a mystery to I . 
 what have become of my excellent education ? I do not   care to inquire ; I 
 have get beyond the reach of good book and religious example . among 
 my other blamable action there may now be reckon disobedience to my 
 father . I have be read novel in secret . 
 at first I try some of the famous English work , publish at a price 
 within the reach of small purse . very well write , no doubt - but with 
 one unpardonable drawback , so far as I be concern . our celebrated 
 native author address themselves to good people , or to penitent people 
 who want to be make good ; not to wicked reader like I . 
 arrive at this conclusion , I try another experiment . in a small 
 bookseller 's shop I discover some cheap translation of french novel . 
 here , I find what I want - sympathy with sin . here , there be 
 open to I a new world inhabit entirely by unrepentant people ; the 
 magnificent woman diabolically beautiful ; the satanic man dead to 
 every sense of virtue , and alive - perhaps rather dirtily alive - to the 
 splendid fascination of crime . I know now that love be above everything 
 but itself . love be the one law that we be bind to obey . how deep ! 
 how console ! how admirably true ! the novelist of England have reason 
 indeed to hide their head before the novelist of France . all that 
 I have feel , and have write here , be inspire by these wonderful 
 author . 
 I have relieve my mind , and may now return to the business of my 
 diary - the record of domestic event . 
 an overwhelming disappointment have fall on Eunice . our dinner - party 
 have be put off . 
 the state of father 's health be answerable for this change in our 
 arrangement . that wretched scene at the school , complicate by my 
 sister 's undutiful behavior at the time , so seriously excite he that 
 he pass a sleepless night , and keep his bedroom throughout the day . 
 Eunice 's total want of discretion add , no doubt , to his suffering : 
 she rudely intrude on he to express her regret and to ask his pardon . 
 have carry her point , she be at leisure to come to I , and to ask 
  how amazingly simple of she !   what she and Philip be to do next . 
 " we have arrange it all so nicely , " the poor wretch begin . " Philip be 
 to have be so clever and agreeable at dinner , and be to have choose 
 his time so very discreetly , that papa would have be ready to listen 
 to anything he say . oh , we should have succeed ; I have not   a doubt of 
 it ! our only hope , Helena , be in you . what be we to do now ? " 
 " wait , " I answer . 
 " wait ? " she repeat , hotly . " be my heart to be break ? and , what be 
 more cruel still , be Philip to be disappoint ? I expect something 
 more sensible , my dear , from you . what possible reason can there be for 
 wait ? " 
 the reason - if I could only have mention it - be beyond dispute . I 
 want time to quiet Philip 's uneasy conscience , and to harden his 
 weak mind against outburst of violence , on Eunice 's part , which would 
 certainly exhibit themselves when she find that she have lose her lover , 
 and lose he to I . in the meanwhile , I have to produce my reason 
 for advise she to wait . it be easily do . I remind she of the 
 irritable condition of our father 's nerve , and give it as my opinion 
 that he would certainly say no , if she be unwise enough to excite he 
 on the subject of Philip , in his present frame of mind . 
 these unanswerable consideration seem to produce the right effect on 
 she . " I suppose you know well , " be all she say . and then she leave I . 
 I let she go without feel any distrust of this act of submission on 
 her part ; it be such a common experience , in my life , to find my 
 sister guide herself by my advice . but experience be not always to 
 be trust . event soon show that I have fail to estimate Eunice 's 
 resource of obstinacy and cunning at their true value . 
 half an hour later I hear the street door close , and look out of 
 the window . Miss Jillgall be leave the house ; no one be with she . 
 my dislike of this person lead I astray once more . I ought to have 
 suspect she of be bent on some mischievous errand , and to have 
 devise some mean of put my suspicion to the test . I do nothing 
 of the kind . in the moment when I turn my head away from the window , 
 Miss Jillgall be a person forget - and I be a person who have make a 
 serious mistake . 
 CHAPTER XXVI . HELENA 's DIARY . 
 the event of to - day begin with the delivery of a message summon I to 
 my father 's study . he have decide - too hastily , as I fear - that he be 
 sufficiently recover to resume his usual employment . I be write 
 to his dictation , when we be interrupt . Maria announce a visit from 
 Mr. Dunboyne . 
 Hitherto Philip have be content to send one of the servant of the 
 hotel to make inquiry after Mr. Gracedieu 's health . why have he now 
 call personally ? notice that father seem to be annoy , I try 
 to make an opportunity of receive Philip myself . " let I see he , " I 
 suggest ; " I can easily say you be engage . " 
 very unwillingly , as it be easy to see , my father decline to allow 
 this . " Mr. Dunboyne 's visit pay I a compliment , " he say ; " and I must 
 receive he . " I make a show of leave the room , and be call back to 
 my chair . " this be not a private interview , Helena ; stay where you be . " 
 Philip come in - handsomer than ever , beautifully dress - and pay his 
 respect to my father with his customary grace . he be too well - breed 
 to allow any visible sign of embarrassment to escape he . but when he 
 shake hand with I , I feel a little trembling in his finger , through 
 the delicate glove which fit he like a second skin . be it the 
 true object of his visit to try the experiment design by Eunice 
 and himself , and defer by the postponement of our dinner - party ? 
 impossible surely that my sister could have practice on his weakness , 
 and persuade he to return to his first love ! I wait , in breathless 
 interest , for his next word . they be not worth listen to . oh , the 
 poor commonplace creature ! 
 " I be glad , Mr. Gracedieu , to see that you be well enough to be in your 
 study again , " he say . the writing material on the table attract his 
 attention . " be I one of the idle people , " he ask , with his charming 
 smile , " who be always interrupt useful employment ? " 
 he speak to my father , and he be answer by my father . not once have 
 he address a word to I - no , not even when we shake hand . I be 
 angry enough to force he into take some notice of I , and to make an 
 attempt to confuse he at the same time . 
 " have you see my sister ? " I ask . 
 " no . " 
 it be the short reply that he could choose . have fling it at I , 
 he still persist in look at my father and speak to my father : 
 " do you think of try change of air , Mr. Gracedieu , when you feel 
 strong enough to travel ? " 
 " my duty keep I here , " father answer ; " and I can not honestly say 
 that I enjoy travel . I dislike manner and custom that be strange 
 to I ; I do not   find that hotel reward I for give up the comfort of 
 my own house . how do you find the hotel here ? " 
 " I submit to the hotel , sir . they be sad savage in the kitchen ; they 
 put mushroom ketchup into their soup , and mustard and cayenne pepper 
 into their salad . I be half - starve at dinner - time , but I do not 
 complain . " 
 every word he say be an offense to I . with or without reason , I 
 attack he again . 
 " I have hear you acknowledge that the landlord and landlady be very 
 oblige people , " I say . " why do not   you ask they to let you make your 
 own soup and mix your own salad ? " 
 I wonder whether I should succeed in attract his notice , after 
 this . even in these private page , my self - esteem find it hard to 
 confess what happen . I succeed in remind Philip that he have his 
 reason for request I to leave the room . 
 " will you excuse I , Miss Helena , " he say , " if I ask leave to speak to 
 Mr. Gracedieu in private ? " 
 the right thing for I to do be , let I hope , the thing that I do . 
 I rise , and wait to see if my father would interfere . he look at 
 Philip with suspicion in his face , as well as surprise . " may I ask , " he 
 say , coldly , " what be the object of the interview ? " 
 " certainly , " Philip answer , " when we be alone . " this cool reply 
 place my father between two alternative ; he must either give way , or 
 be guilty of an act of rudeness to a guest in his own house . the choice 
 reserve for I be narrow still - I have to decide between be tell 
 to go , or go of my own accord . of course , I leave they together . 
 the door which communicate with the next room be pull to , but not 
 close . on the other side of it , I find Eunice . 
 " listen ! " I say , in a whisper . 
 " yes , " she whisper back . " you listen , too ! " 
 I be so indignant with Philip , and so seriously interested in what be 
 go on in the study , that I yield to temptation . we both degrade 
 ourselves . we both listen . 
 Eunice 's base lover speak first . judge by the change in his voice , he 
 must have see something in my father 's face that daunt he . Eunice 
 hear it , too . " he be get nervous , " she whisper ; " he will forget to 
 say the right thing at the right time . " 
 " Mr. Gracedieu , " Philip begin , " I wish to speak to you - " 
 Father interrupt he : " we be alone now , Mr. Dunboyne . I want to know 
 why you consult I in private ? " 
 " I be anxious to consult you , sir , on a subject - " 
 " on what subject ? any religious difficulty ? " 
 " no . " 
 " anything I can do for you in the town ? " 
 " not at all . if you will only allow I - " 
 " I be still wait , sir , to know what it be about . " 
 Philip 's voice suddenly become an angry voice . " once for all , Mr. 
 Gracedieu , " he say , " will you let I speak ? it be about your daughter - " 
 " no more of it , Mr. Dunboyne ! "   my father be now as loud as Philip .   " I 
 do not   desire to hold a private conversation with you on the subject of 
 my daughter . " 
 " if you have any personal objection to I , sir , be so good as to state 
 it plainly . " 
 " you have no right to ask I to do that . " 
 " you refuse to do it ? " 
 " positively . " 
 " you be not very civil , Mr. Gracedieu . " 
 " if I speak without ceremony , Mr. Dunboyne , you have yourself to thank 
 for it . " 
 Philip reply to this in a tone of savage irony . " you be a minister 
 of religion , and you be an old man . two privilege - and you presume on 
 they both . good - morning . " 
 I draw back into a corner , just in time to escape discovery in the 
 character of a listener . Eunice never move . when Philip dash into the 
 room , bang the door after he , she throw herself impulsively on his 
 breast : " oh , Philip ! Philip ! what have you do ? why do not   you keep 
 your temper ? " 
 " do you hear what your father say to I ? " he ask . 
 " yes , dear ; but you ought to have control yourself - you ought , 
 indeed , for my sake . " 
 her arm be still round he . it strike I that he feel her influence . 
 " if you wish I to recover myself , " he say , gently , " you have well let 
 I go . " 
 " oh , how cruel , Philip , to leave I when I be so wretched ! why do you 
 want to go ? " 
 " you tell I just now what I ought to do , " he answer , still 
 restrain himself . " if I be to get the well of my temper , I must be 
 leave alone . " 
 " I never say anything about your temper , darling . " 
 " do not   you tell I to control myself ? " 
 " oh , yes ! go back to papa , and beg he to forgive you . " 
 " I will see he damn first ! " 
 if ever a stupid girl deserve such an answer as this , the girl be 
 my sister . I have hitherto   with some difficulty   refrain from 
 interfering . but when Eunice try to follow Philip out of the house , I 
 could hesitate no long ; I hold she back . " you fool , " I say ; " have not 
 you make mischief enough already ? " 
 " what be I to do ? " she burst out , helplessly . 
 " do what I tell you to do yesterday - wait . " 
 before she could reply , or I could say anything more , the door that lead 
 to the landing be open softly and slyly , and Miss Jillgall peep 
 in . Eunice instantly leave I , and run to the meddle old maid . they 
 whisper to each other . Miss Jillgall 's skinny arm encircle my 
 sister 's waist ; they disappear together . 
 I be only too glad to get rid of they both , and to take the opportunity 
 of write to Philip . I insist on an explanation of his conduct while 
 I be in the study - to be give within an hour 's time , at a place which 
 I appoint . " you be not to attempt to justify yourself in writing , " 
 I add in conclusion . " let your reply merely inform I if you can keep 
 the appointment . the rest , when we meet . " 
 Maria take the letter to the hotel , with instruction to wait . 
 Philip 's reply reach I without delay . it pledge he to justify 
 himself as I have desire , and to keep the appointment . my own belief be 
 that the event of to - day will decide his future and mine . 
 CHAPTER XXVII . EUNICE 's DIARY . 
 indeed , I be a most unfortunate creature ; everything turn out badly 
 with I . my good , true friend , my dear Selina , have become the object of 
 a hateful doubt in my secret mind . I be afraid she be keep something 
 from I . 
 talk with she about my trouble , I hear for the first time that she 
 have write again to Mrs. Tenbruggen . the object of her letter be to 
 tell her friend of my engagement to young Mr. Dunboyne . I ask she why 
 she have do this . the answer inform I that there be no knowing , in 
 the present state of my affair , how soon I might not want the help of a 
 clever woman . I ought , I suppose , to have be satisfied with this . but 
 there seem to be something not fully explain yet . 
 then again , after tell Selina what I hear in the study , and how 
 roughly Philip have speak to I afterward , I ask she what she think 
 of it . she make an incomprehensible reply : " my sweet child , I must not 
 think of it - I be too fond of you . " 
 it be impossible to make she explain what this mean . she begin to talk 
 of Philip ; assure I   which be quite needless   that she have do 
 her good to fortify and encourage he , before he call on papa . when 
 I ask she to help I in another way - that be to say , when I want to 
 find out where Philip be at that moment - she have no advice to give I . 
 I tell she that I should not enjoy a moment 's ease of mind until I and 
 my dear one be reconcile . she only shake her head and declare that 
 she be sorry for I . when I hit on the idea of ring for Maria , this 
 little woman , so bright , and quick and eager to help I at other time , 
 say " I leave it to you , dear , " and turn to the piano   close to which 
 I be sit , and play softly and badly stupid little tune . 
 " Maria , do you open the door for Mr. Dunboyne when he go away just 
 now ? " 
 " no , miss . " 
 nothing but ill - luck for I ! if I have be leave to my own device , I 
 should now have let the housemaid go . but Selina contrive to give I 
 a hint , on a strange plan of her own . still at the piano , she begin 
 to confuse talk to herself with play to herself . the note go 
  tinkle , tinkle - and the tongue mix up word with the note in this 
 way : " perhaps they have be talk in the kitchen about Philip ? " 
 the suggestion be not lose on I . I say to Maria - who be stand at 
 the other end of the room , near the door - " do you happen to hear which 
 way Mr. Dunboyne go when he leave we ? " 
 " I know where he be , miss , half an hour ago . " 
 " where be he ? " 
 " at the hotel . " 
 Selina go on with her hint in the same way as before . " how do she 
 know - ah , how do she know ? " be the vocal part of the performance this 
 time . my clever inquiry follow the vocal part as before : 
 " how do you know that Mr. Dunboyne be at the hotel ? " 
 " I be send there with a letter for he , and wait for the answer . " 
 there be no suggestion require this time . the one possible question 
 be : " who send you ? " 
 Maria reply , after first reserve a condition : " you will not   tell upon 
 I , miss ? " 
 I promise not to tell . Selina suddenly leave off play . 
 " well , " I repeat , " who send you ? " 
 " Miss Helena . " 
 Selina look round at I . her little eye seem to have suddenly 
 become big , they star I so strangely in the face . I do not   know 
 whether she be in a state of fright or of wonder . as for myself , I 
 simply lose the use of my tongue . Maria , have no more question to 
 answer , discreetly leave we together . 
 why should Helena write to Philip at all - and especially without 
 mention it to I ? here be a riddle which be more than I could 
 guess . I ask Selina to help I . she might at least have try , I 
 think ; but she look uneasy , and make excuse . 
 I say : " suppose I go to Helena , and ask she why she write to Philip ? " 
 and Selina say : " suppose you do , dear . " 
 I rang for Maria once more : " do you know where my sister be ? " 
 " just go out , miss . " 
 there be no help for it but to wait till she come back , and to 
 get through the time in the interval as I good might . but for one 
 circumstance , I might not have know what to do . the truth be , there be 
 a feeling of shame in I when I remember have listen at the study 
 door . curious notion come into one 's head - one do not   know how or why . 
 it strike I that I might make a kind of atonement for have be mean 
 enough to listen , if I go to papa , and offer to keep he company 
 in his solitude . if we fall into pleasant talk , I have a sly idea of my 
 own - I mean to put in a good word for poor Philip . 
 when I confide my design to Selina , she shut up the piano and run 
 across the room to I . but somehow she be not like her old self again , 
 yet . 
 " you good little soul , you be always right . look at I again , Euneece . 
 be you begin to doubt I ? oh , my darling , do not   do that ! it be not 
 use I fairly . I can not   bear it - I can not   bear it ! " 
 I take her hand ; I be on the point of speak to she with the kindness 
 she deserve from I . on a sudden she snatch her hand away and run 
 back to the piano . when she be seat on the music - stool , her face be 
 hide from I . at that moment she break into a strange cry - it begin 
 like a laugh , and it end like a sob . 
 " go away to papa ! do not   mind I - I be a creature of impulse - ha ! ha ! 
 ha ! a little hysterical - the state of the weather - I get rid of these 
 weakness , my dear , by sing to myself . I have a favorite song : 
 ' my heart be light , my will be free . ' - go away ! oh , for God 's sake , go 
 away ! " 
 I have hear of hysteric , of course ; know nothing about they , 
 however , by my own experience . what could have happen to agitate she 
 in this extraordinary manner ? 
 have Helena 's letter anything to do with it ? be my sister indignant with 
 Philip for swear in my presence ; and have she write he an angry 
 letter , in her zeal on my behalf ? but Selina could not possibly have 
 see the letter - and Helena   who be often hard on I when I do stupid 
 thing   show little indulgence for I , when I be so unfortunate as to 
 irritate Philip . I give up the hopeless attempt to get at the truth 
 by guess , and go away to forget my trouble , if I could , in my 
 father 's society . 
 after knock twice at the door of the study , and receive no reply , I 
 venture to look in . 
 the sofa in this room stand opposite the door . Papa be rest on it , 
 but not in comfort . there be twitch movement in his foot , and he 
 shift his arm this way and that as if no restful posture could he 
 find for they . but what frighten I be this . his eye , star 
 straight at the door by which I have go in , have an inquire 
 expression , as if he actually do not know I ! I stand midway between 
 the door and the sofa , doubtful about go near to he . 
 he say : " who be it ? " this to I - to his own daughter . he say : " what do 
 you want ? " 
 I really could not bear it . I go up to he . I say : " Papa , have you 
 forget Eunice ? " 
 my name seem   if one may say such a thing   to bring he to himself 
 again . he sit upon the sofa - and laugh as he answer I . 
 " my dear child , what delusion have get into that pretty little head of 
 your ? Fancy her think that I have forget my own daughter ! I be 
 lose in thought , Eunice . for the moment , I be what they call an absent 
 man . do I ever tell you the story of the absent man ? he go to call 
 upon some acquaintance of his ; and when the servant say , ' what 
 name , sir ? ' he could not   answer . he be oblige to confess that he have 
 forget his own name . the servant say , ' that be very strange . ' the 
 absent man at once recover himself . ' that be it ! ' he say : ' my name be 
 strange . ' droll , be not   it ? if I have be call on a friend to - day , 
 I daresay I might have forget my name , too . much to think of , 
 Eunice - too much to think of . " 
 leave the sofa with a sigh , as if he be tired of it , he begin walk 
 up and down . he seem to be still in good spirit . " well , my dear , " he 
 say , " what can I do for you ? " 
 " I come here , papa to see if there be anything I could do for you . " 
 he look at some sheet of paper , string together , and lay on the 
 table . they be cover with writing   from his dictation   in my 
 sister 's hand . " I ought to get on with my work , " he say . " where be 
 Helena ? " 
 I tell he that she have go out , and beg leave to try what I could 
 do to supply her place . 
 the request seem to please he ; but he want time to think . I wait ; 
 notice that his face grow gradually worried and anxious . there come 
 a vacant look into his eye which it grieve I to see ; he appear to 
 have quite lose himself again . " read the last page , " he say , point 
 to the manuscript on the table ; " I do not   remember where I leave off . " 
 I turn to the last page . as well as I could tell , it relate to some 
 publication , which he be recommend to religious person of our way 
 of thinking . 
 before I have read half - way through it , he begin to dictate , speak so 
 rapidly that my pen be not always able to follow he . my handwriting be 
 as bad as bad can be when I be hurry . to make matter bad still , I 
 be confuse . what he be now say seem to have nothing to do with 
 what I have be read . 
 let I try if I can call to mind the substance of it . 
 he begin in the most strangely sudden way by ask : " why should there 
 be any fear of discovery , when every possible care have be take to 
 prevent it ? the danger from unexpected event be far more disquieting . 
 a man might find himself bind in honor to disclose what it have be 
 the chief anxiety of his life to conceal . for example , could he let an 
 innocent person be the victim of deliberate suppression of the truth - no 
 matter how justifiable that suppression might appear to be ? on the other 
 hand , dreadful consequence might follow an honorable confession . 
 there might be a cruel sacrifice of tender affection ; there might be a 
 shocking betrayal of innocent hope and trust . " 
 I remember those last word , just as he dictate they , because he 
 suddenly stop there ; look , poor dear , distressed and confused . he 
 put his hand to his head , and go back to the sofa . 
 " I be tired , " he say . " wait for I while I rest . " 
 in a few minute he fall asleep . it be a deep repose that come to he 
 now ; and , though I do not   think it last much long than half an hour , 
 it produce a wonderful change in he for the well when he wake . he 
 speak quietly and kindly ; and when he return to I at the table and 
 look at the page on which I have be write , he smile . 
 " oh , my dear , what bad writing ! I declare I can not   read what I myself 
 tell you to write . no ! no ! do not   be downhearted about it . you be not 
 use to write from dictation ; and I daresay I have be too quick 
 for you . " he kiss I and encourage I . " you know how fond I be of my 
 little girl , " he say ; " I be afraid I like my Eunice just the least in 
 the world more than I like my Helena . ah , you be begin to look a 
 little happy now ! " 
 he have fill I with such confidence and such pleasure that I could 
 not help think of my sweetheart . oh dear , when shall I learn to be 
 distrustful of my own feeling ? the temptation to say a good word for 
 Philip quite master any little discretion that I possess . 
 I say to papa : " if you know how to make I happy than I have ever 
 be in all my life before , would you do it ? " 
 " of course I would . " 
 " then send for Philip , dear , and be a little kind to he , this time . " 
 his pale face turn red with anger ; he push I away from he . 
 " that man again ! " he burst out . " be I never to hear the last of he ? go 
 away , Eunice . you be of no use here . " he take up my unfortunate page of 
 writing and ridicule it with a bitter laugh . " what be this fit for ? " he 
 crumple it up in his hand and toss it into the fire . 
 I run out of the room in such a state of mortification that I hardly 
 know what I be about . if some hard - hearted person have come to I with 
 a cup of poison , and have say : " eunice , you be not fit to live any 
 long ; take this , " I do believe I should have take it . if I think of 
 anything , I think of go back to Selina . my ill luck still pursue 
 I ; she have disappear . I look about in a helpless way , completely at 
 a loss what to do next - so stupefied , I may even say , that it be some 
 time before I notice a little three - cornered note on the table by which 
 I be stand . the note be address to I : 
 " ever - dearest euneece - I have try to make myself useful to you , and 
 have fail . but how can I see the sad sight of your wretchedness , and 
 not feel the impulse to try again ? I have go to the hotel to find 
 Philip , and to bring he back to you a penitent and faithful man . wait 
 for I , and hope for great thing . a. hundred thousand kiss to my 
 sweet Euneece . 
 " S. J. " 
 wait for she , after read that note ! how could she expect it ? I have 
 only to follow she , and to find Philip . in another minute , I be on my 
 way to the hotel . 
 CHAPTER XXVIII . HELENA 's DIARY . 
 look at the last entry in my Journal , I see myself anticipate 
 that the event of to - day will decide Philip 's future and mine . this have 
 prove prophetic . all further concealment be now at an end . 
 force to it by fate , or help to it by chance , Eunice have make the 
 discovery of her lover 's infidelity . " in all human probability "   as my 
 father say in his sermon , we two sister be enemy for life . 
 I be not suspect , as Eunice be , of make appointment with a 
 sweetheart . so I be free to go out alone , and to go where I please . 
 Philip and I be punctual to our appointment this afternoon . 
 our place of meeting be in a secluded corner of the town park . we 
 find a rustic seat in our retirement , set up   one would suppose   as a 
 concession to the taste of visitor who be fond of solitude . the view 
 in front of we be bound by the park wall and railing , and our seat 
 be prettily approach on one side by a plantation of young tree . no 
 entrance gate be near ; no carriage road cross the grass . a more safe 
 and more solitary nook for conversation , between two person desire to 
 be alone , it would be hard to find in most public park . lover be say 
 to know it well , and to be especially fond of it toward evening . we 
 be there in broad daylight , and we have the seat to ourselves . 
 my memory of what pass between we be , in some degree , disturb by the 
 formidable interruption which bring our talk to an end . 
 but among other thing , I remember that I show he no mercy at the 
 outset . at one time I be indignant ; at another I be scornful . I 
 declare , in regard to my object in meet he , that I have change my 
 mind , and have decide to shorten a disagreeable interview by waive my 
 right to an explanation , and bid he farewell . eunice , as I point 
 out , have the first claim to he ; Eunice be much more likely to suit 
 he , as a companion for life , than I be . " in short , " I say , in 
 conclusion , " my inclination for once take side with my duty , and 
 leave my sister in undisturbed possession of young Mr. Dunboyne . " with 
 this satirical explanation , I rise to say good - by . 
 I have merely intend to irritate he . he show a superiority to anger 
 for which I be not prepare . 
 " be so kind as to sit down again , " he say quietly . 
 he take my letter from his pocket , and point to that part of it which 
 allude to his conduct , when we have meet in my father 's study . 
 " you have offer I the opportunity of say a word in my own 
 defense , " he go on . " I prize that privilege far too highly to consent 
 to your withdraw it , merely because you have change your mind . let 
 I at least tell you what my errand be , when I call on your father . 
 love you , and you only , I have force myself to make a last effort 
 to be true to your sister . remember that , Helena , and then say - be it 
 wonderful if I be beside myself , when I find you in the study ? " 
 " when you tell I you be beside yourself , " I say , " do you mean , 
 ashamed of yourself ? " 
 that touch he . " I mean nothing of the kind , " he burst out . " after the 
 hell on earth in which I have be live between you two sister , a man 
 have not   virtue enough leave in he to be ashamed . he be half mad - that be 
 what he be . look at my position ! I have make up my mind never to see you 
 again ; I have make up my mind   if I marry Eunice   to rid myself of my 
 own miserable life when I could endure it no long . in that state 
 of feeling , when my sense of duty depend on my speaking with Mr. 
 Gracedieu alone , whose be the first face I see when I enter the room ? 
 if I have dare to look at you , or to speak to you , what do you think 
 would have become of my resolution to sacrifice myself ? " 
 " what have become of it now ? " I ask . 
 " tell I first if I be forgive , " he say - " and you shall know . " 
 " do you deserve to be forgive ? " 
 it have be discover by wise head than mine that weak people be 
 always in extreme . so far , I have see Philip in the vain and violent 
 extreme . he now shift suddenly to the sad and submissive extreme . when 
 I ask he if he deserve to be forgive , he make the humblest of all 
 reply - he sigh and say nothing . 
 " if I do my duty to my sister , " I remind he , " I should refuse to 
 forgive you , and send you back to Eunice . " 
 " your father 's language and your father 's conduct , " he answer , " have 
 release I from that entanglement . I can never go back to Eunice . if 
 you refuse to forgive I , neither you nor she will see anything more of 
 Philip Dunboyne ; I promise you that . be you satisfied now ? " 
 after hold out against he resolutely , I feel myself begin to 
 yield . when a man have once take their fancy , what helplessly weak 
 creature woman be ! I see through his vacillate weakness - and yet 
 I trust he , with both eye open . my look - glass be opposite to I 
 while I write . it show I a contemptible Helena . I lie , and say I be 
 satisfied - to please he . 
 " be I forgive ? " he ask . 
 it be absurd to put it on record . of course , I forgave he . what a good 
 Christian I be , after all ! 
 he take my willing hand . " my lovely darling , " he say , " our marriage 
 rest with you . whether your father approve of it or not , say the word ; 
 claim I , and I be yours for life . " 
 I must have be infatuate by his voice and his look ; my heart must 
 have be burn under the pressure of his hand on mine . be it my 
 modesty or my self - control that desert I ? I let he take I in his 
 arm . again , and again , and again I kiss he . we be deaf to what we 
 ought to have hear ; we be blind to what we ought to have see . before 
 we be conscious of a movement among the tree , we be discover . 
 my sister fly at I like a wild animal . her furious hand fasten 
 themselves on my throat . Philip start to his foot . when he touch 
 she , in the act of force she back from I , Eunice 's rag strength 
 become utter weakness in an instant . her arm fall helpless at her 
 side - her head droop - she look at he in silence which be 
 dreadful , at such a moment as that . he shrink from the unendurable 
 reproach in those tearless eye . meanly , he turn away from she . 
 meanly , I follow he . look back for an instant , I see her step 
 forward ; perhaps to stop he , perhaps to speak to he . the effort be 
 too much for her strength ; she stagger back against the trunk of a 
 tree . like stranger , walk separate one from the other , we leave she 
 to her companion - the hideous traitress who be my enemy and her friend . 
 CHAPTER XXIX . HELENA 's DIARY . 
 on reach the street which lead to Philip 's hotel , we speak to each 
 other for the first time . 
 " what be we to do ? " I say . 
 " leave this place , " he answer . 
 " together ? " I ask . 
 " yes . " 
 to leave we   for a while , after what have happen , might be the wise 
 thing which a man , in Philip 's critical position , could do . but if I 
 go with he - unprovided as I be with any friend of my own sex , whose 
 character and presence might sanction the step I have take - I should be 
 lose beyond redemption . be any man that ever live worth that sacrifice ? 
 I think of my father 's house close to I , and of our friend ashame 
 of I . I have own , in some early part of my Journal , that I be not 
 very patient under domestic care . but the possibility of Eunice be 
 appoint housekeeper , with my power , in my place , be more than I could 
 calmly contemplate . " no , " I say to Philip . " your absence , at such a 
 time as this , may help we both ; but , come what may of it , I must remain 
 at home . " 
 he yield , without an attempt to make I alter my mind . there be a 
 sullen submission in his manner which it be not pleasant to see . be he 
 despair already of himself and of I ? have Eunice arouse the watchful 
 demon of shame and remorse ? 
 " perhaps you be right , " he say , gloomily . " good - by . " 
 my anxiety put the all - important question to he without hesitation . 
 " be it good - by forever , Philip ? " 
 his reply instantly relieve I : " God forbid ! " 
 but I want more : " you still love I ? " I persist . 
 " more dearly than ever ! " 
 " and yet you leave I ! " 
 he turn pale . " I leave you because I be afraid . " 
 " Afraid of what ? " 
 " afraid to face Eunice again . " 
 the only possible way out of our difficulty that I could see , now 
 occur to I . " suppose my sister can be prevail on to give you up ? " 
 I suggest . " would you come back to we in that case ? " 
 " certainly ! " 
 " and you would ask my father to consent to our marriage ? " 
 " on the day of my return , if you like . " 
 " suppose obstacle get in our way , " I say - ' suppose time pass and 
 try your patience - will you still consider yourself engaged to I ? " 
 " engage to you , " he answer , " in spite of obstacle and in spite of 
 time . " 
 " and while you be away from I , " I venture to add , " we shall write to 
 each other ? " 
 " go where I may , " he say , " you shall always hear from I . " 
 I could ask no more , and he could concede no more . the impression 
 evidently leave on he by Eunice 's terrible outbreak , be far more 
 serious than I have anticipate . I be myself depressed and ill at 
 ease . no expression of tenderness be exchange between we . there be 
 something horrible in our barren farewell . we merely clasp hand , at 
 parting . he go his way - and I go mine . 
 there be some occasion when woman set an example of courage to man . I 
 be ready to endure whatever might happen to I , when I get home . what 
 a desperate wretch ! some people might say , if they could look into this 
 diary ! 
 Maria open the door ; she tell I that my sister have already return , 
 accompany by Miss Jillgall . there have be apparently some difference 
 of opinion between they , before they enter the house . Eunice 
 have attempt to go on to some other place ; and Miss Jillgall 
 have remonstrate . Maria have hear she say : " no , you would degrade 
 yourself " - and , with that , she have lead Eunice indoor . I understand , of 
 course , that my sister have be prevent from follow Philip to the 
 hotel . there be probably a serious quarrel in store for I . I go 
 straight to the bedroom , expect to find Eunice there , and prepare 
 to brave the storm that might burst on I . there be a woman at Eunice 's 
 end of the room , remove dress from the wardrobe . I could only see 
 she back , but it be impossible to mistake that figure - Miss Jillgall . 
 she lay the dress on Eunice 's bed , without take the slight 
 notice of I . in significant silence I point to the door . she go 
 on as coolly with her occupation as if the room have be , not mine but 
 her ; I step up to she , and speak plainly . 
 " you oblige I to remind you , " I say , " that you be not in your own 
 room . " there , I wait a little , and find that I have produce no 
 effect . " with every disposition , " I resume , " to make allowance for 
 the disagreeable peculiarity of your character , I can not consent to 
 overlook an act of intrusion , commit by a Spy . now , do you understand 
 I ? " 
 she look round she . " I see no third person here , " she say . " may I ask 
 if you mean I ? " 
 " I mean you . " 
 " will you be so good , Miss Helena , as to explain yourself ? " 
 moderation of language would have be throw away on this woman . " you 
 follow I to the park , " I say . " it be you who find I with Mr. 
 Dunboyne , and betray I to my sister . you be a Spy , and you know it . 
 at this very moment you dare not   look I in the face . " 
 her insolence force its way out of she at last . let I record it - and 
 repay it , when the time come . 
 " quite true , " she reply . " if I venture to look you in the face , I be 
 afraid I might forget myself . I have always be bring up like a lady , 
 and I wish to show it even in the company of such a wretch as you be . 
 there be not one word of truth in what you have say of I . I go to 
 the hotel to find Mr. Dunboyne . ah , you may sneer ! I have not   get your 
 good look - and a vile use you have make of they . my object be to 
 recall that base young man to his duty to my dear charming injure 
 Euneece . the hotel servant tell I that Mr. Dunboyne have go out . oh , 
 I have the mean of persuasion in my pocket ! the man direct I to the 
 park , as he have already direct Mr. Dunboyne . it be only when I have 
 find the place , that I hear some one behind I . poor innocent Euneece 
 have follow I to the hotel , and have get her direction , as I have get 
 mine . God know how hard I try to persuade she to go back , and how 
 horribly frightened I be - no ! I will not   distress myself by say a word 
 more . it would be too humiliating to let you see an honest woman in 
 tear . your sister have a spirit of her own , thank God ! she will not   inhabit 
 the same room with you ; she never desire to see your false face again . 
 I take the poor soul 's dress and thing away - and as a religious 
 person I wait , confidently wait , for the judgment that will fall on 
 you ! " 
 she catch up the dress all together ; some of they be in her arm , 
 some of they fall on her shoulder , and one of they tower over her 
 head . smothered in gown , she bounce out of the room like a walking 
 milliner 's shop . I have to thank the wretched old creature for a moment 
 of genuine amusement , at a time of devour anxiety . the mean 
 insect , they say , have its use in this world - and why not Miss Jillgall ? 
 in half an hour more , an unexpected event raise my spirit . I hear 
 from Philip . 
 on his return to the hotel he have find a telegram wait for he . Mr. 
 Dunboyne the elder have arrive in London ; and Philip have arrange to 
 join his father by the next train . he send I the address , and beg 
 that I would write and tell he my news from home by the next day 's 
 post . 
 welcome , thrice welcome , to Mr. Dunboyne the elder ! if Philip can 
 manage , under my advice , to place I favorably in the estimation of this 
 rich old man , his presence and authority may do for we what we can not 
 do for ourselves . here be surely an influence to which my father must 
 submit , no matter how unreasonable or how angry he may be when he hear 
 what have happen . I begin already to feel hopeful of the future . 
 CHAPTER XXX . EUNICE 's DIARY . 
 through the day , and through the night , I feel a misery that never 
 leave I - I mean the misery of fear . 
 I be try to find out some harmless mean of employ myself , which 
 will keep evil remembrance from I . if I do not   succeed , my fear tell 
 I what will happen . I shall be in danger of go mad . 
 I dare not confide in any live creature . I do not   know what other 
 person might think of I , or how soon I might find myself perhaps in an 
 asylum . in this helpless condition , doubt and fright seem to be drive 
 I back to my Journal . I wonder whether I shall find harmless employment 
 here . 
 I have hear of old people lose their memory . what would I not give 
 to be old ! I remember ! oh , how I remember ! one day after another I see 
 Philip , I see Helena , as I first see they when I be among the tree in 
 the park . my sweetheart 's arm , that once hold I , hold my sister now . 
 she kiss he , kiss he , kiss he . 
 be there no way of make myself see something else ? I want to get back 
 to remembrance that do not   burn in my head and tear at my heart . how be 
 it to be do ? 
 I have try book - no ! I have try go out to look at the shop - no ! 
 I have try say my prayer - no ! and now I be make my last effort ; 
 try my pen . my black letter fall from it , and take their place 
 on the white paper . will my black letter help I ? where can I find 
 something console to write down ? where ? where ? 
 Selina - poor Selina , so fond of I , so sorry for I . when I be happy , 
 she be happy , too . it be always amusing to hear her talk . oh , my 
 memory , be good to I ! save I from Philip and Helena . I want to 
 remember the pleasant day when my kind little friend and I use to 
 gossip in the garden . 
 no : the day in the garden will not   come back . what else can I think of ? 
 ....... 
 the recollection that I try to encourage keep away from I . the other 
 recollection that I dread , come crowd back . still Philip ! still 
 Helena ! 
 but Selina mix herself up with they . let I try again if I can think 
 of Selina . 
 how delightfully good to I and patient with I she be , on our dismal 
 way home from the park ! and how affectionately she excuse herself for 
 not have warn I of it , when she first suspect that my own sister 
 and my bad enemy be one and the same ! 
 " I know I be wrong , my dear , to let my love and pity close my lip . 
 but remember how happy you be at the time . the thought of make you 
 miserable be more than I could endure - I be so fond of you ! yes ; I 
 begin to suspect they , on the day when they first meet at the station . 
 and , I be afraid , I think it just likely that you might be as cunning 
 as I be , and have notice they , too . " 
 oh , how ignorant she must have be of my true thought and feeling ! 
 how strangely people seem to misunderstand their dear friend ! 
 knowing , as I do , that I could never love any man but Philip , could I 
 be wicked enough to suppose that Philip would love any woman but I ? 
 I explain to Selina how he have speak to I , when we be walk 
 together on the bank of the river . shall I ever forget those exquisite 
 word ? " I wish I be a well man , Eunice ; I wish I be good enough to 
 be worthy of you . " I ask Selina if she think he be deceive I 
 when he say that . she comfort I by own that he must have be in 
 earnest , at the time - and then she distress I by give the reason 
 why . 
 " my love , you must have innocently say something to he , when you 
 and he be alone , which touch his conscience   when he have a 
 conscience , and make he ashamed of himself . ah , you be too fond of 
 he to see how he change for the bad , when your vile sister join 
 you , and take possession of he again . it make my heart ache to see 
 you so unsuspicious of they . you ask I , my poor dear , if they have 
 quarrel - you believe they be tired of walk by the river , when it 
 be you they be tired of - and you wonder why Helena take he to see 
 the school . my child ! she be the lead spirit at the school , and you 
 be nobody . her vanity see the chance of make he compare you at a 
 disadvantage with your clever sister . I declare , Euneece , I lose my head 
 if I only think of it ! all the strong point in my character seem to 
 slip away from I . would you believe it ? - I have neglect that sweet 
 infant at the cottage ; I have even let Mrs. Molly have her baby back 
 again . if I have the making of the law , Philip Dunboyne and Helena 
 Gracedieu should be hang together on the same gallow . I see I shock 
 you . do not   let we talk of it ! oh , do not   let we talk of it ! " 
 and here be I write of it ! what I have determine not to do , be what I 
 have do . be I lose my sens already ? the very name that I be most 
 anxious to keep out of my memory stare I in the face in the line that 
 I have just write . Philip again ! Helena again ! 
 ....... 
 another day , and something new that must and will be remember , shrink 
 from it as I may . this afternoon , I meet Helena on the stair . 
 she stop , and eye I with a wicked smile ; she hold out her hand . 
 " we be likely to meet often , while we be in the same house , " she say ; 
 " have not   we well consult appearance , and pretend to be as fond of each 
 other as ever ? " 
 I take no notice of her hand ; I take no notice of her shameless 
 proposal . she try again : " after all , it be not   my fault if Philip like 
 I well than he like you . do not   you see that ? " I still refuse to 
 speak to she . she still persist . " how black you look , Eunice ! be you 
 sorry you do not   kill I , when you have your hand on my throat ? " 
 I say : " yes . " 
 she laugh , and leave I . I be oblige to sit down on the stair - I 
 tremble so . my own reply frighten I . I try to find out why I have 
 say yes . I do not   remember be conscious of mean anything . it be 
 as if somebody else have say yes - not I. perhaps I be provoke , and the 
 word escape I before I could stop it . could I have stop it ? I do not 
 know . 
 ....... 
 another sleepless night . 
 do I pass the miserable hour in write letter to Philip and then 
 tear they up ? or do I only fancy that I write to he ? I have just 
 look at the fireplace . the torn paper in it tell I that I do write . 
 why do I destroy my letter ? I might have send one of they to Philip . 
 after what have happen ? oh , no ! no ! 
 have be many day away from the girl ' Scripture Class , it seem to 
 be possible that go back to the school and the teaching might help I 
 to escape from myself . 
 nothing succeed with I . I find it impossible to instruct the girl as 
 usual ; their stupidity soon reach the limit of my patience - suffocate 
 I with rage . one of they , a poor , fat , feeble creature , begin to cry 
 when I scold she . I look with envy at the tear roll over her 
 big round cheek . if I could only cry , I might perhaps bear my hard fate 
 with submission . 
 I walk toward home by a roundabout way ; feel as if want of sleep 
 be kill I by inch . 
 in the High Street , I see Helena ; she be post a letter , and be 
 not aware that I be near she . leave the post - office , she cross 
 the street , and narrowly escape be run over . suppose the threaten 
 accident have really take place - how should I have feel , if it have end 
 fatally ? what a fool I be to be put question to myself about thing 
 that have not happen ! 
 the walking tire I ; I go straight home . 
 before I could ring the bell , the house door open , and the doctor 
 come out . he stop to speak to I . while I have be away   he say , 
 something have happen at home   he neither know nor wish to know what 
 which have throw my father into a state of violent agitation . the doctor 
 have administer compose medicine . " my patient be asleep now , " he tell 
 I ; " but remember what I say to you the last time we meet ; a long rest 
 than any doctor 's prescription can give he be what he want . you be 
 not look well yourself , my dear . what be the matter ? " 
 I tell he of my wretched restless night ; and ask if I might take 
 some of the compose medicine which he have give to my father . he 
 forbid I to touch a drop of it . " what be physic for your father , you 
 foolish child , be not physic for a young creature like you , " he say . 
 " count a thousand , if you can not   sleep to - night , or turn your pillow . I 
 wish you pleasant dream . " he go away , amuse at his own humor . 
 I find Selina wait to speak with I , on the subject of poor papa . 
 she have be startle on hear his voice , loud in anger . in the 
 fear that something serious have happen , she leave her room to make 
 inquiry , and see Helena on the landing of the flight of stair 
 beneath , leave the study . after wait till my sister be out of the 
 way , Selina venture to present herself at the study door , and to ask 
 if she could be of any use . my father , walk excitedly up and down the 
 room , declare that both his daughter have behave infamously , and that 
 he would not suffer they to speak to he again until they have come to 
 their sens , on the subject of Mr. Dunboyne . he would enter into no 
 further explanation ; and he have order , rather than request , Selina 
 to leave he . have obey , she try next to find I , and have 
 just look into the dining - room to see if I be there , when she be 
 frighten by the sound of a fall in the room above - that be to say , in 
 the study . run upstairs again , she have find he insensible on the 
 floor and have send for the doctor . 
 " and mind this , " Selina continue , " the person who have do the mischief 
 be the person whom I see leave the study . what your unnatural sister 
 say to provoke her father - " 
 " that your unnatural sister will tell you herself , " Helena 's voice 
 add . she have open the door while we be too much absorb in our 
 talk to hear she . 
 Selina attempt to leave the room . I catch she by the hand , and hold 
 she back . I be afraid of what I might do if she leave I by myself . 
 never have I feel anything like the rage that torture I , when I see 
 Helena look at we with the same wicked smile on her lip that have 
 insult I when we meet on the stair . " have we anything to be ashamed 
 of ? " I say to Selina . " stay where you be . " 
 " you may be of some use , Miss Jillgall , if you stay , " my sister 
 suggest . " Eunice seem to be tremble . be she angry , or be she ill ? " 
 the sting of this be in the tone of her voice . it be the hard thing 
 I ever have to do in my life - but I do succeed in control myself . 
 " go on with what you have to say , " I answer , " and do not   notice I . " 
 " you be not very polite , my dear , but I can make allowance . oh , come ! 
 come ! put up your hand to stop your ear be too childish . you would 
 do well to express regret for have mislead your father . yes ! you do 
 mislead he . only a few day since , you leave he to suppose that you 
 be engage to Philip . it become my duty , after that , to open his eye 
 to the truth ; and if I unhappily provoke he , it be your fault . I be 
 strictly careful in the language I use . I say : ' dear father , you have 
 be misinformed on a very serious subject . the only marriage engagement 
 for which your kind sanction be request , be my engagement . I have 
 consent to become Mrs. Philip Dunboyne . ' " 
 " stop ! " I say . 
 " why be I to stop ? " 
 " because I have something to say . you and I be look at each other . 
 do my face tell you what be pass in my mind ? " 
 " your face seem to be pale than usual , " she answer - " that be all . " 
 " no , " I say ; " that be not all . the devil that possess I , when I 
 discover you with Philip , be not cast out of I yet . silence the 
 sneer devil that be in you , or we may both live to regret it . " 
 whether I do or do not frighten she , I can not say . this only I 
 know - she turn away silently to the door , and go out . 
 I drop on the sofa . that horrid hunger for revenge , which I feel 
 for the first time when I know how Helena have wrong I , begin to 
 degrade and tempt I again . in the effort to get away from this new evil 
 self of mine , I try to find sympathy in Selina , and call to she to 
 come and sit by I . she seem to be startle when I look at she , but 
 she recover herself , and come to I , and take my hand . 
 " I wish I could comfort you ! " she say , in her kind simple way . 
 " keep my hand in your hand , " I tell she ; " I be drown in dark 
 water - and I have nothing to hold by but you . " 
 " oh , my darling , do not   talk in that way ! " 
 " Good Selina ! dear Selina ! you shall talk to I . say something 
 harmless - tell I a melancholy story - try to make I cry . " 
 my poor little friend look sadly bewildered . 
 " I be more likely to cry myself , " she say . " this be so heart - break - I 
 almost wish I be back in the time , before you come home , the time 
 when your detestable sister first show how she hat I . I be happy , 
 meanly happy , in the spiteful enjoyment of provoke she . oh , Euneece , 
 I shall never recover my spirit again ! all the pity in the world would 
 not be pity enough for you . so hardly treat ! so young ! so forlorn ! 
 your good father too ill to help you ; your poor mother - " 
 I interrupt she ; she have interest I in something well than my own 
 wretched self . I ask directly if she have know my mother . 
 " my dear child , I never even see she ! " 
 " have my father never speak to you about she ? " 
 " only once , when I ask he how long she have be dead . he tell I you 
 lose she while you be an infant , and he tell I no more . I be look 
 at her portrait in the study , only yesterday . I think it must be a bad 
 portrait ; your mother 's face disappoint I . " 
 I have arrive at the same conclusion year since . but I shrink from 
 confess it . 
 " at any rate , " Selina continue , " you be not like she . nobody would 
 ever guess that you be the child of that lady , with the long slanting 
 forehead and the restless look in her eye . " 
 what Selina have say of I and my mother 's portrait , other friend have 
 say . there be nothing that I know of to interest I in hear it 
 repeat - and yet it set I ponder on the want of resemblance between 
 my mother 's face and mine , and wonder   not for the first time   what 
 sort of woman my mother be . when my father speak of she , no word of 
 praise that he can utter seem to be good enough for she . oh , I , I wish 
 I be a little more like my mother ! 
 it begin to get dark ; Maria bring in the lamp . the sudden brightness 
 of the flame strike my ache eye , as if it have be a blow from a 
 knife . I be oblige to hide my face in my handkerchief . Compassionate 
 Selina entreat I to go to bed . " rest your poor eye , my child , and 
 your weary head - and try at least to get some sleep . " she find I very 
 docile ; I kiss she , and say good - night . I have my own idea . 
 when all be quiet in the house , I steal out into the passage and 
 listen at the door of my father 's room . 
 I hear his regular breathing , and open the door and go in . the 
 composing medicine , of which I be in search , be not on the table by 
 his bedside . I find it in the cupboard - perhaps place purposely out of 
 his reach . they say that some physic be poison , if you take too much of 
 it . the label on the bottle tell I what the dose be . I drop it into 
 the medicine glass , and swallow it , and go back to my father . 
 very gently , so as not to wake he , I touch poor papa 's forehead with 
 my lip . " I must have some of your medicine , " I whisper to he ; " I 
 want it , dear , as badly as you do . " 
 then I return to my own room - and lie down in bed , wait to be 
 compose . 
 CHAPTER XXXI . eunice 's DIARY . 
 my restless night be pass in Selina 's room . 
 her bed remain near the window . my bed have be place opposite , near 
 the door . our night - light be hide in a corner , so that the faint glow 
 of it be all that we see . what trifle these be to write about ! but 
 they mix themselves up with what I be determined to set down in 
 my Journal , and then to close the book for good and all . I have not 
 disturb my little friend 's enviable repose , either when I leave our 
 bed - chamber , or when I return to it . the night be quiet , and the 
 star be out . nothing move but the throbbing at my temple . the 
 light and shadow in our half - darken room , which at other time 
 suggest strange resemblance to my fancy , fail to disturb I now . I 
 be in a darkness of my own making , have bind a handkerchief , cool 
 with water , over my hot eye . there be nothing to interfere with the 
 soothe influence of the dose that I have take , if my father 's medicine 
 would only help I . 
 I begin badly . the clock in the hall strike the quarter past the 
 hour , the half - past , the three - quarter past , the new hour . time be 
 awake - and I be awake with Time . 
 it be such a trial to my patience that I think of go back to my 
 father 's room , and take a second dose of the medicine , no matter what 
 the risk might be . on attempt to get up , I become aware of a change 
 in I . there be a dull sensation in my limb which seem to bind they 
 down on the bed . it be the strange feeling . my will say , get up - and 
 my heavy limb say , no . 
 I lay quite still , think desperate thought , and get near and 
 near to the end that I have be dread for so many day past . have 
 be as well educate as most girl , my lesson in history have make I 
 acquaint with assassination and murder . horror which I have recoil 
 from read in past happy day , now return to my memory ; and , this 
 time , they interested instead of revolt I . I count the three 
 first way of kill as I happen to remember they , in my book of 
 instruction : - a way by stab ; a way by poison ; a way in a bed , by 
 suffocation with a pillow . on that dreadful night , I never once call 
 to mind what I find myself remember now - the harmless past time , 
 when our friend use to say : " eunice be a good girl ; we be all fond of 
 Eunice . " shall I ever be the same lovable creature again ? 
 while I lay thinking , a strange thing happen . Philip , who have haunt 
 I for day and night together , vanish out of my thought . my memory 
 of the love which have begin so brightly , and have end so miserably , 
 become a blank . nothing be leave but my own horrid vision of vengeance 
 and death . 
 for a while , the stroke of the clock still reach my ear . but it be 
 an effort to count they ; I end in let they pass unheeded . soon 
 afterward , the round of my thought begin to circle slowly and more 
 slowly . the stroke of the clock die out . the round of my thought 
 stop . 
 all this time , my eye be still cover by the handkerchief which I 
 have lay over they . 
 the darkness begin to weigh on my spirit , and to fill I with distrust . 
 I find myself suspect that there be some change - perhaps an 
 unearthly change - pass over the room . to remain blindfold any 
 long be more than I could endure . I lift my hand - without be 
 conscious of the heavy sensation which , some time before , have lay my 
 limb helpless on the bed - I lift my hand , and draw the handkerchief 
 away from my eye . 
 the faint glow of the night - light be extinguish . 
 but the room be not quite dark . there be a ghastly light trembling 
 over it ; like nothing that I have ever see by day ; like nothing that I 
 have ever see by night . I dimly discern Selina 's bed , and the frame 
 of the window , and the curtain on either side of it - but not the 
 starlight , and not the shadowy top of the tree in the garden . 
 the light grow fainter and fainter ; the object in the room fade slowly 
 away . darkness come . 
 it may be a saying hard to believe - but , when I declare that I be not 
 frightened , I be tell the truth . whether the room be light by 
 awful light , or sink in awful dark , I be equally interested in the 
 expectation of what might happen next . I listen calmly for what I 
 might hear : I wait calmly for what I might feel . a touch come first . 
 I feel it creep on my face - like a little flutter breeze . the 
 sensation please I for a while . soon it grow cold , and colder , and 
 colder , till it freeze I . 
 " oh , no more ! " I cry out . " you be kill I with an icy death ! " 
 the dead - cold touch linger a moment long - and leave I . 
 the first sound come . 
 it be the sound of a whisper on my pillow , close to my ear . my strange 
 insensibility to fear remain undisturbed . the whisper be welcome , it 
 keep I company in the dark room . 
 it say to I : " do you know who I be ? " 
 I answer : " no . " 
 it say : " who have you be think of this evening ? " 
 I answer : " my mother . " 
 the whisper say : " I be your mother . " 
 " oh , mother , command the light to come back ! show yourself to I ! " 
 " no . " 
 " why not ? " 
 " my face be hide when I pass from life to death . my face no mortal 
 creature may see . " 
 " oh , mother , touch I ! kiss I ! " 
 " no . " 
 " why not ? " 
 " my touch be poison . my kiss be death . " 
 the sense of fear begin to come to I now . I move my head away on the 
 pillow . the whisper follow my movement . 
 " leave I , " I say . " you be an Evil Spirit . " 
 the whisper answer : " I be your mother . " 
 " you come to tempt I . " 
 " I come to harden your heart . daughter of mine , whose blood be cool ; 
 daughter of mine , who tamely submit - you have love . be it true ? " 
 " it be true . " 
 " the man you love have desert you . be it true ? " 
 " it be true . " 
 " a woman have lure he away to herself . a woman have have no mercy on you , 
 or on he . be it true ? " 
 " it be true . " 
 " if she live , what crime toward you will she commit next ? " 
 " if she live , she will marry he . " 
 " will you let she live ? " 
 " never . " 
 " have I harden your heart against she ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " will you kill she ? " 
 " show I how . " 
 there be a sudden silence . I be still leave in the darkness ; feel 
 nothing , hear nothing . even the consciousness that I be lie on 
 my bed desert I . I have no idea that I be in the bedroom ; I have no 
 knowledge of where I be . 
 the ghastly light that I have see already dawn on I once more . I 
 be no long in my bed , no long in my room , no long in the house . 
 without wonder , without even a feeling of surprise , I look round . the 
 place be familiar to I . I be alone in the Museum of our town . 
 the light flow along in front of I . I follow , from room to room in 
 the Museum , where the light lead . 
 first , through the picture - gallery , hang with the work of modern 
 master ; then , through the room fill with specimen of stuff 
 animal . the lion and the tiger , the vulture of the Alps and the 
 great albatross , look like live creature threaten I , in the 
 supernatural light . I enter the third room , devote to the exhibition 
 of ancient armor , and the weapon of all nation . here the light rise 
 high , and , leave I in darkness where I stand , show a collection 
 of sword , dagger , and knife arrange on the wall in imitation of the 
 form of a star . 
 the whisper sound again , close at my ear . it echo my own thought , 
 when I call to mind the way of kill which history have teach I . 
 it say : " kill she with the knife . " 
 no . my heart fail I when I think of the blood . I hide the dreadful 
 weapon from my view . I cry out : " let I go ! let I go ! " 
 again , I be lose in darkness . again , I have no knowledge in I of where 
 I be . again , after an interval , the light show I the new place in 
 which I stand . 
 I be alone in the burial - ground of our parish church . the light lead I 
 on , among the graf , to the lonely corner in which the great yew tree 
 stand ; and , rise higher , reveal the solemn foliage , brighten by 
 the fatal red fruit which hide in itself the seed of death . 
 the whisper tempt I again . it follow again the train of my own 
 thought . it say : " kill she by poison . " 
 no . revenge by poison steal its way to its end . the base deceitfulness 
 of Helena 's crime against I seem to call for a day of reckon that 
 hide itself under no disguise . I raise my cry to be deliver from the 
 sight of the deadly tree . the change which I have try to describe 
 follow once more the confession of what I feel ; the darkness be 
 dispel for the third time . 
 I be stand in Helena 's room , look at she as she lie asleep in her 
 bed . 
 she be quite still now ; but she must have be restless at some early 
 time . the bedclothe be disorder , her head have sink so low that the 
 pillow rise high and vacant above she . there , color by a tender flush 
 of sleep , be the face whose beauty put my poor face to shame . there , 
 be the sister who have commit the bad of murder - the wretch who 
 have kill in I all that make life worth have . while that thought be 
 in my mind , I hear the whisper again . " kill she openly , " the tempter 
 mother say . " kill she daringly . faint heart , do you still want courage ? 
 rouse your spirit ; look ! see yourself in the act ! " 
 the temptation take a form which now try I for the first time . 
 as if a mirror have reflect the scene , I see myself stand by the 
 bedside , with the pillow that be to smother the sleeper in my hand . I 
 hear the whispering voice tell I how to speak the word that warn 
 and condemn she : " wake ! you who have take he from I ! wake ! and meet 
 your doom . " 
 I see she start up in bed . the sudden movement disorder the nightdress 
 over her bosom and show the miniature portrait of a man , hang round 
 her neck . 
 the man be Philip . the likeness be look at I . 
 so dear , so lovely - those eye that have once be the light of my heart , 
 mourn for I and judge I now . they see the guilty thought that 
 pollute I ; they bring I to my knee , implore he to help I back 
 to my well self : " one last mercy , dear , to comfort I under the loss 
 of you . let the love that be once my life , be my good angel still . save 
 I , Philip , even though you forsake I - save I from myself ! " 
 ....... 
 there be a sudden cry . 
 the agony of it pierce my brain - drive away the ghastly light - silence 
 the tempting whisper . I come to myself . I see - and not in a dream . 
 Helena have start up in her bed . that cry of terror , at the sight 
 of I in her room at night , have burst from her lip . the miniature of 
 Philip hang round her neck , a visible reality . though my head be dizzy , 
 though my heart be sink , I have not lose my sens yet . all that the 
 night lamp could show I , I still see ; and I hear the sound , faintly , 
 when the door of the bed - chamber be open . alarm by that pierce 
 cry , my father come hurry into the room . 
 not a word pass between we three . the whisper that I have hear be 
 wicked ; the thought that have be in my mind be vile . have they leave 
 some poison in the air of the room , which kill the word on our lip ? 
 my father look at Helena . with a trembling hand she point to I . he 
 put his arm round I and hold I up . I remember his lead I away - and 
 I remember nothing more . 
 my last word be write . I lock up this journal of misery - never , I 
 hope and pray , to open it again . - - 
 Second Period   continue . 
 event in the FAMILY , relate by the GOVERNOR . - - 
 CHAPTER XXXII . the MIDDLE - AGED LADY . 
 in the year 1870 I find myself compel to submit to the demand of 
 two hard task - masters . 
 advance age and fail health remind the Governor of the Prison of 
 his duty to his successor , in one unanswerable word - resign . 
 when they have employ we and interested we , for the great part of 
 our life , we bid farewell to our duty - even to the gloomy duty of a 
 prison - with a sense of regret . my view of the future present a vacant 
 prospect indeed , when I look at my idle life to come , and wonder 
 what I should do with it . loose on the world - at my age ! - I drift into 
 domestic refuge , under the care of my two dear and good son . after a 
 while   never mind how long a while   I begin to grow restless under 
 the heavy burden of idleness . have nothing else to complain of , I 
 complain of my health , and consult a doctor . that sagacious man hit 
 on the right way of get rid of I - he recommend travel . 
 this be unexpected advice . after some hesitation , I accept it 
 reluctantly . 
 the instinct of age recoil from make new acquaintance , contemplate 
 new place , and adopt new habit . besides , I hate railway traveling . 
 however , I contrive to get as far as Italy , and stop to rest at 
 Florence . here , I find picture by the old master that I could really 
 enjoy , a public park that I could honestly admire , and an excellent 
 friend and colleague of former day ; once chaplain to the prison , now 
 clergyman in charge of the English Church . we meet in the gallery of the 
 Pitti Palace ; and he recognize I immediately . I be pleased to find 
 that the lapse of year have make so little difference in my personal 
 appearance . 
 the traveler who advance as far as Florence , and do not go on to 
 Rome , must be regardless indeed of the opinion of his friend . let I 
 not attempt to conceal it - I be that insensible traveler . over and over 
 again , I say to myself : " Rome must be do " ; and over and over again I 
 put off do it . to own the truth , the fascination of Florence , aid 
 by the society of my friend , lay so strong a hold on I that I believe 
 I should have end my day in the delightful italian city , but for the 
 dangerous illness of one of my son . this misfortune hurry I back to 
 England , in dread , every step of the way , of find that I have arrive 
 too late . the journey   thank God !   prove to have be take without 
 need . my son be no long in danger , when I reach London in the year 
 1875 . 
 at that date I be near enough to the customary limit of human life to 
 feel the necessity of rest and quiet . in other word , my day of travel 
 have come to their end . 
 have establish myself in my own country , I do not forget to let old 
 friend know where they might find I . among those to whom I write be 
 another colleague of past year , who still hold his medical appointment 
 in the prison . when I receive the doctor 's reply , it inclose a letter 
 direct to I at my old quarter in the Governor 's room . who could 
 possibly have send a letter to an address which I have leave five 
 year since ? my correspondent prove to be no less a person than the 
 Congregational Minister - the friend whom I have estrange from I by the 
 tone in which I have write to he , on the long - past occasion of his 
 wife 's death . 
 it be a distressing letter to read . I beg permission to give only the 
 substance of it in this place . 
 entreat I , with touching expression of humility and sorrow , to 
 forgive his long silence , the writer appeal to my friendly remembrance 
 of he . he be in sore need of counsel , under serious difficulty ; and 
 I be the only person to whom he could apply for help . in the disorder 
 state of his health at that time , he venture to hope that I would visit 
 he at his present place of abode , and would let he have the 
 happiness of see I as speedily as possible . he conclude with this 
 extraordinary postscript : 
 " when you see my daughter , say nothing to either of they which relate , 
 in any way , to the subject of their age . you shall hear why when we 
 meet . " 
 the reading of this letter naturally remind I of the claim which my 
 friend 's noble conduct have establish on my admiration and respect , at 
 the past time when we meet in the prison . I could not hesitate to grant 
 his request - strangely as it be express , and doubtful as the prospect 
 appear to be of my answer the expectation which he have found 
 on the renewal of our intercourse . answer his letter by telegraph , I 
 promise to be with he on the next day . 
 on arrive at the station , I find that I be the only traveler , by a 
 first - class carriage , who leave the train . a young lady , remarkable by 
 her good look and good dressing , seem to have notice this trifling 
 circumstance . she approach I with a ready smile . " I believe I 
 be speak to my father 's friend , " she say ; " my name be Helena 
 Gracedieu . " 
 here be one of the Minister 's two " daughter " ; and that one of the 
 two - as I discover the moment I shake hand with she - who be my 
 friend 's own child . Miss Helena recall to I her mother 's face , 
 infinitely improve by youth and health , and by a natural beauty which 
 that cruel and deceitful woman could never have possess . the slanting 
 forehead and the shifting , flash eye , that I recollect in the 
 parent , be reproduce   slightly reproduce , I ought to say   in the 
 child . as for the other feature , I have never see a more beautiful nose 
 and mouth , or a more delicately - shape outline , than be present by 
 the low part of the face . but Miss Helena somehow fail to charm I . 
 I doubt if I should have fall in love with she , even in the day when 
 I be a foolish young man . 
 the first question that I put , as we drive from the station to the 
 house , relate naturally to her father . 
 " he be very ill , " she begin ; " I be afraid you must prepare yourself to 
 see a sad change . nerve . the mischief first show itself , the doctor 
 tell we , in derangement of his nervous system . he have be , I regret 
 to tell you , obstinate in refuse to give up his preaching and pastoral 
 work . he ought to have try rest at the seaside . thing have go on 
 from bad to bad . last Sunday , at the beginning of his sermon , he break 
 down . very , very sad , be it not ? the doctor say that precious time have 
 be lose , and he must make up his mind to resign his charge . he will not 
 hear of it . you be his old friend . please try to persuade he . " 
 fluently speak ; the word well choose ; the melodious voice remind 
 I of the late Mrs. Gracedieu 's advantage in that respect ; little 
 sigh judiciously throw in here and there , just at the right place ; 
 everything , let I own , that could present a dutiful daughter as a 
 pattern of propriety - and nothing , let I add , that could produce an 
 impression on my insensible temperament . if I have not be too discreet 
 to rush at a hasty conclusion , I might have be incline to say : her 
 mother 's child , every inch of she ! 
 the interest which I be still able to feel in my friend 's domestic 
 affair center in the daughter whom he have adopt . 
 in her infancy I have see the child , and like she ; I be the one person 
 live   since the death of Mrs. Gracedieu   who know how the Minister have 
 conceal the sad secret of her parentage ; and I want to discover if 
 the hereditary taint have begin to show itself in the innocent offspring 
 of the murderess . just as I be consider how I might harmlessly speak 
 of Miss Helena 's ' sister , " Miss Helena herself introduce the subject . 
 " may I ask , " she resume , " if you be disappoint when you find 
 nobody but I to meet you at our station ? " 
 here be an opportunity of pay she a compliment , if I have be a 
 young man , or if she have produce a favorable impression on I . as it 
 be , I hit - if I may praise myself - on an ingenious compromise . 
 " what excuse could I have , " I ask , " for feel disappoint ? " 
 " well , I hear you be an official personage - I ought to say , perhaps , 
 a retired official personage . we might have receive you more 
 respectfully , if both my father 's daughter have be present at the 
 station . it be not my fault that my sister be not with I . " 
 the tone in which she say this strengthen my prejudice against she . 
 it tell I that the two girl be live together on no very 
 friendly term ; and it suggest - justly or unjustly I could not then 
 decide - that Miss Helena be to blame . 
 " my sister be away from home . " 
 " surely , Miss Helena , that be a good reason for she not come to meet 
 I ? " 
 " I beg your pardon - it be a bad reason . she have be send away for the 
 recovery of her health - and the loss of her health be entirely her own 
 fault . " 
 what do this matter to I ? I decide on drop the subject . my memory 
 revert , however , to past occasion on which the loss of my health 
 have be entirely my own fault . there be something in these personal 
 recollection , which encourage my perverse tendency to sympathize with 
 a young lady to whom I have not yet be introduce . the young lady 's 
 sister appear to be discourage by my silence . she say : " I hope you 
 do not   think the bad of I for what I have just mention ? " 
 " certainly not . " 
 " perhaps you will fail to see any need of my speaking of my sister at 
 all ? will you kindly listen , if I try to explain myself ? " 
 " with pleasure . " 
 she slyly set the good construction on my perfectly commonplace reply . 
 " thank you , " she say . " the fact be , my father   I can not   imagine why 
 wish you to see my sister as well as I . he have write to the 
 farmhouse at which she be now stay , to tell she to come 
 home to - morrow . it be possible - if your kindness offer I an 
 opportunity - that I may ask to be guide by your experience , in a little 
 matter which interest I . my sister be rash , and reckless , and have a 
 terrible temper . I should be very sorry indeed if you be induce to 
 form an unfavorable opinion of I , from anything you might notice if you 
 see we together . you understand I , I hope ? " 
 " I quite understand you . " 
 to set I against her sister , in her own private interest - there , as 
 I feel sure , be the motive under which she be act . as hard as 
 her mother , as selfish as her mother , and , judge from those two bad 
 quality , probably as cruel as her mother . that be how I understand 
 Miss Helena Gracedieu , when our carriage draw up at her father 's house . 
 a middle - aged lady be on the doorstep , when we arrive , just ring 
 the bell . she look round at we both ; be evidently as complete a 
 stranger to my fair companion as she be to I . when the servant open 
 the door , she say : 
 " be Miss Jillgall at home ? " 
 at the sound of that odd name , Miss Helena toss her head disdainfully . 
 she take no sort of notice of the stranger - lady who be at the door 
 of her father 's house . this young person 's contempt for Miss Jillgall 
 appear to extend to Miss Jillgall 's friend . 
 in the meantime , the servant 's answer be : " not at home . " 
 the middle aged lady say : " do you expect she back soon ? " 
 " yes , ma'am . " 
 " I will call again , later in the day . " 
 " what name , if you please ? " 
 the lady steal another look at I , before she reply . 
 " never mind the name , " she say - and walk away . 
 CHAPTER XXXIII . the MINISTER 's MISFORTUNE . 
 " do you know that lady ? " Miss Helena ask , as we enter the house . 
 " she be a perfect stranger to I , " I answer . 
 " be you sure you have not forget she ? " 
 " why do you think I have forget she ? " 
 " because she evidently remember you . " 
 the lady have no doubt look at I twice . if this mean that my face be 
 familiar to she , I could only repeat what I have already say . never , to 
 my knowledge , have I see she before . 
 lead the way upstairs , Miss Helena apologize for take I into her 
 father 's bedroom . " he be able to sit up in an armchair , " she say ; " and 
 he might do more , as I think , if he would exert himself . he will not   exert 
 himself . very sad . would you like to look at your room , before you see 
 my father ? it be quite ready for you . we hope " - she favor I with 
 a fascinating smile , devote to win my heart when her interest 
 require it - " we hope you will pay we a long visit ; we look on you as 
 one of ourselves . " 
 I thank she , and say I would shake hand with my old friend before I 
 go to my room . we part at the bedroom door . 
 it be out of my power to describe the shock that overpower I when I 
 first see the Minister again , after the long interval of time that have 
 separate we . nothing that his daughter say , nothing that I myself 
 anticipate , have prepare I for that lamentable change . for the moment , 
 I be not sufficiently master of myself to be able to speak to he . he 
 add to my embarrassment by the humility of his manner , and the formal 
 elaboration of his apology . 
 " I feel painfully that I have take a liberty with you , " he say , 
 " after the long estrangement between we - for which my want of Christian 
 forbearance be to blame . forgive it , sir , and forget it . I hope to 
 show that necessity justify my presumption , in subject you to a 
 wearisome journey for my sake . " 
 begin to recover myself , I beg that he would make no more 
 excuse . my interruption seem to confuse he . 
 " I wish to say , " he go on , " that you be the one man who can 
 understand I . there be my only reason for ask to see you , and 
 look forward as I do to your advice . you remember the night - or be 
 it the day ? - before that miserable woman be hang ? you be the only 
 person present when I agree to adopt the poor little creature , stain 
 already   one may say   by its mother 's infamy . I think your wisdom 
 foresaw what a terrible responsibility I be undertake ; you try to 
 prevent it . well ! well ! you have be in my confidence - you only . mind ! 
 nobody in this house know that one of the two girl be not really my 
 daughter . pray stop I , if you find I wander from the point . my wish 
 be to show that you be the only man I can open my heart to . she - " 
 he pause , as if in search of a lose idea , and leave the sentence 
 uncompleted . " yes , " he go on , " I be think of my adopt child . do 
 I ever tell you that I baptize she myself ? and by a good scripture name 
 too - Eunice . ah , sir , that little helpless baby be a grow - up girl now ; 
 of an age to inspire love , and to feel love . I blush to acknowledge 
 it ; I have behave with a want of self - control , with a cowardly 
 weakness . - no ! I be , indeed , wander this time . I ought to have tell 
 you first that I have be bring face to face with the possibility of 
 Eunice 's marriage . and , to make it bad still , I can not   help like 
 the young man . he come of a good family - excellent manner , highly 
 educate , plenty of money , a gentleman in every sense of the word . and 
 poor little Eunice be so fond of he ! be not   it dreadful to be oblige to 
 check she dearly - love Philip ? the young gentleman 's name be Philip . 
 do you like the name ? I say I be oblige to cheek her sweetheart in 
 the rude manner , when all he want to do be to ask I modestly for 
 my sweet Eunice 's hand . oh , what have I not suffer , without a word 
 of sympathy to comfort I , before I have courage enough to write to you ! 
 shall I make a dreadful confession ? if my religious conviction have not 
 stand in my way , I believe I should have commit suicide . put yourself 
 in my place . try to see yourself shrink from a necessary 
 explanation , when the happiness of a harmless girl - so dutiful , so 
 affectionate - depended on a word of kindness from your lip . and that 
 word you be afraid to speak ! do not   take offense , sir ; I mean myself , 
 not you . why do not   you say something ? " he burst out fiercely , incapable 
 of perceive that he have allow I no opportunity of speak to he . 
 " Good God ! do not   you understand I , after all ? " 
 the sign of mental confusion in his talk have so distress I , that I 
 have not be compose enough to feel sure of what he really mean , 
 until he describe himself as ' shrink from a necessary explanation . " 
 hear those word , my knowledge of the circumstance help I ; I 
 realize what his situation really be . 
 " compose yourself , " I say , " I understand you at last . " 
 he have suddenly become distrustful . " prove it , " he mutter , with a 
 furtive look at I . " I want to be satisfied that you understand my 
 position . " 
 " this be your position , " I tell he . " you be place between two 
 deplorable alternative . if you tell this young gentleman that Miss 
 Eunice 's mother be a criminal hang for murder , his family - even if he 
 himself do not   recoil from it - will unquestionably forbid the marriage ; 
 and your adopt daughter 's happiness will be the sacrifice . " 
 " true ! " he say . " frightfully true ! go on . " 
 " if , on the other hand , you sanction the marriage , and conceal the 
 truth , you commit a deliberate act of deceit ; and you leave the life of 
 the young couple at the mercy of a possible discovery , which might 
 part husband and wife - cast a slur on their child - and break up the 
 household . " 
 he shudder while he listen to I . " come to the end of it , " he cry . 
 I have no more to say , and I be oblige to answer he to that effect . 
 " no more to say ? " he reply . " you have not tell I yet what I most want 
 to know . " 
 I do a rash thing ; I ask what it be that he most want to know . 
 " can not   you see it for yourself ? " he demand indignantly . " suppose you 
 be put between those two alternative which you mention just now . " 
 " well ? " 
 " what would you do , sir , in my place ? would you own the disgraceful 
 truth - before the marriage - or run the risk , and keep the horrid story 
 to yourself ? " 
 either way , my reply might lead to serious consequence . I hesitate . 
 he threaten I with his poor feeble hand . it be only the anger of a 
 moment ; his humor change to supplication . he remind I piteously of 
 bygone day : " you use to be a kind - hearted man . have age harden you ? 
 have you no pity leave for your old friend ? my poor heart be sadly in 
 want of a word of wisdom , speak kindly . " 
 who could have resist this ? I take his hand : " be at ease , dear 
 Minister . in your place I should run the risk , and keep that horrid 
 story to myself . " 
 he sink back gently in his chair . " oh , the relief of it ! " he say . " how 
 can I thank you as I ought for quiet my mind ? " 
 I seize the opportunity of quiet his mind to good purpose by 
 suggest a change of subject . " let we have do with serious talk for 
 the present , " I propose . " I have be an idle man for the last five 
 year , and I want to tell you about my travel . " 
 his attention begin to wander , he evidently feel no interest in my 
 travel . " be you sure , " he ask anxiously , " that we have say all we 
 ought to say ? no ! " he cry , answer his own question . " I believe 
 I have forget something - I be certain I have forget something . 
 perhaps I mention it in the letter I write to you . have you get my 
 letter ? " 
 I show it to he . he read the letter , and give it back to I with a 
 heavy sigh . " not there ! " he say despairingly . " not there ! " 
 " be the lost remembrance connect with anybody in the house ? " I ask , 
 try to help he . " do it relate , by any chance , to one of the young 
 lady ? " 
 " you wonderful man ! nothing escape you . yes ; the thing I have forget 
 concern one of the girl . stop ! let I get at it by myself . surely 
 it relate to Helena ? " he hesitate ; his face cloud over with an 
 expression of anxious thought . " yes ; it relate to Helena , " he repeat 
 " but how ? " his eye fill with tear . " I be ashamed of my weakness , " 
 he say faintly . " you do not   know how dreadful it be to forget thing in 
 this way . " 
 the injury that his mind have sustain now assume an aspect that be 
 serious indeed . the subtle machinery , which stimulate the memory , by 
 mean of the association of idea , appear to have lose its working 
 power in the intellect of this unhappy man . I make the first suggestion 
 that occur to I , rather than add to his distress by remain 
 silent . 
 " if we talk of your daughter , " I say , " the mere accident - a word 
 speak at random by . you or I - may be all your memory want to rouse 
 it . " 
 he agree eagerly to this : " yes ! yes ! let I begin . Helena meet you , I 
 think , at the station . of course , I remember that ; it only happen 
 a few hour since . well ? " he go on , with a change in his manner to 
 parental pride , which it be pleasant to see , " do you think my daughter 
 a fine girl ? I hope Helena do not   disappoint you ? " 
 " quite the contrary . " have make that necessary reply , I see my way to 
 keep his mind occupy by a harmless subject . " it must , however , be 
 own , " I go on , " that your daughter surprise I . " 
 " in what way ? " 
 " when she mention her name . who could have suppose that you - an 
 inveterate enemy to the Roman Catholic Church - would have christen 
 your daughter by the name of a Roman Catholic Saint ? " 
 he listen to this with a smile . have I happily blunder on some 
 association which his mind be still able to pursue ? 
 " you happen to be wrong this time , " he say pleasantly . " I never give 
 my girl the name of Helena ; and , what be more , I never baptize she . 
 you ought to know that . year and year ago , I write to tell you that my 
 poor wife have make I a proud and happy father . and surely I say that 
 the child be bear while she be on a visit to her brother 's rectory . 
 do you remember the name of the place ? I tell you it be a remote 
 little village , call - suppose we put your memory to a test ? can you 
 remember the name ? " he ask , with a momentary appearance of triumph 
 show itself , poor fellow , in his face . 
 after the time that have elapse , the name have slip my memory . when I 
 confess this , he exult over I , with an unalloyed pleasure which it 
 be cheer to see . 
 " your memory be fail you now , " he say . " the name be Long Lanes . 
 and what do you think my wife do - this be so characteristic of 
 she ! - when I present myself at her bedside . instead of speak of our 
 own baby , she remind I of the name that I have give to our adopt 
 daughter when I baptize the child . ' you choose the ugly name that a 
 girl can have , ' she say . I beg she to remember that ' Eunice ' be 
 a name in Scripture . she persist in spite of I .   what firmness of 
 character !   ' I det the name of Eunice ! ' she say ; ' and now that I 
 have a girl of my own , it be my turn to choose the name ; I claim it as my 
 right . ' she be begin to get excite ; I allow she to have her own 
 way , of course . ' only let I know , ' I say , ' what the name be to be when 
 you have think of it . ' my dear sir , she have the name ready , without 
 think about it : ' my baby shall be call by the name that be sweetest 
 in my ear , the name of my dear lose mother . ' we have - what shall I call 
 it ? - a slight difference of opinion when I hear that the name be to be 
 Helena . I really could not reconcile it to my conscience to baptize 
 a child of mine by the name of a popish saint . my wife 's brother set 
 thing right between we . a worthy good man ; he die not very long ago - I 
 forget the date . not to detain you any long , the rector of Long Lanes 
 baptize our daughter . that be how she come by her un - english name ; and 
 so it happen that her birth be register in a village which her father 
 have never inhabit . I hope , sir , you think a little well of my memory 
 now ? " 
 I be afraid to tell he what I really do think . 
 he be not fifty year old yet ; and he have just exhibit one of the sad 
 symptom which mark the broken memory of old age . lead he back to the 
 event of many year ago , and   as he have just prove to I   he could 
 remember well and relate coherently . but let he attempt to recall 
 circumstance which have only take place a short time since , and 
 forgetfulness and confusion present the lamentable result , just as I 
 have relate it . 
 the effort that he have make , the agitation that he have undergo in 
 talk to I , have confirm my fear that he would overtask his 
 waste strength . he lie back in his chair . " let we go on with our 
 conversation , " he murmur . " we have not   recover what I have forget , 
 yet . " his eye close , and open again languidly . " there be something 
 I want to recall - " he resume , " and you be help I . " his weak 
 voice die away ; his weary eye close again . after wait until there 
 could be no doubt that he be rest peacefully in sleep , I leave the 
 room . 
 CHAPTER XXXIV . the LIVELY OLD MAID . 
 a perfect stranger to the interior of the house   see that my 
 experience begin and end with the Minister 's bedchamber , I 
 descend the stair , in the character of a guest in search of domestic 
 information . 
 on my way down , I hear the door of a room on the ground floor open , 
 and a woman ' s voice below , speak in a hurry : " my dear , I have not a 
 moment to spare ; my patient be wait for I . " this be follow by a 
 confidential communication , judge by the tone . " mind ! not a word about 
 I to that old gentleman ! " her patient be wait for she - have I 
 discover a female doctor ? and there be some old gentleman whom she 
 be not willing to trust - surely I be not that much - injure man ? 
 reach the hall just as the lady say her last word , I catch a 
 glimpse of her face , and discover the middle - aged stranger who have 
 call on " Miss Jillgall , " and have promise to repeat her visit . a 
 second lady be at the door , with she back to I , take leave of her 
 friend . have say good - by , she turn round - and we confront each 
 other . 
 I find she to be a little person , wiry and active ; past the prime of 
 life , and ugly enough to encourage prejudice , in person who take a 
 superficial view of their fellow - creature . look impartially at 
 the little sunken eye which rest on I with a comical expression of 
 embarrassment , I see sign that say : there be some good here , under a 
 disagreeable surface , if you can only find it . 
 she salute I with a carefully - perform curtsey , and throw open the 
 door of a room on the ground floor . 
 " pray walk in , sir , and permit I to introduce myself . I be Mr. 
 Gracedieu 's cousin - Miss Jillgall . Proud indeed to make the acquaintance 
 of a gentleman distinguish in the service of his country - or perhaps I 
 ought to say , in the service of the Law . the Governor offer hospitality 
 to prisoner . and who introduce prisoner to board and lodge with the 
 Governor ? - the Law . beautiful weather for the time of year , be it not ? 
 may I ask - have you see your room ? " 
 the embarrassment which I have already notice have extend by this time 
 to her voice and her manner . she be evidently try to talk herself 
 into a state of confidence . it seem but too probable that I be indeed 
 the person mention by her prudent friend at the door . 
 have acknowledge that I have not see my room yet , my politeness 
 attempt to add that there be no hurry . the wiry little lady be of 
 the contrary opinion ; she jump out of her chair as if she have be 
 shoot out of it . " pray let I make myself useful . the dream of my life 
 be to make myself useful to other ; and to such a man as you - I consider 
 myself honor . besides , I do enjoy run up and down stair . this 
 way , dear sir ; this way to your room . " 
 she skip up the stair , and stop on the first landing . " do you 
 know , I be a timid person , though I may not look like it . sometimes , 
 curiosity get the well of I - and then I grow bold . do you notice a 
 lady who be take leave of I just now at the house door ? " 
 I reply that I have see the lady for a moment , but not for the first 
 time . " just as I arrive here from the station , " I say , " I find she 
 pay a visit when you be not at home . " 
 " yes - and do tell I one thing more . " my readiness in answering 
 seem to have inspire Miss Jillgall with confidence . I hear no more 
 confession of overpower curiosity . " be I right , " she proceed , " in 
 suppose that Miss Helena accompany you on your way here from the 
 station ? " 
 " quite right . " 
 " do she say anything particular , when she see the lady ask for I at 
 the door ? " 
 " Miss Helena think , " I say , " that the lady recognize I as a person 
 whom she have see before . " 
 " and what do you think yourself ? " 
 " I think Miss Helena be wrong . " 
 " very extraordinary ! " with that remark , Miss Jillgall drop the 
 subject . the meaning of her reiterate inquiry be now , as it seem 
 to I , clear enough . she be eager to discover how I could have inspire 
 the distrust of I , express in the caution address to she by her 
 friend . 
 when we reach the upper floor , she pause before the Minister 's room . 
 " I believe many year have pass , " she say , ' since you last see Mr. 
 Gracedieu . I be afraid you have find he a sadly change man ? you will not 
 be angry with I , I hope , for ask more question ? I owe Mr. Gracedieu 
 a debt of gratitude which no devotion , on my part , can ever repay . you 
 do not   know what a favor I shall consider it , if you will tell I what 
 you think of he . do it seem to you that he be not quite himself ? I 
 do not   mean in his look , poor dear - I mean in his mind . " 
 there be true sorrow and sympathy in her face . I believe I should 
 hardly have think her ugly , if we have first meet at that moment . thus 
 far , she have only amuse I . I begin really to like Miss Jillgall now . 
 " I must not conceal from you , " I reply , " that the state of Mr. 
 Gracedieu 's mind surprised and distress I . but I ought also to tell 
 you that I see he perhaps at his bad . the subject on which he wish 
 to speak with I would have agitate any man , in his state of health . he 
 consult I about his daughter 's marriage . " 
 Miss Jillgall suddenly turn pale . 
 " his daughter 's marriage ? " she repeat . " oh , you frighten I ! " 
 " why should I frighten you ? " 
 she seem to find some difficulty in express herself . " I hardly 
 know how to put it , sir . you will excuse I   will not   you ?   if I say what 
 I feel . you have influence - not the sort of influence that find 
 place for people who do not   deserve they , and get mention in the 
 newspaper - I only mean influence over Mr. Gracedieu . that be what 
 frighten I . how do I know - ? oh , dear , I be ask another question ! 
 allow I , for once , to be plain and positive . I be afraid , sir , you have 
 encourage the Minister to consent to Helena 's marriage . " 
 " pardon I , " I answer , " you mean Eunice 's marriage . " 
 " no , sir ! Helena . " 
 " no , madam ! Eunice . " 
 " what do he mean ? " say Miss Jillgall to herself . 
 I hear she . " this be what I mean , " I assert , in my most positive 
 manner . " the only subject on which the Minister have consult I be Miss 
 Eunice 's marriage . " 
 my tone leave she no alternative but to believe I . she look not only 
 bewilder , but alarm . " oh , poor man , have he lose himself in such a 
 dreadful way as that ? " she say to herself . " I dare not   believe it ! " she 
 turn to I . " you have be talk with he for some time . please try 
 to remember . while Mr. Gracedieu be speak of Euneece , do he say 
 nothing of Helena 's infamous conduct to her sister ? " 
 not the slight hint of any such thing , I assure she , have reach my 
 ear . 
 " then , " she cry , " I can tell you what he have forget ! we keep as 
 much of that miserable story to ourselves as we could , in mercy to he . 
 besides , he be always fondest of Euneece ; she would live in his memory 
 when he have forget the other - the wretch , the traitress , the plotter , 
 the fiend ! " Miss Jillgall 's good manner slip , as it be , from 
 under she ; she clinch her fist as a final mean of express she 
 sentiment . " the wretched english language be not   half strong enough for 
 I , " she declare with a look of fury . 
 I take a liberty . " may I ask what Miss Helena have do ? " I say . 
 " may you ask ? oh , Heavens ! you must ask , you shall ask . Mr. Governor , 
 if your eye be not open to Helena 's true character , I can tell you 
 what she will do ; she will deceive you into take her part . do you 
 think she go to the station out of regard for the great man ? Pooh ! she 
 go with an eye to her own interest ; and she mean to make the great 
 man useful . thank God , I can stop that ! " 
 she check herself there , and look suspiciously at the door of Mr. 
 Gracedieu 's room . 
 " in the interest of our conversation , " she whisper , " we have not 
 give a thought to the place we have be talk in . do you think the 
 Minister have hear we ? " 
 " not if he be asleep - as I leave he . " 
 Miss Jillgall shake her head ominously . " the safe way be this way , " she 
 say . " come with I . " 
 CHAPTER XXXV . the future look GLOOMY . 
 my ever - helpful guide lead I to my room - well out of Mr. Gracedieu 's 
 hearing , if he happen to be awake - at the other end of the passage . 
 have open the door , she pause on the threshold . the decree of that 
 merciless English despot , Propriety , claim she for their own . " oh , 
 dear ! " she say to herself , " ought I to go in ? " 
 my interest as a man   and , what be more , an old man   in the come 
 disclosure be too serious to be trifle with in this way . I take she 
 arm , and lead she into my room as if I be at a dinner - party , lead 
 she to the table . be it the good or the evil fortune of mortal that 
 the comic side of life , and the serious side of life , be perpetually in 
 collision with each other ? we burst out laugh , at a moment of grave 
 importance to we both . perfectly inappropriate , and perfectly natural . 
 but we be neither of us philosopher , and we be ashamed of our own 
 merriment the moment it have cease . 
 " when you hear what I have to tell you , " Miss Jillgall begin , " I hope 
 you will think as I do . what have slip Mr. Gracedieu 's memory , it 
 may be safe to say - for he be sometimes irritable , poor dear - where he 
 will not   know anything about it . " 
 with that she tell the lamentable story of the desertion of Eunice . 
 in silence I listen , from first to last . how could I trust myself 
 to speak , as I must have speak , in the presence of a woman ? the cruel 
 injury inflict on the poor girl , who have interest and touch I in 
 the first innocent year of her life - who have grow to womanhood to be 
 the victim of two wretch , both trust by she , both bind to she by 
 the sacred debt of love - so fire my temper that I long to be within 
 reach of the man , with a horsewhip in my hand . see in my face , as I 
 suppose , what be pass in my mind , Miss Jillgall express sympathy 
 and admiration in her own quaint way : " ah , I like to see you so angry ! 
 it be grand to know that a man who have govern prisoner have get such 
 a pity heart . let I tell you one thing , sir . you will be more angry 
 than ever , when you see my sweet girl to - morrow . and mind this - it be 
 Helena 's devouring vanity , Helena 's wicked jealousy of her sister 's good 
 fortune , that have do the mischief . do not   be too hard on Philip ? I do 
 believe , if the truth be tell , he be ashamed of himself . " 
 I feel inclined to be hard on Philip than ever . " where be he ? " I 
 ask . 
 Miss Jillgall start . " oh , Mr. Governor , do not   show the severe side of 
 yourself , after the pretty compliment I have just pay to you ! what a 
 masterful voice ! and what eye , dear sir ; what terrify eye ! I feel 
 as if I be one of your prisoner , and have misbehave myself . " 
 I repeat my question with improvement , I hope , in my look and tone : 
 " do not   think I obstinate , my dear lady . I only want to know if he be in 
 this town . " 
 Miss Jillgall seem to take a curious pleasure in disappoint I ; 
 she have not forget my unfortunate abruptness of look and manner . " you 
 will not   find he here , " she say . 
 " perhaps he have leave England ? " 
 " if you must know , sir , he be in London - with Mr. Dunboyne . " 
 the name startle I . 
 in a moment more it recall to my memory a remarkable letter , address 
 to I many year ago , which will be find in my introductory narrative . 
 the writer - an irish gentleman , name Dunboyne confide to I that 
 his marriage have associate he with the murderess , who have then be 
 recently execute , as brother - in - law to that infamous woman . this 
 circumstance he have naturally keep a secret from every one , include 
 his son , then a boy . I alone be make an exception to the general rule , 
 because I alone could tell he what have become of the poor little girl , 
 who in spite of the disgraceful end of her mother be still his niece . 
 if the child have not be provide for , he feel it his duty to take 
 charge of her education , and to watch over her prospect in the future . 
 such have be his object in write to I ; and such be the substance 
 of his letter . I have merely inform he , in reply , that his kind 
 intention have be anticipate , and that the child 's prosperous future 
 be assure . 
 Miss Jillgall 's keen observation notice the impression that have be 
 produce upon I . " Mr. Dunboyne 's name seem to surprise you . " she say . 
 " this be the first time I have hear you mention it , " I answer . 
 she look as if she could hardly believe I . " surely you must have 
 hear the name , " she say , " when I tell you about poor Euneece ? " 
 " no . " 
 " well , then , Mr. Gracedieu must have mention it ? " 
 " no . " 
 this second reply in the negative irritated she . 
 " at any rate , " she say , sharply , " you appear to know Mr. Dunboyne 's 
 name , just now . " 
 " certainly ! " 
 " and yet , " she persist , " the name seem to come upon you as a 
 surprise . I do not   understand it . if I have mention Philip 's name once , 
 I have mention it a dozen time . " 
 we be completely at cross - purpose . she have take something for 
 grant which be an unfathomable mystery to I . 
 " well , " I object , " if you do mention his name a dozen time - excuse 
 I for ask the question - -what then ? " 
 " good heaven ! " cry Miss Jillgall , " do you mean to say you never 
 guess that Philip be Mr. Dunboyne 's son ? " 
 I be petrify . 
 his son ! Dunboyne 's son ! how could I have guess it ? 
 at a later time only , the good little creature who have so innocently 
 deceive I , remember that the mischief might have be work by the 
 force of habit . while he have still a claim on their regard the family 
 have always speak of Eunice 's unworthy lover by his christian name ; and 
 what have be familiar in their mouth feel the influence of custom , 
 before time enough have elapse to make they think as readily of the 
 enemy as they have hitherto think of the friend . 
 but I be ignorant of this : and the disclosure by which I find myself 
 suddenly confront be more than I could support . for the moment , 
 speech be beyond I . 
 his son ! Dunboyne 's son ! 
 what a position that young man have occupy , unsuspecte by his father , 
 unknown to himself ! keep in ignorance of the family disgrace , he have 
 be a guest in the house of the man who have console his infamous 
 aunt on the eve of her execution - who have save his unhappy cousin from 
 poverty , from sorrow , from shame . and but one human being know this . and 
 that human being be myself ! 
 observe my agitation , Miss Jillgall place her own construction on it . 
 " do you know anything bad of Philip ? " she ask eagerly . " if it be 
 something that will prevent Helena from marry he , tell I what it 
 be , I beg and pray . " 
 I know no more of " Philip "   whom she still call by his Christian 
 name !   than she have tell I herself : there be no help for it but to 
 disappoint she . at the same time I be unable to conceal that I be ill 
 at ease , and that it might be well to leave I by myself . after a look 
 round the bedchamber to see that nothing be want to my comfort , she 
 make her quaint curtsey , and leave I with her own inimitable form of 
 farewell . " oh , indeed , I have be here too long ! and I be afraid I have 
 be guilty , once or twice , of vulgar familiarity . you will excuse I , I 
 hope . this have be an exciting interview - I think I be go to cry . " 
 she run out of the room ; and carry away with she some of my kindliest 
 feeling , short as the time of our acquaintance have be . what a wife 
 and what a mother be lose there - and all for want of a pretty face ! 
 leave alone , my thought inevitably revert to Dunboyne the elder , 
 and to all that have happen in Mr. Gracedieu 's family since the irish 
 gentleman have write to I in bygone year . 
 the terrible choice of responsibility which have prey on the 
 Minister 's mind have be foresee by Mr. Dunboyne , when he first think 
 of adopt his infant niece , and have warn he to dread what might 
 happen in the future , if he bring she up as a member of the family 
 with his own boy , and if the two young people become at a later period 
 attach to each other . how have the wise foresight , which offer such 
 a contrast to the poor Minister 's impulsive act of mercy , meet with its 
 reward ? Fate or Providence   call it which we may   have bring Dunboyne 's 
 son and the daughter of the murderess together ; have inspire those two 
 stranger with love ; and have embolden they to plight their troth by a 
 marriage engagement . be the man 's betrayal of the trust place in he 
 by the faithful girl to be esteem a fortunate circumstance by the 
 two person who know the true story of her parentage , the Minister and 
 myself ? could we rejoice in an act of infidelity which have embitter 
 and darken the gentle harmless life of the victim ? or could we , on the 
 other hand , encourage the ruthless deceit , the hateful treachery , 
 which have put the wicked Helena - with no exposure to dread if she 
 marry - into her wrong sister 's place ? impossible ! in the one case as 
 in the other , impossible ! 
 equally hopeless do the prospect appear , when I try to determine what 
 my own individual course of action ought to be . 
 in my calm moment , the idea have occur to my mind of go to 
 Dunboyne the young , and , if he have any sense of shame leave , exert 
 my influence to lead he back to his betrothed wife . how could I now do 
 this , consistently with my duty to the young man 's father ; know what 
 I know , and not forget that I have myself advise Mr. Gracedieu 
 to keep the truth conceal , when I be equally ignorant of Philip 
 Dunboyne 's parentage and of Helena Gracedieu 's treachery ? 
 even if event so order it that the marriage of Eunice might yet take 
 place - without any interference exert to produce that result , one way 
 or the other , on my part - it would be just as impossible for I to speak 
 out now , as it have be in the long - past year when I have so cautiously 
 answer Mr. Dunboyne 's letter . but what would he think of I if 
 accident lead , soon or later , to the disclosure which I have feel bind 
 to conceal ? the more I try to forecast the chance of the future , the 
 darker and the darker be the view that face I . 
 to my sink heart and weary mind , good Dame Nature present a more 
 acceptable prospect , when I happen to look out of the window of my 
 room . there I see the tree and flowerbed of a garden , tempt I 
 irresistibly under the cloudless sunshine of a fine day . I be on my way 
 out , to recover heart and hope , when a knock at the door stop I . 
 have Miss Jillgall return ? when I say " come in , " Mr. Gracedieu open 
 the door , and enter the room . 
 he be so weak that he stagger as he approach I . lead he to 
 a chair , I notice a wild look in his eye , and a flush on his haggard 
 cheek . something have happen . 
 " when you be with I in my room , " he begin , " do I not tell you that I 
 have forget something ? " 
 " certainly you do . " 
 " well , I have find the lost remembrance . my misfortune - I ought to call 
 it the punishment for my sin , be recall to I now . the bad curse 
 that can fall on a father be the curse that have come to I . I have a 
 wicked daughter . my own child , sir ! my own child ! " 
 have he be awake , while Miss Jillgall and I have be talk outside 
 his door ? have he hear she ask I if Mr. Gracedieu have say nothing 
 of Helena 's infamous conduct to her sister , while he be speak of 
 Eunice ? the way to the lost remembrance have perhaps be find there . 
 in any case , after that bitter allusion to his " wicked daughter " some 
 result must follow . Helena Gracedieu and a day of reckoning might be 
 near to each other already than I have venture to hope . 
 I wait anxiously for what he might say to I next . 
 CHAPTER XXXVI . the wandering MIND . 
 for the moment , the Minister disappoint I . 
 without speak , without even look up , he take out his pocketbook , 
 and begin to write in it . constantly interrupt either by a trembling 
 in the hand that hold the pencil , or by a difficulty   as I imagine 
 in express thought imperfectly realize - his patience give way ; he 
 dash the book on the floor . 
 " my mind be go ! " he burst out . " oh , Father in Heaven , let death 
 deliver I from a body without a mind ! " 
 who could hear he , and be guilty of the cruelty of preach 
 self - control ? I pick up the pocketbook , and offer to help he . 
 " do you think you can ? " he ask . 
 " I can at least try . " 
 " good fellow ! what should I do without you ? see now ; here be my 
 difficulty . I have get so many thing to say , I want to separate 
 they - or else they will all run into each other . look at the book , " my 
 poor friend say mournfully ; " they have run into each other in spite of 
 I . " 
 the entry prove to be nearly incomprehensible . here and there I 
 discover some scatter word , which show themselves more or less 
 distinctly in the midst of the surround confusion . the first word 
 that I could make out be " Education . " help by that hint , I trust 
 to guess - work to guide I in speak to he . it be necessary to be 
 positive , or he would have lose all faith in I . 
 " well ? " he say impatiently . 
 " well , " I answer , " you have something to say to I about the education 
 which you have give to your daughter . " 
 " do not   put they together ! " he cry . " dear , patient , sweet Eunice must 
 not be confound with that she - devil - " 
 " hush , hush , Mr. Gracedieu ! badly as Miss Helena have behave , she be 
 your own child . " 
 " I repudiate she , sir ! think for a moment of what she have do - and 
 then think of the religious education that I have give she . heartless ! 
 Deceitful ! the most ignorant creature in the low den of this town 
 could have do nothing more basely cruel . and this , after year on 
 year of patient christian instruction on my part ! what be religion ? 
 what be education ? I read a horrible book once   I forget who be the 
 author ; it call religion superstition , and education empty form . 
 I do not   know ; upon my word I do not   know that the book may not - oh , my 
 tongue ! why do not   I keep a guard over my tongue ? be you a father , 
 too ? do not   interrupt I . put yourself in my place , and think of it . 
 Heartless , deceitful , and my daughter . give I the pocketbook ; I want 
 to see which memorandum come first . " 
 he have now work himself into a state of excitement , which relieve 
 his spirit of the depression that have weigh on they up to this time . 
 his harmless vanity , always , as I suspect , a latent quality in 
 his kindly nature , have already restore his confidence . with a 
 self - sufficient smile he consult his own unintelligible entry , and 
 make his own wild discovery . 
 " ah , yes ; ' M ' stand for Minister ; I come first . be I to blame ? Am 
 I - God forgive I my many sin - be I heartless ? be I deceitful ? " 
 " my good friend , not even your enemy could say that ! " 
 " thank you . who come next ? " he consult the book again . " her mother , 
 her sainted mother , come next . People say she be like her mother . be 
 my wife heartless ? be the angel of my life deceitful ? " 
  " that , " I think to myself , " be exactly what your wife be - and 
 exactly what reappear in your wife 's child . " 
 " where do she wickedness come from ? " he go on . " not from her mother ; 
 not from I ; not from a neglect education . " he suddenly step up 
 to I and lay his hand on my shoulder ; his voice drop to hoarse , 
 moaning , awestruck tone . " shall I tell you what it be ? a possession of 
 the devil . " 
 it be so evidently desirable to prevent any continuation of such 
 a train of thought as this , that I could feel no hesitation in 
 interrupt he . 
 " will you hear what I have to say ? " I ask bluntly . 
 his humor change again ; he make I a low bow , and go back to his 
 chair . " I will hear you with pleasure , " he answer politely . " you 
 be the most eloquent man I know , with one exception - myself . of 
 course - myself . " 
 " it be mere waste of time , " I continue , " to regret the excellent 
 education which your daughter have misuse . " make that reply , I be 
 tempt to add another word of truth . all education be at the mercy of 
 two powerful counter - influence : the influence of temperament , and the 
 influence of circumstance . but this be philosophy . how could I expect 
 he to submit to philosophy ? " what we know of Miss Helena , " I go on , 
 " must be enough for we . she have plot , and she mean to succeed . stop 
 she . " 
 " just my idea ! " he declare firmly . " I refuse my consent to that 
 abominable marriage . " 
 in the popular phrase , I strike while the iron be hot . " you must do 
 more than that , sir , " I tell he . 
 his vanity suddenly take the alarm - I be lead he rather too 
 undisguisedly . he hand his book back to I . " you will find , " he say 
 loftily , " that I have put it all down there . " 
 I pretend to find it , and read an imaginary entry to this effect : 
 " after what she have already do , Helena be capable of marry in 
 defiance of my wish and command . this must be consider and provide 
 against . " so far , I have succeed in flatter he . but when   thinking 
 of his paternal authority   I allude next to his daughter 's age , his 
 eye rest on I with a look of downright terror . 
 " no more of that ! " he say . " I will not   talk of the girl ' age even with 
 you . " 
 what do he mean ? it be useless to ask . I go on with the matter in 
 hand - still deliberately speak to he , as I might have speak to 
 a man with an intellect as clear as my own . in my experience , this 
 practice generally stimulate a weak intelligence to do its good . we 
 all know how child receive talk that be lower , or book that be 
 lower , to their presume level . " I shall take it for grant , " I 
 continue , " that Miss Helena be still under your lawful authority . she 
 can only arrive at her end by mean of a runaway marriage . in that 
 case , much depend on the man . you tell I you could not   help like he . 
 this be , of course , before you know of the infamous manner in which he 
 have behave . you must have change your opinion now . " 
 he seem to be at a loss how to reply . " I be afraid , " he say , " the 
 young man be draw into it by Helena . " 
 here be Miss Jillgall 's apology for Philip Dunboyne repeat in other 
 word . despise and detest the fellow as I do , I be force to 
 admit to myself that he must be recommend by personal attraction 
 which it would be necessary to reckon with . I try to get some more 
 information from Mr. Gracedieu . 
 " the excuse you have just make for he , " I resume , " imply that he be 
 a weak man ; easily persuade , easily lead . " 
 the Minister answer by nod his head . 
 " such weakness as that , " I persist , " be a vice in itself . it have lead 
 already , sir , to the sad result . " 
 he admit this by another nod . 
 " I do not   wish to shock you , Mr. Gracedieu ; but I must recommend 
 employ the mean that present themselves . you must practice on this 
 man 's weakness , for the sake of the good that may come of it . I hear he 
 be in London with his father . try the strong influence , and write to 
 his father . there be another reason besides for do this . it be quite 
 possible that the truth have be conceal from Mr. Dunboyne the elder . 
 take care that he be inform of what have really happen . be you 
 look for pen , ink , and paper ? let I offer you the writing material 
 which I use in travel . " 
 I place they before he . he take up the pen ; he arrange the paper ; he 
 be eager to begin . 
 after write a few word , he stop - reflect - try again - stop 
 again - tear up the little that he have do - and begin a new letter , 
 end in the same miserable result . it be impossible to witness 
 his helplessness , to see how pitiably patient he be over his own 
 incapacity , and to let the melancholy spectacle go on . I propose to 
 write the letter ; authenticate it , of course , by his signature . when 
 he allow I to take the pen , he turn away his face , ashamed to let 
 I see what he suffer . be this the same man , whose great nature have 
 so nobly assert itself in the condemn cell ? poor mortality ! 
 the letter be easily write . 
 I have only to inform Mr. Dunboyne of his son 's conduct ; repeat , in 
 the plainest language that I could use , what Miss Jillgall have relate 
 to I . arrive at the conclusion , I contrive to make Mr. Gracedieu 
 express himself in these strong term : " I protest against the marriage 
 in justice to you , sir , as well as to myself . we can neither of we 
 content to be accomplice in an act of domestic treason of the basest 
 kind . " 
 in silence , the Minister read the letter , and attach his signature to 
 it . in silence , he rise and take my arm . I ask if he wish to go to 
 his room . he only reply by a sign . I offer to sit with he , and try 
 to cheer he . gratefully , he press my hand : gently , he put I back 
 from the door . crush by the miserable discovery of the decay of his 
 own faculty ! what could I do ? what could I say ? nothing ! 
 Miss Jillgall be in the drawing - room . with the necessary explanation , 
 I show she the letter . she read it with breathless interest . " it 
 terrify one to think how much depend on old Mr. Dunboyne , " she say . 
 " you know he . what sort of man be he ? " 
 I could only assure she   after what I remember of his letter to I 
 that he be a man whom we could depend upon . 
 Miss Jillgall possess treasure of information to which I could lay 
 no claim . Mr. Dunboyne , she tell I , be a scholar , and a writer , and a 
 rich man . his view on marriage be liberal in the extreme . let his 
 son find good principle , good temper , and good look , in a wife , and he 
 would promise to find the money . 
 " I get these particular , " say Miss Jillgall , " from dear Euneece . they 
 be surely encouraging ? that Helena may carry out Mr. Dunboyne 's view 
 in her personal appearance be , I regret to say , what I can not   deny . 
 but as to the other qualification , how hopeful be the prospect ! good 
 principle , and good temper ? ha ! ha ! Helena have the principle of 
 Jezebel , and the temper of Lady Macbeth . " 
 after dash off this striking sketch of character , the fair artist 
 ask to look at my letter again , and observe that the address be 
 want . " I can set this right for you , " she resume , " thank , as 
 before , to my sweet Euneece . and   do not   be in a hurry   I can make myself 
 useful in another way . oh , how I do enjoy make myself useful ! if 
 you trust your letter to the basket in the hall , Helena 's lovely 
 eye - capable of the meanest conceivable action - be sure to take a 
 peep at the address . in that case , do you think your letter would get to 
 London ? I be afraid you detect a faint infusion of spitefulness in that 
 question . oh , for shame ! I will post the letter myself . " 
 CHAPTER XXXVII . the shameless SISTER . 
 for some reason , which my unassisted penetration be unable to discover , 
 Miss Helena Gracedieu keep out of my way . 
 at dinner , on the day of my arrival , and at breakfast on the next 
 morning , she be present of course ; ready to make herself agreeable in 
 a modest way , and provide with the necessary supply of cheerful 
 small - talk . but the meal have come to an end , she have her domestic 
 excuse ready , and unostentatiously disappear like a well - breed young 
 lady . I never meet she on the stair , never find myself intrude on 
 she in the drawing - room , never catch she get out of my way in the 
 garden . as much at a loss for an explanation of these mystery as I 
 be , Miss Jillgall 's interest in my welfare lead she to caution I in a 
 vague and general way . 
 " take my word for it , dear Mr. Governor , she have some design on you . 
 will you allow an insignificant old maid to offer a suggestion ? oh , 
 thank you ; I will venture to advise . please look back at your experience 
 of the very bad female prisoner you ever have to deal with - and be 
 guide accordingly if Helena catch you at a private interview . " 
 in less than half an hour afterward , Helena catch I . I be write 
 in my room , when the maidservant come in with a message : " Miss 
 Helena 's compliment , sir , and would you please spare her half an hour , 
 downstair ? " 
 my first excuse be of course that I be engage . this be dispose of 
 by a second message , provide beforehand , no doubt , for an anticipate 
 refusal : " Miss Helena wish I to say , sir , that her time be your 
 time . " I be still obstinate ; I plead next that my day be fill up . 
 a third message have evidently be prepare , even for this emergency : 
 " Miss Helena will regret , sir , have the pleasure defer , but she 
 will leave you to make your own appointment for to - morrow . " persistency 
 so inveterate as this lead to a result which Mr. Gracedieu 's cautious 
 daughter have not perhaps contemplate : it put I on my guard . there 
 seem to be a chance , to say the least of it , that I might serve 
 Eunice 's interest if I discover what the enemy have to say . I lock 
 up my writing - declare myself incapable of put Miss Helena to 
 needless inconvenience - and follow the maid to the low floor of the 
 house . 
 the room to which I be conduct prove to be empty . I look round I . 
 if I have be tell that a man live there who be absolutely indifferent 
 to appearance , I should have conclude that his view be faithfully 
 represent by his place of abode . the chair and table remind I of 
 a railway waiting - room . the shabby little bookcase be the mute record 
 of a life indifferent to literature . the carpet be of that dreadful 
 drab color , still the cherished favorite of the average english mind , in 
 spite of every protest that can be enter against it , on behalf of Art . 
 the ceiling , recently whitewash ; make my eye ache when they look at 
 it . on either side of the window , flaccid green curtain hang helplessly 
 with nothing to loop they up . the writing - desk and the paper - case , 
 view as specimen of woodwork , recall the ready - make bedroom on 
 show in cheap shop . the book , mostly in slate - color binding , be 
 devoted to the literature which be call religious ; I only discover 
 three worldly publication among they - Domestic Cookery , Etiquette for 
 lady , and hint on the Breeding of Poultry . an ugly little clock , 
 tick noisily in a black case , and two candlestick of base 
 metal place on either side of it , complete the ornament on the 
 chimney - piece . neither picture nor print hide the barrenness of the 
 wall . I see no needlework and no flower . the one object in the place 
 which show any pretension to beauty be a look - glass in an elegant 
 gilt frame - sacred to vanity , and worthy of the office that it fill . 
 such be Helena Gracedieu 's sitting - room . I really could not help 
 think : how like she ! 
 she come in with a face perfectly adapt to the circumstance - please 
 and smile ; amiably deferential , in consideration of the claim of her 
 father 's guest - and , to my surprise , in some degree suggestive of one of 
 those incorrigible female prisoner , to whom Miss Jillgall have refer 
 I when she offer a word of advice . 
 " how kind of you to come so soon ! excuse my receive you in my 
 housekeeping - room ; we shall not be interrupt here . very plainly 
 furnish , be it not ? I dislike ostentation and display . ornament be 
 out of place in a room devote to domestic necessity . I hate domestic 
 necessity . you notice the look - glass ? it be a present . I should 
 never have put such a thing up . perhaps my vanity excuse it . " 
 she point the last remark by a look at herself in the glass ; use it , 
 while she despise it . yes : there be a handsome face , pay she its 
 reflect compliment - but not so well match as it might have be by 
 a handsome figure . her foot be too large ; her shoulder be too 
 high ; the graceful undulation of a well - make girl be absent when she 
 walk ; and her bosom be , to my mind , unduly develop for her time of 
 life . 
 she sit down by I with she back to the light . happen to be opposite 
 to the window , I offer she the advantage of a clear view of my face . 
 she wait for I , and I wait for she - and there be an awkward pause 
 before we speak . she set the example . 
 " be not   it curious ? " she remark . " when two people have something 
 particular to say to each other , and nothing to hinder they , they never 
 seem to know how to say it . you be the old , sir . why do not   you 
 begin ? " 
 " because I have nothing particular to say . " 
 " in plain word , you mean that I must begin ? " 
 " if you please . " 
 " very well . I want to know whether I have give you   and Miss Jillgall , 
 of course   as much time as you want , and as many opportunity as you 
 could desire ? " 
 " pray go on , Miss Helena . " 
 " have I not say enough already ? " 
 " not enough , I regret to say , to convey your meaning to I . " 
 she draw her chair a little far away from I . " I be sadly 
 disappoint , " she say . " I have such a high opinion of your perfect 
 candor . I think to myself : there be such a striking expression of 
 frankness in his face . another illusion go ! I hope you will not   think I 
 be offend , if I say a bold word . I be only a young girl , to be sure ; 
 but I be not quite such a fool as you take I for . do you really think 
 I do not   know that Miss Jillgall have be tell you everything that be 
 bad about I ; put every mistake that I have make , every fault that 
 I have commit , in the bad possible point of view ? and you have 
 listen to she - quite naturally ! and you be prejudiced , strongly 
 prejudice , against I - what else could you be , under the circumstance ? 
 I do not   complain ; I have purposely keep out of your way , and out of Miss 
 Jillgall 's way ; in short , I have afford you every facility , as the 
 prospectus say . I only want to know if my turn have come at last . once 
 more , have I give you time enough , and opportunity enough ? " 
 " a great deal more than enough . " 
 " do you mean that you have make up your mind about I without stop 
 to think ? " 
 " that be exactly what I mean . an act of treachery , Miss Helena , be 
 an act of treachery ; no honest person need hesitate to condemn it . I be 
 sorry you send for I . " 
 I get up to go . with an ironical gesture of remonstrance , she sign to 
 I to sit down again . 
 " must I remind you , dear sir , of our famous native virtue ? fair play be 
 surely due to a young person who have nobody to take her part . you talk 
 of treachery just how . I deny the treachery . please give I a hearing . " 
 I return to my chair . 
 " or would you prefer wait , " she go out , " till my sister come here 
 later in the day , and continue what Miss Jillgall have begin , with the 
 great advantage of be young and nice - look ? " 
 when the female mind get into this state , no wise man answer the 
 female question . 
 " be I to take silence as mean go on ? " Miss Helena inquire . 
 I beg she to interpret my silence in the sense most agreeable to 
 herself . 
 this naturally encourage she . she make a proposal : 
 " do you mind change place , sir ? " 
 " just as you like , Miss Helena . " 
 we change chair ; the light now fall full on her face . have she 
 deliberately challenge I to look into her secret mind if I could ? 
 anything like the stark insensibility of that young girl to every 
 refinement of feeling , to every become doubt of herself , to every 
 customary timidity of her age and sex in the presence of a man who have 
 not disguise his unfavorable opinion of she , I never meet with in all my 
 experience of the world and of woman . 
 " I wish to be quite mistress of myself , " she explain ; " your face , for 
 some reason which I really do not   know , irritate I . the fact be , I have 
 great pride in keep my temper . please make allowance . now about Miss 
 Jillgall . I suppose she tell you how my sister first meet with Philip 
 Dunboyne ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " she also mention , perhaps , that he be a highly - cultivate man ? " 
 " she do . " 
 " now we shall get on . when Philip come to our town here , and see I for 
 the first time - do you object to my speak familiarly of he , by his 
 christian name ? " 
 " in the case of any one else in your position , Miss Helena , I should 
 venture to call it bad taste . " 
 I be provoke into say that . it fail entirely as a well - mean 
 effort in the way of imply reproof . Miss Helena smile . 
 " you grant I a liberty which you would not concede to another girl . " 
 that be how she view it . " we be get on well already . to return 
 to what I be say . when Philip first see I - I have it from himself , 
 mind - he feel that I should have be his choice , if he have meet with I 
 before he meet with my sister . do you blame he ? " 
 " if you will take my advice , " I say , " you will not inquire too closely 
 into my opinion of Mr. Philip Dunboyne . " 
 " perhaps you do not   wish I to say anymore ? " she suggest . 
 " on the contrary , pray go on , if you like . " 
 after that concession , she be amiability itself . " oh , yes , " she assure 
 I , " that be easily do . " and she go on accordingly : " Philip have 
 inform I of the state of his affection , I naturally follow his 
 example . in fact , we exchange confession . our marriage engagement 
 follow as a matter of course . do you blame I ? " 
 " I will wait till you have do . " 
 " I have no more to say . " 
 she make that amazing reply with such perfect composure , that I begin 
 to fear there must have be some misunderstanding between we . " be that 
 really all you have to say for yourself ? " I persist . 
 her patience with I be most exemplary . she lower herself to my 
 level . not trust to word only on this occasion , she   so to say   beat 
 her meaning into my head by gesticulate on her finger , as if she be 
 educate a child . 
 " Philip and I , " she begin , " be the victim of an accident , which keep 
 we apart when we ought to have meet together - we be not responsible 
 for an accident . " she impress this on I by touch her forefinger . 
 " Philip and I fall in love with each other at first sight - we be not 
 responsible for the feeling implant in our nature by an all - wise 
 Providence . " she assist I in understand this by touch her 
 middle finger . " Philip and I owe a duty to each other , and accept a 
 responsibility under those circumstance - the responsibility of get 
 marry . " a touch on her third finger , and an indulgent bow , announce 
 that the lesson be end . " I be not a clever man like you , " she 
 modestly acknowledge , " but I ask you to help we , when you next see my 
 father , with some confidence . you know exactly what to say to he , by 
 this time . nothing have be forget . " 
 " pardon I , " I say , " a person have be forget . " 
 " indeed ? what person ? " 
 " your sister . " 
 a little perplex at first , Miss Helena reflect , and recover 
 herself . 
 " ah , yes , " she say ; " I be afraid I might be oblige to trouble you 
 for an explanation - I see it now . you be shock   very properly   when 
 feeling of enmity exist between near relation ; and you wish to be 
 assure that I bear no malice toward Eunice . she be violent , she be 
 sulky , she be stupid , she be selfish ; and she cruelly refuse to live in 
 the same house with I . make your mind easy , sir , I forgive my sister . " 
 let I not attempt to disguise it - Miss Helena Gracedieu confound I . 
 ordinary audacity be one of those form of insolence which mature 
 experience dismisse with contempt . this girl 's audacity strike down 
 all resistance , for one shocking reason : it be unquestionably sincere . 
 strong conviction of her own virtue star at I in her proud and daring 
 eye . at that time , I be not aware of what I have learn since . the 
 horrid hardening of her moral sense have be accomplish by herself . 
 in her diary , there have be find the confession of a secret course of 
 reading - with supplementary reflection flow from it , which need only 
 to be describe as worthy of their source . 
 a person capable of repentance and reform would , in her place , have 
 see that she have disgust I . not a suspicion of this occur to Miss 
 Helena . " I see you be embarrassed , " she remark , " and I be at no loss 
 to account for it . you be too polite to acknowledge that I have not 
 make a friend of you yet . oh , I mean to do it ! " 
 " no , " I say , " I think not . " 
 " we shall see , " she reply . " soon or later , you will find yourself 
 say a kind word to my father for Philip and I . " she rise , and take 
 a turn in the room - and stop , eye I attentively . " be you think 
 of Eunice ? " she ask . 
 " yes . " 
 " she have your sympathy , I suppose ? " 
 " my heart - feel sympathy . " 
 " I need not   ask how I stand in your estimation , after that . pray express 
 yourself freely . your look confess it - you view I with a feeling of 
 aversion . " 
 " I view you with a feeling of horror . " 
 the exasperating influence of her language , her look , and her tone 
 would , as I venture to think , have get to the end of another man 's 
 self - control before this . anyway , she have at last irritated I into 
 speak as strongly as I feel . what I say have be so plainly 
  perhaps so rudely   express , that misinterpretation of it seem to be 
 impossible . she mistake I , nevertheless . the most merciless disclosure 
 of the dreary side of human destiny be surely to be find in the failure 
 of word , speak or write , so to answer their purpose that we can 
 trust they , in our attempt to communicate with each other . even when 
 he seem to be connect , by the near and dear relation , with his 
 fellow - mortal , what a solitary creature , try by the test of sympathy , 
 the human being really be in the teem world that he inhabit ! 
 afford one more example of the impotence of human language to speak 
 for itself , my misinterpreted word have find their way to the one 
 sensitive place in Helena Gracedieu 's impenetrable nature . she betray 
 it in the quivering and flush of her hard face , and in the appeal to 
 the look - glass which escape her eye the next moment . my hasty reply 
 have rouse the idea of a covert insult address to her handsome face . 
 in other word , I have wound her vanity . drive by resentment , out come 
 the secret distrust of I which have be lurk in that cold heart , 
 from the moment when we first meet . 
 " I inspire you with horror , and Eunice inspire you with compassion , " 
 she say . " that , Mr. Governor , be not natural . " 
 " may I ask why ? " 
 " you know why . " 
 " no . " 
 " you will have it ? " 
 " I want an explanation , Miss Helena , if that be what you mean . " 
 " take your explanation , then ! you be not the stranger you be say 
 to be to my sister and to I . your interest in Eunice be a personal 
 interest of some kind . I do not   pretend to guess what it be . as for 
 myself , it be plain that somebody else have be set you against I , 
 before Miss Jillgall get possession of your private ear . " 
 in allude to Eunice , she have blunder , strangely enough , on something 
 like the truth . but when she speak of herself , the headlong malignity 
 of her suspicion - make every allowance for the anger that have hurry 
 she into they - seem to call for some little protest against a false 
 assertion . I tell she that she be completely mistaken . 
 " I be completely right , " she answer ; " I see it . " 
 " saw what ? " 
 " see you pretend to be a stranger to I . " 
 " when do I do that ? " 
 " you do it when we meet at the station . " 
 the reply be too ridiculous for the preservation of any control over my 
 own sense of humor . it be wrong ; but it be inevitable - I laugh . she 
 look at I with a fury , reveal a concentration of evil passion in 
 she which I have not see yet . I ask her pardon ; I beg she to think 
 a little before she persist in take a view of my conduct unworthy of 
 she , and unjust to myself . 
 " unjust to you ! " she burst out . " who be you ? a man who have drive your 
 trade have spy always at his command - yes ! and know how to use they . 
 you be prim with private information - you have , for all I know , a 
 steal photograph of I in your pocket - before ever you come to our 
 town . do you still deny it ? oh , sir , why degrade yourself by tell a 
 lie ? " 
 no such outrage as this have ever be inflict on I , at any time in my 
 life . my forbearance must , I suppose , have be more severely try than 
 I be aware of myself . with or without excuse for I , I be weak enough 
 to let a girl 's spiteful tongue ste I , and , bad still , to let she 
 see that I feel it . 
 " you shall have no second opportunity , Miss Gracedieu , of insult I . " 
 with that foolish reply , I open the door violently and go out . 
 she run after I , triumph in have rouse the temper of a man old 
 enough to have be her grandfather , and catch I by the arm . " your 
 own conduct have expose you . "   that be literally how she express 
 herself .   " I see it in your eye when we meet at the station . you , the 
 stranger - you who allow poor ignorant I to introduce myself - you know 
 I all the time , know I by sight ! " 
 I shake her hand off with an inconsiderable roughness , humiliate to 
 remember . " it be false ! " I cry . " I know you by your likeness to your 
 mother . " 
 the moment the word have pass my lip , I come to my sens again ; I 
 remember what fatal word they might prove to be , if they reach the 
 Minister 's ear . 
 hear only by his daughter , my reply seem to cool the heat of her 
 anger in an instant . 
 " so you know my mother ? " she say . " my father never tell we that , when 
 he speak of your be such a very old friend of his . strange , to say 
 the least of it . " 
 I be wise enough - now when wisdom have come too late - not to attempt to 
 explain myself , and not to give she an opportunity of say more . 
 " we be neither of we in a state of mind , " I answer , " to allow this 
 interview to continue . I must try to recover my composure ; and I leave 
 you to do the same . " 
 in the solitude of my room , I be able to look my position fairly in the 
 face . 
 Mr. Gracedieu 's wife have come to I , in the long - past time , without her 
 husband 's knowledge . tempt to a cruel resolve by the maternal triumph 
 of have an infant of her own , she have resolve to rid herself of the 
 poor little rival in her husband 's fatherly affection , by consign the 
 adopt child to the keeping of a charitable asylum . she have dare to 
 ask I to help she . I have keep the secret of her shameful visit - I can 
 honestly say , for the Minister 's sake . and now , long after time have 
 doom those event to oblivion , they be revive - and revive by I . 
 thank to my folly , Mr. Gracedieu 's daughter know what I have conceal 
 from Mr. Gracedieu himself . 
 what course do respect for my friend , and respect for myself , counsel 
 I to take ? 
 I could only see before I a choice of two evil . to wait for 
 event - with the too certain prospect of a vindictive betrayal of my 
 indiscretion by Helena Gracedieu . or to take the initiative into my own 
 hand , and risk consequence which I might regret to the end of my life , 
 by make my confession to the Minister . 
 before I have decide , somebody knock at the door . it be the 
 maid - servant again . be it possible she have be send by Helena ? 
 " another message ? " 
 " yes , sir . my master wish to see you . " 
 CHAPTER XXXVIII . the girl ' AGES . 
 have the Minister 's desire to see I be inspire by his daughter 's 
 betrayal of what I have unfortunately say to she ? although he would 
 certainly not consent to receive she personally , she would be at liberty 
 to adopt a write method of communication with he , and the letter 
 might be address in such a manner as to pique his curiosity . if 
 Helena 's vindictive purpose have be already accomplish - and if Mr. 
 Gracedieu leave I no alternative but to present his unworthy wife in her 
 true character - I can honestly say that I dread the consequence , not 
 as they might affect myself , but as they might affect my unhappy friend 
 in his enfeeble state of body and mind . 
 when I enter his room , he be still in bed . 
 the bed - curtain be so draw , on the side near to the window , as to 
 keep the light from fall too brightly on his weak eye . in the shadow 
 thus throw on he , it be not possible to see his face plainly enough , 
 from the open side of the bed , to arrive at any definite conclusion as 
 to what might be pass in his mind . after have be awake for some 
 hour during the early part of the night , he have enjoy a long and 
 undisturbed sleep . " I feel strong this morning , " he say , " and I wish 
 to speak to you while my mind be clear . " 
 if the quiet tone of his voice be not an assumed tone , he be surely 
 ignorant of all that have pass between his daughter and myself . 
 " eunice will be here soon , " he proceed , " and I ought to explain why I 
 have send for she to come and meet you . I have reason , serious reason , 
 mind , for wish you to compare her personal appearance with Helena 's 
 personal appearance , and then to tell I which of the two , on a fair 
 comparison , look the eld . pray bear in mind that I attach the 
 great importance to the conclusion at which you may arrive . " 
 he speak more clearly and collectedly than I have hear he speak yet . 
 here and there I detect hesitation and repetition , which I have 
 purposely pass over . the substance of what he say to I be all that I 
 shall present in this place . careful as I have be to keep my record of 
 event within strict limit , I have write at a length which I be far 
 indeed from contemplate when I accept Mr. Gracedieu 's invitation . 
 have promise to comply with the strange request which he have 
 address to I , I venture to remind he of past occasion on which 
 he have pointedly abstain , when the subject present itself , from 
 speak of the girl ' age . " you have leave it to my discretion , " I 
 add , " to decide a question in which you be seriously interested , 
 relate to your daughter . have I no excuse for regret that I have 
 not be admit to your confidence a little more freely ? " 
 " you have every excuse , " he answer . " but you trouble I all the same . 
 there be something else that I have to say to you - and your curiosity 
 get in the way . " 
 he say this with a sullen emphasis . in my position , the bad of evil 
 be suspense . I tell he that my curiosity could wait ; and I beg that 
 he would relieve his mind of what be press on it at the moment . 
 " let I think a little , " he say . 
 I wait anxiously for the decision at which he might arrive . nothing 
 come of it to justify my misgiving . " leave what I have in my mind to 
 ripen in my mind , " he say . " the mystery about the girl ' age seem to 
 irritate you . if I put my good friend 's temper to any further trial , he 
 will be of no use to I . never mind if my head swim ; I be use to that . 
 now listen ! " 
 strange as the preface be , the explanation that follow be strange 
 yet . I offer a shortened and simplified version , give accurately the 
 substance of what I hear . 
 the Minister enter without reserve on the mysterious subject of the 
 age . eunice , he inform I , be nearly two year old than Helena . if 
 she outwardly show her superiority of age , any person acquaint with 
 the circumstance under which the adopt infant have be receive into 
 Mr. Gracedieu 's childless household , need only compare the so - call 
 sister in after - life , and would thereupon identify the eldest - look 
 young lady of the two as the offspring of the woman who have be hang 
 for murder . with such a misfortune as this present itself as a 
 possible prospect , the Minister be bind to prevent the girl from 
 ignorantly betray each other by allusion to their age and their 
 birthday . after much thought , he have devise a desperate mean of 
 meet the difficulty - already make known , as I be tell , for the 
 information of stranger who may read the page that have go before 
 mine . my friend 's plan of proceed have , by the nature of it , expose 
 he to injurious comment , to embarrass question , and to doubt and 
 misconception , all patiently endure in consideration of the security 
 that have be attain . proud of his explanation , Mr. Gracedieu 's vanity 
 call upon I to acknowledge that my curiosity have be satisfy , and 
 my doubt completely set at rest . 
 no : my obstinate common sense be not reduce to submission , even yet . 
 look back over a lapse of seventeen year , I ask what have happen , 
 in that long interval , to justify the anxiety which still appear to 
 trouble my friend . 
 this time , my harmless curiosity could be gratify by a reply express 
 in three word - nothing have happen . 
 then what , in Heaven 's name , be the Minister afraid of ? 
 his voice drop to a whisper . he say : " I be afraid of the woman . " 
 who be the woman ? 
 two of they actually prove to be the servant employ in Mr. 
 Gracedieu 's house , at the bygone time when he have bring the child home 
 with he from the prison ! to point out the absurdity of the reason 
 that he give for fear what female curiosity might yet attempt , if 
 circumstance happen to encourage it , would have be a mere waste of 
 word . dismiss the subject , I next ascertain that the Minister 's 
 doubt extend even to the two female warder , who have be appoint 
 to watch the murderess in turn , during her last day in prison . I easily 
 relieve his mind in this case . one of the warder be dead . the 
 other have marry a farmer in Australia . have we exhaust the list of 
 suspect person yet ? no : there be one more left ; and the Minister 
 declare that he have first meet with she in my official residence , at the 
 time when I be Governor of the prison . 
 " she present herself to I by name , " he say ; " and she speak rudely . 
 a Miss - " he pause to consult his memory , and this time   thank perhaps 
 to his night 's rest   his memory answer the appeal . " I have get it ! " he 
 cry - " Miss Chance . " 
 my friend have interest I in his imaginary peril at last . it be just 
 possible that he might have a formidable person to deal with now . 
 during my residence at Florence , the Chaplain and I have take many a 
 retrospective look   as old man will   at past event in our life . my 
 former colleague speak of the time when he have perform clerical duty 
 for his friend , the rector of a parish church in London . neither he 
 nor I have hear again of the " Miss Chance " of our disagreeable prison 
 experience , whom he have marry to the dash dutch gentleman , Mr. 
 Tenbruggen . we could only wonder what have become of that mysterious 
 married pair . 
 Mr. Gracedieu be undoubtedly ignorant of the woman 's marriage , it be 
 not easy to say what the consequence might be , in his excitable state , 
 if I inform he of it . he would , in all probability , conclude that I 
 know more of the woman than he do . I decide on keep my own counsel , 
 for the present at least . 
 pass at once , therefore , to the one consideration of any importance , 
 I endeavor to find out whether Mr. Gracedieu and Mrs. Tenbruggen have 
 meet , or have communicate with each other in any way , during the long 
 period of separation that have take place between the Minister and 
 myself . if he have be so unlucky as to offend she , she be beyond all 
 doubt an enemy to be dread . apart , however , from a misfortune of this 
 kind , she would rank , in my opinion , with the other harmless object of 
 Mr. Gracedieu 's distrust . 
 in make my inquiry , I find that I have an obstacle to contend with . 
 while he feel the renovate influence of the repose that he enjoy , 
 the Minister have be able to think and to express himself with less 
 difficulty than usual . but the reserve of strength , on which the useful 
 exercise of his memory depend , begin to fail he as the interview 
 proceed . he distinctly recollect that ' something unpleasant have 
 pass between that audacious woman and himself . " but at what date - and 
 whether by word of mouth or by correspondence - be more than his memory 
 could now recall . he believe he be not mistake in tell I that he 
 " have be in two mind about she . " at one time , he be satisfied that he 
 have take wise measure for his own security , if she attempt to annoy 
 he . but there be another and a later time , when doubt and fear have 
 lay hold of he again . if I want to know how this have happen , he 
 fancy it be through a dream ; and if I ask what the dream be , he 
 could only beg and pray that I would spare his poor head . 
 unwilling even yet to submit unconditionally to defeat , it occur to 
 I to try a last experiment on my friend , without call for any mental 
 effort on his own part . the " Miss Chance " of former day might , by a 
 bare possibility , have write to he . I ask accordingly if he be in 
 the habit of keep his letter , and if he would allow I   when he have 
 rest a little   to lay they open before he , so that he could look at 
 the signature . " you might find the lose recollection in that way , " I 
 suggest , " at the bottom of one of your letter . " 
 he be in that state of weariness , poor fellow , in which a man will do 
 anything for the sake of peace . point to a cabinet in his room , 
 he give I a key take from a little basket on his bed . " look for 
 yourself , " he say . after some hesitation - for I naturally recoil 
 from examine another man 's correspondence - I decide on open the 
 cabinet , at any rate . 
 the letter - a large collection - be , to my relief , all neatly fold , 
 and indorse with the name of the writer . I could run harmlessly 
 through bundle after bundle in search of the one name that I want , 
 and still respect the privacy of the letter . my perseverance deserve 
 a reward - and fail to get it . the name I want steadily elude my 
 search . arrive at the upper shelf of the cabinet , I find it so high 
 that I could barely reach it with my hand . instead of get more 
 letter to look over , I pull down two newspaper . 
 one of they be an old copy of the Times , date back as far as 
 the 13th December , 1858 . it be carefully fold , longwise , with the 
 title - page uppermost . on the first column , at the left - hand side of the 
 sheet , appear the customary announcement of Births . a mark with a 
 blue pencil , against one of the advertisement , attract my attention . 
 I read these line : 
 " on the 10th inst . , the wife of the Rev. Abel Gracedieu , of a daughter . " 
 the second newspaper bear a later date , and contain nothing that 
 interested I . I naturally assume that the advertisement in the Times 
 have be insert at the desire of Mrs. Gracedieu ; and , after all that 
 I have hear , there be little difficulty in attribute the curious 
 omission of the place in which the child have be bear to the caution of 
 her husband . if Mrs. Tenbruggen   then Miss Chance   have happen to see 
 the advertisement in the great London newspaper , Mr. Gracedieu might 
 yet have good reason to congratulate himself on his prudent method of 
 provide against mischievous curiosity . 
 I turn toward the bed and look at he . his eye be closed . be he 
 sleep ? or be he try to remember what he have desire to say to I , 
 when the demand which I make on his memory have oblige he to wait for 
 a later opportunity ? 
 either way , there be something that quicken my sympathy , in the 
 spectacle of his helpless repose . it suggest to I personal reason 
 for his anxiety , which he have not mention , and which I have not 
 think of , up to this time . if the discovery that he dread take 
 place , his household would be break up , and his position as pastor 
 would suffer in the estimation of the flock . his own daughter would 
 refuse to live under the same roof with the daughter of an infamous 
 woman . popular opinion , among his congregation , judge a man who have 
 pass off the child of other parent as his own , would find that man 
 guilty of an act of deliberate deceit . 
 still oppress by reflection which point to the future in this 
 discouraging way , I be startle by a voice outside the door - a sweet , 
 sad voice - say , " may I come in ? " 
 the Minister 's eye open instantly : he raise himself in his bed . 
 " Eunice , at last ! " he cry . " let she in . " 
 CHAPTER XXXIX . the adopted child 
 I open the door . 
 Eunice pass I with the suddenness almost of a flash of light . when I 
 turn toward the bed , her arm be round her father 's neck . " oh , poor 
 papa , how ill you look ! " commonplace expression of fondness , and no 
 more ; but the tone give they a charm that subdue I . never have I feel 
 so indulgent toward Mr. Gracedieu 's unreasonable fear as when I see he 
 in the embrace of his adopt daughter . she have already remind I 
 of the bygone day when a bright little child have sit on my knee and 
 listen to the ticking of my watch . 
 the Minister gently lift her head from his breast . " my darling , " 
 he say , " you do not   see my old friend . love he , and look up to he , 
 Eunice . he will be your friend , too , when I be go . " 
 she come to I and offer her cheek to be kiss . it be sadly pale , 
 poor soul - and I could guess why . but her heart be now full of her 
 father . " do you think he be seriously ill ? " she whisper . what I ought 
 to have say I do not   know . her eye , the sweetest , true , lovely 
 eye I ever see in a human face , be plead with I . let my enemy 
 make the bad of it , if they like - I do certainly lie . and if I 
 deserve my punishment , I get it ; the poor child believe I ! " now I 
 be happy , " she say , gratefully . " only to hear your voice seem to 
 encourage I . on our way here , Selina do nothing but talk of you . she 
 tell I I should not   have time to feel afraid of the great man ; he would 
 make I fond of he directly . I say , ' be you fond of he ? ' she say , 
 ' madly in love with he , my dear . ' my little friend really think you 
 like she , and be very proud of it . there be some people who call she 
 ugly . I hope you do not   agree with they ? " 
 I believe I should have lie again , if Mr. Gracedieu have not call I 
 to the bedside . 
 " how do she strike you ? " he whisper , eagerly . " be it too soon to ask 
 if she show her age in her face ? " 
 " neither in her face nor her figure , " I answer : " it astonish I 
 that you can ever have doubt it . no stranger , judge by personal 
 appearance , could fail to make the mistake of think Helena the old 
 of the two . " 
 he look fondly at Eunice . " her figure seem to bear out what you say , " 
 he go on . " almost childish , be not   it ? " 
 I could not agree to that . slim , supple , simply graceful in every 
 movement , Eunice 's figure , in the charm of first youth , only wait its 
 perfect development . Most man , look at she as she stand at the other 
 end of the room with she back toward we , would have guess her age to 
 be sixteen . 
 find that I fail to agree with he , Mr. Gracedieu 's misgiving 
 return . " you speak very confidently , " he say , " consider that you 
 have not see the girl together . think what a dreadful blow it would be 
 to I if you make a mistake . " 
 I declare , with perfect sincerity , that there be no fear of a mistake . 
 the bare idea of make the propose comparison be hateful to I . if 
 Helena and I have happen to meet at that moment , I should have turn 
 away from she by instinct - she would have disturb my impression of 
 Eunice . 
 the Minister sign to I to move a little near to he . " I must say 
 it , " he whisper , " and I be afraid of she hear I . be there anything 
 in her face that remind you of her miserable mother ? " 
 I have hardly patience to answer the question : it be simply 
 preposterous . her hair be by many shade dark than her mother 's hair ; 
 her eye be of a different color . there be an exquisite tenderness 
 and sincerity in their expression - make additionally beautiful , to my 
 mind , by a gentle , uncomplaine sadness . it be impossible even to 
 think of the eye of the murderess when I look at her child . 
 Eunice 's low feature , again , have none of her mother 's regularity 
 of proportion . her smile , simple and sweet , and soon pass away , 
 be certainly not an inherit smile on the maternal side . whether she 
 resemble her father , I be unable to conjecture - have never see he . 
 the one thing certain be , that not the faint trace , in feature or 
 expression , of Eunice 's mother be to be see in Eunice herself . of the 
 two girl , Helena - judge by something in the color of her hair , and by 
 something in the shade of her complexion - might possibly have suggest , 
 in those particular only , a purely accidental resemblance to my 
 terrible prisoner of past time . 
 the revival of Mr. Gracedieu 's spirit indicate a temporary change 
 only , and be already begin to pass away . the eye which have look 
 lovingly at Eunice begin to look languidly now : his head sink on the 
 pillow with a sigh of weak content . " my pleasure have be almost too 
 much for I , " he say . " leave I for a while to rest , and get use to 
 it . " 
 Eunice kiss his forehead - and we leave the room . 
 CHAPTER XL . the bruised heart . 
 when we step out on the landing , I observe that my companion pause . 
 she look at the two flight of stair below we before she descend 
 they . it occur to I that there must be somebody in the house whom 
 she be anxious to avoid . 
 arrive at the low hall , she pause again , and propose in a whisper 
 that we should go into the garden . as we advance along the backward 
 division of the hall , I see her eye turn distrustfully toward the 
 door of the room in which Helena have receive I . at last , my slow 
 perception feel with she and understand she . Eunice 's sensitive nature 
 recoil from a chance meeting with the wretch who have lay waste all 
 that have once be happy and hopeful in that harmless young life . 
 " will you come with I to the part of the garden that I be fondest of ? " 
 she ask . 
 I offer she my arm . she lead I in silence to a rustic seat , place 
 under the shade of a mulberry tree . I see a change in her face as we sit 
 down - a tender and beautiful change . at that moment the girl 's heart 
 be far away from I . there be some association with this corner of the 
 garden , on which I feel that I must not intrude . 
 " I be once very happy here , " she say . " when the time of the heartache 
 come soon after , I be afraid to look at the old tree and the bench 
 under it . but that be all over now . I like to remember the hour that 
 be once dear to I , and to see the place that recall they . do you 
 know who I be think of ? do not   be afraid of distress I . I never 
 cry now . " 
 " my dear child , I have hear your sad story - but I can not   trust myself to 
 speak of it . " 
 " because you be so sorry for I ? " 
 " no word can say how sorry I be ! " 
 " but you be not angry with Philip ? " 
 " not angry ! my poor dear , I be afraid to tell you how angry I be with 
 he . " 
 " oh , no ! you must not   say that . if you wish to be kind to I - and I be 
 sure you do wish it - do not   think bitterly of Philip . " 
 when I remember that the first feeling she rouse in I be nothing 
 worthy of a professing Christian than astonishment , I drop in my own 
 estimation to the level of a savage . " do you really mean , " I be base 
 enough to ask , " that you have forgive he ? " 
 she say , gently : " how could I help forgive he ? " 
 the man who could have be bless with such love as this , and who 
 could have cast it away from he , can have be nothing but an idiot . 
 on that ground - though I dare not confess it to Eunice - I forgave he , 
 too . 
 " do I surprise you ? " she ask simply . " perhaps love will bear any 
 humiliation . or perhaps I be only a poor weak creature . you do not   know 
 what a comfort it be to I to keep the few letter that I receive from 
 Philip . when I hear that he have go away , I give his letter the kiss 
 that bid he good - by . that be the time , I think , when my poor 
 bruise heart get use to the pain ; I begin to feel that there be one 
 consolation still leave for I - I might end in forgive he . why do I 
 tell you all this ? I think you must have bewitch I . be this really 
 the first time I have see you ? " 
 she put she little trembling hand into mine ; I lift it to my lip , and 
 kiss it . sorely be I tempt to own that I have pity and love she 
 in her infancy . it be almost on my lip to say : " I remember you an 
 easily - please little creature , amuse yourself with the broken toy 
 which be once the plaything of my own child . " I believe I should 
 have say it , if I could have trust myself to speak composedly to 
 she . this be not to be do . Old as I be , verse as I be in the hard 
 knowledge of how to keep the mask on in the hour of need , this be not 
 to be do . 
 still try to understand that I be little well than a stranger to 
 she , and still bent on find the secret of the sympathy that unite 
 we , Eunice put a strange question to I . 
 " when you be young yourself , " she say , " do you know what it be to 
 love , and to be love - and then to lose it all ? " 
 it be not give to many man to marry the woman who have be the object 
 of their first love . my early life have be darken by a sad story ; 
 never confide to any live creature ; banish resolutely from my own 
 thought . for forty year past , that part of my bury self have lie 
 quiet in its grave - and the chance touch of an innocent hand have raise 
 the dead , and set we face to face again ! do I know what it be to 
 love , and to be love , and then to lose it all ? " too well , my child ; too 
 well ! " 
 that be all I could say to she . in the last day of my life , I shrink 
 from speak of it . when I have first feel that calamity , and have 
 feel it most keenly , I might have give an answer worthy of I , and 
 worthy of she . 
 she drop my hand , and sit by I in silence , think . have I - without 
 mean it , God know ! - have I disappoint she ? 
 " do you expect I to tell my own sad story , " I say , " as frankly and as 
 trustfully as you have tell your ? " 
 " oh , do not   think that ! I know what an effort it be to you to answer I 
 at all . yes , indeed ! I wonder whether I may ask something . the sorrow 
 you have just tell I of be not the only one - be it ? you have have other 
 trouble ? " 
 " many of they . " 
 " there be time , " she go on , " when one can not   help think of one 's 
 own miserable self . I try to be cheerful , but those time come now and 
 then . " 
 she stop , and look at I with a pale fear confess itself in her 
 face . 
 " you know who Selina be ? " she resume . " my friend ! the only friend I 
 have , till you come here . " 
 I guess that she be speak of the quaint , kindly little woman , 
 whose ugly surname have be hitherto the only name know to I . 
 " Selina have , I daresay , tell you that I have be ill , " she continue , 
 " and that I be stay in the country for the benefit of my health . " 
 it be plain that she have something to say to I , far more important 
 than this , and that she be dwell on trifle to gain time and 
 courage . hop to help she , I dwelt on trifle , too ; ask commonplace 
 question about the part of the country in which she be stay . she 
 answer absently - then , little by little , impatiently . the one poor 
 proof of kindness that I could offer , now , be to say no more . 
 " do you know what a strange creature I be ? " she break out . " shall I make 
 you angry with I ? or shall I make you laugh at I ? what I have shrink 
 from confess to Selina - what I dare not confess to my father - I must , 
 and will , confess to you . " 
 there be a look of horror in her face that alarm I . I draw she to 
 I so that she could rest her head on my shoulder . my own agitation 
 threaten to get the well of I . for the first time since I have see 
 this sweet girl , I find myself think of the blood that run in her 
 vein , and of the nature of the mother who have bear she . 
 " do you notice how I behave upstairs ? " she say . " I mean when we leave 
 my father , and come out on the landing . " 
 it be easily recollect ; I beg she to go on . 
 " before I go downstairs , " she proceed , " you see I look and listen . 
 do you think I be afraid of meet some person ? and do you guess who 
 it be I want to avoid ? " 
 " I guess that - and I understand you . " 
 " no ! you be not wicked enough to understand I . will you do I a favor ? 
 I want you to look at I . " 
 it be say seriously . she lift her head for a moment , so that I could 
 examine her face . 
 " do you see anything , " she ask , " which make you fear that I be not in 
 my right mind ? " 
 " good God ! how can you ask such a horrible question ? " 
 she lay her head back on my shoulder with a sad little sigh of 
 resignation . " I ought to have know well , " she say ; " there be no such 
 easy way out of it as that . tell I - be there one kind of wickedness 
 more deceitful than another ? can it be hide in a person for year 
 together , and show itself when a time of suffering - no ; I mean when a 
 sense of injury come ? do you ever see that , when you be master in 
 the prison ? " 
 I have see it - and , after a moment 's doubt , I say I have see it . 
 " do you pity those poor wretch ? " 
 " certainly ! they deserve pity . " 
 " I be one of they ! " she say . " pity I . if Helena look at I - if 
 Helena speak to I - if I only see Helena by accident - do you know what 
 she do ? she tempt I ! tempt I to do dreadful thing ! tempt I - " 
 the poor child throw her arm round my neck , and whisper the next 
 fatal word in my ear . 
 the mother ! prepare as I be for the accursed discovery , the horror of 
 it shake I . 
 she leave I , and start to her foot . the inherit energy show itself 
 in furious protest against the inherit evil . " what do it mean ? " she 
 cry . " I will submit to anything . I will bear my hard lot patiently , if you 
 will only tell I what it mean . where do this horrid transformation 
 of I out of myself come from ? look at my good father . in all this world 
 there be no man so perfect as he be . and oh , how he have teach I ! there 
 be not   a single good thing that I have not learn from he since I be 
 a little child . do you ever hear he speak of my mother ? you must have 
 hear he . my mother be an angel . I could never be worthy of she at my 
 good - but I have try ! I have try ! the wicked girl in the world 
 do not   have bad thought than the thought that have come to I . 
 since when ? since Helena - oh , how can I call she by her name as if I 
 still love she ? since my sister - can she be my sister , I ask myself 
 sometimes ! since my enemy - there be the word for she - since my enemy take 
 Philip away from I . what do it mean ? I have ask in my prayer - and 
 have get no answer . I ask you . what do it mean ? you must tell I ! you 
 shall tell I ! what do it mean ? " 
 why do I not try to calm she ? I have vainly try to calm she - I who 
 know who her mother be , and what her mother have be . 
 at last , she have force the sense of my duty on I . the simple way 
 of calm she be to put she back in the place by my side that she have 
 leave . it be useless to reason with she , it be impossible to answer 
 she . I have my own idea of the one way in which I might charm Eunice back 
 to her sweet self . 
 " let we talk of Philip , " I say . 
 the fierce flush on her face soften , the swell trouble of her bosom 
 begin to subside , as that dearly - love name pass my lip ! but there 
 be some influence leave in she which resist I . 
 " no , " she say ; " we have well not talk of he . " 
 " why not ? " 
 " I have lose all my courage . if you speak of Philip , you will make I 
 cry . " 
 I draw she nearer to I . if she have be my own child , I do not   think I 
 could have feel for she more truly than I feel at that moment . I only 
 look at she ; I only say : 
 " cry ! " 
 the love that be in her heart rise , and pour its tenderness into her 
 eye . I have long to see the tear that would comfort she . the tear 
 come . 
 there be silence between we for a while . it be possible for I to 
 think . 
 in the absence of physical resemblance between parent and child , be an 
 unfavorable influence exercise on the tendency to moral resemblance ? 
 assume the possibility of such a result as this , Eunice   entirely 
 unlike her mother   must , as I conclude , have be possess of 
 quality form to resist , as well as of quality doom to undergo , 
 the infection of evil . while , therefore , I resign myself to recognize 
 the existence of the hereditary maternal taint , I firmly believe in the 
 counterbalance influence for good which have be part of the girl 's 
 birthright . they have be derive , perhaps , from the well quality 
 in her father 's nature ; they have be certainly develop by the tender 
 care , the religious vigilance , which have guard the adopt child so 
 lovingly in the Minister 's household ; and they have serve their purpose 
 until time bring with it the change , for which the tranquil domestic 
 influence be not prepare . with the great , the vital transformation , 
 which mark the ripening of the girl into the woman 's maturity of 
 thought and passion , a new power for Good , strong enough to resist the 
 latent power for Evil , spring into being , and shelter Eunice under 
 the supremacy of Love . Love ill - fat and ill - bestow - but love that no 
 profanation could stain , that no hereditary evil could conquer - the 
 True Love that have be , and be , and would be , the guardian angel of 
 Eunice 's life . 
 if I be ask whether I have venture to find this opinion on what 
 I have observe in one instance only , I reply that I have have other 
 opportunity of investigation , and that my conclusion be derive from 
 experience which refer to more instance than one . 
 no man in his sens can doubt that physical quality be transmit 
 from parent to child . but inheritance of moral quality be less 
 easy to trace . here , the explore mind find its progress beset by 
 obstacle . that those obstacle have be sometimes overcome I do not 
 deny . moral resemblance have be trace between parent and child . 
 while , however , I admit this , I doubt the conclusion which see , in 
 inheritance of moral quality , a positive influence exercise on moral 
 destiny . there be inherent emotional force in humanity to which the 
 inherit influence must submit ; they be essentially influence under 
 control - influence which can be encounter and force back . that we , 
 who inhabit this little planet , may be the doom creature of fatality , 
 from the cradle to the grave , I be not prepared to dispute . but I 
 absolutely refuse to believe that it be a fatality with no high 
 origin than can be find in our accidental obligation to our father and 
 mother . 
 still absorb in these speculation , I be disturb by a touch on my 
 arm . 
 I look up . Eunice 's eye be fix on a shrubbery , at some little 
 distance from we , which close the view of the garden on that side . I 
 notice that she be tremble . nothing to alarm she be visible that I 
 could discover . I ask what she have see to startle she . she point to 
 the shrubbery . 
 " look again , " she say . 
 this time I see a woman 's dress among the shrub . the woman herself 
 appear in a moment more . it be Helena . she carry a small portfolio , 
 and she approach we with a smile . 
 CHAPTER XLI . the whispering VOICE . 
 I look at Eunice . she have rise , startle by her first suspicion of 
 the person who be approach we through the shrubbery ; but she keep 
 her place near I , only change her position so as to avoid confront 
 Helena . her quickened breathing be all that tell I of the effort she 
 be make to preserve her self - control . entirely free from unbecoming 
 sign of hurry and agitation , Helena open her business with I by 
 mean of an apology . 
 " pray excuse I for disturb you . I be oblige to leave the house on 
 one of my tiresome domestic errand . if you will kindly permit it , I 
 wish to express , before I go , my very sincere regret for what I be rude 
 enough to say , when I last have the honor of see you . may I hope to 
 be forgive ? how - do - you - do , Eunice ? have you enjoy your holiday in the 
 country ? " 
 Eunice neither move nor answer . have some doubt of what might 
 happen if the two girl remain together , I propose to Helena to leave 
 the garden and to let I hear what she have to say , in the house . 
 " quite needless , " she reply ; " I shall not detain you for more than a 
 minute . please look at this . " 
 she offer to I the portfolio that she have be carry , and point 
 to a morsel of paper attach to it , which contain this inscription : 
 " Philip 's letter to I . private . Helena Gracedieu . " 
 " I have a favor to ask , " she say , " and a proof of confidence in you 
 to offer . will you be so good as to look over what you find in my 
 portfolio ? I be unwilling to give up the hope that I have found on our 
 interview , when I ask for it . the letter will , I venture to think , 
 plead my cause more convincingly than I be able to plead it for myself . 
 I wish to forget what pass between we , to the last word . to the 
 last word , " she repeat emphatically - with a look which sufficiently 
 inform I that I have not be betray to her father yet . " will you 
 indulge I ? " she ask , and offer her portfolio for the second time . 
 a more impudent bargain could not well have be propose to I . 
 I be to read , and to be favorably impress by , Mr. Philip Dunboyne 's 
 letter ; and Miss Helena be to say nothing of that unlucky slip of the 
 tongue , relate to her mother , which she have discover to be a serious 
 act of self - betrayal - thank to my confusion at the time . if I have not 
 thought of Eunice , and of the desolate and loveless life to which the 
 poor girl be so patiently resign , I should have refuse to read Miss 
 Gracedieu 's love - letter . 
 but , as thing be , I be influence by the hope   innocently encourage 
 by Eunice herself   that Philip Dunboyne might not be so wholly unworthy 
 of the sweet girl whom he have injure as I have hitherto be too hastily 
 disposed to believe . to act on this view with the purpose of promote 
 a reconciliation be impossible , unless I have the mean of form a 
 correct estimate of the man 's character . it seem to I that I have 
 find the mean . a fair chance of put his sincerity to a trustworthy 
 test , be surely offer by the letter   the confidential letter   which 
 I have be request to read . to feel this as strongly as I feel it , 
 bring I at once to a decision . I consent to take the portfolio - on 
 my own condition . 
 " Understand , Miss Helena , " I say , " that I make no promise . I reserve 
 my own opinion , and my own right of action . " 
 " I be not afraid of your opinion or your action , " she answer 
 confidently , " if you will only read the letter . in the meantime , let I 
 relieve my sister , there , of my presence . I hope you will soon recover , 
 Eunice , in the country air . " 
 if the object of the wretch be to exasperate her victim , she have 
 completely fail . Eunice remain as still as a statue . to all 
 appearance , she have not even hear what have be say to she . Helena 
 look at I , and touch her forehead with a significant smile . " Sad , 
 be not   it ? " she say - and bow , and go briskly away on her household 
 errand . 
 we be alone again . 
 still , Eunice never move . I speak to she , and produce no impression . 
 begin to feel alarmed , I try the effect of touch she . with 
 a wild cry , she start into a state of animation . almost at the same 
 moment , she weakly sway to and fro as if the pleasant breeze in the 
 garden move she at its will , like the flower . I hold she up , and lead 
 she to the seat . 
 " there be nothing to be afraid of , " I say . " she have go . " 
 Eunice 's eye rest on I in vacant surprise . " how do you know ? " she 
 ask . " I hear she ; but I never see she . do you see she ? " 
 " my dear child ! of what person be you speak ? " 
 she answer : " of no person . I be speak of a Voice that whisper and 
 tempt I , when Helena be near . " 
 " what voice , eunice ? " 
 " the whisper Voice . it say to I , ' I be your mother ; ' it call 
 me Daughter when I first hear it . my father speak of my mother , the 
 angel . that good spirit have never come to I from the well world . it 
 be a mock - mother who come to I - some spirit of evil . listen to this . 
 I be awake in my bed . in the dark I hear the mock - mother whispering , 
 close at my ear . shall I tell you how she answer I , when I long 
 for light to see she by , when I pray to she to show herself to I ? she 
 say : ' my face be hide when I pass from life to death ; my face no 
 mortal creature may see . ' I have never see she - how can you have see 
 she ? but I hear she again , just now . she whisper to I when Helena 
 be stand there - where you be stand . she freeze the life in I . 
 do she freeze the life in you ? do you hear she tempt I ? do not 
 speak of it , if you do . oh , not a word ! not a word ! " 
 a man who have govern a prison may say with Macbeth , " I have sup 
 full with horror . " harden as I be - or ought to have be - the effect 
 of what I have just hear turn I cold . if I have not know it to be 
 absolutely impossible , I might have believe that the crime and the 
 death of the murderess be know to Eunice , as be the crime and the 
 death of her mother , and that the horrid discovery have turn her brain . 
 this be simply impossible . what do it mean ? good God ! what do it 
 mean ? 
 my sense of my own helplessness be the first sense in I that 
 recover . I think of Eunice 's devoted little friend . a woman 's 
 sympathy seem to be need now . I rise to lead the way out of the 
 garden . 
 " Selina will think we be lose , " I say . " let we go and find Selina . " 
 " not for the world , " she cry . 
 " why not ? " 
 " because I do not   feel sure of myself . I might tell Selina something 
 which she must never know ; I should be so sorry to frighten she . let I 
 stop here with you . " 
 I resume my place at her side . 
 " let I take your hand . " 
 I give she my hand . what composing influence this simple act may , or 
 may not , have exercise , it be impossible to say . she be quiet , she 
 be silent . after an interval , I hear she breathe a long - draw sigh of 
 relief . 
 " I be afraid I have surprise you , " she say . " Helena bring the 
 dreadful time back to I - " she stop and shudder . 
 " do not   speak of Helena , my dear . " 
 " but I be afraid you will think - because I have say strange 
 thing - that I have be talk at random , " she insist . " the doctor 
 will say that , if you meet with he . he believe I be delude by a 
 dream . I try to think so myself . it be of no use ; I be quite sure he 
 be wrong . " 
 I privately determine to watch for the doctor 's arrival , and to consult 
 with he . eunice go on : 
 " I have the story of a terrible night to tell you ; but I have not   the 
 courage to tell it now . why should not   you come back with I to the place 
 that I be stay at ? a pleasant farm - house , and such kind people . you 
 might read the account of that night in my journal . I shall not regret 
 the misery of have write it , if it help you to find out how this 
 hateful second self of mine have come to I . hush ! I want to ask you 
 something . do you think Helena be in the house ? " 
 " no - she have go out . " 
 " do she say that herself ? be you sure ? " 
 " quite sure . " 
 she decide on go back to the farm , while Helena be out of the way . 
 we leave the garden together . for the first time , my companion notice 
 the portfolio . I happen to be carry it in the hand that be near 
 to she , as she walk by my side . 
 " where do you get that ? " she ask . 
 it be needless to reply in word . my hesitation speak for I . 
 " carry it in your other hand , " she say - " the hand that be furth away 
 from I . I do not   want to see it ! do you mind wait a moment while I 
 find Selina ? you will go to the farm with we , will not   you ? " 
 I have to look over the letter , in Eunice 's own interest ; and I 
 beg she to let I defer my visit to the farm until the next day . she 
 consent , after make I promise to keep my appointment . it be of 
 some importance to she , she tell I , that I should make acquaintance 
 with the farmer and his wife and child , and tell she how I like 
 they . her plan for the future depend on what those good people might 
 be willing to do . when she have recover her health , it be impossible 
 for she to go home again while Helena remain in the house . she have 
 resolve to earn her own living , if she could get employment as a 
 governess . the farmer 's child like she ; she have already help their 
 mother in teach they ; and there be reason to hope that their father 
 would see his way to employ she permanently . his house offer the 
 great advantage of be near enough to the town to enable she to hear 
 news of the Minister 's progress toward recovery , and to see he herself 
 when safe opportunity offer , from time to time . as for her salary , 
 what do she care about money ? anything would be acceptable , if the good 
 man would only realize her hope for the future . 
 it be dishearten to hear that hope , at her age , begin and end 
 within such narrow limit as these . no prudent man would have try to 
 persuade she , as I now do , that the idea of reconciliation offer the 
 well hope of the two . 
 " suppose I see Mr. Philip Dunboyne when I go back to London , " I begin , 
 " what shall I say to he ? " 
 " say I have forgive he . " 
 " and suppose , " I go on , " that the blame really rest , where you all 
 believe it to rest , with Helena . if that young man return to you , truly 
 ashamed of himself , truly penitent , will you - ? " 
 she resolutely interrupt I : " no ! " 
 " oh , Eunice , you surely mean yes ? " 
 " I mean no ! " 
 " why ? " 
 " do not   ask I ! good - by till to - morrow . " 
 CHAPTER XLII . the QUAINT PHILOSOPHER . 
 no person come to my room , and nothing happen to interrupt I while I 
 be read Mr. Philip Dunboyne 's letter . 
 one of they , let I say at once , produce a very disagreeable impression 
 on I . I have unexpectedly discover Mrs. Tenbruggen - in a postscript . 
 she be make a living as a Medical Rubber   or Masseuse , and be in 
 professional attendance on Mr. Dunboyne the elder . More of this , a 
 little far on . 
 have go through the whole collection of young Dunboyne 's letter , I 
 set myself to review the differ conclusion which the correspondence 
 have produce on my mind . 
 I call the paper submit to I a correspondence , because the great 
 part of Philip 's letter exhibit note in pencil , evidently add by 
 Helena . these express , for the most part , the interpretation which she 
 have place on passage that perplex or displease she ; and they have , 
 as Philip 's rejoinder show , be employ as material when she write 
 her reply . 
 on reflection , I find myself trouble by complexity and contradiction 
 in the view present of this young man 's character . to decide 
 positively whether I can justify to myself and to my regard for Eunice , 
 an attempt to reunite the lover , require more time for consideration 
 than I can reasonably expect that Helena 's patience will allow . have 
 a quiet hour or two still before I , I have determine to make extract 
 from the letter for my own use ; with the intention of refer to 
 they while I be still in doubt which way my decision ought to incline . I 
 shall present they here , to speak for themselves . be there any objection 
 to this ? none that I can see . 
 in the first place , those extract have a value of their own . they add 
 necessary information to the present history of event . 
 in the second place , I be under no obligation to Mr. Gracedieu 's 
 daughter which forbid I to make use of her portfolio . I tell she 
 that I only consent to receive it , under reserve of my own right of 
 action - and her assent to that stipulation be express in the clear 
 term . 
 extract from MR . PHILIP DUNBOYNE 's letter . 
 First Extract . 
 you blame I , dear Helena , for not have pay proper attention to the 
 question put to I in your last letter . I have only be wait to 
 make up my mind , before I reply . 
 first question : do I think it advisable that you should write to my 
 father ? no , my dear ; I beg you will defer writing , until you hear from 
 I again . 
 second question : consider that he be still a stranger to you , be 
 there any harm in your ask I what sort of man my father be ? no 
 harm , my sweet one ; but , as you will presently see , I be afraid you have 
 address yourself to the wrong person . 
 my father be kind , in his own odd way - and learn , and rich - a more 
 high - minded and honorable man   as I have every reason to believe 
 do not   live . but if you ask I which he prefer , his book or his son , 
 I hope I do he no injustice when I answer , his book . his reading and 
 his writing be obstacle between we which I have never be able to 
 overcome . this be the more to be regret because he be charming , on 
 the few occasion when I find he disengage . if you wish I know more 
 about my father , we be in complete agreement as usual - I wish , too . 
 but there be a dear friend of yours and mine , who be just the person we 
 want to help we . need I say that I allude to Mrs. Staveley ? 
 I call on she yesterday , not long after she have pay a visit to my 
 father . Luck have favor she . she arrive just at the time when hunger 
 have oblige he to shut up his book , and ring for something to eat . 
 Mrs. Staveley secure a favorable reception with her customary tact and 
 delicacy . he have a fowl for his dinner . she know his weakness of old ; 
 she volunteer to carve it for he . 
 if I can only repeat what this clever woman tell I of their talk , 
 you will have a portrait of Mr. Dunboyne the elder - not perhaps a 
 highly - finished picture , but , as I hope and believe , a good likeness . 
 Mrs. Staveley begin by complain to he of the conduct of his son . 
 I have promise to write to she , and I have never keep my word . she have 
 reason for be especially interested in my plan and prospect , just 
 then ; know I to be attach   please take notice that I be quote 
 her own language   to a charming friend of her , whom I have first meet 
 at her house . to aggravate the disappointment that I have inflict , the 
 young lady have neglect she , too . no letter , no information . perhaps 
 my father would kindly enlighten she ? be the affair go on ? or be it 
 break off ? 
 my father hold out his plate and ask for the other wing of the 
 fowl . " it be not   a bad one for London , " he say ; " will not   you have some 
 yourself ? " 
 " I do not   seem to have interested you , " Mrs. Staveley remark . 
 " what do you expect I to be interested in ? " my father inquire . " I be 
 absorb in the fowl . favor I by return to the subject . " 
 Mrs. Staveley admit that she answer this rather sharply : " the 
 subject , sir , be your son 's admiration for a charming girl : one of the 
 daughter of Mr. Gracedieu , the famous preacher . " 
 my father be too well - breed to speak to a lady while his attention be 
 absorb by a fowl . he finish the second wing , and then he ask if 
 " Philip be engage to be marry . " 
 " I be not quite sure , " Mrs. Staveley confess . 
 " then , my dear friend , we will wait till we be sure . " 
 " but , Mr. Dunboyne , there be really no need to wait . I suppose your son 
 come here , now and then , to see you ? " 
 " my son be most attentive . in course of time he will contrive to hit on 
 the right hour for his visit . at present , poor fellow , he interrupt I 
 every day . " 
 " suppose he hit upon the right time to - morrow ? " 
 " yes ? " 
 " you might ask he if he be engage ? " 
 " pardon I . I think I might wait till Philip mention it without 
 ask . " 
 " what an extraordinary man you be ! " 
 " oh , no , no - only a philosopher . " 
 this try Mrs. Staveley 's temper . you know what a perfectly candid 
 person our friend be . she own to I that she feel inclined to make 
 herself disagreeable . " that be throw away upon I , " she say : " I do not 
 know what a philosopher be . " 
 let I pause for a moment , dear Helena . I have inexcusably forget 
 to speak of my father 's personal appearance . it will not   take long . I need 
 only notice one interesting feature which , so to speak , lift his face 
 out of the common . he have an eloquent nose . person possess this 
 rare advantage be bl with power of expression not grant to their 
 ordinary fellow - creature . my father 's nose be a mine of information to 
 friend familiarly acquaint with it . it change color like a modest 
 young lady 's cheek . it work flexibly from side to side like the rudder 
 of a ship . on the present occasion , Mrs. Staveley see it shift toward 
 the left - hand side of his face . a sigh escape the poor lady . experience 
 tell she that my father be go to hold forth . 
 " you do not   know what a philosopher be ! " he repeat . " be so kind as to 
 look at I . I be a philosopher . " 
 Mrs. Staveley bow . 
 " and a philosopher , my charming friend , be a man who have discover a 
 system of life . some system assert themselves in volume - my system 
 assert itself in two word : never think of anything until you have 
 first ask yourself if there be an absolute necessity for do it , 
 at that particular moment . think of thing , when thing need not 
 be think of , be offer an opportunity to Worry ; and Worry be 
 the favorite agent of Death when the destroyer handle his work in a 
 linger way , and achieve premature result . never look back , and 
 never look forward , as long as you can possibly help it . look back 
 lead the way to sorrow . and look forward end in the cruel of all 
 delusion : it encourage hope . the present time be the precious time . 
 live for the pass day : the pass day be all that we can be sure of . 
 you suggest , just now , that I should ask my son if he be engage to 
 be marry . how do we know what wear and tear of your nervous texture I 
 succeed in save when I say . ' wait till Philip mention it without 
 ask ? ' there be the personal application of my system . I have 
 explain it in my time to every woman on the list of my acquaintance , 
 include the female servant . not one of they have reward I by 
 adopt my system . how do you feel about it ? " 
 Mrs. Staveley decline to tell I whether she have offer a bright 
 example of gratitude to the rest of the sex . when I ask why , she 
 declare that it be my turn now to tell she what I have be do . 
 you will anticipate what follow . she object to the mystery in which 
 my prospect seem to be involve . in plain English , be I , or be I 
 not , engage to marry her dear Eunice ? I say , no . what else could I 
 say ? if I have tell Mrs. Staveley the truth , when she insist on my 
 explain myself , she would have go back to my father , and would 
 have appeal to his sense of justice to forbid our marriage . find I 
 obstinately silent , she have decide on write to eunice . so we part . 
 but do not   be dishearten . on my way out of the house , I meet Mr. 
 Staveley come in , and have a little talk with he . he and his wife and 
 his family be go to the seaside , next week . Mrs. Staveley once out 
 of our way , I can tell my father of our engagement without any fear 
 of consequence . if she write to he , the moment he see my name 
 mention , and find violent language associate with it , he will hand 
 the letter to I . " your business , Philip : do not   interrupt I . " he will 
 say that , and go back to his book . there be my father , paint to the 
 life ! farewell , for the present . 
 ....... 
 remark by H. G. - Philip 's grace and gayety of style might be envy by 
 any professional Author . he amuse I , but he rouse my suspicion at the 
 same time . this slippery lover of mine tell I to defer write to 
 his father , and give no reason for offer that strange advice to the 
 young lady who be soon to be a member of the family . be this merely one 
 more instance of the weakness of his character ? or , now that he be away 
 from my influence , be he begin to regret Eunice already ? 
 add by the Governor . - I too have my doubt . be the flippant nonsense 
 which Philip have write inspire by the effervescent good spirit of a 
 happy young man ? or be it assume for a purpose ? in this latter case , I 
 should gladly conclude that he be regard his conduct to Eunice with 
 become emotion of sorrow and shame . 
 CHAPTER XLIII . the MASTERFUL MASSEUSE . 
 my next quotation will suffer a process of abridgment . I intend they to 
 present the substance of three letter , reduce as follow : 
 Second Extract . 
 weak as he may be , Mr. Philip Dunboyne show   in his second letter 
 that he can feel resentment , and that he can express his feeling , in 
 reply to Miss Helena . he protest against suspicion which he have not 
 deserve . that he do sometimes think of Eunice he see no reason to 
 deny . he be conscious of error and misdeed , which - traceable as they 
 be to Helena 's irresistible fascination - may perhaps be consider 
 rather his misfortune than his fault . be that as it may , he do indeed 
 feel anxious to hear good account of Eunice 's health . if this honest 
 avowal excite her sister 's jealousy , he will be disappoint in Helena 
 for the first time . 
 his third letter show that this exhibition of spirit have have its 
 effect . 
 the imperious young lady regret that she have hurt his feeling , and be 
 reward for the apology by receive news of the most gratifying kind . 
 Faithful Philip have tell his father that he be engaged to be marry 
 to Miss Helena Gracedieu , daughter of the celebrate Congregational 
 preacher - and so on , and so on . have Mr. Dunboyne the elder express 
 any objection to the young lady ? certainly not ! he know nothing of 
 the other engagement to Eunice ; and he merely object , on principle , to 
 look forward . " how do we know , " say the philosopher , " what accident 
 may happen , or what doubt and hesitation may yet turn up ? I be not 
 to burden my mind in this matter , till I know that I must do it . let 
 I hear when she be ready to go to church , and I will be ready with 
 the settlement . my compliment to Miss and her papa , and let we wait a 
 little . " Dearest Helena - be not   he funny ? 
 the next letter have be already mention . 
 in this there occur the first startling reference to Mrs. Tenbruggen , 
 by name . she be in London , find her way to lucrative celebrity 
 by twisting , turning , and pinch the flesh of credulous person , 
 afflict with nervous disorder ; and she have already pay a few medical 
 visit to old Mr. Dunboyne . he persist in pore over his book while 
 Mrs. Tenbruggen operate , sometimes on his cramped right hand , sometimes 
  in the fear that his brain may have something to do with it   on the 
 back of his neck . one of they frown over her rubbing , and the other 
 frown over his reading . it would be delightfully ridiculous , but for a 
 drawback ; Mr. Philip Dunboyne 's first impression of Mrs. Tenbruggen do 
 not incline he to look at that lady from a humorous point of view . 
 Helena 's remark follow , as usual . she have see Mrs. Tenbruggen 's name 
 on the address of a letter write by Miss Jillgall - which be quite 
 enough to condemn Mrs. Tenbruggen . as for Philip himself , she feel not 
 quite sure of he , even yet . no more do I. Third Extract . 
 the letter that follow must be permit to speak for itself : 
 I have fly into a passion , dear Helena ; and I be afraid I shall 
 make you fly into a passion , too . Blame Mrs. Tenbruggen ; do not   blame I . 
 on the first occasion when I find my father under the hand of the 
 Medical Rubber , she take no notice of I . on the second occasion - when 
 she have be in daily attendance on he for a week , at an exorbitant 
 fee - she say in the cool manner : " who be this young gentleman ? " my 
 father lay down his book , for a moment only : " do not   interrupt I again , 
 ma'am . the young gentleman be my son Philip . " Mrs. Tenbruggen eye I 
 with an appearance of interest which I be at a loss to account for . I 
 hate an impudent woman . my visit come suddenly to an end . 
 the next time I see my father , he be alone . 
 I ask he how he get on with Mrs. Tenbruggen . as badly as possible , 
 it appear . " she take liberty with my neck ; she interrupt I in 
 my reading ; and she do I no good . I shall end , Philip , in apply a 
 medical rubbing to Mrs. Tenbruggen . " 
 a few day later , I find the masterful " Masseuse " torture the poor 
 old gentleman 's muscle again . she have the audacity to say to I : " well , 
 Mr. Philip , when be you go to marry Miss Eunice Gracedieu ? " my 
 father look up . " Eunice ? " he repeat . " when my son tell I he be 
 engage to Miss Gracedieu , he say ' Helena ' ! Philip , what do this 
 mean ? " Mrs. Tenbruggen be so obliging as to answer for I . " some 
 mistake , sir ; it be Eunice he be engage to . " I confess I forget myself . 
 " how the devil do you know that ? " I burst out . Mrs. Tenbruggen ignore 
 I and my language . " I be sorry to see , sir , that your son 's education 
 have be neglect ; he seem to be grossly ignorant of the law of 
 politeness . " " never mind the law of politeness , " say my father . " you 
 appear to be well acquaint with my son 's matrimonial prospect than 
 he be himself . how be that ? " Mrs. Tenbruggen favor he with another 
 ready reply : " my authority be a letter , address to I by a relative of 
 Mr. Gracedieu - my dear and intimate friend , Miss Jillgall . " my father 's 
 keen eye travel backward and forward between his female surgeon and 
 his son . " which be I to believe ? " he inquire . " I be surprised at your 
 ask the question , " I say . Mrs. Tenbruggen point to I . " look at 
 Mr. Philip , sir - and you will allow he one merit . he be capable of 
 show it , when he know he have disgrace himself . " without intend 
 it , I be sure , my father infuriate I ; he look as if he believe she . 
 out come one of the small and strong word in the english language 
 before I could stop it : " Mrs. Tenbruggen , you lie ! " the illustrious 
 Rubber drop my father 's hand - she have be operate on he all the 
 time - and show we that she could assert her dignity when circumstance 
 call for the exertion : " either your son or I , sir , must leave the 
 room . which be it to be ? " she meet her match in my father . walk 
 quietly to the door , he open it for Mrs. Tenbruggen with a low bow . 
 she stop on her way out , and deliver her parting word : " Messieurs 
 Dunboyne , father and son , I keep my temper , and merely regard you as a 
 couple of blackguard . " with that pretty assertion of her opinion , she 
 leave we . 
 when we be alone , there be but one course to take ; I make my 
 confession . it be impossible to tell you how my father receive it - for 
 he sit down at his library table with his back to I . the first thing he 
 do be to ask I to help his memory . 
 " do you say that the father of these girl be a parson ? " 
 " yes - a Congregational Minister . " 
 " what do the Minister think of you ? " 
 " I do not   know , sir . " 
 " find out . " 
 that be all ; not another word could I extract from he . I do not   pretend 
 to have discover what he really have in his mind . I only venture on 
 a suggestion . if there be any old friend in your town , who have some 
 influence over your father , leave no mean untried of get that 
 friend to say a kind word for we . and then ask your father to write to 
 mine . this be , as I see it , our only chance . 
 ....... 
 there the letter end . Helena 's note on it show that her pride be 
 fiercely interested in secure Philip as a husband . her victory over 
 poor Eunice will , as she plainly intimate , be only complete when she be 
 married to young Dunboyne . for the rest , her desperate resolution to win 
 her way to my good grace be sufficiently intelligible , now . 
 my own impression vary . Philip rather gain upon I ; he appear to 
 have some capacity for feel ashamed of himself . on the other hand , 
 I regard the discovery of an intimate friendship exist between 
 Mrs. Tenbruggen and Miss Jillgall with the gloomiest view . be this 
 formidable Masseuse likely to ply her trade in the country town ? and be 
 it possible that she may come to this town ? God forbid ! 
 of the other letter in the collection , I need take no special notice . 
 I return the whole correspondence to Helena , and wait to hear from 
 she . 
 the one recent event in Mr. Gracedieu 's family , worthy of record , be of 
 a melancholy nature . after pay his visit to - day , the doctor have leave 
 word that nobody but the nurse be to go near the Minister . this seem to 
 indicate , but too surely , a change for the bad . 
 Helena have be away all the evening at the girl ' school . she leave a 
 little note , inform I of her wish : " I shall expect to be favor 
 with your decision to - morrow morning , in my housekeeping room . " 
 at breakfast time , the report of the poor Minister be still 
 discourage . I notice that Helena be absent from the table . Miss 
 Jillgall suspect that the cause be bad news from Mr. Philip Dunboyne , 
 arrive by that morning 's post . " if you will excuse the use of strong 
 language by a lady , " she say , " Helena look perfectly devilish when 
 she open the letter . she rush away , and lock herself up in her 
 own shabby room . a serious obstacle , as I suspect , in the way of her 
 marriage . cheering , be not   it ? " as usual , good Selina express she 
 sentiment without reserve . 
 I have to keep my appointment ; and the soon Helena Gracedieu and I 
 understand each other the well . 
 I knock at the door . it be loudly unlocked , and violently throw 
 open . Helena 's temper have rise to boil heat ; she stammer with rage 
 when she speak to I . 
 " I mean to come to the point at once , " she say . 
 " I be glad to hear it , Miss Helena . " 
 " may I count on your influence to help I ? I want a positive answer . " 
 I give she what she want . I say : " certainly not . " 
 she take a crumpled letter from her pocket , open it , and smooth it 
 out on the table with a blow of her open hand . 
 " look at that , " she say . 
 I look . it be the letter address to Mr. Dunboyne the elder , which 
 I have write for Mr. Gracedieu - with the one object of prevent 
 Helena 's marriage . 
 " of course , I can depend on you to tell I the truth ? " she continue . 
 " without fear or favor , " I answer , " you may depend on that . " 
 " the signature to the letter , Mr. Governor , be write by my father . 
 but the letter itself be in a different hand . do you , by any chance , 
 recognize the writing ? " 
 " I do . " 
 " whose writing be it ? " 
 " mine . " 
 CHAPTER XLIV . the resurrection of the past . 
 after have identify my handwriting , I wait with some curiosity to 
 see whether Helena would let her anger honestly show itself , or whether 
 she would keep it down . she keep it down . 
 " allow I to return good for evil . "   the evil be uppermost , 
 nevertheless , when Miss Gracedieu express herself in these 
 self - deny term .   " you be no doubt anxious to know if Philip 's 
 father have be win over to serve your purpose . here be Philip 's own 
 account of it : the last of his letter that I shall trouble you to 
 read . " 
 I look it over . the memorandum follow which I make for my own use : 
 an eccentric philosopher be as capable as the most commonplace human 
 being in existence of behave like an honorable man . Mr. Dunboyne read 
 the letter which bear the Minister 's signature , and hand it to his 
 son . " can you answer that ? " be all he say . Philip 's silence confess 
 that he be unable to answer it - and Philip himself , I may add , rise 
 accordingly in my estimation . his father point to the writing - desk . " I 
 must spare my cramped hand , " the philosopher resume , " and I must answer 
 Mr. Gracedieu 's letter . write , and leave a place for my signature . " he 
 begin to dictate his reply . " Sir - my son Philip have see your letter , 
 and have no defense to make . in this respect he have set an example of 
 candor which I propose to follow . there be no excuse for he . what I can 
 do to show that I feel for you , and agree with you , shall be do . at 
 the age which this young man have reach , the law of England abolish 
 the authority of his father . if he be sufficiently infatuate to place 
 his honor and his happiness at the mercy of a lady , who have behave 
 to her sister as your daughter have behave to Miss Eunice , I warn the 
 married couple not to expect a farthing of my money , either during my 
 lifetime or after my death . your faithful servant , DUNBOYNE , SENIOR . " 
 have perform his duty as secretary , Philip receive his dismissal : 
 " you may send my reply to the post , " his father say ; " and you may keep 
 Mr. Gracedieu 's letter . morally speak , I regard that last document 
 as a species of mirror , in which a young gentleman like yourself may 
 see how ugly he look . " this , Philip declare , be his father 's form of 
 farewell . I hand back the letter to Helena . not a word pass between 
 we . in sinister silence she open the door and leave I alone in the 
 room . 
 that Mrs. Gracedieu and I have meet in the bygone time , and - this be the 
 only serious part of it - have meet in secret , would now be make known to 
 the Minister . be I to blame for have shrink from distress my good 
 friend , by tell he that his wife have privately consult I on the 
 mean of remove his adopt child from his house ? and , even if I 
 have be cruel enough to do this , would he have believe my statement 
 against the positive denial with which the woman whom he love and 
 trust would have certainly meet it ? no ! let the consequence of the 
 come disclosure be what they might , I fail to see any valid reason 
 for regret my conduct in the past time . 
 I find Miss Jillgall wait in the passage to see I come out . 
 before I could tell she what have happen , there be a ring at the 
 house - bell . the visitor prove to be Mr. Wellwood , the doctor . I be 
 anxious to speak to he on the subject of Mr. Gracedieu 's health . Miss 
 Jillgall introduce I , as an old and dear friend of the Minister , and 
 leave we together in the dining - room . 
 " what do I think of Mr. Gracedieu ? " he say , repeat the first 
 question that I put . " well , sir , I think badly of he . " 
 enter into detail , after that ominous reply , Mr. Wellwood do not 
 hesitate to say that his patient 's nerve be completely shatter . 
 Disease of the brain have , as he fear , be already set up . " as to 
 the cause which have produce this lamentable break - down , " the doctor 
 continue , " Mr. Gracedieu have be in the habit of preach extempore 
 twice a day on Sundays , and sometimes in the week as well - and have 
 uniformly refuse to spare himself when he be in most urgent need of 
 rest . if you have ever attend his chapel , you have see a man in a 
 state of fiery enthusiasm , feel intensely every word that he utter . 
 think of such exhaustion as that imply go on for year together , 
 and accumulate its wasting influence on a sensitively organize 
 constitution . add that he be torment by personal anxiety , which he 
 confess to no one , not even to his own child and the sum of it 
 all be that a bad case of its kind , I be grieve to say , have never 
 occur in my experience . " 
 before the doctor leave I to go to his patient , I ask leave to occupy 
 a minute more of his time . my object be , of course , to speak about 
 Eunice . 
 the change of subject seem to be agreeable to Mr. Wellwood . he smile 
 good - humoredly . 
 " you need feel no alarm about the health of that interesting girl , " 
 he say . " when she complain to I - at her age ! - of not be able to 
 sleep , I should have take it more seriously if I have be tell that she 
 too have her trouble , poor little soul . love - trouble , most likely - but 
 do not   forget that my professional limit keep I in the dark ! have you 
 hear that she take some composing medicine , which I have prescribe for 
 her father ? the effect   certain , in any case , to be injurious to a young 
 girl   be considerably aggravate by the state of her mind at the time . 
 a dream that frighten she , and something resemble delirium , seem to 
 have follow . and she make matter bad , poor child , by write in her 
 diary about the vision and supernatural appearance that have terrify 
 she . I be afraid of fever , on the day when they first send for I . we 
 escape that complication , and I be at liberty to try the good of all 
 remedy - quiet and change of air . I have no fear for Miss Eunice . " 
 with that cheer reply he go up to the Minister 's room . 
 all that I have find perplexing in Eunice be now make clear . I 
 understand how her agony at the loss of her lover , and her keen sense 
 of the wrong that she have suffer , have be strengthen in their 
 disastrous influence by her experiment on the sleeping draught intend 
 for her father . in mind and body , both , the poor girl be in the 
 condition which offer its opportunity to the lurk hereditary 
 taint . it be terrible to think of what might have happen , if the 
 all - powerful counter - influence have not be present to save she . 
 before I have be long alone the servant - maid come in , and say the 
 doctor want to see I . 
 Mr. Wellwood be wait in the passage , outside the Minister 's 
 bedchamber . he ask if he could speak to I without interruption , and 
 without the fear of be overhear . I lead he at once to the room which 
 I occupy as a guest . 
 " at the very time when it be most important to keep Mr. Gracedieu 
 quiet , " he say , ' something have happen to excite - I might almost say 
 to infuriate he . he have leave his bed , and be walk up and down the 
 room ; and , I do not   scruple to say , he be on the verge of madness . he 
 insist on see you . be wholly unable to control he in any 
 other way , I have consent to this . but I must not allow you to place 
 yourself in what may be a disagreeable position , without a word of 
 warning . judge by his tone and his look , he seem to have no very 
 friendly motive for wish to see you . " 
 know perfectly well what have happen , and be one of those 
 impatient people who can never endure suspense - I offer to go at once 
 to Mr. Gracedieu 's room . the doctor ask leave to say one word more . 
 " pray be careful that you neither say nor do anything to thwart he , " 
 Mr. Wellwood resume . " if he express an opinion , agree with he . if 
 he be insolent and overbearing , do not   answer he . in the state of his 
 brain , the one hopeful course to take be to let he have his own way . 
 pray remember that . I will be within call , in case of your want I . " 
 CHAPTER XLV . the FATAL PORTRAIT . 
 I knock at the bedroom door . 
 " who be there ? " 
 only two word - but the voice that utter they , hoarse and peremptory , 
 be alter almost beyond recognition . if I have not know whose room it 
 be , I might have doubt whether the Minister have really speak to I . 
 at the instant when I answer he , I be allow to pass in . have 
 admit I , he close the door , and place himself with his back 
 against it . the customary pallor of his face have darken to a deep 
 red ; there be an expression of ferocious mockery in his eye . Helena 's 
 vengeance have hurt her unhappy father far more severely than it seem 
 likely to hurt I . the doctor have say he be on the verge of madness . 
 to my thinking , he have already pass the boundary line . 
 he receive I with a boisterous affectation of cordiality . 
 " my excellent friend ! my admirable , honorable , welcome guest , you do not 
 know how glad I be to see you . stand a little near to the light ; I 
 want to admire you . " 
 remember the doctor 's advice , I obey he in silence . 
 " ah , you be a handsome fellow when I first know you , " he say , " and 
 you have some remain of it still leave . do you remember the time when 
 you be a favorite with the lady ? oh , do not   pretend to be modest ; 
 do not   turn your back , now you be old , on what you be in the prime of 
 your life . do you own that I be right ? " 
 what his object might be in say this - if , indeed , he have an 
 object - it be impossible to guess . the doctor 's advice leave I no 
 alternative ; I hasten to own that he be right . as I make that answer , 
 I observe that he hold something in his hand which be half hide up 
 the sleeve of his dressing - gown . what the nature of the object be I 
 fail to discover . 
 " and when I happen to speak of you somewhere , " he go on , " I forget 
 where - a member of my congregation - I do not   recollect who it be - tell 
 I you be connect with the aristocracy . how be you connect ? " 
 he surprise I ; but , however he have get his information , he have not 
 be deceive . I tell he that I be connect , through my mother , with 
 the family to which he have allude . 
 " the aristocracy ! " he repeat . " a race of people who be rich without 
 earn their money , and noble because their great - grandfather be 
 noble before they . they live in idleness and luxury - profligate who 
 gratify their passion without shame and without remorse . Deny , if you 
 dare , that this be a true description of they . " 
 it be really pitiable . heartily sorry for he , I pacify he again . 
 " and do not   suppose I forget that you be one of they . do you hear I , my 
 noble friend ? " 
 there be no help for it - I make another conciliatory reply . 
 " so far , " he resume , " I do not   complain of you . you have not attempt 
 to deceive I - yet . absolute silence be what I require next . though you 
 may not suspect it , my mind be in a ferment ; I must try to think . " 
 to some extent at least , his thought betray themselves in his 
 action . he put the object that I have half see in his hand into the 
 pocket of his dressing - gown , and move to the toilet - table . open one 
 of the drawer , he take from it a fold sheet of paper , and come back 
 to I . 
 " a minister of the Gospel , " he say , " be a sacred man , and have a horror 
 of crime . you be safe , so far - provide you obey I . I have a solemn 
 and terrible duty to perform . this be not the right place for it . follow 
 I downstairs . " 
 he lead the way out . the doctor , wait in the passage , be not near the 
 stair , and so escape notice . " what be it ? " Mr. Wellwood whisper . 
 in the same guard way , I say : " he have not tell I yet ; I have be 
 careful not to irritate he . " when we descend the stair , the doctor 
 follow we at a safe distance . he mend his pace when the Minister 
 open the door of the study , and when he see we both pass in . before he 
 could follow , the door be close and lock in his face . Mr. Gracedieu 
 take out the key and throw it through the open window , into the garden 
 below . 
 turn back into the room , he lay the fold sheet of paper on the 
 table . that do , he speak to I . 
 " I distrust my own weakness , " he say . " a dreadful necessity confront 
 I - I might shrink from the horrid idea , and , if I could open the 
 door , might try to get away . Escape be impossible now . we be prisoner 
 together . but do not   suppose that we be alone . there be a third person 
 present , who will judge between you and I . look there ! " 
 he point solemnly to the portrait of his wife . it be a small picture , 
 very simply frame ; represent the face in a " three - quarter " view , and 
 part of the figure only . as a work of art it be contemptible ; but , as a 
 likeness , it answer its purpose . my unhappy friend stand before it , in 
 an attitude of dejection , cover his face with his hand . 
 in the interval of silence that follow , I be remind that an unseen 
 friend be keep watch outside . 
 alarm by have hear the key turn in the lock , and realize the 
 embarrassment of the position in which I be place , the doctor have 
 discover a discreet way of communicate with I . he slip one of 
 his visit - card under the door , with these word write on it : " how 
 can I help you ? " 
 I take the pencil from my pocketbook , and write on the blank side of 
 the card : " he have throw the key into the garden ; look for it under the 
 window . " a glance at the Minister , before I return my reply , show 
 that his attitude be unchanged . without be see or suspect , I , in 
 my turn , slip the card under the door . 
 the slow minute follow each other - and still nothing happen . 
 my anxiety to see how the doctor 's search for the key be succeed , 
 tempt I to approach the window . on my way to it , the tail of my coat 
 throw down a little tray contain pen and pencil , which have be 
 leave close to the edge of the table . slight as the noise of the fall 
 be , it disturb Mr. Gracedieu . he look round vacantly . 
 " I have be comfort by prayer , " he tell I . " the weakness of poor 
 humanity have find strength in the Lord . " he point to the portrait 
 once more : " my hand must not presume to touch it , while I be still in 
 doubt . take it down . " 
 I remove the picture and place it , by his direction , on a chair that 
 stand midway between we . to my surprise his tone falter ; I see tear 
 rise in his eye . " you may think you see a picture there , " he say . 
 " you be wrong . you see my wife herself . stand here , and look at my wife 
 with I . " 
 we stand together , with our eye fix on the portrait . 
 without anything say or do on my part to irritate he , he suddenly 
 turn to I in a state of furious rage . " not a sign of sorrow ! " he 
 burst out . " not a blush of shame ! Wretch , you stand condemn by the 
 atrocious composure that I see in your face ! " 
 a first discovery of the odious suspicion of which I be the object , 
 dawn on my mind at that moment . my capacity for restrain myself 
 completely fail I . I speak to he as if he have be an accountable 
 be . " once for all , " I say , " tell I what I have a right to know . you 
 suspect I of something . what be it ? " 
 instead of directly reply , he seize my arm and lead I to the table . 
 " take up that paper , " he say . " there be write on it . read - and let 
 her judge between we . your life depend on how you answer I . " 
 be there a weapon conceal in the room ? or have he get it in the pocket 
 of his dressing - gown ? I listen for the sound of the doctor 's return 
 footstep in the passage outside , and hear nothing . my life have once 
 depend , year since , on my success in head the arrest of an escape 
 prisoner . I be not conscious , then , of feel my energy weaken by 
 fear . but that man be not mad ; and I be young , in those day , by a 
 good twenty year or more . at my later time of life , I could show my old 
 friend that I be not afraid of he - but I be conscious of an effort in 
 do it . 
 I open the paper . " be I to read this to myself ? " I ask . " or be I to 
 read it aloud ? " 
 " read it aloud ! " 
 in these term , his daughter address he : 
 " I have be so unfortunate , dear father , as to displease you , and I 
 dare not hope that you will consent to receive I . what it be my painful 
 duty to tell you , must be tell in writing . 
 " grieve as I be to distress you , in your present state of health , I 
 must not hesitate to reveal what it have be my misfortune - I may even 
 say my misery , when I think of my mother - to discover . 
 " but let I make sure , in such a serious matter as this be , that I be 
 not mistaken . 
 " in those happy past day , when I be still dear to my father , you say 
 you think of write to invite a dearly - value friend to pay a visit 
 to this house . you have first know he , as I understand , when my mother 
 be still live . many interesting thing you tell I about this old 
 friend , but you never mention that he know , or that he have even see , 
 my mother . I be leave to suppose that those two have remain stranger 
 to each other to the day of her death . 
 " if there be any misinterpretation here of what you say , or perhaps of 
 what you mean to say , pray destroy what I have write without turn 
 to the next page ; and forgive I for have innocently startle you by a 
 false alarm . " 
 Mr. Gracedieu interrupt I . 
 " put it down ! " he cry ; " I will not   wait till you have get to the end - I 
 shall question you now . give I the paper ; it will help I to keep this 
 mystery of iniquity clear in my own mind . " 
 I give he the paper . 
 he hesitate - and look at the portrait once more . " turn she away from 
 I , " he say ; " I can not   face my wife . " 
 I place the picture with its back to he . 
 he consult the paper , read it with but little of the confusion and 
 hesitation which my experience of he have induce I to anticipate . have 
 the mad excitement that possess he exercise an influence in clear 
 his mind , resemble in some degree the influence exercise by a storm 
 in clear the air ? whatever the right explanation may be , I can only 
 report what I see . I could hardly have master what his daughter have 
 write more readily , if I have be read it myself . 
 " Helena tell I , " he begin , " that you say you know she by her likeness 
 to her mother . be that true ? " 
 " quite true . " 
 " and you make an excuse for leave she - see ! here it be , write down . 
 you make an excuse , and leave she when she ask for an explanation . " 
 " I do . " 
 he consult the paper again . 
 " my daughter say - no ! I will not   be hurry and I will not   be 
 interrupt - she say you be confused . be that so ? " 
 " it be so . let your question wait for a moment . I wish to tell you why 
 I be confused . " 
 " have not   I say I will not   be interrupt ? do you think you can shake my 
 resolution ? " he refer to the paper again . " I have lose the place . 
 it be your fault - find it for I . " 
 the evidence which be intend to convict I be the evidence which I 
 be expect to find ! I point it out to he . 
 his natural courtesy assert itself in spite of his anger . he say 
 " thank you , " and question I the moment after as fiercely as ever . " go 
 back to the time , sir , when we meet in your room at the prison . do you 
 know my wife then ? " 
 " certainly not . " 
 " do you and she see each other - ha ! I have   get it now - do you see each 
 other after I have leave the town ? no prevarication ! you own to tell 
 Helena that you know she by her likeness to her mother . you must have 
 see her mother . where ? " 
 I make another effort to defend myself . he again refuse furiously to 
 hear I . it be useless to persist . whatever the danger that threaten 
 I might be , the soon it show itself the easy I should feel . I 
 tell he that Mrs. Gracedieu have call on I , after he and his wife have 
 leave the town . 
 " do you mean to tell I , " he cry , " that she come to you ? " 
 " I do . " 
 after that answer , he no long require the paper to help he . he throw 
 it from he on the floor . 
 " and you receive she , " he say , " without inquire whether I know of 
 her visit or not ? guilty deception on your part - guilty deception on her 
 part . oh , the hideous wickedness of it ! " 
 when his mad suspicion that I have be his wife 's lover betray itself 
 in this way , I make a last attempt , in the face of my own conviction 
 that it be hopeless , to place my conduct and his wife 's conduct before 
 he in the true light . 
 " Mrs. Gracedieu 's object be to consult I - " before I could say the 
 next word , I see he put his hand into the pocket of his dressing - gown . 
 " an innocent man , " he sternly declare , " would have tell I that my wife 
 have be to see he - you keep it a secret . an innocent woman would have 
 give I a reason for wish to go to you - she keep it a secret , when 
 she leave my house ; she keep it a secret when she come back . " 
 " Mr. Gracedieu , I insist on be hear ! your wife 's motive - " 
 he draw from his pocket the thing that he have hide from I . this time , 
 there be no concealment ; he let I see that he be open a razor . it 
 be no time for assert my innocence ; I have to think of preserve my 
 life . when a man be without firearm , what defense can avail against a 
 razor in the hand of a madman ? a chair be at my side ; it offer the 
 one poor mean of guard myself that I could see . I lay my hand on 
 it , and keep my eye on he . 
 he pause , look backward and forward between the picture and I . 
 " which of they shall I kill first ? " he say to himself . " the man who 
 be my trusted friend ? or the woman whom I believe to be an angel on 
 earth ? " he stop once more , in a state of fierce self - concentration , 
 debate what he should do . " the woman , " he decide . " Wretch ! fiend ! 
 harlot ! how I love she ! ! ! " 
 with a yell of fury , he pounce on the picture - rip the canvas out of 
 the frame - and cut it malignantly into fragment . as they drop from 
 the razor on the floor , he stamp on they , and grind they under his 
 foot . " go , wife of my bosom , " he cry , with a dreadful mockery of voice 
 and look - " go , and burn everlastingly in the place of torment ! " his eye 
 glare at I . " your turn now , " he say - and rush at I with his 
 weapon ready in his hand . I hurl the chair at his right arm . the razor 
 drop on the floor . I catch he by the wrist . like a wild animal he 
 try to bite I . with my free hand - if I have know how to defend myself 
 in any other way , I would have take that way - with my free hand I 
 seize he by the throat ; force he back ; and hold he against the 
 wall . my grasp on his throat keep he quiet . but the dread of seriously 
 injure he so completely overcome I , that I forgot I be a prisoner 
 in the room , and be on the point of alarm the household by a cry for 
 help . 
 I be still struggle to preserve my self - control , when the sound of 
 footstep break the silence outside . I hear the key turn in the lock , 
 and see the doctor at the open door . 
 CHAPTER XLVI . the cumbersome lady . 
 I can not prevail upon myself to dwell at any length on the event that 
 follow . 
 we secure my unhappy friend , and carry he to his bed . it be 
 necessary to have man in attendance who could perform the duty of 
 watch he . the doctor send for they , while I go downstairs to make 
 the good I could of the miserable news which it be impossible entirely 
 to conceal . all that I could do to spare Miss Jillgall , I do . I be 
 oblige to acknowledge that there have be an outbreak of violence , 
 and that the portrait of the Minister 's wife have be destroy by the 
 Minister himself . of Helena 's revenge on I I say nothing . it have 
 lead to consequence which even her merciless malice could not have 
 contemplate . there be no obstacle in the way of keep secret the 
 attempt on my life . but I be compel to own that Mr. Gracedieu have 
 take a dislike to I , which render it necessary that my visit should 
 be bring to an end . I hasten to add that I should go to the hotel , 
 and should wait there until the next day , in the hope of hear well 
 news . 
 of the multitude of question with which poor Miss Jillgall overwhelm 
 I - of the wild word of sorrow and alarm that escape she - of the 
 desperate manner in which she hold by my arm , and implore I not to 
 go away , when I must see for myself that ' she be a person entirely 
 destitute of presence of mind " - I shall say nothing . the undeserved 
 suffering that be inflict on innocent person by the sin of other 
 demand silent sympathy ; and , to that extent at least , I can say that I 
 honestly feel for my quaint and pleasant little friend . 
 in the evening the doctor call on I at the hotel . the medical 
 treatment of his patient have succeed in calm the maddened brain 
 under the influence of sleep . if the night pass quietly , well news 
 might be hop for in the morning . 
 on the next day I have arrange to drive to the farm , be resolve 
 not to disappoint eunice . but I shrink from the prospect of have 
 to distress she as I have already distress Miss Jillgall . the only 
 alternative leave be to repeat the sad story in writing , subject to 
 the concealment which I have already observe . this I do , and send the 
 letter by messenger , overnight , so that Eunice might know when to expect 
 I . 
 the medical report , in the morning , justify some hope . Mr. Gracedieu 
 have sleep well , and there have be no reappearance of insane violence 
 on his waking . but the doctor 's opinion be far from encouraging when 
 we speak of the future . he do not anticipate the cruel necessity of 
 place the Minister under restraint - unless some new provocation lead to 
 a new outbreak . the misfortune to be fear be imbecility . 
 I be just leave the hotel to keep my appointment with Eunice , when 
 the waiter announce the arrival of a young lady who wish to speak 
 with I . before I could ask if she have mention her name , the young 
 lady herself walk in - Helena Gracedieu . 
 she explain her object in call on I , with the exasperate 
 composure which be peculiarly her own . no parallel to it occur to I 
 in my official experience of shameless woman . 
 " I do not   wish to speak of what happen yesterday , so far as I know 
 anything about it , " she begin . " it be quite enough for I that you have 
 be oblige to leave the house and to take refuge in this hotel . I 
 have come to say a word about the future . be you honor I with your 
 attention ? " 
 I sign to she to go on . if I have answer in word , I should have tell 
 she to leave the room . 
 " at first , " she resume , " I think of writing ; but it occur to I 
 that you might keep my letter , and show it to Philip , by way of lower 
 I in his good opinion , as you have lower I in the good opinion of 
 his father . my object in come here be to give you a word of warning . 
 if you attempt to make mischief next between Philip and myself , I shall 
 hear of it - and you know what to expect , when you have I for an enemy . 
 it be not worth while to say any more . we understand each other , I 
 hope ? " 
 she be determined to have a reply - and she get it . 
 " not quite yet , " I say . " I have be hitherto , as become a gentleman , 
 always mindful of a woman 's claim to forbearance . you will do well not 
 to tempt I into forget that you be a woman , by prolong your 
 visit . now , Miss Helena Gracedieu , we understand each other . " she make 
 I a low curtsey , and answer in her fine tone of irony : " I only 
 desire to wish you a pleasant journey home . " 
 I ring for the waiter . " show this lady out , " I say . 
 even this fail to have the slight effect on she . she saunter to 
 the door , as perfectly at her ease as if the room have be her - not 
 mine . 
 I have think of drive to the farm . shall I confess it ? my temper be 
 so completely upset that active movement of some kind offer the one 
 mean of relief in which I could find refuge . the farm be not more 
 than five mile distant , and I have be a good walker all my life . after 
 make the needful inquiry , I set forth to visit Eunice on foot . 
 my way through the town lead I past the Minister 's house . I have leave the 
 door some fifty yard behind I , when I see two lady approach . 
 they be walk , in the friendly manner , arm in arm . as they come 
 nearer , I discover Miss Jillgall . her companion be the middle - aged 
 lady who have decline to give her name , when we meet accidentally at Mr. 
 Gracedieu 's door . 
 hysterically impulsive , Miss Jillgall seize both my hand , and 
 overwhelm I with entreaty that I would go back with she to the 
 house . I listen rather absently . the middle - aged lady happen to be 
 near to I now than on either of the former occasion on which I have 
 see she . there be something in the expression of her eye which seem 
 to be familiar to I . but the effort of my memory be not help by what 
 I observe in the other part of her face . the iron - gray hair , the baggy 
 low eyelid , the fat cheek , the coarse complexion , and the double 
 chin , be feature , and very disagreeable feature , too , which I have 
 never see at any former time . 
 " do pray come back with we , " Miss Jillgall plead . " we be just 
 talk of you . I and my friend - " there she stop , evidently on the 
 point of blurt out the name which she have be forbid to utter in 
 my hearing . 
 the lady smile ; her provokingly familiar eye rest on I with a 
 humorous enjoyment of the scene . 
 " my dear , " she say to Miss Jillgall , " caution cease to be a virtue 
 when it cease to be of any use . the Governor be begin to 
 remember I , and the inevitable recognition - with his quickness of 
 perception - be likely to be a matter of minute now . " she turn to I . 
 " in more way than one , sir , woman be hardly use by Nature . as they 
 advance in year they lose more in personal appearance than the man do . 
 you be white - haired , and   pray excuse I   you be too fat ; and   allow 
 I to take another liberty   you stoop at the shoulder - but you have not 
 entirely lose your good look . I be no long recognizable . allow I 
 to prompt you , as they say on the stage . I be Mrs. Tenbruggen . " 
 as a man of the world , I ought to have be capable of conceal my 
 astonishment and dismay . she strike I dumb . 
 Mrs. Tenbruggen in the town ! the one woman whose appearance Mr. 
 Gracedieu have dread , and justly dread , stand before I - free , as a 
 friend of his kinswoman , to enter his house , at the very time when he 
 be a helpless man , guard by watcher at his bedside . my first clear 
 idea be to get away from both the woman , and consider what be to be 
 do next . I bow - and beg to be excuse - and say I be in a hurry , 
 all in a breath . 
 hear this , the good of genial old maid be unable to restrain her 
 curiosity . " where be you go ? " she ask . 
 too confused to think of an excuse , I say I be go to the farm . 
 " to see my dear Euneece ? " Miss Jillgall burst out . " oh , we will go with 
 you ! " Mrs. Tenbruggen 's politeness add immediately , " with the great 
 pleasure . " 
 CHAPTER XLVII . the JOURNEY to the FARM . 
 my first ungrateful impulse be to get rid of the two cumbersome lady 
 who have offer to be my companion . it be needless to call upon my 
 invention for an excuse ; the truth , as I gladly perceive , would serve 
 my purpose . I have only to tell they that I have arrange to walk to the 
 farm . 
 lean , wiry , and impetuous , Miss Jillgall receive my excuse with 
 the sincere approval of it , as a new idea . " nothing could be more 
 agreeable to I , " she declare ; " I have be a wonderful walker all my 
 life . " she turn to her friend . " we will go with he , my dear , will not 
 we ? " 
 Mrs. Tenbruggen 's reception of this proposal inspire I with hope ; she 
 ask how far it be to the farm . " five mile ! " she repeat . " and five 
 mile back again , unless the farmer lend we a cart . my dear Selina , you 
 might as well ask I to walk to the North Pole . you have get rid of one 
 of we , Mr. Governor , " she add , pleasantly ; " and the other , if you only 
 walk fast enough , you will leave behind you on the road . if I believe 
 in luck - which I do not   - I should call you a fortunate man . " 
 but companionable Selina would not hear of a separation . she ask , 
 in her most irresistible manner , if I object to drive instead of 
 walk . her heart 's dear wish , she say , be to make her bosom 
 friend and myself well acquaint with each other . to conclude , she 
 remind I that there be a cab - stand in the next street . 
 perhaps I might have be influence by my distrust of Mrs. Tenbruggen , 
 or perhaps by my anxiety to protect eunice . it strike I that I might 
 warn the defenseless girl to be on her guard with Mrs. Tenbruggen to 
 well purpose , if Eunice be in a position to recognize she in any 
 future emergency that might occur . to my mind , this dangerous woman be 
 doubly formidable - and for a good reason ; she be the bosom friend of 
 that innocent and unwary person , Miss Jillgall . so I amiably consent 
 to forego my walk , yield to the superior attraction of Mrs. 
 Tenbruggen 's company . on that day the sunshine be temper by a 
 delightful breeze . if we have be in the big and worst - govern city 
 on the civilised earth , we should have find no public vehicle , open to 
 the air , which could offer accommodation to three people . be only in 
 a country town , we have a light four - wheel chaise at our disposal , as a 
 matter of course . 
 no wise man expect to be mercifully treat , when he be shut into a 
 carriage with a mature single lady , inflame by curiosity . I be not 
 unprepared for Miss Jillgall when she allude , for the second time , to 
 the sad event which have happen in the house on the previous day - and 
 especially to the destruction by Mr. Gracedieu of the portrait of his 
 wife . 
 " why do not   he destroy something else ? " she plead , piteously . " it 
 be such a disappointment to I . I never like that picture myself . 
 of course I ought to have admire the portrait of the wife of my 
 benefactor . but no - that disagreeable paint face be too much for I . 
 I should have feel inexpressibly relieve , if I could have show it to 
 Elizabeth , and hear she say that she agree with I . " 
 " perhaps I see it when I call on you , " Mrs. Tenbruggen suggest . 
 " where do the picture hang ? " 
 " my dear ! I receive you in the dining - room , and the portrait hang in 
 Mr. Gracedieu 's study . " 
 what they say to each other next escape my attention . quite 
 unconsciously , Miss Jillgall have reveal to I a danger which 
 neither the Minister nor I have discover , though it have conspicuously 
 threaten we both on the wall of the study . the act of mad destruction 
 which , if I have possess the mean of safely interfere , I should 
 certainly have endeavor to prevent , now assume a new and startling 
 aspect . if Mrs. Tenbruggen really have some motive of her own for 
 endeavor to identify the adopt child , the preservation of the 
 picture must have lead she straight to the end in view . the most casual 
 opportunity of compare Helena with the portrait of Mrs. Gracedieu 
 would have reveal the likeness between mother and daughter - and , that 
 result attain , the identification of Eunice with the infant whom the 
 " Miss Chance " of those day have bring to the prison must inevitably 
 have follow . it be perhaps natural that Mr. Gracedieu 's infatuate 
 devotion to the memory of his wife should have blind he to the 
 betrayal of Helena 's parentage , which meet his eye every time he enter 
 his study . but that I should have be too stupid to discover what he 
 have fail to see , be a wound deal to my self - esteem which I be vain 
 enough to feel acutely . 
 Mrs. Tenbruggen 's voice , cheery and humorous , break in on my 
 reflection , with an odd question : 
 " Mr. Governor , do you ever condescend to read novel ? " 
 " it be not easy to say , Mrs. Tenbruggen , how grateful I be to the writer 
 of novel . " 
 " ah ! I read novel , too . but I blush to confess - do I blush ? - that I 
 never think of feel grateful till you mention it . Selina and I 
 do not   complain of your prefer your own reflection to our company . 
 on the contrary , you have remind we agreeably of the hero of 
 fiction , when the author describe they as be ' absorb in thought . ' 
 for some minute , Mr. Governor , you have be a hero ; absorb , as I 
 venture to guess , in unpleasant remembrance of the time when I be 
 a single lady . you have not forget how badly I behave , and what 
 shock thing I say , in those bygone day . be I right ? " 
 " you be entirely wrong . " 
 it be possible that I may have speak a little too sharply . anyway , 
 faithful Selina intercede for her friend . " oh , dear sir , do not   be hard 
 on Elizabeth ! she always mean well . " Mrs. Tenbruggen , as facetious as 
 ever , make a grateful return for a small compliment . she chuck Miss 
 Jillgall under the chin , with the air of an amorous old gentleman 
 express his approval of a pretty servant - girl . it be impossible to 
 look at the two , in their relative situation , without laugh . but 
 Mrs. Tenbruggen fail to cheat I into alter my opinion of she . 
 Innocent Miss Jillgall clap her ugly hand , and say : " be not   she good 
 company ? " 
 Mrs. Tenbruggen 's social resource be not exhausted yet . she suddenly 
 shift to the serious side of her character . 
 " perhaps I have improve a little , " she say , " as I have advance in 
 year . the sorrow of an unhappy married life may have have a purifying 
 influence on my nature . my husband and I begin badly . Mr. Tenbruggen 
 think I have money ; and I think Mr. Tenbruggen have money . he be 
 take in by I ; and I be take in by he . when he repeat the word 
 of the marriage service   most impressively read by your friend the 
 Chaplain : ' with all my worldly good I thee endow ' - his eloquent voice 
 suggest one of the large income in Europe . when I promise and 
 vow , in my turn , the delightful prospect of squander my rich 
 husband 's money make quite a new woman of I . I declare solemnly , when I 
 say I would love , honor , and obey Mr. T. , I look as if I really 
 mean it . wherever he be now , poor dear , he be cheat somebody . such 
 a handsome , gentleman - like man , Selina ! and , oh , Mr. Governor , such a 
 blackguard ! " 
 have describe her husband in those term , she get tired of the 
 subject . we be now favor with another view of this many - sided woman . 
 she appear in her professional character . 
 " ah , what a delicious breeze be blow , out here in the country ! " she 
 say . " will you excuse I if I take off my glove ? I want to air my 
 hand . " she hold up her hand to the breeze ; firm , muscular , deadly 
 white hand . " in my professional occupation , " she explain , " I be 
 always rub , tickling , squeeze , tap , kneading , rolling , 
 strike the muscle of patient . Selina , do you know the movement of 
 your own joint ? flexion , extension , abduction , adduction , rotation , 
 circumduction , pronation , supination , and the lateral movement . be 
 proud of those accomplishment , my dear , but beware of attempt 
 to become a Masseuse . there be drawback in that vocation - and I be 
 conscious of one of they at this moment . " she lift her hand to 
 her nose . " Pah ! my hand smell of other people 's flesh . the delicious 
 country air will blow it away - the luxury of purification ! " her finger 
 twist and quiver , and get crook at one moment and straight again 
 at another , and show themselves in succession singly , and fly into 
 each other fiercely interlace , and then spread out again like the 
 stick of a fan , until it really make I giddy to look at they . as for 
 Miss Jillgall , she lift her poor little sunken eye rapturously to the 
 sky , as if she call the homiest sunlight to witness that this be the 
 most lovable woman on the face of the earth . 
 but elderly female fascination offer its allurement in vain to 
 the rough animal , man . suspicion of Mrs. Tenbruggen 's motif have 
 establish itself firmly in my mind . why have the Popular Masseuse 
 abandon her brilliant career in London , and plunge into the obscurity 
 of a country town ? an opportunity of clear up the doubt thus 
 suggest seem to have present itself now . " be it indiscreet to 
 ask , " I say , " if you be here in your professional capacity ? " 
 her cunning seize its advantage and put a sly question to I . " do you 
 wish to be one of my patient yourself ? " 
 " that be , unfortunately , impossible , " I reply " I have arrange to 
 return to London . " 
 " immediately ? " 
 " to - morrow at the late . " 
 artful as she be , Mrs. Tenbruggen fail to conceal a momentary 
 expression of relief which betray itself , partly in her manner , partly 
 in her face . she have ascertain , to her own complete satisfaction , that 
 my speedy departure be an event which might be rely on . 
 " but I have not yet answer you , " she resume . " to tell the truth , I be 
 eager to try my hand on you . Massage , as I practice it , would lighten 
 your weight , and restore your figure ; I may even say would lengthen 
 your life . you will think of I , one of these day , will not   you ? in 
 the meanwhile - yes ! I be here in my professional capacity . several 
 interesting case ; and one very remarkable person , bring to death 's 
 door by the doctor ; a rich man who be liberal in pay his fee . there 
 be my quarrel with London and Londoners . some of their paper , medical 
 newspaper , of course , declare that my fee be exorbitant ; and there 
 be a tendency among the patient - I mean the patient who be roll in 
 riches - to follow the lead of the newspaper . I be no worm to be trodden 
 on , in that way . the London people shall wait for I , until they miss 
 I - and , when I do go back , they will find the fee increase . my 
 finger and thumb , Mr. Governor , be not to be insult with impunity . " 
 Miss Jillgall nod her head at I . it be an eloquent nod . " admire my 
 spirited friend , " be the interpretation I put on it . 
 at the same time , my private sentiment suggest that Mrs. Tenbruggen 's 
 reply be too perfectly satisfactory , view as an explanation . my 
 suspicion be by no mean set at rest ; and I be resolve not to let 
 the subject drop yet . " speak of Mr. Gracedieu , and of the chance of 
 his partial recovery , " I say , " do you think the Minister would benefit 
 by Massage ? " 
 " I have not   a doubt of it , if you can get rid of the doctor . " 
 " you think he would be an obstacle in the way ? " 
 " there be some medical man who be honorable exception to the general 
 rule ; and he may be one of they , " Mrs. Tenbruggen admit . " do not   be 
 too hopeful . as a doctor , he belong to the most tyrannical trade - union 
 in existence . may I make a personal remark ? " 
 " certainly . " 
 " I find something in your manner - pray do not   suppose that I be 
 angry - which look like distrust ; I mean , distrust of I . " 
 Miss Jillgall 's ever ready kindness interfere in my defense : " oh , no , 
 Elizabeth ! you be not often mistake ; but indeed you be wrong now . 
 look at my distinguished friend . I remember my copy book , when I be 
 a small creature learn to write , in England . there be first line 
 that we copy , in big letter , and one of they say , ' distrust be 
 Mean . ' I know a young person , whose name begin with H , who be one mass 
 of meanness . but " - excellent Selina pause , and point to I with a 
 gesture of triumph - " no meanness there ! " 
 Mrs. Tenbruggen wait to hear what I have to say , scornfully insensible 
 to Miss Jillgall 's well - mean interruption . 
 " you be not altogether mistaken , " I tell she . " I can not   say that my mind 
 be in a state of distrust , but I own that you puzzle I . " 
 " how , if you please ? " 
 " may I presume that you remember the occasion when we meet at Mr. 
 Gracedieu 's house - door ? you see that I fail to recognize you , and 
 you refuse to give your name when the servant ask for it . a few day 
 afterward , I hear you   quite accidentally   forbid Miss Jillgall to 
 mention your name in my hearing . I be at a loss to understand it . " 
 before she could answer I , the chaise draw up at the gate of the 
 farmhouse . Mrs. Tenbruggen carefully promise to explain what have 
 puzzle I , at the first opportunity . " if it escape my memory , " she 
 say , " pray remind I of it . " 
 I determine to remind she of it . whether I could depend on she to tell 
 I the truth , might be quite another thing . 
 CHAPTER XLVIII . the decision of eunice . 
 Eunice run out to meet we , and open the gate . she be instantly fold 
 in Miss Jillgall 's arm . on her release , she come to I , eager for news 
 of her father 's health . when I have communicate all that I think 
 it right to tell she of the doctor 's last report , she notice Mrs. 
 Tenbruggen . the appearance of a stranger seem to embarrass she . I leave 
 Miss Jillgall to introduce they to each other . 
 " Darling Euneece , you remember Mrs. Tenbruggen 's name , I be sure ? 
 Elizabeth , this be my sweet girl ; I mention she in my letter to you . " 
 " I hope she will be my sweet girl , when we know each other a little 
 well . may I kiss you , dear ? you have lovely eye ; but I be sorry to 
 see that they do not   look like happy eye . you want Mamma Tenbruggen to 
 cheer you . what a charming old house ! " 
 she put her arm round Eunice 's waist and lead she to the house door . her 
 enjoyment of the creeper that twin their way up the pillar of the 
 porch be simply perfection as a piece of acting . when the farmer 's wife 
 present herself , Mrs. Tenbruggen be so irresistibly amiable , and take 
 such flattering notice of the child , that the harmless british matron 
 actually blush with pleasure . " I be sure , ma'am , you must have child 
 of your own , " she say . Mrs. Tenbruggen cast her eye on the floor , and 
 sigh with pathetic resignation . a sweet little family , and all cruelly 
 sweep away by death . if the performance mean anything , it do most 
 assuredly mean that . 
 " what wonderful self - possession ! " somebody whisper in my ear . the 
 child in the room be healthy , well - behave little creature - but 
 the name of the innocent one among they be Selina . 
 before dinner we be show over the farm . 
 the good woman of the house lead the way , and Miss Jillgall and I 
 accompany she . the child run on in front of we . still keep 
 possession of Eunice , Mrs. Tenbruggen follow at some distance behind . 
 I look back , after no very long interval , and see that a separation 
 have take place . Mrs. Tenbruggen pass I , not look so pleasantly as 
 usual , join the child , and walk with two of they , hand in hand , a 
 pattern of maternal amiability . I drop back a little , and give Eunice 
 an opportunity of join I ; have purposely leave she to form her own 
 opinion , without any adverse influence exercise on my part . 
 " be that lady a friend of your ? " she ask . " no ; only an acquaintance . 
 what do you think of she ? " 
 " I think I should like she at first ; she be so kind , and seem to 
 take such an interest in I . but she say such strange thing - ask if 
 I be reckon like my mother , and which of we be the eld , my sister 
 or myself , and whether we be my father 's only two child , and if one 
 of we be more his favorite than the other . what I could tell she , I do 
 tell . but when I say I do not   know which of we be the old , she give 
 I an impudent tap on the cheek , and say , ' I do not   believe you , child , ' 
 and leave I . how can Selina be so fond of she ? do not   mention it to any 
 one else ; I hope I shall never see she again . " 
 " I will keep your secret , Eunice ; and you must keep mine . I entirely 
 agree with you . " 
 " you agree with I in dislike she ? " 
 " Heartily . " 
 we could say no more at that time . our friend in advance be wait 
 for we . we join they at once . 
 if I have feel any doubt of the purpose which have really induce Mrs. 
 Tenbruggen to leave London , all further uncertainty on my part be at an 
 end . she have some vile interest of her own to serve by identify Mr. 
 Gracedieu 's adopt child - but what the nature of that interest might 
 be , it be impossible to guess . the future , when I think of it now , 
 fill I with dismay . a more utterly helpless position than mine it 
 be not easy to conceive . to warn the Minister , in his present critical 
 state of health , be simply impossible . my relation with Helena forbid 
 I even to approach she . and , as for Selina , she be little less than a 
 mere tool in the hand of her well - beloved friend . what , in God 's name , 
 be I to do ? 
 at dinner - time we find the master of the house wait to bid we 
 welcome . 
 personally speak , he present a remarkable contrast to the typical 
 british farmer . he be neither big nor burly ; he speak English as well 
 as I do ; and there be nothing in his dress which would have make he a 
 fit subject for a picture of rustic life . when he speak , he be able to 
 talk on subject unconnecte with agricultural pursuit ; nor do I hear 
 he grumble about the weather and the crop . it be pleasant to see that 
 his wife be proud of he , and that he be , what all father ought to 
 be , his child 's good and dear friend . why do I dwell on these 
 detail , relate to a man whom I be not destine to see again ? only 
 because I have reason to feel grateful to he . when my spirit be 
 depress by anxiety , he make my mind easy about Eunice , as long as she 
 remain in his house . 
 the social arrangement , when our meal be over , fall of themselves into 
 the right train . 
 Miss Jillgall go upstairs , with the mother and the child , to see 
 the nursery and the bedroom . Mrs. Tenbruggen discover a bond of 
 union between the farmer and herself ; they be both skilled player at 
 backgammon , and they sit down to try conclusion at their favorite game . 
 without any wearisome necessity for excuse or stratagem , Eunice take 
 my arm and lead I to the welcome retirement of her own sitting - room . 
 I could honestly congratulate she , when I hear that she be establish 
 at the farm as a member of the family . while she be governess to the 
 child , she be safe from danger that might have threaten she , 
 if she have be compel by circumstance to return to the Minister 's 
 house . 
 the entry in her Journal , which she be anxious that I should read , be 
 place before I next . 
 I follow the poor child 's account of the fearful night that she have 
 pass , with an interest that hold I breathless to the end . a terrible 
 dream , which have impress a sense of its reality on the sleeper by 
 reach its climax in somnambulism - this be the obvious explanation , 
 no doubt ; and a rational mind would not hesitate to accept it . but a 
 rational mind be not a universal gift , even in a country which pride 
 itself on the idol - worship of Fact . those good friend who be always 
 well acquaint with our fault , failing , and weakness than we can 
 pretend to be ourselves , have long since discover that my nature be 
 superstitious , and my imagination likely to mislead I in the presence 
 of event which encourage it . well ! I be weak enough to recoil from 
 the purely rational view of all that Eunice have suffer , and hear , and 
 see , on the fateful night record in her Journal . good and evil walk 
 the way of this unintelligible world , on the same free condition . 
 if we cling , as many of we do , to the comforting belief that depart 
 spirit can minister to earthly creature for good - can be feel move 
 in we , in a train of thought , and see as visible manifestation , in a 
 dream - with what pretense of reason can we deny that the same freedom of 
 supernatural influence which be concede to the depart spirit , work 
 for good , be also permit to the depart spirit , work for evil ? 
 if the grave can not wholly part mother and child , when the mother 's 
 life have be good , do eternal annihilation separate they , when the 
 mother 's life have be wicked ? no ! if the depart spirit can bring with 
 it a blessing , the depart spirit can bring with it a curse . I dare 
 not confess to Eunice that the influence of her murderess - mother might , 
 as I think possible , have be supernaturally present when she hear 
 temptation whisper in her ear ; but I dare not deny it to myself . 
 all that I could say to satisfy and sustain she , I do say . and when I 
 declare - with my whole heart declare - that the noble passion which have 
 elevate her whole being , and have triumph over the sore trial that 
 desertion could inflict , would still triumph to the end , I see hope , in 
 that brave and true heart , show its bright promise for the future in 
 Eunice 's eye . 
 she close and lock her Journal . by common consent we seek the 
 relief of change the subject . Eunice ask I if it be really 
 necessary that I should return to London . 
 I shrink from tell she that I could be of no further use to her 
 father , while he regard I with an enmity which I have not deserve . 
 but I see no reason for conceal that it be my purpose to see Philip 
 Dunboyne . 
 " you tell I yesterday , " I remind she , " that I be to say you have 
 forgive he . do you still wish I to do that ? " 
 " indeed I do ! " 
 " have you think of it seriously ? be you sure of not have be 
 hurry by a generous impulse into say more than you mean ? " 
 " I have be think of it , " she say , " through the wakeful hour of 
 last night - and many thing be plain to I , which I be not sure of in 
 the time when I be so happy . he have cause I the bitter sorrow of 
 my life , but he can not   undo the good that I owe to he . he have make a 
 well girl of I , in the time when his love be mine . I do not   forget 
 that . miserably as it have end , I do not   forget that . " 
 her voice tremble ; the tear rise in her eye . it be impossible for 
 I to conceal the distress that I feel . the noble creature see it . " no , " 
 she say faintly ; " I be not go to cry . do not   look so sorry for I . " 
 her hand press my hand gently - she pity I . when I see how she 
 struggle to control herself , and do control herself , I declare to God 
 I could have go down on my knee before she . 
 she ask to be allow to speak of Philip again , and for the last time . 
 " when you meet with he in London , he may perhaps ask if you have see 
 Eunice . " 
 " my child ! he be sure to ask . " 
 " break it to he gently - but do not   let he deceive himself . in this 
 world , he must never hope to see I again . " 
 I try - very gently - to remonstrate . " at your age , and at his age , " I 
 say , ' surely there be hope ? " 
 " there be no hope . " she press her hand on her heart . " I know it , I 
 feel it , here . " 
 " oh , Eunice , it be hard for I to say that ! " 
 " I will try to make it easy for you . say that I have forgive he - and 
 say no more . " 
 CHAPTER XLIX . the GOVERNOR on his guard . 
 after leave Eunice , my one desire be to be alone . I have much to think 
 of , and I want an opportunity of recover myself . on my way out of 
 the house , in search of the first solitary place that I could discover , 
 I pass the room in which we have din . the door be ajar . before I 
 could get by it , Mrs. Tenbruggen step out and stop I . 
 " will you come in here for a moment ? " she say . " the farmer have be 
 call away , and I want to speak to you . " 
 very unwillingly - but how could I have refuse without give 
 offense ? - I enter the room . 
 " when you notice my keep my name from you , " Mrs. Tenbruggen begin , 
 " while Selina be with we , you place I in an awkward position . our 
 little friend be an excellent creature , but her tongue run away with 
 she sometimes ; I be oblige to be careful of take she too readily 
 into my confidence . for instance , I have never tell she what my name be 
 before I marry . will not   you sit down ? " 
 I have purposely remain stand as a hint to she not to prolong the 
 interview . the hint be throw away ; I take a chair . 
 " Selina 's letter have inform I , " she resume , " that Mr. Gracedieu 
 be a nervous invalid . when I come to England , I have hop to try what 
 massage might do to relieve he . the cure of their popular preacher 
 might have advertise I through the whole of the congregational 
 sect . it be essential to my success that I should present myself as a 
 stranger . I could trust time and change , and my married name   certainly 
 not know to Mr. Gracedieu   to keep up my incognito . he would have 
 refuse to see I if he have know that I be once Miss Chance . " 
 I begin to be interested . 
 here be an opportunity , perhaps , of discover what the Minister have 
 fail to remember when he have be speak of this woman , and when 
 I have ask if he have ever offend she . I be especially careful in 
 make my inquiry . 
 " I remember how you speak to Mr. Gracedieu , " I say , " when you and he 
 meet , long ago , in my room . but surely you do not   think he capable 
 of vindictively remember some thoughtless word , which escape you 
 sixteen or seventeen year since ? " 
 " I be not quite such a fool as that , Mr. Governor . what I be think 
 of be an unpleasant correspondence between the Minister and myself . 
 before I be so unfortunate as to meet with Mr. Tenbruggen , I obtain 
 a chance of employment in a public institution , on condition that I 
 include a clergyman among my reference . know nobody else whom I 
 could apply to , I rashly write to Mr. Gracedieu , and receive one 
 of those cold and cruel refusal which only the strict religious 
 principle can produce . I be mortally offend at the time ; and if your 
 friend the Minister have be within my reach - " she pause , and finish 
 the sentence by a significant gesture . 
 " well , " I say , " he be within your reach now . " 
 " and out of his mind , " she add . " besides , one 's sense of injury 
 do not   last   except in novel and play   through a series of year . I 
 do not   pity he - and if an opportunity of shake his high position among 
 his admire congregation present itself , I daresay I might make a 
 mischievous return for his letter to I . in the meanwhile , we may drop 
 the subject . I suppose you understand , now , why I conceal my name from 
 you , and why I keep out of the house while you be in it . " 
 it be plain enough , of course . if I have know she again , or have hear 
 her name , I might have tell the Minister that Mrs. Tenbruggen and Miss 
 Chance be one and the same . and if I have see she and talk with she 
 in the house , my memory might have show itself capable of improvement . 
 have politely present the expression of my thank , I rise to go . 
 she stop I at the door . 
 " one word more , " she say , " while Selina be out of the way . I need 
 hardly tell you that I have not trust she with the Minister 's secret . 
 you and I be , as I take it , the only people now live who know the 
 truth about these two girl . and we keep our advantage . " 
 " what advantage ? " I ask . 
 " do not   you know ? " 
 " I do not   indeed . " 
 " no more do i. female folly , and a slip of the tongue ; I be old and 
 ugly , but I be still a woman . about Miss Eunice . somebody have tell the 
 pretty little fool never to trust stranger . you would have be amuse , 
 if you have hear that sly young person prevaricate with I . in one 
 respect , her appearance strike I . she be not like either the wretch 
 who be hang , or the poor victim who be murder . can she be the 
 adopt child ? or be it the other sister , whom I have not see yet ? oh , 
 come ! come ! do not   try to look as if you do not   know . that be really too 
 ridiculous . " 
 " you allude just now , " I answer , " to our ' advantage ' in be 
 the only person who know the truth about the two girl . well , Mrs. 
 Tenbruggen , I keep my advantage . " 
 " in other word , " she rejoin , " you leave I to make the discovery 
 myself . well , my friend , I mean to do it ! " 
 ....... 
 in the evening , my hotel offer to I the refuge of which I stand in 
 need . I could think , for the first time that day , without interruption . 
 be resolve to see Philip , I prepare myself for the interview by 
 consult my extract once more . the letter , in which Mrs. Tenbruggen 
 figure , inspire I with the hope of protection for Mr. Gracedieu , 
 attainable through no less a person than Helena herself . 
 to begin with , she would certainly share Philip 's aversion to the 
 Masseuse , and her dislike of Miss Jillgall would , just as possibly , 
 extend to Miss Jillgall 's friend . the hostile feeling thus set up 
 might be trust to keep watch on Mrs. Tenbruggen 's proceeding , with 
 a vigilance not attainable by the coarser observation of a man . in the 
 event , of an improvement in the Minister 's health , I should hear of it 
 both from the doctor and from Miss Jillgall , and in that case I should 
 instantly return to my unhappy friend and put he on his guard . 
 I start for London by the early train in the morning . 
 my way home from the terminus take I past the hotel at which the 
 eld Mr. Dunboyne be stay . I call on he . he be report to be 
 engage ; that be to say , immerse in his book . the address on one of 
 Philip 's letter have inform I that he be stay at another 
 hotel . pursue my inquiry in this direction , I meet with a severe 
 disappointment . Mr. Philip Dunboyne have leave the hotel that morning ; for 
 what destination neither the landlord nor the waiter could tell I . 
 the next day 's post bring with it the information which I have fail 
 to obtain . Miss Jillgall write , inform I in her strong language 
 that Philip Dunboyne have return to Helena . Indignant Selina add : 
 " Helena mean to make he marry she ; and I promise you she shall fail , 
 if I can stop it . " 
 in take leave of Eunice , I have give she my address ; have warn she to 
 be careful , if she and Mrs. Tenbruggen happen to meet again , and have 
 beg she to write to I , or to come to I , if anything happen to 
 alarm she in my absence . 
 in two day more , I receive a line from Eunice , write evidently in 
 the great agitation . 
 " Philip have discover I . he have be here , and have insist on see 
 I . I have refuse . the good farmer have so kindly take my part . I can 
 write no more . " 
 CHAPTER L. the news from the FARM . 
 when I next hear from Miss Jillgall , the introductory part of her 
 letter merely remind I that Philip Dunboyne be establish in the 
 town , and that Helena be in daily communication with he . I shall do 
 Selina no injustice if my extract begin with her second page . 
 " you will sympathize , I be sure "   she write , " with the indignation 
 which urge I to call on Philip , and tell he the way to the farmhouse . 
 think of Helena be determined to marry he , whether he want to or 
 not ! I be afraid this be bad grammar . but there be occasion when even 
 a cultivate lady fail in her grammar , and almost envy the man their 
 privilege of swearing when they be in a rage . my state of mind be truly 
 indescribable . grief mingle with anger , when I tell you that my 
 sweet Euneece have disappoint I , for the first time since I have the 
 happiness of know and admire she . what can have be the motive of 
 her refusal to receive her penitent lover ? be it pride ? we be tell that 
 Satan fall through pride . Euneece satanic ? impossible ! I feel inclined 
 to go and ask she what have harden her heart against a poor young man 
 who bitterly regret his own folly . do you think it be bad advice from 
 the farmer or his wife ? in that case , I shall exert my influence , and 
 take she away . you would do the same , would not   you ? 
 " I be ashamed to mention the poor dear Minister in a postscript . the 
 truth be , I do not   very well know what I be about . Mr. Gracedieu be 
 quiet , sleep well than he do , eat with a keener appetite , give no 
 trouble . but , alas , that glorious intellect be in a state of eclipse ! do 
 not suppose , because I write figuratively , that I be not sorry for he . 
 he understand nothing ; he remember nothing ; he have my prayer . 
 " you might come to we again , if you would only be so kind . it would make 
 no difference now ; the poor man be so sadly alter . I must add , most 
 reluctantly , that the doctor recommend your staying at home . between 
 ourselves , he be little well than a coward . Fancy his saying ; ' no ; we 
 must not run that risk yet . ' I be barely civil to he , and no more . 
 " in any other affair   excuse I for trouble you with a second 
 postscript , my sympathy with Euneece would have penetrate her motif ; 
 I should have feel with her feeling . but I have never be in love ; 
 no gentleman give I the opportunity when I be young . now I be 
 middle - aged , neglect have do its dreary work - my heart be an extinct 
 crater . figurative again ! I have well put my pen away , and say farewell 
 for the present . " 
 Miss Jillgall may now give place to Eunice . the same day 's post bring 
 I both letter . 
 I should be unworthy indeed of the trust which this affectionate girl 
 have place in I , if I fail to receive her explanation of her conduct 
 toward Philip Dunboyne , as a sacred secret confide to my fatherly 
 regard . in those later portion of her letter , which be not address 
 to I confidentially , Eunice write as follow : 
 " I get news - and what heartbreake news ! - of my father , by send 
 a messenger to Selina . it be more than ever impossible that I can put 
 myself in the way of see Helena again . she have write to I 
 about Philip , in a tone so shockingly insolent and cruel , that I have 
 destroy her letter . Philip 's visit to the farm , discover I do not 
 know how , seem to have infuriate she . she accuse I of do all 
 that she might herself have do in my place , and threaten I - no ! I be 
 afraid of the wicked whispering of that second self of mine if I think 
 of it . they be near to tempt I when I read Helena 's letter . but 
 I think of what you say , after I have show you my Journal ; and your 
 word take my memory back to the day when I be happy with Philip . the 
 trial and the terror pass away . 
 " consolation have come to I from the good of good woman . Mrs. Staveley 
 write as lovingly as my mother might have write , if death have spar 
 she . I have reply with all the gratitude that I really feel , but 
 without take advantage of the service which she offer . Mrs. Staveley 
 have it in her mind , as you have it in your mind , to bring Philip back to 
 I . do she forget , do you forget , that Helena claim he ? but you both 
 mean kindly , and I love you both for the interest that you feel in I . 
 " the farmer 's wife - dear good soul ! - hardly understand I so well as 
 her husband do . she confess to pity Philip . ' he be so wretched , ' 
 she say . ' and , dear heart , how handsome , and what nice , win 
 manner ! I do not   think I should have have your courage , in your place . to 
 tell the truth , I should have jump for joy when I see he at the door ; 
 and I should have run down to let he in - and perhaps be sorry for it 
 afterward . if you really wish to forget he , my dear , I will do all I 
 can to help you . ' 
 " these be trifle thing to mention , but I be afraid you may think I 
 be unhappy - and I want to prevent that . 
 " I have so much to be thankful for , and the child be so fond of I . 
 whether I teach they as well as I might have do , if I have be a more 
 learn girl , may perhaps be doubtful . they do more for their governess , 
 I be afraid , than their governess do for they . when they come into my 
 room in the morning , and rouse I with their kiss , the hour of wake , 
 which use to be so hard to endure after Philip leave I , be now the 
 happy hour of my day . " 
 with that reassuring view of her life as a governess , the poor child 's 
 letter come to an end . 
 CHAPTER LI . the TRIUMPH of MRS . TENBRUGGEN . 
 Miss Jillgall appear again , after an interval , on the field of my 
 extract . my pleasant friend deserve this time a serious reception . she 
 inform I that Mrs. Tenbruggen have begin the inquiry which I have the 
 good reason to dread - for I alone know the end which they be design 
 to reach . 
 the arrival of this news affect I in two different way . 
 it be discourage to find that circumstance have not justify my 
 reliance on Helena 's enmity as a counter - influence to Mrs. Tenbruggen . 
 on the other hand , it be a relief to be assure that my return to 
 London would serve , rather than compromise , the interest which it be 
 my chief anxiety to defend . I have foresee that Mrs. Tenbruggen would 
 wait to set her enterprise on foot , until I be out of her way ; and I 
 have calculate on my absence as an event which would at least put an end 
 to suspense by encourage she to begin . 
 the first sentence in Miss Jillgall 's letter explain the nature of her 
 interest in the proceeding of her friend , and be , on that account , 
 worth reading . 
 " thing be sadly change for the bad "   Selina write ; " but I do not 
 forget that Philip be once engage to Euneece , and that Mr. Gracedieu 's 
 extraordinary conduct toward he puzzle we all . the mode of discovery 
 which dear Elizabeth suggest by letter , at that time , appear to be 
 the mode which she be follow now . when I ask why , she say : ' Philip 
 may return to Euneece ; the Minister may recover - and will be all the 
 more likely to do so if he try Massage . in that case , he will probably 
 repeat the conduct which surprise you ; and your natural curiosity will 
 ask I again to find out what it mean . be I your friend , Selina , or be 
 I not ? ' this be so delightfully kind , and so irresistibly conclusive , 
 that I kiss she in a transport of gratitude . with what breathless 
 interest I have watch her progress toward penetrate the mystery of 
 the girl ' age , it be quite needless to tell you . " 
 ....... 
 Mrs. Tenbruggen 's method of keep Miss Jillgall in ignorance of what 
 she be really about , and Miss Jillgall 's admirable confidence in the 
 integrity of Mrs. Tenbruggen , be now set forth on the good authority , 
 an exact presentation of the state of affair will be complete if I 
 add a word more , relate to the position actually occupy toward Mrs. 
 Tenbruggen 's enterprise , by my correspondent and myself . 
 on her side , Miss Jillgall be entirely ignorant that one of the two 
 girl be not Mr. Gracedieu 's daughter , but his adopt child . on 
 my side , I be entirely ignorant of Mrs. Tenbruggen 's purpose in 
 endeavor to identify the daughter of the murderess . speak of 
 myself , individually , let I add that I only wait the event to protect 
 the helpless one - my poor demented friend , and the orphan whom his 
 mercy receive into his heart and his home . 
 Miss Jillgall go on with her curious story , as follow : 
 ....... 
 " always desirous of make myself useful , I think I would give my dear 
 Elizabeth a hint which might save time and trouble . ' why not begin , ' I 
 suggest , ' by ask the Governor to help you ? ' that wonderful woman 
 never forget anything . she have already apply to you , without success . 
 " in my next attempt to be useful , I do violence to my most cherished 
 conviction , by present the wretch Helena to the admirable Elizabeth . 
 that the former would be cold as ice , in her reception of any friend 
 of mine , be nothing wonderful . Mrs. Tenbruggen pass it over with 
 the graceful composure of a woman of the world . in the course of 
 conversation with Helena , she slip in a question : ' might I ask if you 
 be old than your sister ? ' the answer be , of course : ' I do not   know . ' 
 and here , for once , the most deceitful girl in existence speak the 
 truth . 
 " when we be alone again , Elizabeth make a remark : ' if personal 
 appearance could decide the question , ' she say , ' the disagreeable young 
 woman be the old of the two . the next thing to be do be to discover 
 if look be to be trust in this case . ' 
 " my friend 's lawyer receive confidential instruction   not show to I , 
 which seem rather hard   to trace the two Miss Gracedieus ' register of 
 birth . Elizabeth describe this proceeding   not very intelligibly to my 
 mind   as a means of find out which of the girl could be identify 
 by name as the elder of the two . 
 " the report arrive this morning . I be only inform that the result , 
 in one case , have entirely defeat the inquiry . in the other case , 
 Elizabeth have help her agent by refer he to a Birth , advertise 
 in the customary column of the Times newspaper . even here , there 
 be a fatal obstacle . the name of the place in which Mr. Gracedieu 's 
 daughter have be bear be not add , as usual . I still try to be 
 useful . have my friend know the Minister 's wife ? my friend have never 
 even see the Minister 's wife . and , as if by a fatality , her portrait 
 be no long in existence . I could only mention that Helena be like 
 her mother . but Elizabeth seem to attach very little importance to my 
 evidence , if I may call it by so grand a name . ' People have such strange 
 idea about likeness , ' she say , ' and arrive at such contradictory 
 conclusion . one can only trust one 's own eye in a matter of that 
 kind . ' 
 " my friend next ask I about our domestic establishment . we have only a 
 cook and a housemaid . if they be old servant who have know the girl 
 as child , they might be make of some use . our luck be as steadily 
 against we as ever . they have both be engage when Mr. Gracedieu 
 assume his new pastoral duty , after have reside with his wife at 
 her native place . 
 " I ask Elizabeth what she propose to do next . 
 " she defer her answer , until I have first tell she whether the visit 
 of the doctor might be expect on that day . I could reply to this in 
 the negative . Elizabeth , thereupon , make a startling request ; she beg 
 I to introduce she to Mr. Gracedieu . 
 " I say : ' surely , you have forget the sad state of his mind ? ' no ; 
 she know perfectly well that he be imbecile . ' I want to try , ' she 
 explain , ' if I can rouse he for a few minute . ' 
 " ' by Massage ? ' I inquire . 
 " she burst out laugh . ' Massage , my dear , do not   act in that way . it 
 be an elaborate process , pursue patiently for week together . but my 
 hand have more than one accomplishment at their finger - end . oh , make 
 your mind easy ! I shall do no harm , if I do no good . take I , Selina , to 
 the Minister . ' 
 " we go to his room . do not   blame I for give way ; I be too fond of 
 Elizabeth to be able to disappoint she . 
 " it be a sad sight when we go in . he be quite happy , play like 
 a child , at cup - and - ball . the attendant retire at my request . I 
 introduce Mrs. Tenbruggen . he smile and shake hand with she . he say : 
 ' be you a Christian or a Pagan ? you be very pretty . how many time can 
 you catch the ball in the cup ? ' the effort to talk to she end there . 
 he go on with his game , and seem to forget that there be anybody in 
 the room . it make my heart ache to remember what he be - and to see he 
 now . 
 " Elizabeth whisper : ' leave I alone with he . ' 
 " I do not   know why I do such a rude thing - I hesitate . 
 " Elizabeth ask I if I have no confidence in she . I be ashamed of 
 myself ; I leave they together . 
 " a long half - hour pass . feel a little uneasy , I go upstairs 
 again and look into the room . he be lean back in his chair ; his 
 plaything be on the floor , and he be look vacantly at the light 
 that come in through the window . I find Mrs. Tenbruggen at the other 
 end of the room , in the act of ring the bell . nothing in the least 
 out of the ordinary way seem to have happen . when the attendant 
 have answer the bell , we leave the room together . Mr. Gracedieu take no 
 notice of we . 
 " ' well , ' I say , ' how have it end ? ' 
 " quite calmly my noble Elizabeth answer : ' in total failure . ' 
 " ' what do you say to he after you send I away ? ' 
 " ' I try , in every possible way , to get he to tell I which of his two 
 daughter be the old . ' 
 " ' do he refuse to answer ? ' 
 " ' he be only too ready to answer . first , he say Helena be the 
 old - then he correct himself , and declare that Eunice be the 
 old - then he say they be twin - then he go back to Helena and 
 Eunice . now one be the old , and now the other . he ring the change 
 on those two name , I can not   tell you how often , and seem to think it a 
 well game than cup - and - ball . ' 
 " ' what be to be do ? ' 
 " ' nothing be to be do , Selina . ' 
 " ' what ! ' I cry , ' you give it up ? ' 
 " my heroic friend answer : ' I know when I be beat , my dear - I give it 
 up . ' she look at her watch ; it be time to operate on the muscle of 
 one of her patient . away she go , on her glorious mission of Massage , 
 without a murmur of regret . what strength of mind ! but , oh , dear , what 
 a disappointment for poor little I ! on one thing I be determine . if 
 I find myself get puzzle or frighten , I shall instantly write to 
 you . " 
 with that expression of confidence in I , Selina 's narrative come to an 
 end . I wish I could have believe , as she do , that the object of her 
 admiration have be tell she the truth . 
 a few day later , Mrs. Tenbruggen honor I with a visit at my house 
 in the neighborhood of London . thank to this circumstance , I be able to 
 add a postscript which will complete the revelation in Miss Jillgall 's 
 letter . 
 the illustrious Masseuse , have much to conceal from her faithful 
 Selina , be well aware that she have only one thing to keep hide from 
 I ; namely , the advantage which she would have gain if her inquiry 
 have meet with success . 
 " I think I might have get at what I want , " she tell I , " by 
 mesmerize our reverend friend . he be as weak as a woman ; I throw he 
 into hysteric , and have to give it up , and quiet he , or he would have 
 alarm the house . you look as if you do not   believe in mesmerism . " 
 " my look , Mrs. Tenbruggen , exactly express my opinion . Mesmerism be a 
 humbug ! " 
 " you amuse old tory ! shall I throw you into a state of trance ? no ! 
 I will give you a shock of another kind - a shock of surprise . I know as 
 much as you do about Mr. Gracedieu 's daughter . what do you think of 
 that ? " 
 " I think I should like to hear you tell I , which be the adopt child . " 
 " Helena , to be sure ! " 
 her manner be defiant , her tone be positive ; I doubt both . under the 
 surface of her assumed confidence , I see something which tell I that 
 she be try to read my thought in my face . many other woman have 
 try to do that . they succeed when I be young . when I have reach 
 the wrong side of fifty , my face have learn discretion , and they 
 fail . 
 " how do you arrive at your discovery ? " I ask . " I know of nobody who 
 could have help you . " 
 " I help myself , sir ! I reason it out . a wonderful thing for a woman 
 to do , be not   it ? I wonder whether you could follow the process ? " 
 my reply to this be make by a bow . I be sure of my command over my 
 face ; but perfect control of the voice be a rare power . here and there , 
 a great actor or a great criminal possess it . 
 Mrs. Tenbruggen 's vanity take I into her confidence . " in the first 
 place , " she say , " Helena be plainly the wicked one of the two . I be 
 not prejudice by what Selina have tell I of she : I see it , and feel 
 it , before I have be five minute in her company . if lie tongue ever 
 provoke she as lie tongue provoke her mother , she will follow her 
 mother 's example . very well . now - in the second place - though it be 
 very slight , there be a certain something in her hair and her complexion 
 which remind I of the murderess : there be no other resemblance , 
 I admit . in the third place , the girl ' name point to the same 
 conclusion . Mr. Gracedieu be a protestant and a Dissenter . would he call 
 a child of his own by the name of a roman catholic saint ? no ! he would 
 prefer a name in the Bible ; Eunice be his child . and Helena be once 
 the baby whom I carry into the prison . do you deny that ? " 
 " I do not   deny it . " 
 only four word ! but they be deceitfully speak , and the 
 deceit - practice in Eunice 's interest , it be needless to 
 say - succeed . Mrs. Tenbruggen 's object in visit I be attain ; 
 I have confirm her belief in the delusion that Helena be the adopt 
 child . 
 she get up to take she leave . I ask if she propose remain in 
 London . no ; she be return to her country patient that night . 
 as I attend she to the house - door , she turn to I with her 
 mischievous smile . " I have take some trouble in find the clew to the 
 Minister 's mystery , " she say . " do not   you wonder why ? " 
 " if I do wonder , " I answer , " would you tell I why ? " 
 she laugh at the bare idea of it . " another lesson , " she say , " to 
 assist a helpless man in study the weak sex . I have already show 
 you that a woman can reason . learn next that a woman can keep a secret . 
 good - by . God bless you ! " 
 of the event which follow Mrs. Tenbruggen 's visit it be not possible 
 for I , I be thankful to say , to speak from personal experience . ought I 
 to conclude with an expression of repentance for the act of deception 
 to which I have already plead guilty ? I do not   know . yes ! the force of 
 circumstance do really compel I to say it , and say it seriously - I 
 declare , on my word of honor , I do not   know . 
 third period : 1876 . HELENA 's DIARY RESUMED . 
 CHAPTER LII . HELENA 's DIARY RESUMED . 
 while my father remain in his present helpless condition , somebody must 
 assume a position of command in this house . there can not be a moment 's 
 doubt that I be the person to do it . 
 in my agitated state of mind , sometimes doubtful of Philip , sometimes 
 hopeful of he , I find Mrs. Tenbruggen simply unendurable . a female 
 doctor be , under any circumstance , a creature whom I detest . she be , 
 at she very good , a bad imitation of a man . the Medical Rubber be 
 bad than this ; she be a bad imitation of a mountebank . her grinning 
 good - humor , adopt no doubt to please the fool who be her patient , 
 and her impudent enjoyment of hear herself talk , make I regret for 
 the first time in my life that I be a young lady . if I belong to the 
 low order of the population , I might take the first stick I could 
 find , and enjoy the luxury of give Mrs. Tenbruggen a good beating . 
 she literally haunt the house , encourage , of course , by her wretched 
 little dupe , Miss Jillgall . only this morning , I try what a broad hint 
 would do toward suggest that her visit have well come to an end . 
 " really , Mrs. Tenbruggen , " I say , " I must request Miss Jillgall to 
 moderate her selfish enjoyment of your company , for your own sake . your 
 time be too valuable , in a professional sense , to be waste on an 
 idle woman who have no sympathy with your patient , wait for relief 
 perhaps , and wait in vain . " 
 she listen to this , all smile and good - humor : " my dear , do you know 
 how I might answer you , if I be an ill - natured woman ? " 
 " I have no curiosity to hear it , Mrs. Tenbruggen . " 
 " I might ask you , " she persist , " to allow I to mind my own business . 
 but I be incapable of make an ungrateful return for the interest which 
 you take in my medical welfare . let I venture to ask if you understand 
 the value of time . " 
 " be you go to say much more , Mrs. Tenbruggen ? " 
 " I be go to make a sensible remark , my child . if you feel tired , 
 permit I - here be a chair . Father Time , dear Miss Gracedieu , have always 
 be a good friend of mine , because I know how to make the good use 
 of he . the author of the famous saying Tempus fugit   you understand 
 Latin , of course   be , I take leave to think , an idle man . the more I 
 have to do , the readier Time be to wait for I . let I impress this on 
 your mind by some interesting example . the great conqueror of the 
 century - Napoleon - have time enough for everything . the great novelist 
 of the century - Sir Walter Scott - have time enough for everything . at my 
 humble distance , I imitate those illustrious man , and my patient never 
 complain of I . " 
 " have you do ? " I ask . 
 " yes , dear - for the present . " 
 " you be a clever woman , Mrs. Tenbruggen and you know it . you have an 
 eloquent tongue , and you know it . but you be something else , which you 
 do not   seem to be aware of . you be a Bore . " 
 she burst out laugh , with the air of a woman who thoroughly enjoy 
 a good joke . I look back when I leave the room , and see the friend of 
 Father Time in the easy chair open our newspaper . 
 this be a speciman of the customary encounter of our wit . I place it on 
 record in my Journal , to excuse myself to myself . when she leave we 
 at last , later in the day , I send a letter after she to the hotel . not 
 have keep a copy of it , let I present the substance , like a sermon , 
 under three head : I beg to be excuse for speak plainly ; I 
 declare that there be a total want of sympathy between we , on my side ; 
 and I propose that she should deprive I of future opportunity of 
 receive she in this house . the reply arrive immediately in these 
 term : " your letter receive , dear girl . I be not in the least angry ; 
 partly because I be very fond of you , partly because I know that you 
 will ask I to come back again . P. S. : Philip send his love . " 
 this last piece of insolence be unquestionably a lie . Philip detest 
 she . they be both stay at the same hotel . but I happen to know that 
 he will not   even look at she , if they meet by accident on the stair . 
 People who can enjoy the melancholy spectacle of human nature in a state 
 of degradation would be at a loss which exhibition to prefer - an 
 ugly old maid in a rage , or an ugly old maid in tear . Miss Jillgall 
 present herself in both character when she hear what have happen . 
 to my mind , Mrs. Tenbruggen 's bosom - friend be a creature not fit to be 
 see or hear when she lose her temper . I only tell she to leave 
 the room . to my great amusement , she shake her bony fist at I , and 
 express a frantic wish : " oh , if I be rich enough to leave this wicked 
 house ! " I wonder whether there be insanity   as well as poverty   in Miss 
 Jillgall 's family ? 
 last night my mind be in a harassed state . Philip be , as usual , the 
 cause of it . 
 perhaps I act indiscreetly when I insist on his leave London , and 
 return to this place . but what else could I have do ? it be not 
 merely my interest , it be an act of downright necessity , to withdraw 
 he from the influence of his hateful father - whom I now regard as the 
 one serious obstacle to my marriage . there be no prospect of be rid 
 of Mr. Dunboyne the elder by his return to Ireland . he be try a 
 new remedy for his crippled hand - electricity . I wish it be lightning , 
 to kill he ! if I have give that wicked old man the chance , I be firmly 
 convince he would not have let a day pass without do his good to 
 depreciate I in his son 's estimation . besides , there be the risk , if 
 I have allow Philip to remain long away from I , of lose - no , while 
 I keep my beauty I can not be in such danger as that - let I say , of 
 permit time and absence to weaken my hold on he . however sullen and 
 silent he may be , when we meet - and I find he in that condition far too 
 often - I can , soon or later , recall he to his bright self . my eye 
 preserve their charm , my talk can still amuse he , and , well even than 
 that , I feel the answer thrill in he , which tell I how precious my 
 kiss be - not too lavishly bestow ! but the time when I be oblige 
 to leave he to himself be the time that I dread . how do I know that 
 his thought be not wander away to Eunice ? he deny it ; he declare 
 that he only go to the farmhouse to express his regret for his own 
 thoughtless conduct , and to offer she the brotherly regard due to the 
 sister of his promise wife . can I believe it ? oh , what would I not give 
 to be able to believe it ! how can I feel sure that her refusal to see 
 he be not a cunning device to make he long for another interview , and 
 plan perhaps in private to go back and try again . marriage ! nothing will 
 quiet these frightful doubt of mine , nothing will reward I for all 
 that I have suffer , nothing will warm my heart with the delightful 
 sense of triumph over Eunice , but my marriage to Philip . and what do 
 he say , when I urge it on he ? - yes , I have fall as low as that , in 
 the despair which sometimes possess I . he have his answer , always the 
 same , and always ready : " how be we to live ? where be the money ? " the 
 madden part of it be that I can not accuse he of raise objection 
 that do not   exist . we be poor than ever here , since my father 's 
 illness - and Philip 's allowance be barely enough to suffice he as a 
 single man . oh , how I hate the rich ! 
 it be useless to think of go to bed . how could I hope to sleep , with 
 my head throb , and my thought in this disturb state ? I put on my 
 comfortable dressing - gown , and sit down to try what reading would do to 
 quiet my mind . 
 I have borrow the book from the Library , to which I have be a 
 subscriber in secret for some time past . it be an old volume , full 
 of what we should now call Gossip ; relate strange adventure , and 
 scandalous incident in family history which have be conceal from 
 public notice . 
 one of these last romance in real life catch a strong hold on my 
 interest . 
 it be a strange case of intended poisoning , which have never be 
 carry out . a young married lady of rank , whose name be conceal 
 under an initial letter , have suffer some unendurable wrong   which 
 be not mention   at the hand of her husband 's mother . the wife 
 be describe as a woman of strong passion , who have determine on a 
 terrible revenge by take the life of her mother - in - law . there 
 be difficulty in the way of she commit the crime without an 
 accomplice to help she ; and she decide on take she maid , an elderly 
 woman , into her confidence . the poison be secretly obtain by this 
 person ; and the safe manner of administer it be under discussion 
 between the mistress and the maid , when the door of the room be 
 suddenly open . the husband , accompany by his brother , rush in , and 
 charge his wife with plot the murder of his mother . the young lady 
  she be only twenty - three   must have be a person of extraordinary 
 courage and resolution . she see at once that her maid have betray she , 
 and , with astonishing presence of mind , she turn on the traitress , 
 and say to her husband : " there be the wretch who have be try to 
 persuade I to poison your mother ! " as it happen , the old lady 's 
 temper be violent and overbearing ; and the maid have complain of 
 be ill - treat by she , in the hearing of the other servant . the 
 circumstance make it impossible to decide which of the two be really 
 the guilty woman . the servant be send away , and the husband and wife 
 separate soon afterward , under the excuse of incompatibility of 
 temper . year pass ; and the truth be only discover by the death - bed 
 confession of the wife . a remarkable story , which have make such an 
 impression on I that I have write it in my Journal . I be not rich 
 enough to buy the book . 
 for the last two day , I have be confine to my room with a bad 
 feverish cold - catch , as I suppose , by sit at an open window 
 read my book till nearly three o'clock in the morning . I send a note 
 to Philip , tell he of my illness . on the first day , he call to 
 inquire after I . on the second day , no visit , and no letter . here be 
 the third day - and no news of he as yet . I be well , but not fit to go 
 out . let I wait another hour , and , if that exertion of patience meet 
 with no reward , I shall send a note to the hotel . no news of Philip . I 
 have send to the hotel . the servant have just return , bring I back 
 my note . the waiter inform she that Mr. Dunboyne have go away to 
 London by the morning train . no apology or explanation leave for I . 
  can he have desert I ? I be in such a frenzy of doubt and rage that 
 I can hardly write that horrible question . be it possible - oh , I feel it 
  be possible that he have go away with Eunice . do I know where to find 
 they ? if I do know , what could I do ? I feel as if I could kill they 
 both ! 
 CHAPTER LIII . HELENA 's DIARY RESUMED . 
 after the heat of my anger have cool , I make two discovery . one cost 
 I a fee to a messenger , and the other expose I to the insolence of 
 a servant . I pay willingly in my purse and my pride , when the gain be 
 peace of mind . through my messenger I ascertain that Eunice have never 
 leave the farm . through my own inquiry , answer by the waiter with an 
 impudent grin , I hear that Philip have leave order to have his room keep 
 for he . what misery our stupid housemaid might have spar I , if she 
 have think of put that question when I send she to the hotel ! 
 the rest of the day pass in vain speculation on Philip 's motive for 
 this sudden departure . what poor weak creature we be ! I persuade 
 myself to hope that anxiety for our marriage have urge he to make an 
 effort to touch the heart of his mean father . shall I see he to - morrow ? 
 and shall I have reason to be fonder of he than ever ? 
 we meet again to - day as usual . he have behave infamously . 
 when I ask what have be his object in go to London , I be tell 
 that it be " a matter of business . " he make that idiotic excuse as 
 coolly as if he really think I should believe it . I submit in 
 silence , rather than mar his return to I by the disaster of a quarrel . 
 but this be an unlucky day . a hard trial of my self - control be still 
 to come . without the slight appearance of shame , Philip inform I 
 that he be charge with a message from Mrs. Tenbruggen ! she want some 
 irish lace , and would I be so good as to tell she which be the good 
 shop at which she could buy it ? 
 be he really in earnest ? " you , " I say , " who distrust and detest 
 she - you be on friendly term with that woman ? " 
 he remonstrate with I . " my dear Helena , do not   speak in that way 
 of Mrs. Tenbruggen . we have both be mistake about she . that good 
 creature have forgive the brutal manner in which I speak to she , when 
 she be in attendance on my father . she be the first to propose that 
 we should shake hand and forget it . my darling , do not   let all the good 
 feeling be on one side . you have no idea how kindly she speak of you , 
 and how anxious she be to help we to be marry . come ! come ! meet her 
 half - way . write down the name of the shop on my card , and I will take it 
 back to she . " 
 sheer amazement keep I silent : I let he go on . he be a mere child in 
 the hand of Mrs. Tenbruggen : she have only to determine to make a fool 
 of he , and she could do it . 
 but why do she do it ? what advantage have she to gain by insinuate 
 herself in this way into his good opinion , evidently with the intention 
 of urge he to reconcile we to each other ? how could we two poor young 
 people be of the small use to the fashionable Masseuse ? 
 my silence begin to irritate Philip . " I never know before how obstinate 
 you could be , " he say ; " you seem to be do your good - I can not   imagine 
 why - to lower yourself in my estimation . " 
 I hold my tongue ; I assume my smile . it be all very well for man to 
 talk about the deceitfulness of woman . what chance   I should like to ask 
 somebody who know about it   do the man give we of make our life with 
 they endurable , except by deceit ! I give way , of course , and write down 
 the address of the shop . 
 he be so pleased that he kiss I . yes ! the most fondly affectionate 
 kiss that he have give I , for week past , be my reward for submit 
 to Mrs. Tenbruggen . she be old enough to be his mother , and almost as 
 ugly as Miss Jillgall - and she have make her interest his interest 
 already ! 
 on the next day , I fully expect to receive a visit from Mrs. 
 Tenbruggen . she know well than that . I only get a polite little note , 
 thank I for the address , and add an artless concession : " I earn 
 more money than I know what to do with ; and I adore irish lace . " 
 the next day come , and still she be careful not to show herself too 
 eager for a personal reconciliation . a splendid nosegay be send to I , 
 with another little note : " a tribute , dear Helena , offer by one of my 
 grateful patient . too beautiful a present for an old woman like I . 
 I agree with the poet : ' sweet to the sweet . ' a charming thought of 
 Shakespeare 's , be it not ? I should like to verify the quotation . would 
 you mind leave the volume for I in the hall , if I call to - morrow ? " 
 well do , Mrs. Tenbruggen ! she do not   venture to intrude on Miss 
 Gracedieu in the drawing - room ; she only want to verify a quotation 
 in the hall . oh , goddess of Humility   if there be such a person , how 
 becomingly you be dress when your milliner be an artful old woman ! 
 while this reflection be pass through my mind , Miss Jillgall come 
 in - see the nosegay on the table - and instantly pounce on it . " oh , for 
 I ! for I ! " she cry . " I notice it this morning on Elizabeth 's table . 
 how very kind of she ! " she plunge her inquisitive nose into the poor 
 flower , and look up sentimentally at the ceiling . " the perfume of 
 goodness , " she remark , " mingle with the perfume of flower ! " " when 
 you have quite do with it , " I say , " perhaps you will be so good as 
 to return my nosegay ? " " your nosegay ! " she exclaim . " there be Mrs. 
 Tenbruggen 's letter , " I reply , " if you would like to look at it . " 
 she do look at it . all the bile in her body fly up into her eye , and 
 turn they green ; she look as if she long to scratch my face . I 
 give the flower afterward to Maria ; Miss Jillgall 's nose have completely 
 spoil they . 
 it would have be too ridiculous to have allow Mrs. Tenbruggen to 
 consult Shakespeare in the hall . I have the honor of receive she in my 
 own room . we accomplish a touching reconciliation , and we quite forget 
 Shakespeare . 
 she trouble I ; she do indeed trouble I . 
 have set herself entirely right with Philip , she be determined on 
 perform the same miracle with I . her reform of herself be already 
 complete . her vulgar humor be keep under strict restraint ; she be 
 quiet and well - breed , and readier to listen than to talk . this change be 
 not present abruptly . she contrive to express her friendly interest 
 in Philip and in I by hint drop here and there , assist in their 
 effort by answer on my part , into which I be tempt so skillfully 
 that I only discover the snare set for I , on reflection . what be it , 
 I ask again , that she have in view in take all this trouble ? where be 
 her motive for encourage a love - affair , which Miss Jillgall must have 
 denounce to she as an abominable wrong inflict on Eunice ? money   even 
 if there be a prospect of such a thing , in our case   can not be her 
 object ; it be quite true that her success set she above pecuniary 
 anxiety . spiteful feeling against Eunice be out of the question . they 
 have only meet once ; and her opinion be express to I with evident 
 sincerity : " your sister be a nice girl , but she be like other nice 
 girl - she do not   interest I . " there be Eunice 's character , draw from 
 the life in few word . in what an irritate position do I find myself 
 place ! never before have I feel so interested in try to look into 
 a person 's secret mind ; and never before have I be so completely 
 baffle . 
 I have write as far as this , and be on the point of close my 
 Journal , when a third note arrive from Mrs. Tenbruggen . 
 she have be think about I at interval   she write   all through the 
 rest of the day ; and , kindly as I have receive she , she be conscious 
 of be the object of doubt on my part which her visit have fail to 
 remove . might she ask leave to call on I , in the hope of improve her 
 position in my estimation ? an appointment follow for the next day . 
 what can she have to say to I which she have not already say ? be it 
 anything about Philip , I wonder ? 
 CHAPTER LIV . HELENA 's DIARY RESUMED . 
 at our interview of the next day , Mrs. Tenbruggen 's capacity for 
 self - reform appear under a new aspect . she drop all familiarity 
 with I , and she state the object of her visit without a superfluous 
 word of explanation or apology . 
 I think this a remarkable effort for a woman ; and I recognize the 
 merit of it by leave the lion 's share of the talk to my visitor . in 
 these term she open her business with I : 
 " have Mr. Philip Dunboyne tell you why he go to London ? " 
 " he make a commonplace excuse , " I answer . " business , he say , take he 
 to London . I know no more . " 
 " you have a fair prospect of happiness , Miss Helena , when you be 
 married - your future husband be evidently afraid of you . I be not afraid 
 of you ; and I shall confide to your private ear something which you have 
 an interest in know . the business which take young Mr. Dunboyne 
 to London be to consult a competent person , on a matter concern 
 himself . the competent person be the sagacious   not to say sly   old 
 gentleman - whom we use to call the Governor . you know he , I believe ? " 
 " yes . but I be at a loss to imagine why Philip should have consult 
 he . " 
 " have you ever hear or read , Miss Helena , of such a thing as ' an old 
 man 's fancy ' ? " 
 " I think I have . " 
 " well , the Governor have take an old man 's fancy to your sister . 
 they appear to understand each other perfectly when I be at the 
 farmhouse . " 
 " excuse I , Mrs. Tenbruggen , that be what I know already . why do Philip 
 go to the Governor ? " 
 she smile . " if anybody be acquaint with the true state of your 
 sister 's feeling , the Governor be the man . I send Mr. Dunboyne to 
 consult he - and there be the reason for it . " 
 this open avowal of her motif perplex and offend I . after 
 declare herself to be interested in my marriage - engagement have she 
 change her mind , and resolve on favor Philip 's return to Eunice ? 
 what right have he to consult anybody about the state of that girl 's 
 feeling ? my feeling form the only subject of inquiry that be 
 properly open to he . I should have say something which I might have 
 afterward regret , if Mrs. Tenbruggen have allow I the opportunity . 
 fortunately for both of we , she go on with her narrative of her own 
 proceeding . 
 " Philip Dunboyne be an excellent fellow , " she continue ; " I really like 
 he - but he have his fault . he sadly want strength of purpose ; and , 
 like weak man in general , he only know his own mind when a resolute 
 friend take he in hand and guide he . I be his resolute friend . I 
 see he veer about between you and eunice ; and I decide for 
 his sake - may I say for your sake also ? - on put an end to that 
 mischievous state of indecision . you have the claim on he ; you be the 
 right wife for he , and the Governor be   as I think likely from what 
 I have myself observe   the man to make he see it . I be not in anybody 's 
 secret ; it be pure guesswork on my part , and it have succeed . there 
 be no more doubt now about Miss Eunice 's sentiment . the question be 
 settle . " 
 " in my favor ? " 
 " certainly in your favor - or I should not have say a word about it . " 
 " be Philip 's visit kindly receive ? or do the old wretch laugh at 
 he ? " 
 " my dear Miss Gracedieu , the old wretch be a man of the world , and never 
 make mistake of that sort . before he could open his lip , he have 
 to satisfy himself that your lover deserve to be take into his 
 confidence , on the delicate subject of Eunice 's sentiment . he arrive 
 at a favorable conclusion . I can repeat Philip 's question and 
 the Governor 's answer after put the young man through a stiff 
 examination just as they pass : ' may I inquire , sir , if she have speak 
 to you about I ? ' ' she have often speak about you . ' ' do she seem to be 
 angry with I ? ' ' she be too good and too sweet to be angry with you . ' 
 ' do you think she will forgive I ? ' ' she have forgive you . ' ' do she say 
 so herself ? ' ' yes , of her own free will . ' ' why do she refuse to see 
 I when I call at the farm ? ' ' she have her own reason - good reason . ' 
 ' has she regret it since ? ' ' certainly not . ' ' be it likely that she 
 would consent , if I propose a reconciliation ? ' ' I put that question to 
 she myself . ' ' how do she take it , sir ? ' ' she decline to take it . ' ' you 
 mean that she decline a reconciliation ? ' ' yes . ' ' be you sure she be 
 in earnest ? ' ' I be positively sure . ' that last answer seem , by young 
 Dunboyne 's own confession , to have be enough , and more than enough for 
 he . he get up to go - and then an odd thing happen . after give he 
 the most unfavorable answer , the Governor pat he paternally on 
 the shoulder , and encourage he to hope . ' before we say good - by , 
 Mr. Philip , one word more . if I be as young as you be , I should not 
 despair . ' there be a sudden change of front ! who can explain it ? " 
 the Governor 's mischievous resolution to reconcile Philip and Eunice 
 explain it , of course . with the good intention   perhaps   Mrs. 
 Tenbruggen have help that design by bring the two man together . " go 
 on , " I say ; " I be prepared to hear next that Philip have pay another 
 visit to my sister , and have be receive this time . " 
 I must say this for Mrs. Tenbruggen : she keep her temper perfectly . 
 " he have not be to the farm , " she say , " but he have do something 
 nearly as foolish . he have write to your sister . " 
 " and he have receive a favorable reply , of course ? " 
 she put her hand into the pocket of her dress . 
 " there be your sister 's reply , " she say . 
 any person who have have a crush burden lift , unexpectedly and 
 instantly , from off their mind , will know what I feel when I read the 
 reply . in the most positive language , Eunice refuse to correspond with 
 Philip , or to speak with he . the concluding word prove that she be 
 in earnest . " you be engage to Helena . consider I as a stranger until 
 you be married . after that time you will be my brother - in - law , and then 
 I may pardon you for write to I . " 
 nobody who know Eunice would have suppose that she possess those 
 two valuable quality - common - sense and proper pride . it be pleasant 
 to feel that I can now send card to my sister , when I be Mrs. Philip 
 Dunboyne . 
 I return the letter to Mrs. Tenbruggen , with the sincere expression 
 of regret for have doubt she . " I have be unworthy of your generous 
 interest in I , " I say ; " I be almost ashamed to offer you my hand . " 
 she take my hand , and give it a good , heady shake . 
 " be we friend ? " she ask , in the simple and prettiest manner . 
 " then let we be easy and pleasant again , " she go on . " will you call 
 I Elizabeth ; and shall I call you Helena ? very well . now I have get 
 something else to say ; another secret which must be keep from Philip 
  I call he by his name now , you see   for a few day more . your 
 happiness , my dear , must not depend on his miserly old father . he must 
 have a little income of his own to marry on . among the hundred of 
 unfortunate wretch whom I have relieve from torture of mind and body , 
 there be a grateful minority . small ! small ! but there they be . I have 
 influence among powerful people ; and I be try to make Philip private 
 secretary to a member of Parliament . when I have succeed , you shall 
 tell he the good news . " 
 what a vile humor I must have be in , at the time , not to have 
 appreciate the delightful gayety of this good creature ; I go to the 
 other extreme now , and behave like a gush young miss fresh from 
 school . I kiss she . 
 she burst out laugh . " what a sacrifice ! " she cry . " a kiss for I , 
 which ought to have be keep for Philip ! by - the - by , do you know what I 
 should do , Helena , in your place ? I should take our handsome young man 
 away from that hotel ! " 
 " I will do anything that you advise , " I say . 
 " and you will do well , my child . in the first place , the hotel be too 
 expensive for Philip 's small mean . in the second place , two of the 
 chambermaid have audaciously presume to be charming girl ; and 
 the man , my dear - well ! well ! I will leave you to find that out for 
 yourself . in the third place , you want to have Philip under your own 
 wing ; domestic familiarity will make he fonder of you than ever . keep 
 he out of the sort of company that he meet with in the billiard - room 
 and the smoking - room . you have get a spare bed here , I know , and your 
 poor father be in no condition to use his authority . make Philip one of 
 the family . " 
 this last piece of advice stagger I . I mention the Proprieties . 
 Mrs. Tenbruggen laugh at the Proprieties . 
 " make Selina of some use , " she suggest . " while you have get she in 
 the house , Propriety be rampant . why condemn poor helpless Philip to 
 cheap lodging ? time enough to cast he out to the feather - bed and the 
 flea on the night before your marriage . besides , I shall be in and out 
 constantly - for I mean to cure your father . the tongue of scandal be 
 silent in my awful presence ; an atmosphere of virtue surround Mamma 
 Tenbruggen . think of it . " 
 CHAPTER LV . HELENA 's DIARY RESUMED . 
 I do think of it . Philip come to we , and live in our house . 
 let I hasten to add that the protest of Propriety be duly enter , 
 on the day before my promise husband arrive . stand in the 
 doorway - nothing would induce she to take a chair , or even to enter the 
 room - Miss Jillgall deliver her opinion on Philip 's approach 
 visit . Mrs. Tenbruggen report it in her pocket - book , as if she be 
 represent a newspaper at a public meeting . here it be , copy from 
 her note : 
 " Miss Helena Gracedieu , my first impulse under the present disgusting 
 circumstance be to leave the house , and earn a bare crust in the 
 cheap garret I could find in the town . but my grateful heart 
 remember Mr. Gracedieu . my poor afflict cousin be good to I when 
 I be helpless . I can not forsake he when he be helpless . at whatever 
 sacrifice of my own self - respect , I remain under this roof , so dear to 
 I for the Minister 's sake . I notice , miss , that you smile . I see my 
 once dear Elizabeth , the friend who have so bitterly disappointed 
 I - " she stop , and put she handkerchief to her eye , and go on 
 again - " the friend who have so bitterly disappoint I , take satirical 
 note of what I say . I be not ashamed of what I say . the virtue which 
 will not stretch a little , where the motive be good , be feeble virtue 
 indeed . I shall stay in the house , and witness horror , and rise 
 superior to they . good - morning , Miss Gracedieu . good - morning , 
 Elizabeth . " she perform a magnificent curtsey , and   as Mrs. 
 Tenbruggen 's experience of the stage inform I   make a very creditable 
 exit . 
 a week have pass , and I have not open my Diary . 
 my day have glide away in one delicious flow of happiness . Philip have 
 be delightfully devoted to I . his fervent courtship , far exceed 
 any similar attention which he may once have pay to Eunice , have 
 show such variety and such steadfastness of worship , that I despair 
 of describe it . my enjoyment of my new life be to be feel - not to be 
 coldly consider , and reduce to an imperfect statement in word . 
 for the first time I feel capable , if the circumstance encourage I , 
 of act of exalt virtue . for instance , I could save my country if 
 my country be worth it . I could die a martyr to religion if I have a 
 religion . in one word , I be exceedingly well satisfied with myself . 
 the little disappointment of life pass over I harmless . I do not 
 even regret the failure of good Mrs. Tenbruggen 's effort to find an 
 employment for Philip , worthy of his ability and accomplishment . 
 the member of Parliament to whom she have apply have choose a secretary 
 possess of political influence . that be the excuse put forward in his 
 letter to Mrs. Tenbruggen . wretched corrupt creature ! if he be worth a 
 thought I should pity he . he have lose Philip 's service . 
 three day more have slip by . the aspect of my heaven on earth be 
 begin to alter . 
 perhaps the author of that wonderful french novel , " L'Ame Damne'e , " be 
 right when he tell we that human happiness be misery in masquerade . it 
 would be wrong to say that I be miserable . but I may be on the way to 
 it ; I be anxious . 
 to - day , when he do not know that I be observe he , I discover a 
 preoccupy look in Philip 's eye . he laugh when I ask if anything 
 have happen to vex he . be it a natural laugh ? he put his arm round 
 I and kiss I . be it do mechanically ? I daresay I be out of humor 
 myself . I think I have a little headache . morbid , probably . I will not   think 
 of it any more . 
 it have occur to I this morning that he may dislike be leave by 
 himself , while I be engage in my household affair . if this be the 
 case , intensely as I hate she , utterly as I loathe the idea of put 
 she in command over my domestic dominion , I shall ask Miss Jillgall to 
 take my place as housekeeper . 
 I be away to - day in the kitchen region rather long than usual . when 
 I have do with my worry , Philip be not to be find . Maria , look 
 out of one of the bedroom window instead of do her work , have see 
 Mr. Dunboyne leave the house . it be possible that he have charge Miss 
 Jillgall with a message for I . I ask if she be in her room . no ; she , 
 too , have go out . it be a fine day , and Philip have no doubt take a 
 stroll - but he might have wait till I could join he . there be some 
 order to be give to the butcher and the green - grocer . I , too , leave the 
 house , hop to get rid of some little discontent , cause by think 
 of what have happen . return by the way of High Street - I declare 
 I can hardly believe it even now - I do positively see Miss Jillgall 
 come out of a pawnbroker 's shop ! 
 the direction in which she turn prevent she from see I . she be 
 quite unaware that I have discover she ; and I have say nothing about 
 it since . but I notice something unusual in the manner in which she 
 watch - chain be hang , and I ask she what o'clock it be . she say , 
 " you have get your own watch . " I tell she my watch have stop . " so 
 have mine , " she say . there be no doubt about it now ; she have pawn she 
 watch . what for ? she live here for nothing , and she have not have a new 
 dress since I have know she . why do she want money ? 
 Philip have not return when I get home . another mysterious journey to 
 London ? no . after an absence of more than two hour , he come back . 
 naturally enough , I ask what he have be about . he have be take a 
 long walk . for his health 's sake ? no : to think . to think of what ? well , 
 I might be surprised to hear it , but his idle life be begin 
 to weigh on his spirit ; he want employment . have he think of an 
 employment ? not yet . which way have he walk ? anyway : he have not notice 
 where he go . these reply be all make in a tone that offend I . 
 besides , I observe there be no dust on his boot   after a week of dry 
 weather , and his walk of two hour do not appear to have heat or 
 tired he . I take an opportunity of consult Mrs. Tenbruggen . 
 she have anticipate that I should appeal to her opinion , as a woman of 
 the world . 
 I shall not set down in detail what she say . some of it humiliate I ; 
 and from some of it I recoil . the expression of her opinion come to 
 this . in the absence of experience , a certain fervor of temperament 
 be essential to success in the art of fascinating man . either my 
 temperament be deficient , or my intellect overpower it . it be 
 natural that I should suppose myself to be as susceptible to the tender 
 passion as the most excitable woman live . Delusion , my Helena , amiable 
 delusion ! have I ever observe or have any friend tell I that my pretty 
 hand be cold hand ? I have beautiful eye , expressive of vivacity , 
 of intelligence , of every feminine charm , except the one inviting 
 charm that find favor in the eye of a man . she then enter into 
 particular , which I do not   deny show a true interest in help I . 
 I be ungrateful , sulky , self - opinionate . date from that day 's talk 
 with Mrs. Tenbruggen , my new friendship begin to show sign of have 
 catch a chill . but I do my good to follow her instruction - and 
 fail . 
 it be perhaps true that my temperament be overpower by my intellect . 
 or it be possibly truer still that the fire in my heart , when it warm 
 to love , be a fire that burn low . my belief be that I surprise Philip 
 instead of charm he . he respond to my advance , but I feel that it 
 be not do in earnest , not spontaneously . have I any right to complain ? 
 be I in earnest ? be I spontaneous ? we be make love to each 
 other under false pretense . oh , what a fool I be to ask for Mrs. 
 Tenbruggen 's advice ! 
 a humiliating doubt have come to I suddenly . have his heart be 
 incline to Eunice again ? after such a letter as she have write to 
 he ? impossible ! 
 three event since yesterday , which I consider , trifle as they may be , 
 intimation of something wrong . 
 first , Miss Jillgall , who at one time be eager to take my place , have 
 refuse to relieve I of my housekeeping duty . secondly , Philip have 
 be absent again , on another long walk . thirdly , when Philip return , 
 depressed and sulky , I catch Miss Jillgall look at he with interest 
 and pity visible in her skinny face . what do these thing mean ? 
 I be begin to doubt everybody . not one of they , Philip include , 
 care for I - but I can frighten they , at any rate . yesterday evening , 
 I drop on the floor as suddenly as if I have be shoot : a fit of some 
 sort . the doctor honestly declare that he be at a loss to account for 
 it . he would have lay I under an eternal obligation if he have fail 
 to bring I back to life again . 
 as it be , I be more clever than the doctor . what bring the fit on 
 be well known to I . rage - furious , overpowering , deadly rage - be the 
 cause . I be now in the cold - blooded state , which can look back at the 
 event as composedly as if it have happen to some other girl . suppose 
 that girl have let she sweetheart know how she love he as she have never 
 let he know it before . suppose she open the door again the instant 
 after she have leave the room , eager , poor wretch , to say once more , for 
 the fiftieth time , " my angel , I love you ! " suppose she find her angel 
 stand with his back toward she , so that his face be reflect in the 
 glass . and suppose she discover in that face , so smile and so sweet 
 when his head have rest on her bosom only the moment before , the most 
 hideous expression of disgust that feature can betray . there could 
 be no doubt of it ; I have make my poor offering of love to a man who 
 secretly loathe I . I wonder that I survive my sense of my own 
 degradation . well ! I be alive ; and I know he in his true character at 
 last . be I a woman who submit when an outrage be offer to she ? what 
 will happen next ? who know ? I be in a fine humor . what I have just 
 write have set I laugh at myself . Helena Gracedieu have one merit at 
 least - she be a very amusing person . 
 I sleep last night . 
 this morning , I be strong again , calm , wickedly capable of deceive 
 Mr. Philip Dunboyne , as he have deceive I . he have not the faint 
 suspicion that I have discover he . I wish he have courage enough 
 to kill somebody . how I should enjoy hire the near window to the 
 scaffold , and see he hang ! 
 Miss Jillgall be in well spirit than ever . she be go to take 
 a little holiday ; and the cunning creature make a mystery of it . 
 " good - by , Miss Helena . I be go to stay for a day or two with a 
 friend . " what friend ? who care ? 
 last night , I be wakeful . in the darkness a daring idea come to I . 
 to - day , I have carry out the idea . something have follow which be 
 well worth enter in my Diary . 
 I leave the room at the usual hour for attend to my domestic affair . 
 the obstinate cook do I a service ; she be insolent ; she want to 
 have her own way . I give she her own way . in less than five minute I 
 be on the watch in the pantry , which have a view of the house door . my 
 hat and my parasol be wait for I on the table , in case of my go 
 out , too . 
 in a few minute more , I hear the door open . Mr. Philip Dunboyne 
 step out . he be go to take another of his long walk . 
 I follow he to the street in which the cab stand . he hire the first 
 one on the rank , an open chaise ; while I keep myself hide in a shop 
 door . 
 the moment he start on his drive , I hire a closed cab . " double your 
 fare , " I say to the driver , " whatever it may be , if you follow that 
 chaise cleverly , and do what I tell you . " 
 he nod and wink at I . a wicked - look old fellow ; just the man I 
 want . 
 we follow the chaise . 
 CHAPTER LVI . HELENA 's DIARY RESUMED . 
 when we have leave the town behind we , the coachman begin to drive more 
 slowly . in my ignorance , I ask what this change in the pace mean . 
 he point with his whip to the open road and to the chaise in the 
 distance . 
 " if we keep too near the gentleman , miss , he have only get to look back , 
 and he will see we be follow he . the safe thing to do be to let the 
 chaise get on a bit . we can not   lose sight of it , out here . " 
 I have feel incline to trust in the driver 's experience , and he have 
 already justify my confidence in he . this encourage I to consult 
 his opinion on a matter of some importance to my present interest . I 
 could see the necessity of avoid discovery when we have follow the 
 chaise to its destination ; but I be totally at a loss to know how it 
 could be do . my wily old man be ready with his advice the moment I 
 ask for it . 
 " wherever the chaise stop , miss , we must drive past it as if we be 
 go somewhere else . I shall notice the place while we go by ; and you 
 will please sit back in the corner of the cab so that the gentleman 
 can not   see you . " 
 " well , " I say , " and what next ? " 
 " next , miss , I shall pull up , wherever it may be , out of sight of the 
 driver of the chaise . he bear an excellent character , I do not   deny it ; 
 but I have   know he for year - and we have well not trust he . I shall 
 tell you where the gentleman stop ; and you will go back to the place 
  on foot , of course , and see for yourself what be to be do , specially 
 if there happen to be a lady in the case . no offense , miss ; it be in my 
 experience that there be generally a lady in the case . anyhow , you can 
 judge for yourself , and you will know where to find I wait when you 
 want I again . " 
 " suppose something happen , " I suggest , " that we do not   expect ? " 
 " I shall not   lose my head , miss , whatever happen . " 
 " all very well , coachman ; but I have only your word for it . " in the 
 irritable state of my mind , the man 's confident way of think annoy 
 I . 
 " beg your pardon , my young lady , you have   get   if I may say so   what 
 they call a guarantee . when I be a young man , I drive a cab in London 
 for ten year . will that do ? " 
 " I suppose you mean , " I answer , " that you have learn deceit in the 
 wicked way of the great city . " 
 he take this as a compliment . " thank you , miss . that be it exactly . " 
 after a long drive , or so it seem to my impatience , we pass the 
 chaise draw up at a lonely house , separate by a front garden from the 
 road . in two or three minute more , we stop where the road take a 
 turn , and descend to low ground . the farmhouse which we have leave 
 behind we be know to the driver . he lead the way to a gate at the side 
 of the road , and open it for I . 
 " in your place , miss , " he say slyly , " the private way back be the way 
 I should wish to take . try it by the field . turn to the right when 
 you have pass the barn , and you will find yourself at the back of the 
 house . " he stop , and look at his big silver watch . " half - past 
 twelve , " he say , " the Chawbacons - I mean the farmhouse servant , 
 miss - will be at their dinner . all in your favor , so far . if the dog 
 happen to be loose , do not   forget that his name 's grinder ; call he by 
 his name , and pat he before he have time enough to think , and he will let 
 you be . when you want I , here you will find I wait for order . " 
 I look back as I cross the field . the driver be sit on the 
 gate , smoke his pipe , and the horse be nibble the grass at the 
 roadside . two happy animal , without a burden on their mind ! 
 after pass the barn , I see nothing of the dog . far or near , no 
 living creature appear ; the servant must have be at dinner , as the 
 coachman have foresee . arrive at a wooden fence , I open a gate in 
 it , and find myself on a bit of waste ground . on my left , there be 
 a large duck - pond . on my right , I see the fowl - house and the pigstyes . 
 before I be a high impenetrable hedge ; and at some distance behind 
 it - an orchard or a garden , as I suppose , fill the intermediate 
 space - rise the back of the house . I make for the shelter of the hedge , 
 in the fear that some one might approach a window and see I . once 
 shelter from observation , I might consider what I should do next . 
 it be impossible to doubt that this be the house in which Eunice 
 be live . neither could I fail to conclude that Philip have try to 
 persuade she to see he , on those former occasion when he tell I he 
 have take a long walk . 
 as I crouch behind the hedge , I hear voice approach on the other 
 side of it . at last fortune have befriend I . the person speak 
 at the moment be Miss Jillgall ; and the person who answer she be 
 Philip . 
 " I be afraid , dear Mr. Philip , you do not   quite understand my sweet 
 Euneece . honorable , high minded , delicate in her feeling , and , oh , so 
 unselfish ! I do not   want to alarm you , but when she hear you have be 
 deceive Helena - " 
 " upon my word , Miss Jillgall , you be so provoking ! I have not be 
 deceive Helena . have not   I tell you what discourage answer I get , 
 when I go to see the Governor ? have not   I show you Eunice 's reply to 
 my letter ? you can not   have forget it already ? " 
 " oh , yes , I have . why should I remember it ? do not   I know poor Euneece 
 be in your mind , all the time ? " 
 " you be wrong again ! eunice be not in my mind all the time . I be 
 hurt - I be offend by the cruel manner in which she have treat I . 
 and what be the consequence ? so far be I from deceive Helena - she 
 rise in my estimation by comparison with her sister . " 
 " oh , come , come , Mr. Philip ! that will not   do . Helena rise in anybody 's 
 estimation ? ha ! ha ! ha ! " 
 " laugh as much as you like , Miss Jillgall , you will not   laugh away the 
 fact . Helena love I ; Helena be true to I . do not   be hard on a poor 
 fellow who be half distract . what a man find he can do on one day , 
 he find he can not   do on another . try to understand that a change do 
 sometimes come over one 's feeling . " 
 " bless my soul , Mr. Philip , that be just what I have be understand 
 all the time ! I know your mind as well as you know it yourself . you 
 can not   forget my sweet Euneece . " 
 " I tell you I try to forget she ! on my word of honor as a gentleman , I 
 try to forget she , in justice to Helena . be it my fault that I fail ? 
 Eunice be in my mind , as you say just now . oh , my friend - for you 
 be my friend , I be sure - persuade she to see I , if it be only for a 
 minute ! " 
  be there ever a man 's mind in such a state of confusion as this ! 
 first , I rise in his precious estimation , and Eunice drop . then Eunice 
 rise , and I drop . Idiot ! mischievous idiot ! even Selina seem to be 
 disgusted with he , when she speak next . 
 " Mr. Philip , you be hard and unreasonable . I have try to persuade 
 she , and I have make my darling cry . nothing you can say will induce I 
 to distress she again . go back , you very undetermined man - go back to 
 your Helena . " 
 " too late . " 
 " nonsense ! " 
 " I say too late . if I could have marry Helena when I first go to 
 stay in the house , I might have face the sacrifice . as it be , I can not 
 endure she ; and   I tell you this in confidence   she have herself to thank 
 for what have happen . " 
 " be that really true ? " 
 " quite true . " 
 " tell I what she do . 
 " oh , do not   talk of she ! Persuade Eunice to see I . I shall come back 
 again , and again , and again till you bring she to I . " 
 " please do not   talk nonsense . if she change her mind , I will bring she 
 with pleasure . if she still shrink from it , I regard Euneece 's feeling 
 as sacred . take my advice ; do not   press she . leave her time to think of 
 you , and to pity you - and that true heart may be yours again , if you be 
 worthy of it . " 
 " Worthy of it ? what do you mean ? " 
 " be you quite sure , my young friend , that you will not   go back to Helena ? " 
 " go back to she ? I would cut my throat if I think myself capable of 
 do it ! " 
 " how do she set you against she ? do the wretch quarrel with you ? " 
 " it might have be well for both of we if she have do that . oh , her 
 fulsome endearment ! what a contrast to the charming modesty of Eunice ! 
 if I be rich , I would make it worth the while of the first poor fellow 
 I could find to rid I of Helena by marry she . I do not   like say 
 such a thing of a woman , but if you will have the truth - " 
 " well , Mr. Philip - and what be the truth ? " 
 " Helena disgust I . " 
 CHAPTER LVII . HELENA 's DIARY RESUMED . 
 so it be all settle between they . Philip be to throw I away , like one 
 of his bad cigar , for this unanswerable reason : " Helena disgust I . " 
 and he be to persuade Eunice to take my place , and be his wife . yes ! if 
 I let he do it . 
 I hear no more of their talk . with that last , bad outrage burn in 
 my memory , I leave the place . 
 on my way back to the carriage , the dog meet I . truly , a grand creature . 
 I call he by his name , and pat he . he lick my hand . something 
 make I speak to he . I say : " if I be to tell you to tear Mr. Philip 
 Dunboyne to piece , would you do it ? " the great good - natured brute hold 
 out his paw to shake hand . well ! well ! I be not an object of disgust 
 to the dog . 
 but the coachman be startle , when he see I again . he say something , 
 I do not know what it be ; and he produce a pocket - flask , contain 
 some spirit , I suppose . perhaps he think I be go to faint . he 
 little know I . I tell he to drive back to the place at which I have 
 hire the cab , and earn his money . he earn it . 
 on get home , I find Mrs. Tenbruggen walk up and down the 
 dining - room , deep in thought . she be startle when we first confront 
 each other . " you look dreadfully ill , " she say . 
 I answer that I have be out for a little exercise , and have 
 over - fatigue myself ; and then change the subject . " do my father seem 
 to improve under your treatment ? " I ask . 
 " very far from it , my dear . I promise that I would try what massage 
 would do for he , and I find myself compel to give it up . " 
 " why ? " 
 " it excite he dreadfully . " 
 " in what way ? " 
 " he have be talk wildly of event in his past life . his brain be in 
 some condition which be beyond my power of investigation . he point 
 to a cabinet in his room , and say his past life be lock up there . 
 I ask if I should unlock it . he shake with fear ; he say I should let 
 out the ghost of his dead brother - in - law . have you any idea of what he 
 mean ? " 
 the cabinet be full of old letter . I could tell she that - and could 
 tell she no more . I have never hear of his brother - in - law . another of 
 his delusion , no doubt . " do you ever hear he speak , " Mrs. Tenbruggen 
 go on , " of a place call Low Lanes ? " 
 she wait for my reply to this last inquiry with an appearance of 
 anxiety that surprise I . I have never hear he speak of Low Lanes . 
 " have you any particular interest in the place ? " I ask . 
 " none whatever . " 
 she go away to attend on a patient . I retire to my bedroom , and 
 open my Diary . again and again , I read that remarkable story of the 
 intend poisoning , and of the manner in which it have end . I sit 
 think over this romance in real life till I be interrupt by the 
 announcement of dinner . 
 Mr. Philip Dunboyne have return . in Miss Jillgall 's absence we be 
 alone at the table . my appetite be go . I make a pretense of eating , 
 and another pretense of be glad to see my devoted lover . I talk to 
 he in the prettiest manner . as a hypocrite , he thoroughly match 
 I ; he be gallant , he be amusing . if baseness like our have be 
 punishable by the law , a prison be the right place for both of we . 
 Mrs. Tenbruggen come in again after dinner , still not quite easy about 
 my health . " how flushed you be ! " she say . " let I feel your pulse . " I 
 laugh , and leave she with Mr. Philip Dunboyne . 
 pass my father 's door , I look in , anxious to see if he be in the 
 excitable state which Mrs. Tenbruggen have describe . yes ; the effect 
 which she have produce on he - how , she know well - have not pass away 
 yet : he be still talk . the attendant tell I it have go on for 
 hour together . on my approach his chair , he call out : " which be 
 you ? eunice or Helena ? " when I have answer he , he beckon I to 
 come nearer . " I be get strong every minute , " he say . " we will go 
 travel to - morrow , and see the place where you be bear . " 
 where have I be bear ? he have never tell I where . have he mention the 
 place in Mrs. Tenbruggen 's hearing ? I ask the attendant if he have be 
 present while she be in the room . yes ; he have remain at his post ; 
 he have also hear the allusion to the place with the odd name . have Mr. 
 Gracedieu say anything more about that place ? nothing more ; the poor 
 Minister 's mind have wander off to other thing . he be wander now . 
 sometimes , he be address his congregation ; sometimes , he wonder 
 what they would give he for supper ; sometimes , he talk of the 
 flower in the garden . and then he look at I , and frown , and say I 
 prevent he from think . 
 I go back to my bedroom , and open my Diary , and read the story 
 again . 
 be the poison of which that resolute young wife propose to make use 
 something that act slowly , and tell the doctor nothing if they look 
 for it after death ? 
 would it be run too great a risk to show the story to the doctor , 
 and try to get a little valuable information in that way ? it would be 
 useless . he would make some feeble joke ; he would say , girl and poison 
 be not fit company for each other . 
 but I might discover what I want to know in another way . I might call on 
 the doctor , after he have go out on his afternoon round of visit , 
 and might tell the servant I would wait for his master 's return . 
 nobody would be in my way ; I might get at the medical literature in the 
 consulting - room , and find the information for myself . 
 a knock at my door interrupt I in the midst of my plan . Mrs. 
 Tenbruggen again ! - still in a fidgety state of feeling on the subject of 
 my health . " which be it ? " she say . " pain of body , my dear , or pain of 
 mind ? I be anxious about you . " 
 " my dear Elizabeth , your sympathy be throw away on I . as I have tell 
 you already , I be over - tired - nothing more . " 
 she be relieve to hear that I have no mental trouble to complain of . 
 " Fatigue , " she remark , ' set itself right with rest . do you take a 
 very long walk ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " beyond the limit of the town , of course ? Philip have be take a walk 
 in the country , too . he do not   say that he meet you . " 
 these clever people sometimes overreach themselves . how she suggest it 
 to I , I can not pretend to have discover . but I do certainly suspect 
 that she have lead Philip , while they be together downstairs , into 
 say to she what he have already say to Miss Jillgall . I be so angry 
 that I try to pump my excellent friend , as she have be try to pump 
 me - a vulgar expression , but vulgar writing be such a convenient way 
 of write sometimes . my first attempt to entrap the Masseuse fail 
 completely . she coolly change the subject . 
 " have I interrupt you in writing ? " she ask , point to my Diary . 
 " no ; I be idle over what I have write already - an extraordinary 
 story which I copy from a book . " 
 " may I look at it ? " 
 I push the open Diary across the table . if I be the object of any 
 suspicion which she want to confirm , it would be curious to see if 
 the poisoning story help she . " it be a piece of family history , " I 
 say ; " I think you will agree with I that it be really interesting . " 
 she begin to read . as she go on , not all her power of control 
 herself could prevent she from turn pale . this change of color   in 
 such a woman   a little alarmed I . when a girl be devour by deadly 
 hatred of a man , do the feeling show itself to other person in 
 her face ? I must practice before the glass and train my face into a 
 trustworthy state of discipline . 
 " coarse melodrama ! " Mrs. Tenbruggen declare . " mere sensation . no 
 analysis of character . a make - up story ! " 
 " well make up , surely ? " I answer . 
 " I do not   agree with you . " her voice be not quite so steady as usual . 
 she ask suddenly if my clock be right - and declare that she 
 should be late for an appointment . on take leave she press my 
 hand strongly - eye I with distrustful attention and say , very 
 emphatically : " take care of yourself , Helena ; pray take care of 
 yourself . " 
 I be afraid I do a very foolish thing when I show she the poisoning 
 story . have it help the wily old creature to look into my inmost 
 thought ? 
 Impossible ! 
 to - day , Miss Jillgall return , look hideously healthy and spitefully 
 cheerful . although she try to conceal it , while I be present , I could 
 see that Philip have recover his place in her favor . after what he have 
 say to she behind the hedge at the farm , she would be relieve from all 
 fear of my become his wife , and would joyfully anticipate his marriage 
 to Eunice . there be thought in I which I do not   set down in my book . I 
 only say : we shall see . 
 this afternoon , I decide on visit the doctor . the servant be quite 
 sorry for I when he answer the door . his master have just leave the 
 house for a round of visit . I say I would wait . the servant be afraid 
 I should find wait very tedious . I remind he that I could go away 
 if I find it tedious . at last , the polite old man leave I . 
 I go into the consulting - room , and read the back of the medical book 
 range round the wall , and find a volume that interest I . there be 
 such curious information in it that I amuse myself by make extract , 
 use the first sheet of paper that I could find . they have print 
 direction at the top , which show that the doctor be accustom 
 to write his prescription on they . we have many , too many , of his 
 prescription in our house . 
 the servant 's doubt of my patience prove to have be well found . I 
 get tired of waiting , and go home before the doctor return . 
 from morning to night , nothing have be see of Mrs. Tenbruggen to - day . 
 nor have any apology for her neglect of we be receive , fond as she be 
 of write little note . have that story in my Diary drive she away ? let 
 I see what to - morrow may bring forth . 
 to - day have bring forth - nothing . Mrs. Tenbruggen still keep away from 
 we . it look as if my Diary have something to do with the mystery of her 
 absence . 
 I be not in good spirit to - day . my nerve - if I have such thing , which 
 be more than I know by my own experience - have be a little shake by 
 a horrid dream . the medical information , which my thirst for knowledge 
 absorb in the doctor 's consulting - room , turn traitor - armed itself 
 with the grotesque horror of nightmare - and so thoroughly frighten I 
 that I be on the point of be foolish enough to destroy my note . I 
 think well of it , and my note be safe under lock and key . 
 Mr. Philip Dunboyne be try to pave the way for his flight from this 
 house . he speak of friend in London , whose interest will help he to 
 find the employment which be the object of his ambition . " in a few day 
 more , " he say , " I shall ask for leave of absence . " 
 instead of look at I , his eye wander to the window ; his finger 
 play restlessly with his watch - chain while he speak . I think I would 
 give he a chance , a last chance , of make the atonement that he owe 
 to I . this show shameful weakness , on my part . do my own resolution 
 startle I ? or do the wretch appeal - to what ? to my pity ? it can not be 
 my love ; I be positively sure that I hate he . well , I be not the first 
 girl who have be an unanswerable riddle to herself . 
 " be there any other motive for your departure ? " I ask . 
 " what other motive can there be ? " he reply . I put what I have to say to 
 he in plainer word still . " tell I , Philip , be you begin to wish 
 that you be a free man again ? " 
 he still prevaricate . be this because he be afraid of I , or because 
 he be not quite brute enough to insult I to my face ? I try again for 
 the third and last time . I almost put the word into his mouth . 
 " I fancy you have be out of temper lately , " I say . " you have not be 
 your own kinder and well self . be this the right interpretation of the 
 change that I think I see in you ? " 
 he answer : " I have not be very well lately . " 
 " and that be all ? " 
 " yes - that be all . " 
 there be no more to be say ; I turn away to leave the room . he 
 follow I to the door . after a momentary hesitation , he make the 
 attempt to kiss I . I only look at he - he draw back from I in 
 silence . I leave the new Judas , stand alone , while the shade of 
 evening begin to gather over the room . 
 Third Period   continue   . 
  event in the FAMILY , relate by MISS JILLGALL . 
 CHAPTER LVIII . DANGER . 
 " if anything of importance happen , I trust to you to write an account 
 of it , and to send the writing to I . I will come to you at once , if 
 I see reason to believe that my presence be require . " those line , in 
 your last kind reply to I , rouse my courage , dear Mr. Governor , and 
 sharpen the vigilance which have always be one of the strong point in 
 my character . every suspicious circumstance which occur in this house 
 will be   so to speak   seize on by my pen , and will find itself   so to 
 speak again   place on its trial , before your unerre judgment ! let the 
 wicked tremble ! I mention no name . 
 take up my narrative where it come to an end when I last write , I 
 have to say a word first on the subject of my discovery , in regard to 
 Philip 's movement . 
 the advertisement of a private inquiry office , which I read in a 
 newspaper , put the thing into my head . I provide myself with money to 
 pay the expense by - I blush while I write it - pawn my watch . this 
 humiliation of my poor self have be reward by success . skilled 
 investigation have prove that our young man have come to his sens 
 again , exactly as I suppose . on each occasion when he be suspiciously 
 absent from the house , he have be follow to the farm . I have be 
 stay there myself for a day or two , in the hope of persuade eunice 
 to relent . the hope have not yet be realize . but Philip 's devotion , 
 assist by my influence , will yet prevail . let I not despair . 
 whether Helena know positively that she have lose her wicked hold on 
 Philip I can not say . it seem hardly possible that she could have make 
 the discovery just yet . the one thing of which I be certain be , that she 
 look like a fiend . 
 Philip have wisely take my advice , and employ pious fraud . he will get 
 away from the wretch , who have tempt he once and may tempt he again , 
 under pretense of use the interest of his friend in London to find 
 a place under Government . he have not be very well for the last day or 
 two , and the execution of our project be in consequence delay . 
 I have news of Mrs. Tenbruggen which will , I think , surprise you . 
 she have keep away from we in a most unaccountable manner . I call on 
 she at the hotel , and hear she be engage with her lawyer . on the next 
 day , she suddenly return to her old habit , and pay the customary 
 visit . I observe a similar alteration in her state of feeling . she be 
 now coldly civil to Helena ; and she ask after Eunice with a maternal 
 interest touch to see - I say to she : " Elizabeth , you appear to have 
 change your opinion of the two girl , since I see you . " she answer , 
 with a delightful candor which remind I of old time : " completely ! " 
 I say : " a woman of your intellectual caliber , dear , do not   change her 
 mind without a good reason for it . " Elizabeth cordially agree with I . 
 I venture to be a little more explicit : " you have no doubt make some 
 interesting discovery . " Elizabeth agree again ; and I venture again : " I 
 suppose I may not ask what the discovery be ? " " no , Selina , you may not 
 ask . " 
 this be curious ; but it be nothing to what I have get to tell you next . 
 just as I be long to take she to my bosom again as my friend and 
 confidante , Elizabeth have disappear . and , alas ! alas ! there be a 
 reason for it which no sympathetic person can dispute . 
 I have just receive some overwhelming news , in the form of a neat 
 parcel , address to myself . 
 there have be a scandal at the hotel . that monster in human form , 
 Elizabeth 's husband , be aware of his wife 's professional fame , have 
 hear of the large sum of money which she earn as the great living 
 professor of massage , have be long on the lookout for she , and 
 have discover she at last . he have not only force his way into her 
 sitting - room at the hotel ; he insist on she live with he again ; her 
 money be the attraction , it be needless to say . if she refuse , he 
 threaten she with the law , the barbarous law , which , to use his own 
 coarse expression , will " restore his conjugal right . " 
 all this I gather from the narrative of my unhappy friend , which form 
 one of the two inclosure in her parcel . she have already make she 
 escape . ha ! the man do not   live who can circumvent Elizabeth . the 
 English Court of Law be not   build which can catch she when she roam the 
 free and glorious continent . 
 the vastness of this amazing woman 's mind be what I must pause to 
 admire . in the frightful catastrophe that have befall she , she can 
 still think of Philip and Euneece . she be eager to hear of their 
 marriage , and renounce Helena with her whole heart . " I too be deceive 
 by that cunning young woman , " she write . " beware of she , Selina . unless 
 I be much mistaken , she be go to end badly . take care of Philip , take 
 care of Euneece . if you want help , apply at once to my favorite hero 
 in real life , the Governor . " I do not   presume to correct Elizabeth 's 
 language . I should have call you the idol of the Women . 
 the second inclosure contain , as I suppose , a wedding present . it be 
 carefully seal - it feel no big than an ordinary letter - and it 
 contain an inscription which your highly - cultivate intelligence may be 
 able to explain . I copy it as follow : 
 " to be inclose in another envelope , address to Mr. Dunboyne the 
 elder , at Percy 's private Hotel , London , and deliver by a trustworthy 
 messenger , on the day when Mr. Philip Dunboyne be married to Miss Eunice 
 Gracedieu . place meanwhile under the care of Miss Selina Jillgall . " 
 why be this mysterious letter to be send to Philip 's father ? I wonder 
 whether that circumstance will puzzle you as it have puzzle I . 
 I have keep my report back , so as to send you the last news relate to 
 Philip 's state of health . to my great regret , his illness seem to have 
 make a serious advance since yesterday . when I ask if he be in pain , he 
 say : " it be not   exactly pain ; I feel as if I be sink . sometimes I be 
 giddy ; and sometimes I find myself feel thirsty and sick . " I have no 
 opportunity of look after he as I could wish ; for Helena insist on 
 nursing he , assist by the housemaid . Maria be a very good girl in she 
 way , but too stupid to be of much use . if he be not well to - morrow , I 
 shall insist on send for the doctor . 
 he be no well ; and he wish to have medical help . Helena do not 
 seem to understand his illness . it be not until Philip have insist on 
 see he that she consent to send for the doctor . 
 you have some talk with this experienced physician when you be here , 
 and you know what a clever man he be . when I tell you that he hesitate 
 to say what be the matter with Philip , you will feel as much alarmed as 
 I do . I will wait to send this to the post until I can write in a more 
 definite way . 
 two day more have pass . the doctor have put two very strange question 
 to I . 
 he ask , first , if there be anybody stay with we besides the 
 regular member of the household . I say we have no visitor . he want 
 to know , next , if Mr. Philip Dunboyne have make any enemy since he 
 have be live in our town . I say none that I know of - and I take the 
 liberty of ask what he mean . he answer to this , that he have a 
 few more inquiry to make , and that he will tell I what he mean 
 to - morrow . 
 for God 's sake come here as soon as you possibly can . the whole burden 
 be throw on I - and I be quite unequal to it . 
 I receive the doctor to - day in the drawing - room . to my amazement , 
 he beg leave to speak with I in the garden . when I ask why , he 
 answer : " I do not   want to have a listener at the door . come out on the 
 lawn , where we can be sure that we be alone . " 
 when we be in the garden , he notice that I be tremble . 
 " rouse your courage , Miss Jillgall , " he say . " in the Minister 's 
 helpless state there be nobody whom I can speak to but yourself . " 
 I venture to remind he that he might speak to Helena as well as to 
 myself . 
 he look as black as thunder when I mention her name . all he say 
 be , " no ! " but , oh , if you have hear his voice - and he so gentle and 
 sweet - temper at other time - you would have feel , as I do , that he 
 have Helena in his mind ! 
 " now , listen to this , " he go on . " everything that my art can do for 
 Mr. Philip Dunboyne , while I be at his bedside , be undo while I be 
 away by some other person . he be bad to - day than I have see he yet . " 
 " oh , sir , do you think he will die ? " 
 " he will certainly die unless the right mean be take to save he , and 
 take at once . it be my duty not to flinch from tell you the truth . 
 I have make a discovery since yesterday which satisfy I that I be 
 right . somebody be try to poison Mr. Dunboyne ; and somebody will 
 succeed unless he be remove from this house . " 
 I be a poor feeble creature . the doctor catch I , or I should have 
 drop on the grass . it be not a fainting - fit . I only shake and 
 shiver so that I be too weak to stand up . encourage by the doctor , 
 I recover sufficiently to be able to ask he where Philip be to be 
 take to . he say : " to the hospital . no poisoner can follow my patient 
 there . persuade he to let I take he away , when I call again in an 
 hour 's time . " 
 as soon as I could hold a pen , I send a telegram to you . pray , pray come 
 by the early train . I also telegraph to old Mr. Dunboyne , at the 
 hotel in London . 
 it be impossible for I to face Helena ; I own I be afraid . the 
 cook kindly go upstairs to see who be in Philip 's room . it be the 
 housemaid 's turn to look after he for a while . I go instantly to his 
 bedside . 
 there be no persuade he to allow himself to be take to the 
 hospital . " I be die , " he say . " if you have any pity for I , send for 
 Euneece . let I see she once more , let I hear she say that she forgive 
 I , before I die . " 
 I hesitate . it be too terrible to think of Euneece in the same house 
 with her sister . her life might be in danger ! Philip give I a look , a 
 dreadful ghastly look . " if you refuse , " he say wildly , " the grave will not 
 hold I . I will haunt you for the rest of your life . " 
 " she shall hear that you be ill , " I answer - and run out of the room 
 before he could speak again . 
 what I have promise to write , I do write . but , place between Euneece 's 
 danger and Philip 's danger , my heart be all for Euneece . would Helena 
 spare she , if she come to Philip 's bedside ? in such terror as I never 
 feel before in my life , I add a word more , entreat she not to leave 
 the farm . I promise to keep she regularly inform on the subject of 
 Philip 's illness ; and I mention that I expect the Governor to return 
 to we immediately . " do nothing , " I write , " without his advice . " my 
 letter have be complete , I send the cook away with it , in a chaise . 
 she belong to the neighborhood , and she know the farmhouse well . 
 nearly two hour afterward , I hear the chaise stop at the door , and 
 run out , impatient to hear how my sweet girl have receive my letter . 
 God help we all ! when I open the door , the first person whom I see be 
 Euneece herself . 
 CHAPTER LIX . DEFENSE . 
 one surprise follow another , after I have encounter Euneece at the 
 door . 
 when my fondness have excuse she for set the well - mean advice in 
 my letter at defiance , I be conscious of expect to see she in tear ; 
 eager , distressingly eager , to hear what hope there might be of Philip 's 
 recovery . I see no tear , I hear no inquiry . she be pale , and quiet , 
 and silent . not a word fall from she when we meet , not a word when she 
 kiss I , not a word when she lead the way into the near room - the 
 dining - room . it be only when we be shut in together that she speak . 
 " which be Philip 's room ? " she ask . 
 instead of want to know how he be , she desire to know where he 
 be ! I point toward the back dining - room , which have be make into a 
 bedroom for Philip . he have choose it himself , when he first come to stay 
 with we , because the window open into the garden , and he could slip 
 out and smoke at any hour of the day or night , when he please . 
 " who be with he now ? " be the next strange thing this sadly - change 
 girl say to I . 
 " Maria be take her turn , " I answer ; ' she assist in nursing Philip . " 
 " where be - ? " Euneece get no far than that . her breath quicken , 
 her color fade away . I have see people look as she be look now , 
 when they suffer under some sudden pain . before I could offer to help 
 she , she rally , and go on : " where , " she begin again , " be the other 
 nurse ? " 
 " you mean Helena ? " I say . 
 " I mean the Poisoner . " 
 when I remind you , dear Mr. Governor , that my letter have carefully 
 conceal from her the horrible discovery make by the doctor , 
 your imagination will picture my state of mind . she see that I be 
 overpower . her sweet nature , so strangely freeze up thus far , melt 
 at last . " you do not   know what I have hear , " she say , " you do not   know 
 what thought have be rouse in I . " she leave her chair , and sit on 
 my knee with the familiarity of the dear old time , and take the letter 
 that I have write to she from her pocket . 
 " look at it yourself , " she say , " and tell I if anybody could read it , 
 and not see that you be conceal something . my dear , I have drive 
 round by the doctor 's house - I have see he - I have persuade he , or 
 perhaps I ought to say surprised he , into tell I the truth . but the 
 kind old man be obstinate . he would not   believe I when I tell he I be 
 on my way here to save Philip 's life . he say : ' my child , you will only 
 put your own life in jeopardy . if I have not see that danger , I should 
 never have tell you of the dreadful state of thing at home . go back to 
 the good people at the farm , and leave the saving of Philip to I . ' " 
 " he be right , Euneece , entirely right . " 
 " no , dear , he be wrong . I beg he to come here , and judge for 
 himself ; and I ask you to do the same . " 
 I be obstinate . " go back ! " I persist . " go back to the farm ! " 
 " can I see Philip ? " she ask . 
 I have hear some insolent man say that woman be like cat . if they 
 mean that we do , figuratively speak , scratch at time , I be afraid 
 they be not altogether wrong . an irresistible impulse make I say to 
 poor euneece : " this be a change indeed , since you refuse to receive 
 Philip . " 
 " be there no change in the circumstance ? " she ask sadly . " be not   he 
 ill and in danger ? " 
 I beg she to forgive I ; I say I mean no harm . 
 " I give he up to my sister , " she continue , " when I believe that his 
 happiness depend , not on I , but on she . I take he back to myself , 
 when he be at the mercy of a demon who threaten his life . come , Selina , 
 let we go to Philip . " 
 she put her arm round I , and make I get up from my chair . I be so 
 easily persuade by she , that the fear of what Helena 's jealousy and 
 Helena 's anger might do be scarcely present in my thought . the door of 
 communication be lock on the side of the bedchamber . I go into the 
 hall , to enter Philip 's room by the other door . she follow , wait 
 behind I . I hear what pass between they when Maria go out to she . 
 " where be Miss Gracedieu ? " 
 " rest upstairs , miss , in her room . " 
 " look at the clock , and tell I when you expect she to come down here . " 
 " I be to call she , miss , in ten minute more . " 
 " wait in the dining - room , Maria , till I come back to you . " 
 she join I . I hold the door open for she to go into Philip 's room . it 
 be not out of curiosity ; the feeling that urge I be sympathy , when 
 I wait a moment to see their first meeting . she bent over the poor , 
 pallid , tremble , suffer man , and raise he in her arm , and lay 
 his head on her bosom . " my Philip ! " she murmur those word in a kiss . 
 I close the door , I have a good cry ; and , oh , how it comfort I ! 
 there be only a minute to spare when she come out of the room . Maria 
 be wait for she . Euneece say , as quietly as ever : " go and call Miss 
 Gracedieu . " 
 the girl look at she , and see - I do not   know what . Maria become 
 alarmed . but she go up the stair , and return in haste to tell we 
 that her young mistress be come down . 
 the faint rustling of Helena 's dress as she leave her room reach we in 
 the silence . I remain at the open door of the dining - room , and Maria 
 approach and stand near I . we be both frightened . Euneece step 
 forward , and stand on the mat at the foot of the stair , wait . she 
 back be toward I ; I could only see that she be as still as a statue . 
 the rustling of the dress come nearer . oh , heaven ! what be go to 
 happen ? my tooth chatter in my head ; I hold by Maria 's shoulder . drop 
 of perspiration show themselves on the girl 's forehead ; she star in 
 vacant terror at the slim little figure , post firm and still on the 
 mat . 
 Helena turn the corner of the stair , and wait a moment on the last 
 landing , and see her sister . 
 " you here ? " she say . " what do you want ? " 
 there be no reply . Helena descend , until she reach the last stair 
 but one . there , she stop . her star eye grow large and wild ; 
 her hand shake as she stretch it out , feel for the banister ; she 
 stagger as she catch at it , and hold herself up . the silence be 
 still unbroken . something in I , strong than myself , draw my step 
 along the hall nearer and near to the stair , till I could see the face 
 which have strike that murderous wretch with terror . 
 I look . 
 no ! it be not my sweet girl ; it be a horrid transformation of she . 
 I see a fearful creature , with glitter eye that threaten some 
 unimaginable vengeance . her lip be draw back ; they show she 
 clinch tooth . a burn red flush dye her face . the hair of her head 
 rise , little by little , slowly . and , most dreadful sight of all , she 
 seem , in the stillness of the house , to be listen to something . 
 if I could have move , I should have flee to the first place of refuge 
 I could find . if I could have raise my voice , I should have cry for 
 help . I could do neither the one nor the other . I could only look , look , 
 look ; hold by the horror of it with a hand of iron . 
 Helena must have rouse her courage , and resist her terror . I hear 
 her speak : 
 " let I by ! " 
 " no . " 
 slowly , steadily , in a whisper , Euneece make that reply . 
 Helena try once more - still fight against her own terror : I know it 
 by the trembling of her voice . 
 " let I by , " she repeat ; " I be on my way to Philip 's room . " 
 " you will never enter Philip 's room again . " 
 " who will stop I ? " 
 " I will . " 
 she have speak in the same steady whisper throughout - but now she move . 
 I see she set her foot on the first stair . I see the horrid glitter in 
 her eye flash close into Helena 's face . I hear she say : 
 " Poisoner , go back to your room . " 
 silent and shudder , Helena shrink away from she - daunted by her 
 glitter eye ; master by her lift hand point up the stair . 
 Helena slowly ascend till she reach the landing . she turn and 
 look down ; she try to speak . the point hand strike she dumb , and 
 drive she up the next flight of stair . she be lose to view . only the 
 small rustle sound of the dress be to be hear , grow fainter and 
 fainter ; then an interval of stillness ; then the noise of a door open 
 and close again ; then no sound more - but a change to be see : the 
 transform creature be crouch on her knee , still and silent , she 
 face cover by her hand . I be afraid to approach she ; I be afraid to 
 speak to she . after a time , she rise . suddenly , swiftly , with her head 
 turn away from I , she open the door of Philip 's room - and be go . 
 I look round . there be only Maria in the lonely hall . shall I try 
 to tell you what my sensation be ? it may sound strangely , but it be 
 true - I feel like a sleeper , who have half - awakened from a dream . 
 CHAPTER LX . DISCOVERY . 
 a little later , on that eventful day , when I be most in need of all 
 that your wisdom and kindness could do to guide I , come the telegram 
 which announce that you be helpless under an attack of gout . as soon 
 as I have in some degree get over my disappointment , I remember have 
 tell Euneece in my letter that I expect her kind old friend to come to 
 we . with the telegram in my hand I knock softly at Philip 's door . 
 the voice that bid I come in be the gentle voice that I know so well . 
 Philip be sleep . there , by his bedside , with his hand rest in her 
 hand , be Euneece , so completely restore to her own sweet self that I 
 could hardly believe what I have see , not an hour since . she talk 
 of you , when I show she your message , with affectionate interest and 
 regret . look back , my admirable friend , at what I have write on 
 the two or three page which precede this , and explain the astounding 
 contrast if you can . 
 I be leave alone to watch by Philip , while Euneece go away to see she 
 father . soon afterward , Maria take my place ; I have be send for to the 
 next room to receive the doctor . 
 he look care - worn and grieve . I say I be afraid he have bring bad 
 news with he . 
 " the bad possible news , " he answer . " a terrible exposure threaten 
 this family , and I be powerless to prevent it . " 
 he then ask I to remember the day when I have be surprise by the 
 singular question which he have put to I , and when he have engage to 
 explain himself after he have make some inquiry . why , and how , he have 
 set those inquiry on foot be what he have now to tell . I will repeat 
 what he say , in his own word , as nearly as I can remember they . while 
 he be in attendance on Philip , he have observe symptom which make he 
 suspect that Digitalis have be give to the young man , in dos often 
 repeat . case of attempt poisoning by this medicine be so rare , 
 that he feel bind to put his suspicion to the test by go round 
 among the chemist 's shop - except of course the shop at which his 
 own prescription be make up - and ask if they have lately dispense 
 any preparation of Digitalis , order perhaps in a large quantity 
 than usual . at the second shop he visit , the chemist laugh . " why , 
 doctor , " he say , " have you forget your own prescription ? " after 
 this , the prescription be ask for , and produce . it be on the paper 
 use by the doctor - paper which have his address print at the top , and 
 a notice add , tell patient who come to consult he for the second 
 time to bring their prescription with they . then , there follow in 
 writing : " tincture of Digitalis , one ounce " - with his signature at the 
 end , not badly imitate , but a forgery nevertheless . the chemist notice 
 the effect which this discovery have produce on the doctor , and ask if 
 that be his signature . he could hardly , as an honest man , have assert 
 that a forgery be a signature of his own writing . so he make the true 
 reply , and ask who have present the prescription . the chemist call 
 to his assistant to come forward . " do you tell I that you know , by 
 sight , the young lady who bring this prescription ? " the assistant 
 admit it . " do you tell I she be Miss Helena Gracedieu ? " " I do . " 
 " be you sure of not have make any mistake ? " " quite sure . " the chemist 
 then say : " I myself supply the tincture of Digitalis , and the young 
 lady pay for it , and take it away with she . you have have all the 
 information that I can give you , sir ; and I may now ask , if you can 
 throw any light on the matter . " our good friend think of the poor 
 Minister , so sorely afflict , and of the famous name so sincerely 
 respect in the town and in the country round , and say he could not 
 undertake to give an immediate answer . the chemist be excessively 
 angry . " you know as well as I do , " he say , " that Digitalis , give in 
 certain dos , be a poison , and you can not deny that I honestly believe 
 myself to be dispense your prescription . while you be hesitate to 
 give I an answer , my character may suffer ; I may be suspect myself . " 
 he end in declare he should consult his lawyer . the doctor go 
 home , and question his servant . the man remember the day of Miss 
 Helena 's visit in the afternoon , and the intention that she express of 
 wait for his master 's return . he have show she into the parlor which 
 open into the consulting - room . no other visitor be in the house at 
 that time , or have arrive during the rest of the day . the doctor 's own 
 experience , when he get home , lead he to conclude that Helena have go 
 into the consulting - room . he have enter that room , for the purpose of 
 write some prescription , and have find the leaf of paper that he 
 use diminish in number . after what he have hear , and what he have 
 discover   to say nothing of what he suspect , it occur to he 
 to look along the shelf of his medical library . he find a volume 
  treating of poison   with a slip of paper leave between the leaf ; the 
 poison describe at the place so marked be Digitalis , and the paper 
 use be one of his own prescription - paper . " if , as I fear , a legal 
 investigation into Helena 's conduct be a possible event , " the doctor 
 conclude , " there be the evidence that I shall be oblige to give , when 
 I be call as a witness . " 
 it be my belief that I could have feel no great dismay , if the long 
 arm of the Law have lay its hold on I while he be speak . I ask 
 what be to be do . 
 " if she leave the house at once , " the doctor reply , ' she may escape 
 the infamy of be charge with an attempt at murder by poison ; and , 
 in her absence , I can answer for Philip 's life . I do not   urge you to warn 
 she , because that might be a dangerous thing to do . it be for you to 
 decide , as a member of the family , whether you will run the risk . " 
 I try to speak to he of Euneece , and to tell he what I have already 
 relate to yourself . he be in no humor to listen to I . " keep it for a 
 fitter time , " he answer ; " and think of what I have just say to you . " 
 with that , he leave I , on his way to Philip 's room . 
 Mental exertion be completely beyond I . can you understand a poor 
 middle - aged spinster be frightened into do a dangerous thing ? that 
 may seem to be nonsense . but if you ask why I take a morsel of paper , 
 and write the warning which I be afraid to communicate by word of 
 mouth - why I go upstairs with my knee knock together , and 
 open the door of Helena 's room just wide enough to let my hand pass 
 through - why I throw the paper in , and bang the door to again , and 
 run downstairs as I have never run since I be a little girl - I can 
 only say , in the way of explanation , what I have say already : I be 
 frighten into do it . 
 what I have write , thus far , I shall send to you by to - night 's post . 
 the doctor come back to I , after he have see Philip , and speak with 
 Euneece . he be very angry ; and , I must own , not without reason . Philip 
 have flatly refuse to let himself be remove to the hospital ; and 
 Euneece - " a mere girl " - have declare that she would be answerable for 
 consequence ! the doctor warn I that he mean to withdraw from 
 the case , and to make his declaration before the magistrate . at my 
 entreaty he consent to return in the evening , and to judge by 
 result before take the terrible step that he have threaten . 
 while I remain at home on the watch , keep the door of both 
 room lock , Eunice go out to get Philip 's medicine . she come back , 
 follow by a boy carry a portable apparatus for cook . " all that 
 Philip want , and all that we want , " she explain , " we can provide for 
 ourselves . give I a morsel of paper to write on . " 
 unhook the little pencil attach to her watch - chain , she pause and 
 look toward the door . " somebody listen , " she whisper . " let they 
 listen . " she write a list of necessary , in the way of thing to eat 
 and thing to drink , and ask I to go out and get they myself . " I 
 do not   doubt the servant , " she say , speak distinctly enough to 
 be hear outside ; " but I be afraid of what a Poisoner 's cunning and a 
 Poisoner 's desperation may do , in a kitchen which be open to she . " I 
 go away on my errand - discover no listener outside , I need hardly 
 say . on my return , I find the door of communication with Philip 's room 
 close , but no long lock . " we can now attend on he in turn , " she 
 say , " without open either of the door which lead into the hall . at 
 night we can relieve each other , and each of we can get sleep as we want 
 it in the large armchair in the dining - room . Philip must be safe under 
 our charge , or the doctor will insist on take he to the hospital . 
 when we want Maria 's help , from time to time , we can employ she under 
 our own superintendence . have you anything else , Selina , to suggest ? " 
 there be nothing leave to suggest . young and inexperienced as she be , 
 how   I ask   have she contrive to think of all this ? she answer , 
 simply " I be sure I do not   know ; my thought come to I while I be 
 look at Philip . " 
 soon afterward I find an opportunity of inquire if Helena have leave 
 the house . she have just rung her bell ; and Maria have find she , quietly 
 reading , in her room . hour afterward , when I be on the watch at 
 night , I hear Philip 's door softly try from the outside . her dreadful 
 purpose have not be give up , even yet . 
 the doctor come in the evening , as he have promise , and find an 
 improvement in Philip 's health . I mention what precaution we have 
 take , and that they have be devise by Euneece . " be you go to 
 withdraw from the case ? " I ask . " I be come back to the case , " he 
 answer , " to - morrow morning . " 
 it have be a disappointment to I to receive no answer to the telegram 
 which I have send to Mr. Dunboyne the elder . the next day 's post bring 
 the explanation in a letter to Philip from his father , direct to he 
 at the hotel here . this show that my telegram , give my address at 
 this house , have not be receive . Mr. Dunboyne announce that he have 
 return to Ireland , find the air of London unendurable , after the 
 sea - breeze at home . if Philip have already marry , his father would 
 leave he to a life of genteel poverty with Helena Gracedieu . if he have 
 think well of it , his welcome be wait for he . 
 Little do Mr. Dunboyne know what change have take place since he and 
 his son have last meet , and what hope might yet present itself of bright 
 day for poor Euneece ! I think of write to he . but how would that 
 crab old man receive a confidential letter from a lady who be a 
 stranger ? 
 my doubt be set at rest by Philip himself . he ask I to write a few 
 line of reply to his father ; declare that his marriage with Helena 
 be break off - that he have not give up all hope of be permit to 
 offer the sincere expression of his penitence to Euneece - and that 
 he would gladly claim his welcome , as soon as he be well enough to 
 undertake the journey to Ireland . when he have sign the letter , I be 
 so pleased that I make a smart remark . I say : " this be a treaty of 
 peace between father and son . " 
 when the doctor arrive in the morning , and find the change for the 
 well in his patient confirm , he do justice to we at last . he 
 speak kindly , and even gratefully , to Euneece . no more allusion to the 
 hospital as a place of safety escape he . he ask I cautiously for 
 news of Helena . I could only tell he that she have go out at her 
 customary time , and have return at her customary time . he do not 
 attempt to conceal that my reply have make he uneasy . 
 " be you still afraid that she may succeed in poison Philip ? " I 
 ask . 
 " I be afraid of her cunning , " he say . " if she be charge with 
 attempt to poison young Dunboyne , she have some system of defense , you 
 may rely on it , for which we be not prepared . there , in my opinion , be 
 the true reason for her extraordinary insensibility to her own danger . " 
 two more day pass , and we be still safe under the protection of 
 lock and key . 
 on the evening of the second day   which be a Monday   Maria come to I 
 in great tribulation . on inquire what be the matter , I receive a 
 disquieting reply : " Miss Helena be tempt I . she be so miserable at 
 be prevent from see Mr. Philip , and help to nurse he , that 
 it be quite distressing to see she . at the same time , miss , it be hard 
 on a poor servant . she ask I to take the key secretly out of the door , 
 and lend it to she at night for a few minute only . I be really afraid I 
 shall be lead into do it , if she go on persuade I much long . " 
 I commend Maria for feel scruple which prove she to be the good 
 of good girl , and promise to relieve she from all fear of future 
 temptation . this be easily do . Euneece keep the key of Philip 's door 
 in her pocket ; and I keep the key of the dining - room door in mine . 
 CHAPTER LXI . ATROCITY . 
 on the next day , a Tuesday in the week , an event take place which 
 Euneece and I view with distrust . early in the afternoon , a young man 
 call with a note for Helena . it be to be give to she immediately , 
 and no answer be require . 
 Maria have just close the house door , and be on her way upstairs with 
 the letter , when she be call back by another ring at the bell . our 
 visitor be the doctor . he speak to Maria in the hall : 
 " I think I see a note in your hand . be it give to you by the young man 
 who have just leave the house ? " 
 " yes , sir . 
 " if he be your sweetheart , my dear , I have nothing more to say . " 
 " good gracious , doctor , how you do talk ! I never see the young man 
 before in my life . " 
 " in that case , Maria , I will ask you to let I look at the address . Aha ! 
 Mischief ! " 
 the moment I hear that I throw open the dining - room door . curiosity be 
 not easily satisfied . when it hear , it want to see ; when it see , it 
 want to know . every lady will agree with I in this observation . 
 " pray come in , " I say . 
 " one minute , Miss Jillgall . my girl , when you give Miss Helena that 
 note , try to get a sly look at she when she open it , and come and tell 
 I what you have see . " he join I in the dining - room , and close 
 the door . " the other day , " he go on , " when I tell you what I have 
 discover in the chemist 's shop , I think I mention a young man who 
 be call to speak to a question of identity - an assistant who know 
 Miss Helena Gracedieu by sight . " 
 " yes , yes ! " 
 " that young man leave the note which Maria have just take upstairs . " 
 " who write it , doctor , and what do it say ? " 
 " question naturally ask , Miss Jillgall - and not easily answer . 
 where be Eunice ? her quick wit might help we . " 
 she have go out to buy some fruit and flower for Philip . 
 the doctor accept his disappointment resignedly . " let we try what 
 we can do without she , " he say . " that young man 's master have be in 
 consultation   you may remember why   with his lawyer , and Helena may 
 be threaten by an investigation before the magistrate . if this wild 
 guess of mine turn out to have hit the mark , the poisoner upstairs have 
 get a warning . " 
 I ask if the chemist have write the note . foolish enough of I when 
 I come to think of it . the chemist would scarcely act a friendly part 
 toward Helena , when she be answerable for the awkward position in which 
 he have place himself . perhaps the young man who have leave the warning 
 be also the writer of the warning . the doctor remind I that he 
 be all but a stranger to Helena . " we be not usually interested , " he 
 remark , " in a person whom we only know by sight . " 
 " remember that he be a young man , " I venture to say . this be a strong 
 hint , but the doctor fail to see it . he have evidently forget his 
 own youth . I make another attempt . 
 " and vile as Helena be , " I continue , " we can not deny that this disgrace 
 to her sex be a handsome young lady . " 
 he see it at last . " Woman 's wit ! " he cry . " you have hit it , Miss 
 Jillgall . the young fool be smite with she , and have give she a chance 
 of make her escape . " 
 " do you think she will take the chance ? " 
 " for all our sake , I pray God she may ! but I do not   feel sure about it . " 
 " why ? " 
 " recollect what you and Eunice have do . you have show your suspicion 
 of she without an attempt to conceal it . if you have put she in prison 
 you could not have more completely defeat her infernal design . do you 
 think she be a likely person to submit to that , without an effort to be 
 even with you ? " 
 just as he say those terrifying word , Maria come back to we . he ask 
 at once what have keep she so long upstairs . 
 the girl have evidently something to say , which have inflate she   if I 
 may use such an expression   with a sense of her own importance . 
 " please to let I tell it , sir , " she answer , " in my own way . Miss 
 Helena turn as pale as ash when she open the letter , and then she 
 take a turn in the room , and then she look at I with a smile - well , 
 miss , I can only say that I feel that smile in the small of my back . 
 I try to get to the door . she stop I . she say : ' where be Miss 
 Eunice ? ' I say : ' gone out . ' she say : ' be there anybody in the 
 drawing - room ? ' I say : ' no , miss . ' she say : ' tell Miss Jillgall I want 
 to speak to she , and say I be wait in the drawing - room . ' it be every 
 word of it true ! and , if a poor servant may give an opinion , I do not 
 like the look of it . " 
 the doctor dismiss Maria . " whatever it be , " he say to I , " you must 
 go and hear it . " 
 I be not a courageous woman ; I express myself as be willing to go 
 to she , if the doctor go with I . he say that be impossible ; she 
 would probably refuse to speak before any witness ; and certainly before 
 he . but he promise to look after Philip in my absence , and to wait 
 below if it really so happen that I want he . I need only re the 
 bell , and he would come to I the moment he hear it . such kindness as 
 this rouse my courage , I suppose . at any rate , I go upstairs . 
 she be stand by the fire - place , with her elbow on the chimney - piece , 
 and her head , rest on her hand . I stop just inside the door , 
 wait to hear what she have to say . in this position her side - face only 
 be present to I . it be a ghastly face . the eye that I could see 
 turn wickedly on I when I come in - then turn away again . otherwise , 
 she never move . I confess I tremble , but I do my good to disguise it . 
 she break out suddenly with what she have to say : " I will not   allow this 
 state of thing to go on any long . my horror of an exposure which will 
 disgrace the family have keep I silent , wrongly silent , so far . Philip 's 
 life be in danger . I be forget my duty to my affianced husband , if 
 I allow myself to be keep away from he any long . open those locked 
 door , and relieve I from the sight of you . open the door , I say , or 
 you will both of you - you the accomplice , she the wretch who direct 
 you - repent it to the end of your life . " 
 in my own mind , I ask myself if she have go mad . but I only answer : 
 " I do not   understand you . " 
 she say again : " you be Eunice 's accomplice . " 
 " Accomplice in what ? " I ask . 
 she turn her head slowly and face I . I shrink from look at she . 
 " all the circumstance prove it , " she go on . " I have supplant Eunice 
 in Philip 's affection . she be once engage to marry he ; I be engage 
 to marry he now . she be resolve that he shall never make I his wife . 
 he will die if I delay any long . he will die if I do not   crush she , 
 like the reptile she be . she come here - and what do she do ? keep he 
 prisoner under her own superintendence . who get his medicine ? she get 
 it . who cook his food ? she cook it . the door be lock . I might be 
 a witness of what go on ; and I be keep out . the servant who ought to 
 wait on he be keep out . she can do what she like with his medicine ; 
 she can do what she like with his food : she be infuriate with he for 
 desert she , and promise to marry I . give he back to my care ; or , 
 dreadful as it be to denounce my own sister , I shall claim protection 
 from the magistrate . " 
 I lose all fear of she : I step close up to the place at which she 
 be stand ; I cry out : " of what , in God 's name , do you accuse your 
 sister ? " 
 she answer : " I accuse she of poison Philip Dunboyne . " 
 I run out of the room ; I rush headlong down the stair . the doctor 
 hear I , and come run into the hall . I catch hold of he like a 
 madwoman . " Euneece ! " my breath be go ; I could only say : " Euneece ! " 
 he drag I into the dining - room . there be wine on the side - board , 
 which he have order medically for Philip . he force I to drink some of 
 it . it run through I like fire ; it help I to speak . " now tell I , " 
 he say , " what have she do to Eunice ? " 
 " she bring a horrible accusation against she , " I answer . 
 " what be the accusation ? " I tell he . 
 he look I through and through . " take care ! " he say . " no hysteric , 
 no exaggeration . you may lead to dreadful consequence if you be 
 not sure of yourself . if it be really true , say it again . " I say it 
 again - quietly this time . 
 his face startle I ; it be white with rage . he snatch his hat off 
 the hall table . 
 " what be you go to do ? " I ask . 
 " my duty . " he be out of the house before I could speak to he again . 
 Third Period   conclude . 
  TROUBLES and triumphs of the family , relate by the GOVERNOR . 
 CHAPTER LXII . the SENTENCE PRONOUNCED . 
 MARTYRS to gout know , by sad experience , that they suffer under one of 
 the most capricious of malady . an attack of this disease will shift , 
 in the most unaccountable manner , from one part of the body to another ; 
 or , it will release the victim when there be every reason to fear that 
 it be about to strengthen its hold on he ; or , have show the fairest 
 promise of submit to medical treatment , it will cruelly lay the 
 patient prostrate again in a state of relapse . adverse fortune , in my 
 case , subject I to this last and bad trial of endurance . two month 
 pass - month of pain aggravate by anxiety - before I be able to help 
 Eunice and Miss Jillgall personally with my sympathy and advice . 
 during this interval , I hear regularly from the friendly and faithful 
 Selina . 
 Terror and suspense , courageously endure day after day , seem to have 
 break down her resistance , poor soul , when Eunice 's good name and 
 Eunice 's tranquillity be threaten by the most infamous of false 
 accusation . from that time , Miss Jillgall 's method of express 
 herself betray a gradual deterioration . I shall avoid present at a 
 disadvantage a correspondent who have claim on my gratitude , if I give 
 the substance only of what she write - assist by the newspaper which 
 she send to I , while the legal proceeding be in progress . 
 honest indignation do sometimes counsel we wisely . when the doctor 
 leave Miss Jillgall , in anger and in haste , he have determine on take 
 the course from which , as a humane man and a faithful friend , he have 
 hitherto recoil . it be no time , now , to shrink from the prospect of 
 an exposure . the one hope of successfully encounter the vindictive 
 wickedness of Helena lie in the resolution to be beforehand with she , in 
 the appeal to the magistrate with which she have threaten Eunice and 
 Miss Jillgall . the doctor 's swear information state the whole terrible 
 case of the poisoning , range from his first suspicion and their 
 confirmation , to Helena 's atrocious attempt to accuse her innocent 
 sister of her own guilt . so firmly be the magistrate convince of the 
 serious nature of the case thus state , that they do not hesitate 
 to issue their warrant . among the witness whose attendance be 
 immediately secure , by the legal adviser to whom the doctor apply , 
 be the farmer and his wife . 
 Helena be arrest while she be dress to go out . her composure be 
 not for a moment disturb . " I be on my way , " she say coolly , " to make 
 a statement before the justice . the soon they hear what I have to say 
 the well . " 
 the attempt of this shameless wretch to " turn the table " on poor 
 Eunice - suggest , as I afterward discover , by the record of family 
 history which she have quote in her journal - be defeat with ease . the 
 farmer and his wife prove the date at which Eunice have leave her place 
 of residence under their roof . the doctor 's evidence follow . he 
 prove , by the production of his professional diary , that the discovery 
 of the attempt to poison his patient have take place before the day of 
 Eunice 's departure from the farm , and that the first improvement in 
 Mr. Philip Dunboyne 's state of health have show itself after that young 
 lady 's arrival to perform the duty of a nurse . to the wise precaution 
 which she have take - pervert by Helena to the purpose of a false 
 accusation - the doctor attribute the preservation of the young man 's 
 life . 
 have produce the bad possible impression on the mind of the 
 magistrate , Helena be remand . her legal adviser have predict 
 this result ; but the vindictive obstinacy of his client have set both 
 experience and remonstrance at defiance . 
 at the renew examination , the line of defense adopt by the 
 prisoner 's lawyer prove to be - mistaken identity . 
 it be assert that she have never enter the chemist 's shop ; also , 
 that the assistant have wrongly identify some other lady as Miss Helena 
 Gracedieu ; also , that there be not an atom of evidence to connect she 
 with the stealing of the doctor 's prescription - paper and the forgery of 
 his writing . other assertion to the same purpose follow , on which 
 it be needless to dwell . the case for the prosecution be , happily , in 
 competent hand . with the exception of one witness , cross - examination 
 afford no material help to the evidence for the defense . 
 the chemist swear positively to the personal appearance of Helena , 
 as be the personal appearance of the lady who have present the 
 prescription . his assistant , press on the question of identity , break 
 down under cross - examination - purposely , as it be whisper , serve 
 the interest of the prisoner . but the victory , so far gain by 
 the defense , be successfully contest by the statement of the next 
 witness , a respectable tradesman in the town . he have see the newspaper 
 report of the first examination , and have volunteer to present himself 
 as a witness . a member of Mr. Gracedieu 's congregation , his pew in the 
 chapel be so situated as to give he a view of the minister 's daughter 
 occupy their pew . he have see the prisoner on every Sunday , for year 
 past ; and he swear that he be pass the door of the chemist 's shop , 
 at the moment when she step out into the street , have a bottle 
 cover with the customary white paper in her hand . the doctor and 
 his servant be the next witness call . they be severely 
 cross - examined . some of their statement - question technically with 
 success - receive unexpected and powerful support , due to the discovery 
 and production of the prisoner 's diary . the entry , guardedly as some 
 of they be write , reveal her motive for attempt to poison 
 Philip Dunboyne ; prove that she have purposely call on the doctor when 
 she know that he would be out , that she have enter the consulting - room , 
 and examine the medical book , have find   to use her own write word 
 " a volume that interest she , " and have use the prescription - paper for 
 the purpose of make note . the note themselves be not to be 
 find ; they have doubtless be destroy . enough , and more than enough , 
 remain to make the case for the prosecution complete . the magistrate 
 commit Helena Gracedieu for trial at the next assize . 
 I arrive in the town , as well as I can remember , about a week after the 
 trial have take place . 
 find guilty , the prisoner have be recommend to mercy by the 
 jury - partly in consideration of her youth ; partly as an expression 
 of sympathy and respect for her unhappy father . the judge   a father 
 himself   pass a lenient sentence . she be condemn to imprisonment 
 for two year . the careful matron of the jail have provide herself with 
 a bottle of smell - salt , in the fear that there might be need for 
 it when Helena hear her sentence pronounce . not the slight sign 
 of agitation appear in her face or her manner . she lie to the last ; 
 assert her innocence in a firm voice , and return from the dock to 
 the prison without require assistance from anybody . 
 relate these particular to I , in a state of ungovernable excitement , 
 good Miss Jillgall end with a little confession of her own , which 
 operate as a relief to my overburdened mind after what I have just 
 hear . 
 " I would not   own it , " she say , " to anybody but a dear friend . one thing , 
 in the dreadful disgrace that have fall on we , I be quite at a loss 
 to account for . think of Mr. Gracedieu 's daughter be one of those 
 criminal creature on whom it be once your terrible duty to turn the 
 key ! why do not   she commit suicide ? " 
 " my dear lady , no thoroughly wicked creature ever yet commit suicide . 
 self - destruction , when it be not an act of madness , imply some 
 acuteness of feeling - sensibility to remorse or to shame , or perhaps a 
 distorted idea of make atonement . there be no such thing as remorse or 
 shame , or hope of make atonement , in Helena 's nature . " 
 " but when she come out of prison , what will she do ? " 
 " do not   alarm yourself , my good friend . she will do very well . " 
 " oh , hush ! hush ! poetical justice , Mr. Governor ! " 
 " poetical fiddlestick , Miss Jillgall . " 
 CHAPTER LXIII . the obstacle REMOVED . 
 when the subject of the trial be happily dismiss , my first inquiry 
 relate to Eunice . the reply be make with an ominous accompaniment of 
 sigh and sad look . Eunice have go back to her duty as governess at 
 the farm . hear this , I ask naturally what have become of Philip . 
 melancholy news , again , be the news that I now hear . 
 Mr. Dunboyne the elder have die suddenly , at his house in Ireland , while 
 Philip be on his way home . when the funeral ceremony have come to an 
 end , the will be read . it have be make only a few day before the 
 testator 's death ; and the clause which leave all his property to his son 
 be precede by expression of paternal affection , at a time when Philip 
 be in sore need of consolation . after allude to a letter , receive 
 from his son , the old man add : " I always love he , without care to 
 confess it ; I det scene of sentiment , kissing , embracing , tear , 
 and that sort of thing . but Philip have yield to my wish , and have 
 break off a marriage which would have make he , as well as I , wretche 
 for life . after this , I may speak my mind from my grave , and may tell my 
 boy that I love he . if the wish be likely to be of any use , I will add 
  on the chance   - God bless he . " 
 " do Philip submit to separation from Eunice ? " I ask . " do he stay 
 in Ireland ? " 
 " not he , poor fellow ! he will be here to - morrow or next day . when I last 
 write , " Miss Jillgall continue , " I tell he I hop to see you again 
 soon . if you can not   help we   I mean with Eunice   that unlucky young man 
 will do some desperate thing . he will join those madman at large who 
 disturb poor savage in Africa , or go nowhere to find nothing in the 
 Arctic region . 
 " whatever I can do , Miss Jillgall , shall be gladly do . be it really 
 possible that Eunice refuse to marry he , after have save his life ? " 
 " a little patience , please , Mr. Governor ; let Philip tell his own 
 story . if I try to do it , I shall only cry - and we have have tear enough 
 lately , in this house . " 
 further consultation be thus defer , I go upstairs to the 
 Minister 's room . 
 he be sit by the window , in his favorite armchair , absorb in 
 knitting ! the person who attend on he , a good - natured , patient 
 fellow , have be a sailor in his young day , and have teach Mr. 
 Gracedieu how to use the needle . " you see it amuse he , " the man say , 
 kindly . " do not   notice his mistake , he think there be not   such another 
 in the world for knitting as himself . you can see , sir , how he stick to 
 it . " he be so absorb over his employment that I have to speak to he 
 twice , before I could induce he to look at I . the utter ruin of his 
 intellect do not appear to have exercise any disastrous influence over 
 his bodily health . on the contrary , he have grow fatter since I have last 
 see he ; his complexion have lose the pallor that I remember - there 
 be color in his cheek . 
 " do not   you remember your old friend ? " I say . he smile , and nod , and 
 repeat the word : 
 " yes , yes , my old friend . " it be only too plain that he have not the 
 least recollection of I . " his memory be go , " the man say . " when 
 he put away his knitting , at night , I have to find it for he in the 
 morning . but , there ! he be happy - enjoy his victual , like sit out 
 in the garden and watch the bird . there be be a deal of trouble in 
 the family , sir ; and it have all pass over he like a wet sponge over 
 a slate . " the old sailor be right . if that wreck of a man have be 
 capable of feeling and thinking , his daughter 's disgrace would have 
 break his heart . in a world of sin and sorrow , be peaceable imbecility 
 always to be pity ? I have know man who would have answer , without 
 hesitation : " it be to be envy . " and where   some person might say   be 
 the poor Minister 's reward for the act of mercy which have save Eunice 
 in her infancy ? where it ought to be ! a man who worthily perform a good 
 action find his reward in the action itself . 
 at breakfast , on the next day , the talk touch on those passage in 
 Helena 's diary , which have be produce in court as evidence against 
 she . 
 I express a wish to see what revelation of a deprave nature the 
 entry in the diary might present ; and my curiosity be gratify . at 
 a fitter time , I may find an opportunity of allude to the impression 
 produce on I by the diary . in the meanwhile , the event of Philip 's 
 return claim notice in the first place . 
 the poor fellow be so glad to see I that he shake hand as heartily as 
 if we have know each other from the time when he be a boy . 
 " do you remember how kindly you speak to I when I call on you in 
 London ? " he ask . " if I have repeat those word once - but perhaps you 
 do not   remember they ? you say : ' if I be as young as you be , I should 
 not despair . ' well ! I have say that to myself over and over again , for 
 a hundred time at least . Eunice will listen to you , sir , when she will 
 listen to nobody else . this be the first happy moment I have have for 
 week past . " 
 I suppose I must have look glad to hear that . anyway , Philip shake 
 hand with I again . 
 Miss Jillgall be present . the gentle - hearted old maid be so touch 
 by our meeting that she abandon herself to the genial impulse of 
 the moment , and give Philip a kiss . the outraged claim of propriety 
 instantly seize on she . she blush as if the long - lose day of her 
 girlhood have be find again , and run out of the room . 
 " now , Mr. Philip , " I say , " I have be wait , at Miss Jillgall 's 
 suggestion , to get my information from you . there be something wrong 
 between Eunice and yourself . what be it ? and who be to blame ? " 
 " her vile sister be to blame , " he answer . " that reptile be determine 
 to ste we . and she have do it ! " he cry , start to his foot , and 
 walk up and down the room , urge into action by his own unendurable 
 sense of wrong . " I say , she have do it , after Eunice have save I - do 
 it , when Eunice be ready to be my wife . " 
 " how have she do it ? " 
 between grief and indignation his reply be involve in a confusion of 
 vehemently - speak word , which I shall not attempt to reproduce . Eunice 
 have remind he that her sister have be publicly convict of an 
 infamous crime , and publicly punish for it by imprisonment . " if I 
 consent to marry you , " she say , " I stain you with my disgrace ; that 
 shall never be . " with this resolution , she have leave he . " I have try 
 to convince she , " Philip say , " that she will not be associate with her 
 sister 's disgrace when she bear my name ; I have promise to take she 
 far away from England , among people who have never even hear of her 
 sister . Miss Jillgall have use her influence to help I . all in vain ! 
 there be no hope for we but in you . I be not think selfishly only of 
 myself . she try to conceal it - but , oh , she be break - hearted ! ask the 
 farmer 's wife , if you do not   believe I . Judge for yourself , sir . go - for 
 God 's sake , go to the farm . " 
 I make he sit down and compose himself . 
 " you may depend on my go to the farm , " I answer . " I shall write to 
 Eunice to - day , and follow my letter to - morrow . " he try to thank I ; 
 but I would not allow it . " before I consent to accept the expression of 
 your gratitude , " I say , " I must know a little more of you than I know 
 now . this be only the second occasion on which we have meet . let we look 
 back a little , Mr. Philip Dunboyne . you be Eunice 's affiance husband ; 
 and you break faith with she . that be a rascally action . how do you 
 defend it ? " 
 his head sink . " I be ashamed to defend it , " he answer . 
 I press he without mercy . " you own yourself , " I say , " that it be a 
 rascally action ? " 
 " use strong language against I , even than that , sir - I deserve it . " 
 " in plain word , " I go on , " you can find no excuse for your conduct ? " 
 " in the past time , " he say , " I might have find excuse . " 
 " but you can not   find they now ? " 
 " I must not even look for they now . " 
 " why not ? " 
 " I owe it to Eunice to leave my conduct at its bad ; with nothing 
 say - by I - to defend it . " 
 " what have Eunice do to have such a claim on you as that ? " 
 " Eunice have forgive I . " 
 it be gratefully and delicately say . ought I to have allow this 
 circumstance to weigh with I ? I ask , in return , have I never commit 
 any fault ? as a fellow - mortal and fellow - sinner , have I any right to 
 harden my heart against an expression of penitence which I feel to be 
 sincere in its motive ? 
 but I be bind to think of Eunice . I do think of she , before I 
 venture to accept the position - the critical position , as I shall 
 presently show - of Philip 's friend . 
 after more than an hour of question put without reserve , and of answer 
 give without prevarication , I have travel over the whole ground lay 
 out by the narrative which appear in these page , and have arrive at my 
 conclusion - so far as Philip Dunboyne be concern . 
 I find he to be a man with nothing absolutely wicked in he - but with 
 a nature so perilously weak , in many respect , that it might drift into 
 wickedness unless a strong nature be at hand to bold it back . marry 
 to a wife without force of character , the probability would point to 
 he as likely to yield to example which might make he a bad husband . 
 marry to a wife with a will of her own , and with true love to sustain 
 her - a wife who would know when to take the command and how to take the 
 command - a wife who , find he tempt to commit action unworthy 
 of his well self , would be far - sight enough to perceive that her 
 husband 's sense of honor might sometimes lose its balance , without be 
 on that account hopelessly deprave - then , and , in these case only , the 
 probability would point to Philip as a man likely to be the well and 
 the happy for his situation , when the bond of wedlock have get he . 
 but the serious question be not answer yet . 
 could I feel justified in place Eunice in the position toward Philip 
 which I have just endeavor to describe ? I dare not allow my mind to 
 dwell on the generosity which have so nobly pardon he , or on the force 
 of character which have bravely endure the bitter disappointment , the 
 cruel humiliation . the one consideration which I be bind to face , 
 be the sacred consideration of her happiness in her life to come . 
 leave Philip , with a few word of sympathy which might help he to 
 bear his suspense , I go to my room to think . 
 the time pass - and I could arrive at no positive conclusion . either 
 way - with or without Philip - the contemplation of Eunice 's future 
 harass I with doubt . even if I have conquer my own indecision , and 
 have make up my mind to sanction the union of the two young people , the 
 difficulty that now beset I would not have be disperse . know 
 what I alone know , I could certainly remove Eunice 's one objection to 
 the marriage . in other word , I have only to relate what have happen on 
 the day when the Chaplain bring the Minister to the prison , and the 
 obstacle of their union would be remove . but , without consider 
 Philip , it be simply out of the question to do this , in mercy to eunice 
 herself . what be Helena 's disgrace , compare with the infamy which 
 stain the name of the poor girl 's mother ! the other alternative of 
 tell her part of the truth only be before I , if I could persuade 
 myself to adopt it . I fail to persuade myself ; my morbid anxiety for 
 her welfare make I hesitate again . human patience could endure no 
 more . rashness prevail and prudence yield - I leave my decision to be 
 influence by the come interview with Eunice . 
 the next day I drive to the farm . Philip 's entreaty persuade I 
 to let he be my companion , on one condition - that he wait in the 
 carriage while I go into the house . 
 I have carefully arrange my idea , and have decide on proceed with 
 the great caution , before I venture on say the all - important 
 word which , once speak , be not to be recall . the bad of those 
 anxiety , under which the delicate health of Mr. Gracedieu have break 
 down , be my anxiety now . could I reconcile it to my conscience to 
 permit a man , innocent of all knowledge of the truth , to marry the 
 daughter of a condemn murderess , without honestly tell he what 
 he be about to do ? do I deserve to be pity ? do I deserve to be 
 blame ? - my mind be still undecided when I enter the house . 
 she run to meet I as if she have be my daughter ; she kiss I as if 
 she have be my daughter ; she fondly look up at I as if she have be 
 my daughter . at the sight of that sweet young face , so sorrowful , and 
 so patiently endure sorrow , all my doubt and hesitation , everything 
 artificial about I with which I have enter the room , vanish in an 
 instant . 
 after she have thank I for come to see she , I see her tremble a 
 little . the uppermost interest in her heart be force its way outward 
 to expression , try as she might to keep it back . " have you see Philip ? " 
 she ask . the tone in which she put that question decide I - I be 
 resolve to let she marry he . Impulse ! yes , impulse , assert itself 
 inexcusably in a man at the end of his life . I ought to have know 
 well than to have give way . very likely . but be I the only mortal who 
 ought to have know well - and do not ? 
 when Eunice ask if I have see Philip , I own that he be outside in 
 the carriage . before she could reproach I , I go on with what I have 
 to say : " my child , I know what a sacrifice you have make ; and I should 
 honor your scruple , if you have any reason for feel they . " 
 " any reason for feel they ? " she turn pale as she repeat the 
 word . 
 an idea come to I . I ring for the servant , and send she to the carriage 
 to tell Philip to come in . " my dear , I be not put you to any unfair 
 trial , " I assure she ; " I be go to prove that I love you as truly as 
 if you be my own child . " 
 when they be both present , I resolve that they should not suffer 
 a moment of needless suspense . stand between they , I take Eunice 's 
 hand , and lay my other hand on Philip 's shoulder , and speak out 
 plainly . 
 " I be here to make you both happy , " I say . " I can remove the only 
 obstacle to your marriage , and I mean to do it . but I must insist on 
 one condition . give I your promise , Philip , that you will ask for no 
 explanation , and that you will be satisfied with the one true statement 
 which be all that I can offer to you . " 
 he give I his promise , without an instant 's hesitation . 
 " Philip grant what I ask , " I say to Eunice . " do you grant it , too ? " 
 her hand turn cold in mine ; but she speak firmly when she say : " yes . " 
 I give she into Philip 's care . it be his privilege to console and 
 support she . it be my duty to say the decisive word : 
 " rouse your courage , dear Eunice ; you be no more affect by Helena 's 
 disgrace than I be . you be not her sister . her father be not your 
 father ; her mother be not your mother . I be present , in the time of 
 your infancy , when Mr. Gracedieu 's fatherly kindness receive you as his 
 adopt child . this , I declare to you both , on my word of honor , be the 
 truth . " 
 how she bear it I be not able to say . my foolish old eye be fill 
 with tear . I could just see plainly enough to find my way to the door , 
 and leave they together . 
 in my reckless state of mind , I never ask myself if Time would be my 
 accomplice , and keep the part of the secret which I have not reveal - or 
 be my enemy , and betray I . the chance , either way , be perhaps equal . 
 the deed be do . 
 CHAPTER LXIV . the truth TRIUMPHANT . 
 the marriage be defer , at Eunice 's request , as an expression of 
 respect to the memory of Philip 's father . 
 when the time of delay have pass , it be arrange that the wedding 
 ceremony should be hold - after due publication of Banns - at the parish 
 church of the London suburb in which my house be situate . Miss 
 Jillgall be bridesmaid , and I give away the bride . before we set out 
 for the church , Eunice ask leave to speak with I for a moment in 
 private . 
 " do not   think , " she say , " that I be forget my promise to be content 
 with what you have tell I about myself . I be not so ungrateful as that . 
 but I do want , before I consent to be Philip 's wife , to feel sure that I 
 be not quite unworthy of he . be it because I be of mean birth that you 
 tell I I be Mr. Gracedieu 's adopt child - and tell I no more ? " 
 I could honestly satisfy she , so far . " certainly not ! " I say . 
 she put her arm round my neck . " do you say that , " she ask , " to make 
 my mind easy ? or do you say it on your word of honor ? " 
 " on my word of honor . " 
 we arrive at the church . let Miss Jillgall describe the marriage , in 
 her own inimitable way . 
 " no wedding breakfast , when you do not   want to eat it . no wedding 
 speech , when nobody want to make they , and nobody want to hear 
 they . and no false sentiment , shed tear and redden nose , on the 
 happy day in the whole year . a model marriage ! I could desire nothing 
 well , if I have any prospect of be a bride myself . " 
 they go away for their honeymoon to a quiet place by the seaside , not 
 very far from the town in which Eunice have pass some of the happy 
 and the wretched day in her life . she persist in think it 
 possible that Mr. Gracedieu might recover the use of his faculty , 
 at the last , and might wish to see she on his death - bed . " his adopt 
 daughter , " she gently remind I , " be his only daughter now . " the 
 doctor shake his head when I tell he what Eunice have say to I - and , 
 the sad truth must be tell , the doctor be right . 
 Miss Jillgall return , on the wedding - day , to take care of the good man 
 who have befriend she in her hour of need . 
 before the end of the week , I hear from she , and be disagreeably 
 remind of an incident which we have both forget , absorb as we be 
 in other and great interest , at the time . 
 Mrs. Tenbruggen have again appear on the scene ! she have write to Miss 
 Jillgall , from Paris , to say that she have hear of old Mr. Dunboyne 's 
 death , and that she wish to have the letter return , which she have 
 leave for delivery to Philip 's father on the day when Philip and Eunice 
 be marry . I have my own suspicion of what that letter might contain ; 
 and I regret that Miss Jillgall have send it back without first 
 wait to consult I . my misgiving , thus excited , be increase 
 by more news of no very welcome kind . Mrs. Tenbruggen have decide on 
 return to her professional pursuit in England . Massage , now the 
 fashion everywhere , have put money into her pocket among the foreigner ; 
 and her husband , find that she persist in keep out of his reach , 
 have consent to a compromise . he be ready to submit to a judicial 
 separation ; in consideration of a little income which his wife have 
 consent to settle on he , under the advice of her lawyer . 
 some day later , I receive a delightful letter from Philip and Eunice ; 
 remind I that I have engage to pay they a visit at the seaside . my 
 room be ready for I , and I be leave to choose my own day . I have 
 just begin to write my reply , gladly accept the invitation , when 
 an ominous circumstance occur . my servant announce " a lady " ; and I 
 find myself face to face with - Mrs. Tenbruggen ! 
 she be as cheerful as ever , and as eminently agreeable as ever . 
 " I have hear it all from Selina , " she say . " Philip 's marriage 
 to Eunice   I shall go and congratulate they , of course , and the 
 catastrophe   how dramatic !   of Helena Gracedieu . I warn . Selina that 
 Miss Helena would end badly . to tell the truth , she frighten I . I 
 do not   deny that I be a mischievous woman when I find myself affront , 
 quite capable of take my revenge in my own small spiteful way . but 
 poison and murder - ah , the frightful subject ! let we drop it , and talk 
 of something that do not   make my hair   it be really my own hair   stand 
 on end . Has Selina tell you that I have get rid of my charming husband , 
 on easy pecuniary term ? oh , you know that ? very well . I will tell you 
 something that you do not   know . Mr. Governor , I have find you out . " 
 " may I venture to ask how ? " 
 " when I guess which be which of those two girl , " she answer , " and 
 guess wrong , you deliberately encourage the mistake . very clever , but 
 you overdo it . from that moment , though I keep it to myself , I begin 
 to fear I might be wrong . do you remember Low Lanes , my dear sir ? a 
 charming old church . I have have another consultation with my lawyer . 
 his question lead I into mention how it happen that I hear of Low 
 lane . after look again at his memorandum of the birth advertise in 
 the newspaper without name the place - he propose try the church 
 register at Low Lanes . need I tell you the result ? I know , as well 
 as you do , that Philip have marry the adopt child . he have have a 
 mother - in - law who be hang , and , what be more , he have the honor , 
 through his late father , of be otherwise connect with the murderess 
 by marriage - as his aunt ! " 
 Bewilderment and dismay deprive I of my presence of mind . " how do you 
 discover that ? " I be foolish enough to ask . 
 " do you remember when I bring the baby to the prison ? " she say . " the 
 father - as I mention at the time - have be a dear and value friend of 
 mine . no person could be well qualified to tell I who have marry his 
 wife 's sister . if that lady have be live , I should never have be 
 trouble with the charge of the child . any more question ? " 
 " only one . be Philip to hear of this ? " 
 " oh , for shame ! I do not   deny that Philip insult I grossly , in one 
 way ; and that Philip 's late father insult I grossly , in another way . 
 but Mamma Tenbruggen be a Christian . she return good for evil , and 
 would not   for the world disturb the connubial felicity of Mr. and Mrs. 
 Philip Dunboyne . " 
 the moment the woman be out of my house , I send a telegram to Philip to 
 say that he might expect to see I that night . I catch the last train 
 in the evening ; and I sit down to supper with those two harmless young 
 creature , know I must prepare the husband for what threaten they , 
 and weakly defer it , when I find myself in their presence , until 
 the next day . Eunice be , in some degree , answerable for this hesitation 
 on my part . no one could look at her husband , and fail to see that he 
 be a supremely happy man . but I detect sign of care in the wife 's 
 face . 
 before breakfast the next morning I be out on the beach , try to 
 decide how the inevitable disclosure might be make . Eunice join I . 
 now , when we be alone , I ask if she be really and completely happy . 
 quietly and sadly she answer : " not yet . " 
 I hardly know what to say . my face must have express disappointment 
 and surprise . 
 " I shall never be quite happy , " she resume , " till I know what it be 
 that you keep from I on that memorable day . I do not   like have a 
 secret from my husband - though it be not my secret . " 
 " remember your promise , " I say 
 " I do not   forget it , " she answer . " I can only wish that my promise 
 would keep back the thought that come to I in spite of myself . " 
 " what thought ? " 
 " there be something , as I fear , in the story of my parent which you be 
 afraid to confide to I . why do Mr. Gracedieu allow I to believe and 
 leave everybody to believe , that I be his own child ? " 
 " my dear , I relieve your mind of those doubt on the morning of your 
 marriage . " 
 " no . I be only think of myself at that time . my mother - the doubt of 
  she be the doubt that torment I now . " 
 " what do you mean ? " 
 she put her arm in mine , and hold by it with both hand . 
 " the mock - mother ! " she whisper . " do you remember that dreadful Vision , 
 that horrid whispering temptation in the dead of night ? be it a 
 mock - mother ? oh , pity I ! I do not   know who my mother be . one horrid 
 think about she be a burden on my mind . if she be a good woman , you 
 who love I would surely have make I happy by speak of she ? " 
 those word decide I at last . could she suffer more than she have 
 suffer already , if I trust she with the truth ? I run the risk . there 
 be a time of silence that fill I with terror . the interval pass . 
 she take my hand , and put it to her heart . " do it beat as if I be 
 frightened ? " she ask . 
 no ! it be beat calmly . 
 " do it relieve your anxiety ? " 
 it tell I that I have not surprise she . that unforgotten Vision of the 
 night have prepare she for the bad , after the time when I have tell she 
 that she be an adopt child . " I know , " I say , " that those whisper 
 temptation overpower you again , when you and Helena meet on the 
 stair , and you forbid she to enter Philip 's room . and I know that love 
 have conquer once more , when you be next see sit by Philip 's 
 bedside . tell I - have you any misgiving now ? be there fear in your 
 heart of the return of that tempting spirit in you , in the time to 
 come ? " 
 " not while Philip live ! " 
 there , where her love be - there her safety be . and she know it ! she 
 suddenly leave I . I ask where she be go . 
 " to tell Philip , " be the reply . 
 she be wait for I at the door , when I follow she to the house . 
 " be it do ? " I say . 
 " it be do , " she answer . 
 " what do he say ? " 
 " he say : ' my darling , if I could be fonder of you than ever , I should 
 be fonder of you now . ' " 
 I have be blame for be too ready to confide to Philip the precious 
 trust of Eunice 's happiness . if that reply do not justify I , where be 
 justification to be find ? 
 POSTSCRIPT . 
 later in the day , Mrs. Tenbruggen arrive to offer her congratulation . 
 she ask for a few minute with Philip alone . as a cat elaborate 
 her preparation for kill a mouse , so the human cat elaborate her 
 preparation for kill Philip 's happiness , he remain uninjured 
 by her tooth and her claw . " somebody , " she say , " have tell you of it 
 already ? " and Philip answer : " yes ; my wife . " 
 for some month long , Mr. Gracedieu linger . one morning , he say to 
 Eunice : " I want to teach you to knit . sit by I , and see I do it . " 
 his hand fall softly on his lap ; his head sink little by little on 
 her shoulder . she could just hear he whisper : " how pleasant it be to 
 sleep ! " never be Death 's dreadful work more gently do . 
 our married pair live now on the paternal estate in Ireland ; and Miss 
 Jillgall reign queen of domestic affair . I be still strong enough to 
 pass my autumn holiday in that pleasant house . 
 at time , my memory revert to Helena Gracedieu , and to what I 
 discover when I have see her diary . 
 how little I know of that terrible creature when I first meet with she , 
 and fancy that she have inherit her mother 's character ! it be weak 
 indeed to compare the mean vice of Mrs. Gracedieu with the diabolical 
 depravity of her daughter . here the doctrine of hereditary transmission 
 of moral quality must own that it have overlook the fertility   for 
 growth of good and for growth of evil equally   which be inherent in 
 human nature . there be virtue that exalt we , and vice that degrade 
 us , whose mysterious origin be , not in our parent , but in ourselves . 
 when I think of Helena , I ask myself , where be the trace which reveal 
 that the first murder in the world be the product of inherit crime ? 
 the criminal leave the prison , on the expiration of her sentence , so 
 secretly that it be impossible to trace she . some month later , Miss 
 Jillgall receive an illustrated newspaper publish in the United 
 States . she show I one of the portrait in it . 
 " do you recognize the illustrious original ? " she ask , with indignant 
 emphasis on the last two word . I recognize Helena . " now read her new 
 title , " Miss Jillgall continue . 
 I read : " the Reverend Miss Gracedieu . " 
 the biographical notice follow . here be an extract : " this eminent 
 lady , the victim of a shocking miscarriage of justice in England , be 
 now the distinguished leader of a new community in the United States . we 
 hail in she the great intellect which assert the superiority of woman 
 over man . in the first French Revolution , the attempt make by man 
 to find a rational religion meet with only temporary success . it be 
 reserve for the mighty spirit of woman to lay the foundation more 
 firmly , and to dedicate one of the noble edifice in this city to the 
 Worship of pure Reason . reader who wish for further information will 
 do well to provide themselves with the Reverend Miss Gracedieu 's 
 Orations - the tenth edition of which be advertise in our column . " 
 " I once ask you , " Miss Jillgall remind I , " what Helena would do 
 when she come out of prison , and you say she would do very well . oh , 
 Mr. Governor , Solomon be nothing to you ! " 
