basil 

 by Wilkie Collins 




 letter of DEDICATION . 

 to CHARLES JAMES WARD , ESQ . 

 it have long be one of my pleasantest anticipation to look forward to 
 the time when I might offer to you , my old and dear friend , some such 
 acknowledgment of the value I place on your affection for I , and of my 
 grateful sense of the many act of kindness by which that affection 
 have be prove , as I now gladly offer in this place . in dedicate the 
 present work to you , I fulfil therefore a purpose which , for some time 
 past , I have sincerely desire to achieve ; and , more than that , I gain 
 for myself the satisfaction of know that there be one page , at least , 
 of my book , on which I shall always look with unalloye pleasure - the 
 page that bear your name . 

 I have found the main event out of which this story spring , on a 
 fact within my own knowledge . in afterwards shape the course of the 
 narrative thus suggest , I have guide it , as often as I could , where 
 I know by my own experience , or by experience relate to I by other , 
 that it would touch on something real and true in its progress . my idea 
 be , that the more of the actual I could garner up as a text to speak 
 from , the more certain I might feel of the genuineness and value of the 
 Ideal which be sure to spring out of it . Fancy and Imagination , Grace 
 and Beauty , all those quality which be to the work of art what scent 
 and colour be to the flower , can only grow towards heaven by take 
 root in earth . be not the noble poetry of prose fiction the poetry of 
 every - day truth ? 

 direct my character and my story , then , towards the light of reality 
 wherever I could find it , I have not hesitate to violate some of 
 the conventionality of sentimental fiction . for instance , the first 
 love - meeting of two of the personage in this book , occur   where the 
 real love - meeting from which it be draw , occur   in the very last 
 place and under the very last circumstance which the artifice of 
 sentimental writing would sanction . will my lover excite ridicule 
 instead of interest , because I have truly represent they as see 
 each other where hundred of other lover have first see each other , 
 as hundred of people will readily admit when they read the passage to 
 which I refer ? I be sanguine enough to think not . 

 so again , in certain part of this book where I have attempt to excite 
 the suspense or pity of the reader , I have admit as perfectly fit 
 accessory to the scene the most ordinary street - sound that could be 
 hear , and the most ordinary street - event that could occur , at the time 
 and in the place represent - believe that by add to truth , they 
 be add to tragedy - add by all the force of fair contrast - add 
 as no artifice of mere writing possibly could add , let they be ever so 
 cunningly introduce by ever so crafty a hand . 

 allow I to dwell a moment long on the story which these page 
 contain . 

 believe that the Novel and the play be twin - sister in the family 
 of Fiction ; that the one be a drama narrate , as the other be a drama 
 act ; and that all the strong and deep emotion which the play - writer 
 be privileged to excite , the novel - writer be privileged to excite also , 
 I have not think it either politic or necessary , while adhere to 
 reality , to adhere to every - day reality only . in other word , I have 
 not stoop so low as to assure myself of the reader 's belief in the 
 probability of my story , by never once call on he for the exercise 
 of his faith . those extraordinary accident and event which happen to 
 few man , seem to I to be as legitimate material for fiction to 
 work with - when there be a good object in use they - as the ordinary 
 accident and event which may , and do , happen to we all . by appeal 
 to genuine source of interest within the reader 's own experience , I 
 could certainly gain his attention to begin with ; but it would be only 
 by appeal to other source   as genuine in their way   beyond his 
 own experience , that I could hope to fix his interest and excite his 
 suspense , to occupy his deep feeling , or to stir his nobler thought . 

 in write thus - briefly and very generally -   for I must not delay 
 you too long from the story , I can but repeat , though I hope almost 
 unnecessarily , that I be now only speak of what I have try to do . 
 between the purpose hint at here , and the execution of that purpose 
 contain in the succeed page , lie the broad line of separation 
 which distinguish between the will and the deed . how far I may fall 
 short of another man 's standard , remain to be discover . how far I 
 have fall short of my own , I know painfully well . 

 one word more on the manner in which the purpose of the follow page 
 be work out - and I have do . 

 nobody who admit that the business of fiction be to exhibit human life , 
 can deny that scene of misery and crime must of necessity , while human 
 nature remain what it be , form part of that exhibition . nobody can 
 assert that such scene be unproductive of useful result , when they 
 be turn to a plainly and purely moral purpose . if I be ask why I 
 have write certain scene in this book , my answer be to be find in 
 the universally - accept truth which the precede word express . I have 
 a right to appeal to that truth ; for I guide myself by it throughout . 
 in derive the lesson which the follow page contain , from those 
 example of error and crime which would most strikingly and naturally 
 teach it , I determine to do justice to the honesty of my object by 
 speak out . in draw the two character , whose action bring about 
 the dark scene of my story , I do not forget that it be my duty , 
 while strive to portray they naturally , to put they to a good moral 
 use ; and at some sacrifice , in certain place , of dramatic effect 
  though I trust with no sacrifice of truth to Nature , I have show the 
 conduct of the vile , as always , in a great or less degree , associate 
 with something that be selfish , contemptible , or cruel in motive . 
 whether any of my well character may succeed in endear themselves 
 to the reader , I know not : but this I do certainly know : - that I shall 
 in no instance cheat he out of his sympathy in favour of the bad . 

 to those person who dissent from the broad principle here advert to ; 
 who deny that it be the novelist 's vocation to do more than merely amuse 
 they ; who shrink from all honest and serious reference , in book , 
 to subject which they think of in private and talk of in public 
 everywhere ; who see covert implication where nothing be imply , and 
 improper allusion where nothing improper be allude to ; whose innocence 
 be in the word , and not in the thought ; whose morality stop at the 
 tongue , and never get on to the heart - to those person , I should 
 consider it loss of time , and bad , to offer any further explanation of 
 my motif , than the sufficient explanation which I have give already . 
 I do not address myself to they in this book , and shall never think of 
 address myself to they in any other . 

 PART I. 


 I. 

 what be I now about to write ? 

 the history of little more than the event of one year , out of the 
 twenty - four year of my life . 

 why do I undertake such an employment as this ? 

 perhaps , because I think that my narrative may do good ; because I hope 
 that , one day , it may be put to some warning use . I be now about to 
 relate the story of an error , innocent in its beginning , guilty in its 
 progress , fatal in its result ; and I would fain hope that my plain 
 and true record will show that this error be not commit altogether 
 without excuse . when these page be find after my death , they will 
 perhaps be calmly read and gently judge , as relic solemnize by the 
 atone shadow of the grave . then , the hard sentence against I may 
 be repent of ; the child of the next generation of our house may 
 be teach to speak charitably of my memory , and may often , of their own 
 accord , think of I kindly in the thoughtful watch of the night . 

 prompt by these motif , and by other which I feel , but can not 
 analyse , I now begin my self - impose occupation . hide amid the far 
 hill of the far West of England , surround only by the few simple 
 inhabitant of a fishing hamlet on the cornish coast , there be little 
 fear that my attention will be distract from my task ; and as 
 little chance that any indolence on my part will delay its speedy 
 accomplishment . I live under a threat of impend hostility , which may 
 descend and overwhelm I , I know not how soon , or in what manner . an 
 enemy , determined and deadly , patient alike to wait day or year for 
 his opportunity , be ever lurk after I in the dark . in enter on my 
 new employment , I can not say of my time , that it may be mine for another 
 hour ; of my life , that it may last till evening . 

 thus it be as no leisure work that I begin my narrative - and begin it , 
 too , on my birthday ! on this day I complete my twenty - fourth year ; the 
 first new year of my life which have not be greet by a single kind 
 word , or a single love wish . but one look of welcome can still find I 
 in my solitude - the lovely morning look of nature , as I now see it from 
 the casement of my room . bright and bright shin out the lusty sun 
 from bank of purple , rainy cloud ; fisherman be spread their net 
 to dry on the low declivity of the rock ; child be play round 
 the boat draw up on the beach ; the sea - breeze blow fresh and pure 
 towards the shore - - all object be brilliant to look on , all sound 
 be pleasant to hear , as my pen trace the first line which open the 
 story of my life . 

 II . 

 I be the second son of an english gentleman of large fortune . our family 
 be , I believe , one of the most ancient in this country . on my father 's 
 side , it date back beyond the Conquest ; on my mother 's , it be not so 
 old , but the pedigree be nobler . besides my eld brother , I have one 
 sister , young than myself . my mother die shortly after give birth 
 to her last child . 

 circumstance which will appear hereafter , have force I to abandon my 
 father 's name . I have be oblige in honour to resign it ; and in honour 
 I abstain from mention it here . accordingly , at the head of these 
 page , I have only place my christian name - not consider it of any 
 importance to add the surname which I have assume ; and which I may , 
 perhaps , be oblige to change for some other , at no very distant period . 
 it will now , I hope , be understand from the outset , why I never mention 
 my brother and sister but by their christian name ; why a blank occur 
 wherever my father 's name should appear ; why my own be keep conceal in 
 this narrative , as it be keep conceal in the world . 

 the story of my boyhood and youth have little to interest - nothing that 
 be new . my education be the education of hundred of other in my rank 
 of life . I be first teach at a public school , and then go to college 
 to complete what be term " a liberal education . " 

 my life at college have not leave I a single pleasant recollection . I 
 find sycophancy establish there , as a principle of action ; flaunt 
 on the lord 's gold tassel in the street ; enthrone on the lord 's dais in 
 the dining - room . the most learn student in my college - the man whose 
 life be most exemplary , whose acquirement be most admirable - be 
 show I sit , as a commoner , in the low place . the heir to an 
 Earldom , who have fail at the last examination , be point out a few 
 minute afterwards , din in solitary grandeur at a raise table , above 
 the reverend scholar who have turn he back as a dunce . I have just 
 arrive at the University , and have just be congratulate on enter 
 " a venerable seminary of learning and religion . " 

 Trite and common - place though it be , I mention this circumstance 
 attend my introduction to college , because it form the first cause 
 which tend to diminish my faith in the institution to which I be 
 attach . I soon grow to regard my university training as a sort of 
 necessary evil , to be patiently submit to . I read for no honours , 
 and join no particular set of man . I study the literature of France , 
 Italy , and Germany ; just keep up my classical knowledge sufficiently 
 to take my degree ; and leave college with no other reputation than a 
 reputation for indolence and reserve . 

 when I return home , it be think necessary , as I be a young son , 
 and could inherit none of the land property of the family , except in 
 the case of my brother 's dying without child , that I should belong 
 to a profession . my father have the patronage of some valuable " living , " 
 and good interest with more than one member of the government . the 
 church , the army , the navy , and , in the last instance , the bar , be 
 offer I to choose from . I select the last . 

 my father appear to be a little astonished at my choice ; but he make 
 no remark on it , except simply tell I not to forget that the bar be 
 a good step - stone to parliament . my real ambition , however , be , not 
 to make a name in parliament , but a name in literature . I have already 
 engage myself in the hard , but glorious service of the pen ; and I be 
 determined to persevere . the profession which offer I the great 
 facility for pursue my project , be the profession which I be ready 
 to prefer . so I choose the bar . 

 thus , I enter life under the fair auspex . though a young son , I 
 know that my father 's wealth , exclusive of his land property , secure 
 I an independent income far beyond my want . I have no extravagant 
 habit ; no taste that I could not gratify as soon as form ; no care 
 or responsibility of any kind . I might practise my profession or 
 not , just as I choose . I could devote myself wholly and unreservedly to 
 literature , know that , in my case , the struggle for fame could never 
 be identical - terribly , though gloriously identical - with the struggle 
 for bread . for I , the morning sunshine of life be sunshine without a 
 cloud ! 

 I might attempt , in this place , to sketch my own character as it be at 
 that time . but what man can say - I will sound the depth of my own vice , 
 and measure the height of my own virtue ; and be as good as his word ? we 
 can neither know nor judge ourselves ; other may judge , but can not know 
 we : God alone judge and know too . let my character appear - as far as 
 any human character can appear in its integrity , in this world - in my 
 action , when I describe the one eventful passage in my life which form 
 the basis of this narrative . in the mean time , it be first necessary 
 that I should say more about the member of my family . two of they , at 
 least , will be find important to the progress of event in these 
 page . I make no attempt to judge their character : I only describe 
 they - whether rightly or wrongly , I know not - as they appear to I . 

 III . 

 I always consider my father - I speak of he in the past tense , because 
 we be now separate for ever ; because he be henceforth as dead to I 
 as if the grave have close over he - I always consider my father to be 
 the proud man I ever know ; the proud man I ever hear of . his 
 be not that conventional pride , which the popular notion be fond of 
 characterise by a stiff , stately carriage ; by a rigid expression of 
 feature ; by a hard , severe intonation of voice ; by set speech of 
 contempt for poverty and rag , and rhapsodical braggadocio about rank 
 and breeding . my father 's pride have nothing of this about it . it be 
 that quiet , negative , courteous , inbreed pride , which only the close 
 observation could detect ; which no ordinary observer ever detect at 
 all . 

 who that observe he in communication with any of the farmer on any of 
 his estate - who that see the manner in which he lift his hat , when 
 he accidentally meet any of those farmer ' wife - who that notice his 
 hearty welcome to the man of the people , when that man happen to be a 
 man of genius - would have think he proud ? on such occasion as these , 
 if he have any pride , it be impossible to detect it . but see he 
 when , for instance , an author and a new - make peer of no ancestry enter 
 his house together - observe merely the entirely different manner in 
 which he shake hand with each - remarking that the polite cordiality 
 be all for the man of letter , who do not contest his family rank with 
 he , and the polite formality all for the man of title , who do - you 
 discover where and how he be proud in an instant . here lie his 
 fretful point . the aristocracy of rank , as separate from the aristocracy 
 of ancestry , be no aristocracy for he . he be jealous of it ; he 
 hat it . Commoner though he be , he consider himself the social 
 superior of any man , from a baronet up to a duke , whose family be less 
 ancient than his own . 

 among a host of instance of this peculiar pride of his which I could 
 cite , I remember one , characteristic enough to be take as a sample of 
 all the rest . it happen when I be quite a child , and be tell I by 
 one of my uncle now dead - who witness the circumstance himself , and 
 always make a good story of it to the end of his life . 

 a merchant of enormous wealth , who have recently be raise to the 
 peerage , be stay at one of our country house . his daughter , my 
 uncle , and an italian Abbe be the only guest besides . the merchant 
 be a portly , purple - face man , who bear his new honour with a curious 
 mixture of assume pomposity and natural good - humour . the Abbe be 
 dwarfish and deform , lean , sallow , sharp - feature , with bright 
 bird - like eye , and a low , liquid voice . he be a political refugee , 
 dependent for the bread he eat , on the money he receive for teaching 
 language . he might have be a beggar from the street ; and still my 
 father would have treat he as the principal guest in the house , for 
 this all - sufficient reason - he be a direct descendant of one of the 
 old of those famous roman family whose name be part of the 
 history of the Civil Wars in Italy . 

 on the first day , the party assemble for dinner comprise the 
 merchant 's daughter , my mother , an old lady who have once be her 
 governess , and have always live with she since her marriage , the new 
 Lord , the Abbe , my father , and my uncle . when dinner be announce , 
 the peer advance in new - blow dignity , to offer his arm as a matter of 
 course to my mother . my father 's pale face flush crimson in a moment . 
 he touch the magnificent merchant - lord on the arm , and point 
 significantly , with a low bow , towards the decrepit old lady who have 
 once be my mother 's governess . then walk to the other end of the 
 room , where the penniless Abbe be look over a book in a corner , 
 he gravely and courteously lead the little , deform , limp 
 language - master , clothe in a long , threadbare , black coat , up to my mother 
  whose shoulder the Abbe 's head hardly reach , hold the door open 
 for they to pass out first , with his own hand ; politely invite the new 
 nobleman , who stand half - paralyse between confusion and astonishment , 
 to follow with the totter old lady on his arm ; and then return to 
 lead the peer 's daughter down to dinner himself . he only resume his 
 wonte expression and manner , when he have see the little Abbe - the 
 squalid , half - starve representative of mighty baron of the olden 
 time - seat at the high place of the table by my mother 's side . 

 it be by such accidental circumstance as these that you discover how 
 far he be proud . he never boast of his ancestor ; he never even speak 
 of they , except when he be question on the subject ; but he never 
 forget they . they be the very breath of his life ; the deity of his 
 social worship : the family treasure to be hold precious beyond all 
 land and all wealth , all ambition and all glory , by his child and 
 his child 's child to the end of their race . 

 in home - life he perform his duty towards his family honourably , 
 delicately , and kindly . I believe in his own way he love we all ; but 
 we , his descendant , have to share his heart with his ancestor - we be 
 his household property as well as his child . every fair liberty be 
 give to we ; every fair indulgence be grant to we . he never display 
 any suspicion , or any undue severity . we be teach by his direction , 
 that to disgrace our family , either by word or action , be the one fatal 
 crime which could never be forget and never be pardon . we be 
 form , under his superintendence , in principle of religion , honour , 
 and industry ; and the rest be leave to our own moral sense , to our own 
 comprehension of the duty and privilege of our station . there be no 
 one point in his conduct towards any of we that we could complain of ; 
 and yet there be something always incomplete in our domestic relation . 

 it may seem incomprehensible , even ridiculous , to some person , but it 
 be nevertheless true , that we be none of we ever on intimate term 
 with he . I mean by this , that he be a father to we , but never a 
 companion . there be something in his manner , his quiet and unchanging 
 manner , which keep we almost unconsciously restrained . I never in my 
 life feel less at my ease - I know not why at the time - than when I 
 occasionally din alone with he . I never confide to he my scheme 
 for amusement as a boy , or mention more than generally my ambitious 
 hope , as a young man . it be not that he would have receive such 
 confidence with ridicule or severity , he be incapable of it ; but that 
 he seem above they , unfit to enter into they , too far remove by 
 his own thought from such thought as ours . thus , all holiday council 
 be hold with old servant ; thus , my first page of manuscript , when 
 I first try authorship , be read by my sister , and never penetrate 
 into my father 's study . 

 again , his mode of testifying displeasure towards my brother or myself , 
 have something terrible in its calmness , something that we never forget , 
 and always dread as the bad calamity that could befall we . 

 whenever , as boy , we commit some boyish fault , he never display 
 outwardly any irritation - he simply alter his manner towards we 
 altogether . we be not soundly lecture , or vehemently threaten , or 
 positively punish in anyway ; but , when we come in contact with he , 
 we be treat with a cold , contemptuous politeness   especially if our 
 fault show a tendency to anything mean or ungentlemanlike   which 
 cut we to the heart . on these occasion , we be not address by our 
 christian name ; if we accidentally meet he out of door , he be sure to 
 turn aside and avoid we ; if we ask a question , it be answer in the 
 brief possible manner , as if we have be stranger . his whole 
 course of conduct say , as though in so many word - you have render 
 yourself unfit to associate with your father ; and he be now make you 
 feel that unfitness as deeply as he do . we be leave in this domestic 
 purgatory for day , sometimes for week together . to our boyish feeling 
  to mine especially   there be no ignominy like it , while it last . 

 I know not on what term my father live with my mother . towards my 
 sister , his demeanour always exhibit something of the old - fashioned , 
 affectionate gallantry of a former age . he pay she the same attention 
 that he would have pay to the high lady in the land . he lead she 
 into the dining - room , when we be alone , exactly as he would have lead a 
 duchess into a banqueting - hall . he would allow we , as boy , to quit the 
 breakfast - table before he have rise himself ; but never before she have 
 leave it . if a servant fail in duty towards he , the servant be 
 often forgive ; if towards she , the servant be send away on the 
 spot . his daughter be in his eye the representative of her mother : the 
 mistress of his house , as well as his child . it be curious to see the 
 mixture of high - breed courtesy and fatherly love in his manner , as he 
 just gently touch her forehead with his lip , when he first see she in 
 the morning . 

 in person , my father be of not more than middle height . he be very 
 slenderly and delicately make ; his head small , and well set on his 
 shoulder - his forehead more broad than lofty - his complexion singularly 
 pale , except in moment of agitation , when I have already notice its 
 tendency to flush all over in an instant . his eye , large and gray , 
 have something command in their look ; they give a certain unchanging 
 firmness and dignity to his expression , not often meet with . they 
 betray his birth and breeding , his old ancestral prejudice , his 
 chivalrous sense of honour , in every glance . it require , indeed , all 
 the masculine energy of look about the upper part of his face , to redeem 
 the low part from an appearance of effeminacy , so delicately be it 
 mould in its fine Norman outline . his smile be remarkable for its 
 sweetness - it be almost like a woman 's smile . in speak , too , his 
 lip often tremble as woman 's do . if he ever laugh , as a young 
 man , his laugh must have be very clear and musical ; but since I can 
 recollect he , I never hear it . in his happy moment , in the gay 
 society , I have only see he smile . 

 there be other characteristic of my father 's disposition and manner , 
 which I might mention ; but they will appear to great advantage , 
 perhaps , hereafter , connect with circumstance which especially call 
 they forth . 

 IV . 

 when a family be possess of large land property , the individual of 
 that family who show least interest in its welfare ; who be least fond 
 of home , least connect by his own sympathy with his relative , least 
 ready to learn his duty or admit his responsibility , be often that 
 very individual who be to succeed to the family inheritance - the eld 
 son . 

 my brother Ralph be no exception to this remark . we be educate 
 together . after our education be complete , I never see he , except 
 for short period . he be almost always on the continent , for some year 
 after he leave college . and when he return definitely to England , he 
 do not return to live under our roof . both in town and country he be 
 our visitor , not our inmate . 

 I recollect he at school - strong , tall , handsomer than I be ; far 
 beyond I in popularity among the little community we live with ; the 
 first to lead a daring exploit , the last to abandon it ; now at the 
 bottom of the class , now at the top - just that sort of gay , boisterous , 
 fine - look , dare - devil boy , whom old people would instinctively turn 
 round and smile after , as they pass he by in a morning walk . 

 then , at college , he become illustrious among rower and cricketer , 
 renowne as a pistol shot , dread as a singlestick player . no wine 
 party in the university be such wine party as his ; tradesman give 
 he the first choice of everything that be new ; young lady in the 
 town fall in love with he by dozen ; young tutor with a tendency to 
 dandyism , copy the cut of his coat and the tie of his cravat ; even the 
 awful head of house look leniently on his delinquency . the gay , 
 hearty , handsome young english gentleman carry a charm about he that 
 subdue everybody . though I be his favourite butt , both at school 
 and college , I never quarrel with he in my life . I always let he 
 ridicule my dress , manner , and habit in his own reckless , boisterous 
 way , as if it have be a part of his birthright privilege to laugh at I 
 as much as he choose . 

 thus far , my father have no bad anxiety about he than those 
 occasion by his high spirit and his heavy debt . but when he return 
 home - when the debt have be pay , and it be next thought necessary 
 to drill the free , careless energy into something like useful 
 discipline - then my father 's trial and difficulty begin in earnest . 

 it be impossible to make Ralph comprehend and appreciate his position , 
 as he be desire to comprehend and appreciate it . the steward give up 
 in despair all attempt to enlighten he about the extent , value , and 
 management of the estate he be to inherit . a vigorous effort be 
 make to inspire he with ambition ; to get he to go into parliament . he 
 laugh at the idea . a commission in the Guards be next offer to 
 he . he refuse it , because he would never be button up in a red 
 coat ; because he would submit to no restraint , fashionable or military ; 
 because in short , he be determined to be his own master . my father 
 talk to he by the hour together , about his duty and his prospect , 
 the cultivation of his mind , and the example of his ancestor ; and 
 talk in vain . he yawn and fidgette over the emblazon page of his 
 own family pedigree , whenever they be open before he . 

 in the country , he care for nothing but hunting and shoot - it be as 
 difficult to make he go to a grand county dinner - party , as to make he 
 go to church . in town , he haunt the theatre , behind the scene as 
 well as before ; entertain actor and actress at Richmond ; ascend 
 in balloon at Vauxhall ; go about with detective policeman , see 
 life among pickpocket and housebreaker ; belong to a whist club , 
 a supper club , a catch club , a boxing club , a picnic club , an amateur 
 theatrical club ; and , in short , live such a careless , convivial life , 
 that my father , outrage in every one of his family prejudice and 
 family refinement , almost cease to speak to he , and see he as rarely 
 as possible . occasionally , my sister 's interference reconcile they 
 again for a short time ; her influence , gentle as it be , be always 
 powerfully feel for good , but she could not change my brother 's nature . 
 Persuade and entreat as anxiously as she might , he be always sure to 
 forfeit the paternal favour again , a few day after he have be restore 
 to it . 

 at last , matter be bring to their climax by an awkward love 
 adventure of Ralph 's with one of our tenant ' daughter . my father 
 act with his usual decision on the occasion . he determine to apply 
 a desperate remedy : to let the refractory eld son run through his 
 career in freedom , abroad , until he have well weary himself , and could 
 return home a sobered man . accordingly , he procure for my brother 
 an attache 's place in a foreign embassy , and insist on his leaving 
 England forthwith . for once in a way , Ralph be docile . he know and 
 care nothing about diplomacy ; but he like the idea of live on the 
 continent , so he take his leave of home with his good grace . my father 
 see he depart , with ill - conceal agitation and apprehension ; although 
 he affect to feel satisfied that , flighty and idle as Ralph be , he 
 be incapable of voluntarily dishonour his family , even in his most 
 reckless mood . 

 after this , we hear little from my brother . his letter be few and 
 short , and generally end with petition for money . the only important 
 news of he that reach we , reach we through public channel . 

 he be make quite a continental reputation - a reputation , the bare 
 mention of which make my father wince . he have fight a duel ; he have 
 import a new dance from Hungary ; he have contrive to get the small 
 groom that ever be see behind a cabriolet ; he have carry off the 
 reign beauty among the opera - dancer of the day from all competitor ; 
 a great french cook have compose a great french dish , and christen 
 it by his name ; he be understand to be the " unknown friend , " to whom 
 a literary polish countess have dedicate her " letter against the 
 restraint of the Marriage Tie ; " a female german metaphysician , sixty 
 year old , have fall   Platonically   in love with he , and have take to 
 write erotic romance in her old age . such be some of the rumour 
 that reach my father 's ear on the subject of his son and heir ! 

 after a long absence , he come home on a visit . how well I remember 
 the astonishment he produce in the whole household ! he have become a 
 foreigner in manner and appearance . his mustachio be magnificent ; 
 miniature toy in gold and jewellery hang in cluster from his 
 watch - chain ; his shirt - front be a perfect filigree of lace and cambric . 
 he bring with he his own box of choice liqueur and perfume ; his 
 own smart , impudent , french valet ; his own travel bookcase of french 
 novel , which he open with his own golden key . he drink nothing but 
 chocolate in the morning ; he have long interview with the cook , and 
 revolutionize our dinner table . all the french newspaper be send to 
 he by a London agent . he alter the arrangement of his bed - room ; no 
 servant but his own valet be permit to enter it . family portrait 
 that hang there , be turn to the wall , and portrait of french 
 actress and italian singer be stick to the back of the canvass . 
 then he displace a beautiful little ebony cabinet which have be in the 
 family three hundred year ; and set up in its stead a cyprian temple of 
 his own , in miniature , with crystal door , behind which hang lock 
 of hair , ring , note write on blush - colour paper , and other 
 love - token keep as sentimental relic . his influence become 
 all - pervading among we . he seem to communicate to the house the change 
 that have take place in himself , from the reckless , racketty young 
 Englishman to the super - exquisite foreign dandy . it be as if the 
 fiery , effervescent atmosphere of the boulevard of Paris have insolently 
 penetrate into the old English mansion , and ruffle and infect its 
 quiet native air , to the remotest corner of the place . 

 my father be even more dismayed than displease by the alteration in 
 my brother 's habit and manner - the eld son be now far from 
 his ideal of what an eld son should be , than ever . as for friend and 
 neighbour , Ralph be heartily fear and dislike by they , before 
 he have be in the house a week . he have an ironically patient way of 
 listen to their conversation ; an ironically respectful manner of 
 demolish their old - fashioned opinion , and correct their slight 
 mistake , which secretly aggravate they beyond endurance . it be bad 
 still , when my father , in despair , try to tempt he into marriage , 
 as the one final chance of work his reform ; and invite half the 
 marriageable young lady of our acquaintance to the house , for his 
 especial benefit . 

 Ralph have never show much fondness at home , for the refinement of 
 good female society . abroad , he have live as exclusively as he possibly 
 could , among woman whose character range downwards by infinitesimal 
 degree , from the mysteriously doubtful to the notoriously bad . the 
 highly - breed , highly - refine , highly - accomplish young english beauty 
 have no charm for he . he detect at once the domestic conspiracy of 
 which he be destine to become the victim . he often come up - stair , at 
 night , into my bed - room ; and while he be amuse himself by derisively 
 kick about my simple clothe and simple toilette apparatus ; while he 
 be laugh in his old careless way at my quiet habit and monotonous 
 life , use to slip in , parenthetically , all sort of sarcasm about our 
 young lady guest . to he , their manner be horribly inanimate ; their 
 innocence , hypocrisy of education . pure complexion and regular feature 
 be very well , he say , as far as they go ; but when a girl could not 
 walk properly , when she shake hand with you with cold finger , when 
 have good eye she could not make a stimulating use of they , then it 
 be time to sentence the regular feature and pure complexion to be 
 take back forthwith to the nursery from which they come . for his 
 part , he miss the conversation of his witty Polish Countess , and 
 long for another pancake - supper with his favourite grisette . 

 the failure of my father 's last experiment with Ralph soon become 
 apparent . watchful and experienced mother begin to suspect that my 
 brother 's method of flirtation be dangerous , and his style of waltzing 
 improper . one or two ultra - cautious parent , alarm by the laxity of 
 his manner and opinion , remove their daughter out of harm 's way , 
 by shorten their visit . the rest be spar any such necessity . my 
 father suddenly discover that Ralph be devote himself rather too 
 significantly to a young married woman who be stay in the house . the 
 same day he have a long private interview with my brother . what pass 
 between they , I know not ; but it must have be something serious . 
 Ralph come out of my father 's private study , very pale and very 
 silent ; order his luggage to be pack directly ; and the next morning 
 depart , with his french valet , and his multifarious french good and 
 chattel , for the continent . 

 another interval pass ; and then we have another short visit from he . 
 he be still unaltered . my father 's temper suffer under this second 
 disappointment . he become more fretful and silent ; more apt to take 
 offence than have be his will not . I particularly mention the change thus 
 produce in his disposition , because that change be destine , at no 
 very distant period , to act fatally upon I . 

 on this last occasion , also , there be another serious disagreement 
 between father and son ; and Ralph leave England again in much the same 
 way that he have leave it before . 

 shortly after that second departure , we hear that he have alter 
 his manner of life . he have contract , what would be term in the 
 continental code of moral , a reformatory attachment to a woman old 
 than himself , who be live separate from her husband , when he meet 
 with she . it be this lady 's lofty ambition to be mentor and mistress , 
 both together ! and she soon prove herself to be well qualified for her 
 courageous undertaking . to the astonishment of everyone who know 
 he , Ralph suddenly turn economical ; and , soon afterwards , actually 
 resign his post at the embassy , to be out of the way of temptation ! 
 since that , he have return to England ; have devote himself to 
 collect snuff - box and learn the violin ; and be now live 
 quietly in the suburb of London , still under the inspection of the 
 resolute female missionary who first work his reform . 

 whether he will ever become the high - minded , high - principle country 
 gentleman , that my father have always desire to see he , it be useless 
 for I to guess . on the domain which he be to inherit , I shall never 
 perhaps set foot again : in the hall where he will one day preside as 
 master , I shall never more be shelter . let I now quit the subject of 
 my eld brother , and turn to a theme which be near to my heart ; dear 
 to I as the last remembrance leave that I can love ; precious beyond all 
 treasure in my solitude and my exile from home . 

 my sister ! - well may I linger over your beloved name in such a record 
 as this . a little far on , and the darkness of crime and grief will 
 encompass I ; here , my recollection of you kindle like a pure light 
 before my eye - doubly pure by contrast with what lie beyond . may your 
 kind eye , love , be the first that fall on these page , when the writer 
 have part from they for ever ! may your tender hand be the first that 
 touch these leaf , when mine be cold ! backward in my narrative , 
 Clara , wherever I have but casually mention my sister , the pen have 
 tremble and stand still . at this place , where all my remembrance of 
 you throng upon I unrestraine , the tear gather fast and thick beyond 
 control ; and for the first time since I begin my task , my courage and my 
 calmness fail I . 

 it be useless to persevere long . my hand tremble ; my eye grow dimmer 
 and dimmer . I must close my labour for the day , and go forth to gather 
 strength and resolution for to - morrow on the hill - top that overlook the 
 sea . 

 V. 

 my sister Clara be four year young than I be . in form of face , in 
 complexion , and - except the eye - in feature , she bear a striking 
 resemblance to my father . her expression however , must be very like 
 what my mother 's be . whenever I have look at she in her silent and 
 thoughtful moment , she have always appear to freshen , and even to 
 increase , my vague , childish recollection of our lost mother . her 
 eye have that slight tinge of melancholy in their tenderness , and that 
 peculiar softness in their repose , which be only see in blue eye . her 
 complexion , pale as my father 's when she be neither speak nor move , 
 have in a far great degree than his the tendency to flush , not merely 
 in moment of agitation , but even when she be walk , or talk on any 
 subject that interest she . without this peculiarity her paleness would 
 be a defect . with it , the absence of any colour in her complexion but 
 the fugitive uncertain colour which I have describe , would to some eye 
 debar she from any claim to beauty . and a beauty perhaps she be not - at 
 least , in the ordinary acceptation of the term . 

 the low part of her face be rather too small for the upper , her figure 
 be too slight , the sensitiveness of her nervous organization be too 
 constantly visible in her action and her look . she would not fix 
 attention and admiration in a box at the opera ; very few man pass she 
 in the street would turn round to look after she ; very few woman 
 would regard she with that slightingly attentive stare , that steady 
 depreciate scrutiny , which a dashing decide beauty so often receive 
  and so often triumph in receive   from her personal inferior among 
 her own sex . the great charm that my sister have on the surface , come 
 from beneath it . 

 when you really know she , when she speak to you freely , as to a 
 friend - then , the attraction of her voice , her smile her manner , 
 impress you indescribably . her slight word and her commonest 
 action interest and delight you , you know not why . there be 
 a beauty about her unassuming simplicity , her natural - exquisitely 
 natural - kindness of heart , and word , and manner , which preserve 
 its own unobtrusive influence over you , in spite of all other rival 
 influence , be they what they might . you miss and think of she , 
 when you be fresh from the society of the most beautiful and the most 
 brilliant woman . you remember a few kind , pleasant word of hers when 
 you forgot the wit of the witty lady , the learning of the most 
 learn . the influence thus possess , and unconsciously possess , 
 by my sister over every one with whom she come in contact - over man 
 especially - may , I think be very simply account for , in very few 
 sentence . 

 we live in an age when too many woman appear to be ambitious of morally 
 unsex themselves before society , by ape the language and the 
 manner of man - especially in reference to that miserable modern 
 dandyism of demeanour , which aim at repress all betrayal of warmth 
 of feeling ; which abstain from display any enthusiasm on any 
 subject whatever ; which , in short , labour to make the fashionable 
 imperturbability of the face the faithful reflection of the fashionable 
 imperturbability of the mind . woman of this exclusively modern 
 order , like to use slang expression in their conversation ; assume 
 a bastard - masculine abruptness in their manner , a bastard - masculine 
 licence in their opinion ; affect to ridicule those outward development 
 of feeling which pass under the general appellation of ' sentiment . " 
 nothing impress , agitate , amuse , or delight they in a hearty , 
 natural , womanly way . Sympathy look ironical , if they ever show it : 
 love seem to be an affair of calculation , or mockery , or contemptuous 
 sufferance , if they ever feel it . 

 to woman such as these , my sister Clara present as complete a contrast 
 as could well be conceive . in this contrast lie the secret of her 
 influence , of the voluntary tribute of love and admiration which 
 follow she wherever she go . 

 few man have not their secret moment of deep feeling - moment when , 
 amid the wretched triviality and hypocrisy of modern society , the 
 image will present itself to their mind of some woman , fresh , 
 innocent , gentle , sincere ; some woman whose emotion be still warm and 
 impressible , whose affection and sympathy can still appear in her 
 action , and give the colour to her thought ; some woman in whom we 
 could put as perfect faith and trust , as if we be child ; whom we 
 despair of finding near the harden influence of the world ; whom we 
 could scarcely venture to look for , except in solitary place far away 
 in the country ; in little rural shrine , shut up from society , among 
 wood and field , and lonesome boundary - hill . when any woman happen to 
 realise , or nearly to realise , such an image as this , they possess that 
 universal influence which no rivalry can ever approach . on they really 
 depend , and by then be really preserve , that claim upon the sincere 
 respect and admiration of man , on which the power of the whole sex be 
 base - the power so often assume by the many , so rarely possess but 
 by the few . 

 it be thus with my sister . thus , wherever she go , though without 
 either the inclination , or the ambition to shine , she eclipse woman 
 who be her superior in beauty , in accomplishment , in brilliancy of 
 manner and conversation - conquering by no other weapon than the purely 
 feminine charm of everything she say , and everything she do . 

 but it be not amid the gaiety and grandeur of a London season that her 
 character be display to the great advantage . it be when she be 
 live where she love to live , in the old country - house , among the old 
 friend and old servant who would every one of they have die a hundred 
 death for her sake , that you could study and love she good . then , the 
 charm there be in the mere presence of the kind , gentle , happy young 
 english girl , who could enter into everybody 's interest , and be 
 grateful for everybody 's love , possess its good and bright 
 influence . at picnic , lawn - party , little country gathering of all 
 sort , she be , in her own quiet , natural manner , always the presiding 
 spirit of general comfort and general friendship . even the rigid law 
 of country punctilio relax before her unaffected cheerfulness and 
 irresistible good - nature . she always contrive - nobody ever know 
 how - to lure the most formal people into forget their formality , 
 and become natural for the rest of the day . even a heavy - headed , 
 lumber , silent country squire be not too much for she . she manage 
 to make he feel at his ease , when no one else would undertake the task ; 
 she could listen patiently to his confused speech about dog , horse , 
 and the state of the crop , when other conversation be proceed in 
 which she be really interested ; she could receive any little 
 grateful attention that he wish to pay she - no matter how awkward or 
 ill - timed - as she receive attention from any one else , with a manner 
 which show she consider it as a favour grant to her sex , not as a 
 right accord to it . 

 so , again , she always succeed in diminish the long list of those 
 pitiful affront and offence , which play such important part in the 
 social drama of country society . she be a perfect Apostle - errant of 
 the order of Reconciliation ; and wherever she go , cast out the devil 
 Sulkiness from all his stronghold - the lofty and the lowly alike . our 
 good rector use to call she his Volunteer Curate ; and declare that 
 she preach by a timely word , or a persuasive look , the good practical 
 sermon on the blessing of peace - making that be ever compose . 

 with all this untiring good - nature , with all this resolute industry 
 in the task of make every one happy whom she approach , there be 
 mingle some indescribable influence , which invariably preserve she 
 from the presumption , even of the most presuming people . I never know 
 anybody venturesome enough - either by word or look - to take a liberty 
 with she . there be something about she which inspire respect as well 
 as love . my father , follow the bent of his peculiar and favourite 
 idea , always think it be the look of her race in her eye , the 
 ascendancy of her race in her manner . I believe it to have proceed 
 from a simple and a well cause . there be a goodness of heart , which 
 carry the shield of its purity over the open hand of its kindness : and 
 that goodness be her . 

 to my father , she be more , I believe , than he himself ever imagine - or 
 will ever know , unless he should lose she . he be often , in his 
 intercourse with the world , wound severely enough in his peculiar 
 prejudice and peculiar refinement - he be always sure to find the 
 first respect , and the last partake by she . he could trust in she 
 implicitly , he could feel assured that she be not only willing , but 
 able , to share and relieve his domestic trouble and anxiety . if he 
 have be less fretfully anxious about his eld son ; if he have wisely 
 distrust from the first his own power of persuade and reform , 
 and have allow Clara to exercise her influence over Ralph more 
 constantly and more completely than he really do , I be persuade that 
 the long - expect epoch of my brother 's transformation would have really 
 arrive by this time , or even before it . 

 the strong and deep feeling of my sister 's nature lie far below the 
 surface - for a woman , too far below it . suffer be , for she , silent , 
 secret , long enduring ; often almost entirely void of outward vent or 
 development . I never remember see she in tear , except on rare and 
 very serious occasion . unless you look at she narrowly , you would 
 judge she to be little sensitive to ordinary grief and trouble . at 
 such time , her eye only grow dimmer and less animate than usual ; the 
 paleness of her complexion become rather more marked ; her lip close 
 and tremble involuntarily - but this be all : there be no sighing , 
 no weeping , no speaking even . and yet she suffer acutely . the very 
 strength of her emotion be in their silence and their secresy . I , of 
 all other - I , guilty of infect with my anguish the pure heart that 
 love I - ought to know this good ! 

 how long I might linger over all that she have do for I ! as I now 
 approach nearer and near to the page which be to reveal my fatal 
 story , so I be more and more tempt to delay over those well and 
 purer remembrance of my sister which now occupy my mind . the first 
 little present - innocent girlish present - which she secretly send to 
 I at school ; the first sweet day of our uninterrupted intercourse , 
 when the close of my college life restore I to home ; her first 
 inestimable sympathy with my first fugitive vanity of embryo 
 authorship , be throng back fast and fondly on my thought , while I 
 now write . 

 but these memory must be calm and discipline . I must be collect 
 and impartial over my narrative - if it be only to make that narrative 
 show fairly and truly , without suppression or exaggeration , all that I 
 have owe to she . 

 not merely all that I have owe to she ; but all that I owe to she 
 now . though I may never see she again , but in my thought ; still she 
 influence , comfort , cheer I on to hope , as if she be already the 
 guardian spirit of the cottage where I live . even in my bad moment of 
 despair , I can still remember that Clara be think of I and sorrow 
 for I : I can still feel that remembrance , as an invisible hand of mercy 
 which support I , sinking ; which raise I , fall ; which may yet lead 
 I safely and tenderly to my hard journey 's end . 

 VI . 

 I have now complete all the preliminary notice of my near relative , 
 which it be necessary to present in these page ; and may proceed at once 
 to the more immediate subject of my narrative . 

 imagine to yourself that my father and my sister have be live for 
 some month at our London residence ; and that I have recently join 
 they , after have enjoy a short tour on the continent . 

 my father be engage in his parliamentary duty . we see very little of 
 he . committee absorb his morning - debate his evening . when he have 
 a day of leisure occasionally , he pass it in his study , devote to his 
 own affair . he go very little into society - a political dinner , or a 
 scientific meeting be the only social relaxation that tempt he . 

 my sister lead a life which be not much in accordance with her simple 
 taste . she be weary of ball , opera , flower - show , and all other 
 London gaiety besides ; and heartily long to be drive about the 
 green lane again in her own little poney - chaise , and distribute 
 plum - cake prize to the good child at the Rector 's Infant School . 
 but the female friend who happen to be stay with she , be fond of 
 excitement ; my father expect she to accept the invitation which he be 
 oblige to decline ; so she give up her own taste and inclination as 
 usual , and go into hot room among crowd of fine people , hear the 
 same glib compliment , and the same polite inquiry , night after night , 
 until , patient as she be , she heartily wish that her fashionable 
 friend all live in some opposite quarter of the globe , the far 
 away the well . 

 my arrival from the continent be the most welcome of event to she . it 
 give a new object and a new impulse to her London life . 

 I be engage in write a historical romance - indeed , it be principally 
 to examine the locality in the country where my story be lay , that I 
 have be abroad . Clara have read the first half - dozen finished chapter , 
 in manuscript , and augur wonderful success for my fiction when it be 
 publish . she be determined to arrange my study with her own hand ; to 
 dust my book , and sort my paper herself . she know that I be already 
 as fretful and precise about my literary good and chattel , as 
 indignant at any interference of housemaid and duster with my library 
 treasure , as if I be a veteran author of twenty year ' standing ; and 
 she be resolve to spare I every apprehension on this score , by take 
 all the arrangement of my study on herself , and keep the key of the 
 door when I be not in need of it . 

 we have our London amusement , too , as well as our London employment . 
 but the pleasantest of our relaxation be , after all , procure for 
 we by our horse . we ride every day - sometimes with friend , sometimes 
 alone together . on these latter occasion , we generally turn our horse ' 
 head away from the park , and seek what country sight we can get 
 in the neighbourhood of London . the northern road be generally our 
 favourite ride . 

 sometimes we penetrate so far that we can bait our horse at a little 
 inn which remind I of the inn near our country home . I see the same 
 sand parlour , decorate with the same old sporting print , furnish 
 with the same battered , deep - coloured mahogany table , and polished elm 
 tree chair , that I remember in our own village inn . Clara , also , find 
 bit of common , out of door , that look like our common ; and tree 
 that might have be transplant expressly for she , from our park . 

 these excursion we keep a secret , we like to enjoy they entirely by 
 ourselves . besides , if my father know that his daughter be drink 
 the landlady 's fresh milk , and his son the landlord 's old ale , in the 
 parlour of a suburban roadside inn , he would , I believe , be apt to 
 suspect that both his child have fairly take leave of their sens . 

 evening party I frequent almost as rarely as my father . Clara 's good 
 nature be call into requisition to do duty for I , as well as for 
 he . she have little respite in the task . old lady relative and friend , 
 always ready to take care of she , leave she no excuse for stay 
 at home . sometimes I be sham into accompany she a little more 
 frequently than usual ; but my old indolence in these matter soon 
 possess I again . I have contract a bad habit of write at night - I 
 read almost incessantly in the day time . it be only because I be fond of 
 riding , that I be ever willing to interrupt my study , and ever ready 
 to go out at all . 

 such be my domestic habit , such my regular occupation and 
 amusement , when a mere accident change every purpose of my life , and 
 alter I irretrievably from what I be then , to what I be now . 

 it happen thus : 

 VII . 

 I have just receive my quarter 's allowance of pocket - money , and have go 
 into the city to cash the cheque at my father 's banker . 

 the money pay , I debate for a moment how I should return homeward . 
 first I think of walk : then of take a cab . while I be 
 consider this frivolous point , an omnibus pass I , go westward . 
 in the idle impulse of the moment , I hail it , and get in . 

 it be something more than an idle impulse though . if I have at that time 
 no other qualification for the literary career on which I be enter , 
 I certainly have this one - an aptitude for discover point of 
 character in other : and its natural result , an unfailing delight in 
 study character of all kind , wherever I could meet with they . 

 I have often before ride in omnibus to amuse myself by observe the 
 passenger . an omnibus have always appear to I , to be a perambulatory 
 exhibition - room of the eccentricity of human nature . I know not any 
 other sphere in which person of all class and all temperament be so 
 oddly collect together , and so immediately contrast and confront 
 with each other . to watch merely the different method of get into 
 the vehicle , and take their seat , adopt by different people , be to 
 study no incomplete commentary on the infinitesimal variety of human 
 character - as various even as the variety of the human face . 

 thus , in addition to the idle impulse , there be the idea of amusement 
 in my thought , as I stop the public vehicle , and add one to the 
 number of the conductor 's passenger . 

 there be five person in the omnibus when I enter it . two 
 middle - aged lady , dress with amazing splendour in silk and satin , 
 wear straw - coloured kid glove , and carry highly - scented pocket 
 handkerchief , sit apart at the end of the vehicle ; try to look as if 
 they occupy it under protest , and preserve the most stately 
 gravity and silence . they evidently feel that their magnificent outward 
 adornment be exhibit in a very unworthy locality , and among a very 
 uncongenial company . 

 one side , close to the door , be occupy by a lean , wither old man , 
 very shabbily dress in black , who sit eternally mumble something 
 between his toothless jaw . occasionally , to the evident disgust of 
 the genteel lady , he wipe his bald head and wrinkle forehead with a 
 ragged blue cotton handkerchief , which he keep in the crown of his hat . 

 opposite to this ancient sit a dignified gentleman and a sickly 
 vacant - look little girl . every event of that day be so indelibly 
 mark on my memory , that I remember , not only this man 's pompous look 
 and manner , but even the word he address to the poor squalid little 
 creature by his side . when I enter the omnibus , he be tell she 
 in a loud voice how she ought to dispose of her frock and her foot when 
 people get into the vehicle , and when they get out . he then impress on 
 she the necessity in future life , when she grow up , of always have 
 the price of her fare ready before it be want , to prevent unnecessary 
 delay . have deliver himself of this good advice , he begin to hum , 
 keep time by drum with his thick Malacca cane . he be still 
 proceed with this amusement - produce some of the most acutely 
 unmusical sound I ever hear - when the omnibus stop to give 
 admission to two lady . the first who get in be an elderly 
 person - pale and depressed - evidently in delicate health . the second be 
 a young girl . 



 among the working of the hidden life within we which we may experience 
 but can not explain , be there any more remarkable than those mysterious 
 moral influence constantly exercise , either for attraction or 
 repulsion , by one human be over another ? in the simple , as in the 
 most important affair of life , how startling , how irresistible be their 
 power ! how often we feel and know , either pleasurably or painfully , that 
 another be look on we , before we have ascertain the fact with our 
 own eye ! how often we prophesy truly to ourselves the approach of a 
 friend or enemy , just before either have really appear ! how strangely 
 and abruptly we become convinced , at a first introduction , that we shall 
 secretly love this person and loathe that , before experience have guide 
 we with a single fact in relation to their character ! 

 I have say that the two additional passenger who enter the vehicle 
 in which I be rid , be , one of they , an elderly lady ; the other , a 
 young girl . as soon as the latter have seat herself nearly opposite 
 to I , by her companion 's side , I feel her influence on I directly - an 
 influence that I can not describe - an influence which I have never 
 experience in my life before , which I shall never experience again . 

 I have help to hand she in , as she pass I ; merely touch her arm 
 for a moment . but how the sense of that touch be prolong ! I feel it 
 thrill through I - thrilling in every nerve , in every pulsation of my 
 fast - throb heart . 

 have I the same influence over she ? or be it I that receive , and she 
 that confer , only ? I be yet destine to discover ; but not then - not 
 for a long , long time . 

 her veil be down when I first see she . her feature and her expression 
 be but indistinctly visible to I . I could just vaguely perceive that 
 she be young and beautiful ; but , beyond this , though I might imagine 
 much , I could see little . 

 from the time when she enter the omnibus , I have no recollection of 
 anything more that occur in it . I neither remember what passenger 
 get out , or what passenger get in . my power of observation , hitherto 
 active enough , have now wholly desert I . strange ! that the capricious 
 rule of chance should sway the action of our faculty that a trifle 
 should set in motion the whole complicated machinery of their exercise , 
 and a trifle suspend it . 

 we have be move onward for some little time , when the girl 's 
 companion address an observation to she . she hear it imperfectly , 
 and lift her veil while it be be repeat . how painfully my heart 
 beat ! I could almost hear it - as her face be , for the first time , 
 freely and fairly disclose ! 

 she be dark . her hair , eye , and complexion be dark than usual in 
 english woman . the form , the look altogether , of her face , couple 
 with what I could see of her figure , make I guess her age to be about 
 twenty . there be the appearance of maturity already in the shape of 
 her feature ; but their expression still remain girlish , unformed , 
 unsettled . the fire in her large dark eye , when she speak , be latent . 
 their languor , when she be silent - that voluptuous languor of black 
 eye - be still fugitive and unsteady . the smile about her full lip   to 
 other eye , they might have look too full   struggle to be 
 eloquent , yet dare not . among woman , there always seem something left 
 incomplete - a moral creation to be superinduce on the physical - which 
 love alone can develop , and which maternity perfect still far , when 
 develop . I think , as I look on she , how the pass colour would 
 fix itself brilliantly on her round , olive cheek ; how the expression 
 that still hesitate to declare itself , would speak out at last , would 
 shine forth in the full luxury of its beauty , when she hear the first 
 word , receive the first kiss , from the man she love ! 

 while I still look at she , as she sit opposite speak to her 
 companion , our eye meet . it be only for a moment - but the sensation of 
 a moment often make the thought of a life ; and that one little instant 
 make the new life of my heart . she put down her veil again immediately ; 
 her lip move involuntarily as she lower it : I think I could 
 discern , through the lace , that the slight movement ripen to a smile . 

 still there be enough leave to see - enough to charm . there be the 
 little rim of delicate white lace , encircle the lovely , dusky throat ; 
 there be the figure visible , where the shawl have fall open , slender , 
 but already well develop in its slenderness , and exquisitely supple ; 
 there be the waist , naturally low , and leave to its natural place and 
 natural size ; there be the little millinery and jewellery ornament 
 that she wear - simple and common - place enough in themselves - yet each 
 a beauty , each a treasure , on she . there be all this to behold , all 
 this to dwell on , in spite of the veil . the veil ! how little of the 
 woman do it hide , when the man really love she ! 

 we have nearly arrive at the last point to which the omnibus would take 
 we , when she and her companion get out . I follow they , cautiously and 
 at some distance . 

 she be tall - tall at least for a woman . there be not many people in 
 the road along which we be proceed ; but even if there have be , 
 far behind as I be walk , I should never have lose she - never have 
 mistake any one else for she . already , stranger though we be , I feel 
 that I should know she , almost at any distance , only by her walk . 

 they go on , until we reach a suburb of new house , intermingle with 
 wretched patch of waste land , half build over . unfinished street , 
 unfinished crescent , unfinished square , unfinished shop , unfinished 
 garden , surround we . at last they stop at a new square , and rang 
 the bell at one of the new of the new house . the door be open , 
 and she and her companion disappear . the house be partly detach . 
 it bear no number ; but be distinguish as North Villa . the 
 square - unfinished like everything else in the neighbourhood - be call 
 Hollyoake Square . 

 I notice nothing else about the place at that time . its newness and 
 desolateness of appearance revolt I , just then . I have satisfy 
 myself about the locality of the house , and I know that it be her home ; 
 for I have approach sufficiently near , when the door be open , to 
 hear her inquire if anybody have call in her absence . for the present , 
 this be enough . my sensation want repose ; my thought want 
 collect . I leave Hollyoake Square at once , and walk into the 
 Regent 's Park , the northern portion of which be close at hand . 

 be I in love ? - in love with a girl whom I have accidentally meet in an 
 omnibus ? or , be I merely indulge a momentary caprice - merely feel 
 a young man 's hot , hasty admiration for a beautiful face ? these 
 be question which I could not then decide . my idea be in utter 
 confusion , all my thought run astray . I walk on , dream in full 
 day - I have no distinct impression , except of the stranger beauty whom 
 I have just see . the more I try to collect myself , to resume the easy , 
 equable feeling with which I have set forth in the morning , the less 
 self - possess I become . there be two emergency in which the wise 
 man may try to reason himself back from impulse to principle ; and try 
 in vain : - the one when a woman have attract he for the first time ; the 
 other , when , for the first time , also , she have happen to offend he . 

 I know not how long I have be walk in the park , thus absorb yet 
 not think , when the clock of a neighbouring church strike three , 
 and rouse I to the remembrance that I have engage to ride out with 
 my sister at two o'clock . it would be nearly half - an - hour more before 
 I could reach home . never have any former appointment of mine with Clara 
 be thus forget ! Love have not yet turn I selfish , as it turn all 
 man , and even all woman , more or less . I feel both sorrow and shame at 
 the neglect of which I have be guilty ; and hastened homeward . 

 the groom , look unutterably weary and discontent , be still lead 
 my horse up and down before the house . my sister 's horse have be send 
 back to the stable . I go in ; and hear that , after wait for I an 
 hour , Clara have go out with some friend , and would not be back before 
 dinner . 

 no one be in the house but the servant . the place look dull , empty , 
 inexpressibly miserable to I ; the distant roll of carriage along the 
 surround street have a heavy bode sound ; the opening and shutting 
 of door in the domestic office below , startle and irritate I ; the 
 London air seem denser to breathe than it have ever seem before . 
 I walk up and down one of the room , fretful and irresolute . once 
 I direct my step towards my study ; but retrace they before I have 
 enter it . read or writing be out of the question at that moment . 

 I feel the secret inclination strengthen within I to return to 
 Hollyoake Square ; to try to see the girl again , or at least to ascertain 
 who she be . I strove - yes , I can honestly say , strove to repress the 
 desire . I try to laugh it off , as idle and ridiculous ; to think of my 
 sister , of the book I be write , of anything but the one subject that 
 press strong and strong on I , the hard I struggle against 
 it . the spell of the syren be over I . I go out , hypocritically 
 persuade myself , that I be only animate by a capricious curiosity 
 to know the girl 's name , which once satisfy , would leave I at rest on 
 the matter , and free to laugh at my own idleness and folly as soon as I 
 get home again . 

 I arrive at the house . the blind be all draw down over the front 
 window , to keep out the sun . the little slip of garden be leave 
 solitary - bake and crack in the heat . the square be silent ; 
 desolately silent , as only a suburban square can be . I walk up and 
 down the glare pavement , resolve to find out her name before 
 I quit the place . while still undecided how to act , a shrill 
 whistle - sound doubly shrill in the silence around - make I look 
 up . 

 a tradesman 's boy - one of those town Pucks of the highway ; one of those 
 incarnation of precocious cunning , inveterate mischief , and impudent 
 humour , which great city only can produce - be approach I with his 
 empty tray under his arm . I call to he to come and speak to I . he 
 evidently belong to the neighbourhood , and might be make of some use . 

 his first answer to my inquiry , show that his master serve the 
 household at North Villa . a present of a shilling secure his attention 
 at once to the few question of any importance which I desire to put 
 to he . I learn from his reply , that the name of the master of the 
 house be " Sherwin : " and that the family only consist of Mr. and Mrs. 
 Sherwin , and the young lady , their daughter . 

 my last inquiry address to the boy be the most important of all . do 
 he know what Mr. Sherwin 's profession or employment be ? 

 his answer startle I into perfect silence . Mr. Sherwin keep a large 
 linen - draper 's shop in one of the great London thoroughfare ! the 
 boy mention the number , and the side of the way on which the house 
 stand - then ask I if I want to know anything more . I could only 
 tell he by a sign that he might leave I , and that I have hear enough . 

 enough ? if he have speak the truth , I have hear too much . 

 a linen - draper 's shop - a linen - draper 's daughter ! be I still in 
 love ? - I think of my father ; I think of the name I bear ; and this 
 time , though I might have answer the question , I dare not . 

 but the boy might be wrong . perhaps , in mere mischief , he have be 
 deceive I throughout . I determine to seek the address he have 
 mention , and ascertain the truth for myself . 

 I reach the place : there be the shop , and there the name " Sherwin " 
 over the door . one chance still remain . this Sherwin and the Sherwin 
 of Hollyoake Square might not be the same . 

 I go in and purchase something . while the man be tie up the 
 parcel , I ask he whether his master live in Hollyoake Square . 
 look a little astonished at the question , he answer in the 
 affirmative . 

 " there be a Mr. Sherwin I once know , " I say , forge in those word 
 the first link in the long chain of deceit which be afterwards to 
 fetter and degrade I - " a Mr. Sherwin who be now , as I have hear , 
 live somewhere in the Hollyoake Square neighbourhood . he be a 
 bachelor - I do not   know whether my friend and your master be the same ? " 

 " oh dear no , Sir ! my master be a married man , and have one daughter - Miss 
 Margaret - who be reckon a very fine young lady , Sir ! " and the man 
 grin as he speak - a grin that sicken and shock I . 

 I be answer at last : I have discover all . Margaret ! - I have hear she 
 name , too . Margaret ! - it have never hitherto be a favourite name with 
 I . now I feel a sort of terror as I detect myself repeat it , and 
 find a new , unimagined poetry in the sound . 

 could this be love ? - pure , first love for a shopkeeper 's daughter , whom 
 I have see for a quarter of an hour in an omnibus , and follow home for 
 another quarter of an hour ? the thing be impossible . and yet , I feel 
 a strange unwillingness to go back to our house , and see my father and 
 sister , just at that moment . 

 I be still walk onward slowly , but not in the direction of home , 
 when I meet an old college friend of my brother 's , and an acquaintance 
 of mine - a reckless , good - humour , convivial fellow . he greet I at 
 once , with uproarious cordiality ; and insist on my accompany he to 
 dine at his club . 

 if the thought that still hang heavy on my mind be only the morbid , 
 fanciful thought of the hour , here be a man whose society would 
 dissipate they . I resolve to try the experiment , and accept his 
 invitation . 

 at dinner , I try hard to rival he in jest and joviality ; I drink much 
 more than my usual quantity of wine - but it be useless . the gay word 
 come faint from my heart , and fall dead on my lip . the wine fevere , 
 but do not exhilarate I . still , the image of the dark beauty of the 
 morning be the one reign image of my thought - still , the influence 
 of the morning , at once sinister and seductive , keep its hold on my 
 heart . 

 I give up the struggle . I long to be alone again . my friend soon find 
 that my forced spirit be flag ; he try to rouse I , try to 
 talk for two , order more wine , but everything fail . yawn at last , 
 in undisguised despair , he suggest a visit to the theatre . 

 I excuse myself - profess illness - hint that the wine have be 
 too much for I . he laugh , with something of contempt as well as 
 good - nature in the laugh ; and go away to the play by himself evidently 
 feel that I be still as bad a companion as he have find I at 
 college , year ago . 

 as soon as we part I feel a sense of relief . I hesitate , walk 
 backwards and forwards a few pace in the street ; and then , silence 
 all doubt , leave my inclination to guide I as they would - I turn 
 my step for the third time in that one day to Hollyoake Square . 

 the fair summer evening be tend towards twilight ; the sun stand 
 fiery and low in a cloudless horizon ; the last loveliness of the last 
 quiet daylight hour be fade on the violet sky , as I enter the 
 square . 

 I approach the house . she be at the window - it be throw wide open . 
 a bird - cage hang rather high up , against the shutter - panel . she be 
 stand opposite to it , make a plaything for the poor captive canary 
 of a piece of sugar , which she rapidly offer and draw back again , 
 now at one bar of the cage , and now at another . the bird hop and 
 flutter up and down in his prison after the sugar , chirp as if he 
 enjoy play his part of the game with his mistress . how lovely she 
 look ! her dark hair , draw back over each cheek so as just to leave 
 the low part of the ear visible , be gather up into a thick simple 
 knot behind , without ornament of any sort . she wear a plain white dress 
 fasten round the neck , and descend over the bosom in numberless 
 little wavy plait . the cage hang just high enough to oblige she to look 
 up to it . she be laugh with all the glee of a child ; dart the 
 piece of sugar about incessantly from place to place . every moment , her 
 head and neck assume some new and lovely turn - every moment her figure 
 naturally fall into the position which show its pliant symmetry well . 
 the last - leave glow of the evening atmosphere be shin on she - the 
 farewell pause of daylight over the kindre daylight of beauty and 
 youth . 

 I keep myself conceal behind a pillar of the garden - gate ; I look , 
 hardly dare either to move or breathe ; for I fear that if she see or 
 hear I , she would leave the window . after a lapse of some minute , the 
 canary touch the sugar with his beak . 

 " there , Minnie ! " she cry laughingly , " you have catch the runaway 
 sugar , and now you shall keep it ! " 

 for a moment more , she stand quietly look at the cage ; then raise 
 herself on tip - toe , pout her lip caressingly to the bird , and 
 disappear in the interior of the room . 

 the sun go down ; the twilight shadow fall over the dreary square ; 
 the gas lamp be light far and near ; people who have be out for a 
 breath of fresh air in the field , come straggle past I by one and 
 two , on their way home - and still I linger near the house , hop she 
 might come to the window again ; but she do not re - appear . at last , 
 a servant bring candle into the room , and draw down the venetian 
 blind . know it would be useless to stay long , I leave the square . 

 I walk homeward joyfully . that second sight of she complete what the 
 first meeting have begin . the impression leave by it make I insensible 
 for the time to all bode reflection , careless of exercise the 
 small self - restraint . I give myself up to the charm that be at 
 work on I . Prudence , duty , memory and prejudice of home , be all 
 absorb and forget in love - love that I encourage , that I dwelt 
 over in the first reckless luxury of a new sensation . 

 I enter our house , think of nothing but how to see she , how to 
 speak to she , on the morrow ; murmur her name to myself ; even while my 
 hand be on the lock of my study door . the instant I be in the room , I 
 involuntarily shudder and stop speechless . Clara be there ! I be 
 not merely startle ; a cold , faint sensation come over I . my first look 
 at my sister make I feel as if I have be detect in a crime . 

 she be stand at my writing - table , and have just finish string 
 together the loose page of my manuscript , which have hitherto lay 
 disconnectedly in a drawer . there be a grand ball somewhere , to which 
 she be go that night . the dress she wear be of pale blue crape   my 
 father 's favourite colour , on she . one white flower be place in her 
 light brown hair . she stand within the soft steady light of my lamp , 
 look up towards the door from the leaf she have just tie together . 
 her slight figure appear slighter than usual , in the delicate material 
 that now clothe it . her complexion be at its pale : her face look 
 almost statue - like in its purity and repose . what a contrast to the 
 other living picture which I have see at sunset ! 

 the remembrance of the engagement that I have break come back on I 
 avengingly , as she smile , and hold my manuscript up before I to look 
 at . with that remembrance there return , too - dark than ever - the 
 ominous doubt which have depress I but a few hour since . I try to 
 steady my voice , and feel how I fail in the effort , as I speak to she : 

 " will you forgive I , Clara , for have deprive you of your ride 
 to - day ? I be afraid I have but a bad excuse - " 

 " then do not   make it , Basil ; or wait till papa can arrange it for you , in 
 a proper parliamentary way , when he come back from the House of Commons 
 to - night . see how I have be meddle with your paper ; but they be 
 in such confusion I be really afraid some of these leaf might have 
 be lose . " 

 " neither the leaf nor the writer deserve half the pain you have take 
 with they ; but I be really sorry for break our engagement . I meet an 
 old college friend - there be business too , in the morning - we din 
 together - he would take no denial . " 

 " Basil , how pale you look ! be you ill ? " 

 " no ; the heat have be a little too much for I - nothing more . " 

 " have anything happen ? I only ask , because if I can be of any use - if 
 you want I to stay at home - " 

 " certainly not , love . I wish you all success and pleasure at the ball . " 

 for a moment she do not speak ; but fix her clear , kind eye on I 
 more gravely and anxiously than usual . be she search my heart , and 
 discover the new love rise , an usurper already , in the place where 
 the love of she have reign before ? 

 love ! love for a shopkeeper 's daughter ! that thought come again , as she 
 look at I ! and , strangely mingle with it , a maxim I have often hear 
 my father repeat to Ralph - " never forget that your station be not your , 
 to do as you like with . it belong to we , and belong to your child . 
 you must keep it for they , as I have keep it for you . " 

 " I think , " resume Clara , in rather low tone than before , " that I 
 would just look into your room before I go to the ball , and see that 
 everything be properly arrange for you , in case you have any idea of 
 write tonight ; I have just time to do this while my aunt , who be go 
 with I , be upstairs alter she toilette . but perhaps you do not   feel 
 inclined to write ? " 

 " I will try at least . " 

 " can I do anything more ? would you like my nosegay leave in the 
 room ? - the flower smell so fresh ! I can easily get another . look at the 
 rose , my favourite white rose , that always remind I of my own garden 
 at the dear old Park ! " 

 " thank you , Clara ; but I think the nosegay be fitter for your hand than 
 my table . " 

 " good night , Basil . " 

 " good night . " 

 she walk to the door , then turn round , and smile as if she be 
 about to speak again ; but check herself , and merely look at I for 
 an instant . in that instant , however , the smile leave her face , and the 
 grave , anxious expression come again . she go out softly . a few minute 
 afterwards the roll of the carriage which take she and her companion 
 to the ball , die away heavily on my ear . I be leave alone in the 
 house - alone for the night . 

 VIII . 

 my manuscript lie before I , set in order by Clara 's careful hand . 
 I slowly turn over the leaf one by one ; but my eye only fall 
 mechanically on the writing . yet one day since , and how much ambition , 
 how much hope , how many of my heart 's dear sensation and my mind 's 
 high thought dwelt in those poor paper leaf , in those 
 little crab mark of pen and ink ! now I could look on they 
 indifferently - almost as a stranger would have look . the day of calm 
 study , of steady toil of thought , seem depart for ever . stir 
 idea ; store of knowledge patiently heap up ; vision of well sight 
 than this world can show , fall freshly and sunnily over the page 
 of my first book ; all these be past and go - wither up by the 
 hot breath of the sens - doom by a paltry fate , whose germ be the 
 accident of an idle day ! 

 I hastily put the manuscript aside . my unexpected interview with Clara 
 have calm the turbulent sensation of the evening : but the fatal 
 influence of the dark beauty remain with I still . how could I write ? 

 I sit down at the open window . it be at the back of the house , and 
 look out on a strip of garden - London garden - a close - shut dungeon for 
 nature , where stunt tree and droop flower seem visibly pin 
 for the free air and sunlight of the country , in their sooty atmosphere , 
 amid their prison of high brick wall . but the place give room for the 
 air to blow in it , and distance the tumult of the busy street . the 
 moon be up , shin round tenderly by a little border - work of pale 
 yellow light . elsewhere , the awful void of night be starless ; the dark 
 lustre of space shine without a cloud . 

 a presentiment arise within I , that in this still and solitary hour 
 would occur my decisive , my final struggle with myself . I feel that my 
 heart 's life or death be set on the hazard of the night . 

 this new love that be in I ; this giant sensation of a day 's growth , 
 be first love . Hitherto , I have be heart - whole . I have know nothing 
 of the passion , which be the absorbing passion of humanity . no woman 
 have ever before stand between I and my ambition , my occupation , my 
 amusement . no woman have ever before inspire I with the sensation 
 which I now feel . 

 in try to realise my position , there be this one question to 
 consider ; be I still strong enough to resist the temptation which 
 accident have throw in my way ? I have this one incentive to resistance : 
 the conviction that , if I succumb , as far as my family prospect be 
 concern , I should be a ruin man . 

 I know my father 's character well : I know how far his affection and 
 his sympathy might prevail over his prejudice - even over his 
 principle - in some peculiar case ; and this very knowledge convince 
 I that the consequence of a degrade marriage contract by his son 
  degrade in regard to rank , would be terrible : fatal to one , perhaps 
 to both . every other irregularity - every other offence even - he 
 might soon or later forgive . this irregularity , this offence , 
 never - never , though his heart break in the struggle . I be as sure of 
 it , as I be of my own existence at that moment . 

 I love she ! all that I feel , all that I know , be sum up in those 
 few word ! deteriorate as my passion be in its effect on the 
 exercise of my mental power , and on my candour and sense of duty in 
 my intercourse with home , it be a pure feeling towards she . this be 
 truth . if I lay on my death - bed , at the present moment , and know that , 
 at the Judgment Day , I should be try by the truth or falsehood of the 
 line just write , I could say with my last breath : so be it ; let they 
 remain . 

 but what matter my love for she ? however worthy of it she might be , I 
 have misplace it , because chance - the same chance which might have 
 give her station and family - have place she in a rank of life far - too 
 far - below mine . as the daughter of a " gentleman , " my father 's welcome , 
 my father 's affection , would have be bestow on she , when I take she 
 home as my wife . as the daughter of a tradesman , my father 's anger , my 
 father 's misery , my own ruin perhaps besides , would be the fatal dower 
 that a marriage would confer on she . what make all this difference ? a 
 social prejudice . yes : but a prejudice which have be a principle - nay , 
 more , a religion - in our house , since my birth ; and for century before 
 it . 

  how strange that foresight of love which precipitate the future into 
 the present ! here be I think of she as my wife , before , perhaps , she 
 have a suspicion of the passion with which she have inspire I - vex my 
 heart , weary my thought , before I have even speak to she , as if the 
 perilous discovery of our marriage be already at hand ! I have think 
 since how unnatural I should have consider this , if I have read it in a 
 book . 

 how could I well crush the desire to see she , to speak to she , on the 
 morrow ? should I leave London , leave England , fly from the temptation , 
 no matter where , or at what sacrifice ? or should I take refuge in my 
 book - the calm , changeless old friend of my early fireside hour ? 
 have I resolution enough to wear my heart out by hard , serious , slaving 
 study ? if I leave London on the morrow , could I feel secure , in my own 
 conscience , that I should not return the day after ! 

 while , throughout the hour of the night , I be thus vainly strive to 
 hold calm counsel with myself ; the base think never occur to I , 
 which might have occur to some other man , in my position : why 
 marry the girl , because I love she ? why , with my money , my station , my 
 opportunity , obstinately connect love and marriage as one idea ; and 
 make a dilemma and a danger where neither need exist ? have such a thought 
 as this , in the faint , the most shadowy form , cross my mind , I 
 should have shrink from it , have shrink from my self ; with horror . 
 whatever fresh degradation may be yet in store for I , this one 
 console and sanctify remembrance must still be mine . my love for 
 Margaret Sherwin be worthy to be offer to the pure and perfect 
 woman that ever God create . 

 the night advance - the noise faintly reach I from the street , 
 sink and cease - my lamp flicker and go out - I hear the carriage 
 return with Clara from the ball - the first cold cloud of day rise and 
 hide the wan orb of the moon - the air be cool with its morning 
 freshness : the earth be purify with its morning dew - and still I sit 
 by my open window , strive with my burn love - thought of Margaret ; 
 strive to think collectedly and usefully - abandon to a struggle ever 
 renewing , yet never change ; and always hour after hour , a struggle in 
 vain . 

 at last I begin to think less and less distinctly - a few moment more , 
 and I sink into a restless , feverish slumber . then begin another , and 
 a more perilous ordeal for I - the ordeal of dream . thought and 
 sensation which have be more and more weakly restrain with each 
 succeed hour of wakefulness , now riot within I in perfect 
 liberation from all control . 

 this be what I dream : 

 I stand on a wide plain . on one side , it be bound by thick wood , 
 whose dark secret depth look unfathomable to the eye : on the other , 
 by hill , ever rise higher and high yet , until they be lose in 
 bright , beautifully white cloud , gleam in refulgent sunlight . on 
 the side above the wood , the sky be dark and vaporous . it seem as if 
 some thick exhalation have arise from beneath the tree , and overspread 
 the clear firmament throughout this portion of the scene . 

 as I still stand on the plain and look around , I see a woman come 
 towards I from the wood . her stature be tall ; her black hair flow 
 about her unconfined ; her robe be of the dun hue of the vapour and mist 
 which hang above the tree , and fall to her foot in dark thick fold . 
 she come on towards I swiftly and softly , pass over the ground like 
 cloud - shadow over the ripe corn - field or the calm water . 

 I look to the other side , towards the hill ; and there be another 
 woman descend from their bright summit ; and her robe be white , 
 and pure , and glistening . her face be illumine with a light , like 
 the light of the harvest - moon ; and her footstep , as she descend the 
 hill , leave a long track of brightness , that sparkle far behind she , 
 like the track of the star when the winter night be clear and cold . she 
 come to the place where the hill and the plain be join together . 
 then she stop , and I know that she be watch I from afar off . 

 meanwhile , the woman from the dark wood still approach ; never pause 
 on her path , like the woman from the fair hill . and now I could see she 
 face plainly . her eye be lustrous and fascinating , as the eye of 
 a serpent - large , dark and soft , as the eye of the wild doe . her lip 
 be part with a languid smile ; and she draw back the long hair , which 
 lie over her cheek , her neck , her bosom , while I be gaze on she . 

 then , I feel as if a light be shin on I from the other side . I 
 turn to look , and there be the woman from the hill beckon I away 
 to ascend with she towards the bright cloud above . her arm , as she 
 hold it forth , shine fair , even against the fair hill ; and from 
 her outstretched hand come long thin ray of tremble light , which 
 penetrate to where I stand , cool and calm wherever they touch 
 I . 

 but the woman from the wood still come near and nearer , until I 
 could feel her hot breath on my face . her eye look into mine , and 
 fascinate they , as she hold out her arm to embrace I . I touch she 
 hand , and in an instant the touch run through I like fire , from head to 
 foot . then , still look intently on I with her wild bright eye , she 
 clasp her supple arm round my neck , and draw I a few pace away with 
 she towards the wood . 

 I feel the ray of light that have touch I from the beckon hand , 
 depart ; and yet once more I look towards the woman from the hill . 
 she be ascend again towards the bright cloud , and ever and anon she 
 stop and turn round , wring her hand and let her head droop , 
 as if in bitter grief . the last time I see she look towards I , she 
 be near the cloud . she cover her face with her robe , and kneel down 
 where she stand . after this I discern no more of she . for now the 
 woman from the wood clasp I more closely than before , press she 
 warm lip on mine ; and it be as if her long hair fall round we 
 both , spread over my eye like a veil , to hide from they the fair 
 hill - top , and the woman who be walk onward to the bright cloud 
 above . 

 I be draw along in the arm of the dark woman , with my blood burn 
 and my breath fail I , until we enter the secret recess that lay 
 amid the unfathomable depth of tree . there , she encircle I in the 
 fold of her dusky robe , and lay her cheek close to mine , and murmur 
 a mysterious music in my ear , amid the midnight silence and darkness of 
 all around we . and I have no thought of return to the plain again ; for 
 I have forget the woman from the fair hill , and have give myself up , 
 heart , and soul , and body , to the woman from the dark wood . 

 here the dream end , and I awake . 

 it be broad daylight . the sun shine brilliantly , the sky be cloudless . 
 I look at my watch ; it have stop . shortly afterwards I hear the 
 hall clock strike six . 

 my dream be vividly impressed on my memory , especially the latter 
 part of it . be it a warning of come event , foreshadow in the wild 
 vision of sleep ? but to what purpose could this dream , or indeed any 
 dream , tend ? why have it remain incomplete , fail to show I the 
 visionary consequence of my visionary action ? what superstition to 
 ask ! what a waste of attention to bestow it on such a trifle as a dream ! 

 still , this trifle have produce one abiding result . I know it not 
 then ; but I know it now . as I look out on the reviving , re - assuring 
 sunlight , it be easy enough for I to dismiss as ridiculous from my 
 mind , or rather from my conscience , the tendency to see in the two 
 shadowy form of my dream , the type of two real live being , whose 
 name almost tremble into utterance on my lip ; but I could not also 
 dismiss from my heart the love - image which that dream have set up there 
 for the worship of the sens . those result of the night still remain 
 within I , grow and strengthen with every minute . 

 if I have be tell beforehand how the mere sight of the morning would 
 reanimate and embolden I , I should have scout the prediction as 
 too outrageous for consideration ; yet so it be . the moody and boding 
 reflection , the fear and struggle of the hour of darkness be go 
 with the daylight . the love - thought of Margaret alone remain , and now 
 remain unquestioned and unopposed . be my conviction of a few hour 
 since , like the night - mist that fade before return sunshine ? I know 
 not . but I be young ; and each new morning be as much the new life of 
 youth , as the new life of Nature . 

 so I leave my study and go out . consequence might come how they would , 
 and when they would ; I think of they no more . it seem as if I have 
 cast off every melancholy thought , in leave my room ; as if my heart 
 have spring up more elastic than ever , after the burden that have be 
 lay on it during the night . enjoyment for the present , hope for the 
 future , and chance and fortune to trust in to the very last ! this be 
 my creed , as I walk into the street , determine to see Margaret again , 
 and to tell she of my love before the day be out . in the exhilaration 
 of the fresh air and the gay sunshine , I turn my step towards 
 Hollyoake Square , almost as light - hearted as a boy let loose from 
 school , joyously repeat Shakespeare 's line as I go : 

  " Hope be a lover 's staff ; walk hence with that , 
  and manage it against despairing thought . " 

 IX . 

 London be rouse everywhere into morning activity , as I pass 
 through the street . the shutter be be remove from the window 
 of public - house : the drink - vampyre that suck the life of London , be 
 open their eye betime to look abroad for the new day 's prey ! 
 small tobacco and provision - shop in poor neighbourhood ; dirty little 
 eating - house , exhale greasy - smell steam , and display a leaf of 
 yesterday 's paper , stain and fly - blow , hang in the window - be 
 already ply , or make ready to ply , their daily trade . here , 
 a labour man , late for his work , hurry by ; there , a hale 
 old gentleman start for his early walk before breakfast . now a 
 market - cart , already unload , pass I on its way back to the country ; 
 now , a cab , laden with luggage and carry pale , sleepy - look people , 
 rattle by , bind for the morning train or the morning steamboat . I 
 see the mighty vitality of the great city renew itself in every 
 direction ; and I feel an unwonted interest in the sight . it be as if 
 all thing , on all side , be reflect before I the aspect of my own 
 heart . 

 but the quiet and torpor of the night still hang over Hollyoake Square . 
 that dreary neighbourhood seem to vindicate its dreariness by be 
 the last to awaken even to a semblance of activity and life . nothing 
 be stir as yet at North Villa . I walk on , beyond the last house , 
 into the sooty London field ; and try to think of the course I ought 
 to pursue in order to see Margaret , and speak to she , before I turn 
 homeward again . after the lapse of more than half an hour , I return 
 to the square , without plan or project ; but resolve , nevertheless , to 
 carry my point . 

 the garden - gate of North Villa be now open . one of the female servant 
 of the house be stand at it , to breathe the fresh air , and look 
 about she , before the duty of the day begin . I advance ; determined , 
 if money and persuasion could do it , to secure her service . 

 she be young   that be one chance in my favour !   - plump , florid , and 
 evidently not by any mean careless about her personal appearance   that 
 give I another !   as she see I approach she , she smile ; and 
 pass her apron hurriedly over her face - carefully polish it for my 
 inspection , much as a broker polish a piece of furniture when you stop 
 to look at it . 

 " be you in Mr. Sherwin 's service ? " - I ask , as I get to the garden 
 gate . 

 " as plain cook , Sir , " answer the girl , administer to her face a 
 final and furious rub of the apron . 

 " should you be very much surprised if I ask you to do I a great 
 favour ? " 

 " well - really , Sir - you be quite a stranger to I - I be sure I do not 
 know ! " she stop , and transfer the apron - rub to her arm . 

 " I hope we shall not be stranger long . suppose I begin our 
 acquaintance , by tell you that you would look pretty in bright 
 cap - ribbon , and ask you to buy some , just to see whether I be not 
 right ? " 

 " it be very kind of you to say so , Sir ; and thank you . but cap and 
 ribbon be the last thing I can buy while I be in this place . 
 Master 's master and missus too , here ; and drive we half wild with the 
 fuss he make about our cap and ribbon . he be such an austerious man , 
 that he will have our cap as he like them . it be bad enough when a 
 missus meddle with a poor servant 's ribbon ; but to have master come 
 down into the kitchen , and - well , it be no use tell you of it , 
 Sir - and - and thank you , Sir , for what you have   give I , all the same ! " 

 " I hope this be not the last time I shall make you a present . and now I 
 must come to the favour I want to ask of you : can you keep a secret ? " 

 " that I can , Sir ! I have   kep ' a many secret since I have   be out at 
 service . " 

 " well : I want you to find I an opportunity of speak to your young 
 lady - " 

 " to Miss Margaret , Sir ? " 

 " yes . I want an opportunity of see Miss Margaret , and speak to she 
 in private - and not a word must be say to she about it , beforehand . " 

 " oh Lord , Sir ! I could not   dare to do it ! " 

 " Come ! come ! can not   you guess why I want to see your young lady , and what 
 I want to say to she ? " 

 the girl smile , and shake her head archly . " perhaps you be in love with 
 Miss Margaret , Sir ! - but I could not   do it ! I could not   dare to do it ! " 

 " very well ; but you can tell I at least , whether Miss Margaret ever 
 go out to take a walk ? " 

 " oh , yes , Sir ; mostly every day . " 

 " do you ever go out with she ? - just to take care of she when no one else 
 can be spar ? " 

 " do not   ask I - please , Sir , do not ! " she crumple her apron between her 
 finger , with a very piteous and perplexed air . " I do not   know you ; 
 and Miss Margaret do not   know you , I be sure - I could not , Sir , I really 
 could not ! " 

 " take a good look at I ! do you think I be likely to do you or your 
 young lady any harm ? be I too dangerous a man to be trust ? would you 
 believe I on my promise ? " 

 " yes , Sir , I be sure I would ! - be so kind and so civil to I , too ! " 
  a fresh arrangement of the cap follow this speech . 

 " then suppose I promise , in the first place , not to tell Miss Margaret 
 that I have speak to you about she at all . and suppose I promise , in 
 the second place , that , if you tell I when you and Miss Margaret go 
 out together , I would only speak to she while she be in your sight , and 
 would leave she the moment you wish I to go away . do not   you think you 
 could venture to help I , if I promise all that ? " 

 " well , Sir , that would make a difference , to be sure . but then , it be 
 master I be so afraid of - could not   you speak to master first , Sir ? " 

 " suppose you be in Miss Margaret 's place , would you like to be make 
 love to , by your father 's authority , without your own wish be 
 consult first ? would you like an offer of marriage , deliver like a 
 message , by mean of your father ? come , tell I honestly , would you ? " 

 she laugh , and shake her head very expressively . I know the strength 
 of my last argument , and repeat it : " suppose you be in Miss 
 Margaret 's place ? " 

 " hush ! do not   speak so loud , " resume the girl in a confidential whisper . 
 " I be sure you be a gentleman . I should like to help you - if I could only 
 dare to do it , I should indeed ! " 

 " that be a good girl , " I say . " now tell I , when do Miss Margaret go 
 out to - day ; and who go with she ? " 

 " dear ! dear ! - it be very wrong to say it ; but I must . she will go out with 
 I to market , this morning , at eleven o'clock . she be do it for the 
 last week . Master do not   like it ; but Missus beg and pray she might ; 
 for Missus say she will not   be fit to be marry , if she know nothing 
 about housekeeping , and price , and what be good meat , and what be not , 
 and all that , you know . " 

 " thank you a thousand time ! you have give I all the help I want . I will 
 be here before eleven , wait for you to come out . " 

 " oh , please do not , Sir - I wish I have not   tell you - I ought not , indeed I 
 ought not ! " 

 " no fear - you shall not lose by what you have tell I - I promise all I 
 say I would promise - good bye . and mind , not a word to Miss Margaret 
 till I see she ! " 

 as I hurry away , I hear the girl run a few pace after I - then 
 stop - then return , and close the garden gate , softly . she have evidently 
 put herself once more in Miss Margaret 's place ; and have give up all 
 idea of further resistance as she do so . 

 how should I occupy the hour until eleven o'clock ? Deceit 
 whisper : - go home ; avoid even the chance of exciting suspicion , by 
 breakfasting with your family as usual . and as deceit counsel , so I 
 act . 

 I never remember Clara more kind , more ready with all those trifle 
 little care and attention which have so exquisite a grace , when 
 offer by a woman to a man , and especially by a sister to a brother , as 
 when she and I and my father assemble together at the breakfast - table . 
 I now recollect with shame how little I think about she , or speak 
 to she on that morning ; with how little hesitation or self - reproach I 
 excuse myself from accept an engagement which she wish to make 
 with I for that day . my father be absorb in some matter of business ; 
 to he she could not speak . it be to I that she address all her 
 wonte question and remark of the morning . I hardly listen to they ; 
 I answer they carelessly and briefly . the moment breakfast be over , 
 without a word of explanation I hastily leave the house again . 

 as I descend the step , I glance by accident at the dining - room 
 window . Clara be look after I from it . there be the same anxious 
 expression on her face which it have wear when she leave I the evening 
 before . she smile as our eye meet - a sad , faint smile that make she 
 look unlike herself . but it produce no impression on I then : I have no 
 attention for anything but my approach interview with Margaret . 
 my life throb and burn within I , in that direction : it be all 
 coldness , torpor , insensibility , in every other . 

 I reach Hollyoake Square nearly an hour before the appoint time . in 
 the suspense and impatience of that long interval , it be impossible to 
 be a moment in repose . I walk incessantly up and down the square , and 
 round and round the neighbourhood , hear each quarter chime from a 
 church clock near , and mechanically quicken my pace the nearer the 
 time come for the hour to strike . at last , I hear the first peal of the 
 eventful eleven . before the clock be silent , I have take up my position 
 within view of the gate of North Villa . 

 five minute pass - ten - and no one appear . in my impatience , I could 
 almost have ring the bell and enter the house , no matter who might 
 be there , or what might be the result . the first quarter strike ; and 
 at that very moment I hear the door open , and see Margaret , and the 
 servant with whom I have speak , descend the step . 

 they pass out slowly through the garden gate , and walk down the 
 square , away from where I be stand . the servant notice I by one 
 significant look , as they go on . her young mistress do not appear 
 to see I . at first , my agitation be so violent that I be perfectly 
 incapable of follow they a single step . in a few moment I recover 
 myself ; and hasten to overtake they , before they arrive at a more 
 frequent part of the neighbourhood . 

 as I approach her side , Margaret turn suddenly and look at I , 
 with an expression of anger and astonishment in her eye . the next 
 instant , her lovely face become ting all over with a deep , burning 
 blush ; her head droop a little ; she hesitate for a moment ; and then 
 abruptly quicken her pace . do she remember I ? the mere chance that 
 she do , give I confidence : i - 

  - no ! I can not write down the word that I say to she . recollect the 
 end to which our fatal interview lead , I recoil at the very thought of 
 expose to other , or of preserve in any permanent form , the word 
 in which I first confess my love . it may be pride - miserable , useless 
 pride - which animate I with this feeling : but I can not overcome it . 
 remember what I do , I be ashamed to write , ashamed to recall , what 
 I say at my first interview with Margaret Sherwin . I can give no good 
 reason for the sensation which now influence I ; I can not analyse they ; 
 and I would not if I could . 

 let it be enough to say that I risk everything , and speak to she . my 
 word , confuse as they be , come hotly , eagerly , and eloquently from 
 my heart . in the space of a few minute , I confess to she all , and 
 more than all , that I have here painfully relate in many page . I make 
 use of my name and my rank in life - even now , my cheek burn while I 
 think of it - to dazzle her girl 's pride , to make she listen to I 
 for the sake of my station , if she would not for the sake of my suit , 
 however honourably urge . never before have I commit the meanness of 
 trust to my social advantage , what I fear to trust to myself . it 
 be true that love soar high than the other passion ; but it can stoop 
 low as well . 

 her answer to all that I urge be confused , commonplace , and chill 
 enough . I have surprise she - frighten she - it be impossible she could 
 listen to such address from a total stranger - it be very wrong of I 
 to speak , and of she to stop and hear I - I should remember what become 
 I as a gentleman , and should not make such advance to she again - I 
 know nothing of she - it be impossible I could really care about she 
 in so short a time - she must beg that I would allow she to proceed 
 unhindered . 

 thus she speak ; sometimes stand still , sometimes move hurriedly 
 a few step forward . she might have express herself severely , even 
 angrily ; but nothing she could have say would have counteract 
 the fascination that her presence exercise over I . I see her face , 
 lovely than ever in its confusion , in its rapid change of expression ; 
 I see her eloquent eye once or twice raise to mine , then instantly 
 withdraw again - and so long as I could look at she , I care not what I 
 listen to . she be only speak what she have be educate to speak ; 
 it be not in her word that I seek the clue to her thought and 
 sensation ; but in the tone of her voice , in the language of her eye , 
 in the whole expression of her face . all these contain indication 
 which reassure I . I try everything that respect , that the persuasion 
 of love could urge , to win her consent to our meeting again ; but she 
 only answer with repetition of what she have say before , walk 
 onward rapidly while she speak . the servant , who have hitherto linger 
 a few pace behind , now advanced to her young mistress 's side , with a 
 significant look , as if to remind I of my promise . say a few parting 
 word , I let they proceed : at this first interview , to have delay they 
 long would have be risk too much . 

 as they walk away , the servant turn round , nod her head and 
 smile , as if to assure I that I have lose nothing by the forbearance 
 which I have exercise . Margaret neither linger nor look back . this 
 last proof of modesty and reserve , so far from discourage , attract 
 I to she more powerfully than ever . after a first interview , it be the 
 most become virtue she could have show . all my love for she before , 
 seem as nothing compare with my love for she now that she have leave 
 I , and leave I without a parting look . 

 what course should I next pursue ? could I expect that Margaret , after 
 what she have say , would go out again at the same hour on the morrow ? 
 no : she would not so soon abandon the modesty and restraint that she have 
 show at our first interview . how communicate with she ? how manage most 
 skilfully to make good the first favourable impression which vanity 
 whisper I have already produce ? I determine to write to she . 

 how different be the writing of that letter , to the writing of those 
 once - treasure page of my romance , which I have now abandon for ever ! 
 how slowly I work ; how cautiously and diffidently I build up sentence 
 after sentence , and doubtingly set a stop here , and laboriously round 
 off a paragraph there , when I toil in the service of ambition ! now , 
 when I have give myself up to the service of love , how rapidly the pen 
 run over the paper ; how much more freely and smoothly the desire of the 
 heart flow into word , than the thought of the mind ! composition be 
 an instinct now , an art no long . I could write eloquently , and yet 
 write without pause for an expression or blot a word - it be the 
 slow progress up the hill , in the service of ambition ; it be the swift 
  too swift   career down it , in the service of love ! 

 there be no need to describe the content of my letter to Margaret ; they 
 comprise a mere recapitulation of what I have already say to she . I 
 insist often and strongly on the honourable purpose of my suit ; and 
 end by entreat she to write an answer , and consent to allow I 
 another interview . 

 the letter be deliver by the servant . another present , a little more 
 timely persuasion , and above all , the regard I have show to my promise , 
 win the girl with all her heart to my interest . she be ready to help 
 I in every way , as long as her interference could be keep a secret from 
 her master . 

 I wait a day for the reply to my letter ; but none come . the servant 
 could give I no explanation of this silence . her young mistress have not 
 say one word to she about I , since the morning when we have meet . 
 still not discourage , I write again . the letter contain some lover 's 
 threat this time , as well as lover 's entreaty ; and it produce its 
 effect - an answer come . 

 it be very short - rather hurriedly and tremblingly write - and simply 
 say that the difference between my rank and hers make it her duty to 
 request of I , that neither by word nor by letter should I ever address 
 she again . 

 " difference in rank , " - that be the only objection then ! " her duty " - it 
 be not from inclination that she refuse I ! so young a creature ; and 
 yet so noble in self - sacrifice , so firm in her integrity ! I resolve to 
 disobey her injunction , and see she again . my rank ! what be my rank ? 
 something to cast at Margaret 's foot , for Margaret to trample on ! 

 once more I seek the aid of my faithful ally , the servant . after 
 delay which half madden I with impatience , insignificant though 
 they be , she contrive to fulfil my wish . one afternoon , while 
 Mr. Sherwin be away at business , and while his wife have go out , I 
 succeed in gain admission to the garden at the back of the house , 
 where Margaret be then occupy in water some flower . 

 she start as she see I , and attempt to return to the house . I 
 take her hand to detain she . she withdraw it , but neither abruptly 
 nor angrily . I seize the opportunity , while she hesitate whether to 
 persist or not in retire ; and repeat what I have already say to she 
 at our first interview   what be the language of love but a language of 
 repetition ? . she answer , as she have answer I in her letter : the 
 difference in our rank make it her duty to discourage I . 

 " but if this difference do not exist , " I say : " if we be both live 
 in the same rank , Margaret - " 

 she look up quickly ; then move away a step or two , as I address she 
 by her christian name . 

 " be you offend with I for call you Margaret so soon ? I do not 
 think of you as Miss Sherwin , but as Margaret - be you offend with I 
 for speak as I think ? " 

 no : she ought not to be offend with I , or with anybody , for do 
 that . 

 " suppose this difference in rank , which you so cruelly insist on , do 
 not exist , would you tell I not to hope , not to speak then , as coldly 
 as you tell I now ? " 

 I must not ask she that - it be no use - the difference in rank do 
 exist . 

 " perhaps I have meet you too late ? - perhaps you be already - " 

 " no ! oh , no ! " - she stop abruptly , as the word pass her lip . the 
 same lovely blush which I have before see spread over her face , rise 
 on it now . she evidently feel that she have unguardedly say too much : 
 that she have give I an answer in a case where , accord to every 
 establish love - law of the female code , I have no right to expect one . 
 her next word accuse I - but in very low and broken tone - of have 
 commit an intrusion which she should hardly have expect from a 
 gentleman in my position . 

 " I will regain your well opinion , " I say , eagerly catch at the 
 most favourable interpretation of her last word , " by see you for the 
 next time , and for all time after , with your father 's full permission . 
 I will write to - day , and ask for a private interview with he . I will 
 tell he all I have tell you : I will tell he that you take a rank in 
 beauty and goodness , which be the high rank in the land - a far high 
 rank than mine - the only rank I desire . "   a smile , which she vainly 
 strove to repress , steal charmingly to her lip .   " yes , I will do this ; 
 I will never leave he till his answer be favourable - and then what 
 would be yours ? one word , Margaret ; one word before I go - " 

 I attempt to take her hand a second time ; but she break from I , and 
 hurry into the house . 

 what more could I desire ? what more could the modesty and timidity of a 
 young girl concede to I ? 

 the moment I reach home , I write to Mr. Sherwin . the letter be 
 superscribe " private ; " and simply request an interview with he on a 
 subject of importance , at any hour he might mention . unwilling to trust 
 what I have write to the post , I send my note by a messenger - not one 
 of our own servant , caution forbid that - and instruct the man to 
 wait for an answer : if Mr. Sherwin be out , to wait till he come home . 

 after a long delay - long to I ; for my impatience would fain have 
 turn hour into minute - I receive a reply . it be write on 
 gilt - edge letter - paper , in a handwriting vulgarise by innumerable 
 flourish . Mr. Sherwin present his respectful compliment , and 
 would be happy to have the honour of see I at North Villa , if quite 
 convenient , at five o'clock to - morrow afternoon . 

 I fold up the letter carefully : it be almost as precious as a letter 
 from Margaret herself . that night I pass sleeplessly , revolve in 
 my mind every possible course that I could take at the interview of the 
 morrow . it would be a difficult and a delicate business . I know nothing 
 of Mr. Sherwin 's character ; yet I must trust he with a secret which I 
 dare not trust to my own father . any proposal for pay address 
 to his daughter , come from one in my position , might appear open 
 to suspicion . what could I say about marriage ? a public , acknowledge 
 marriage be impossible : a private marriage might be a bold , if 
 not fatal proposal . I could come to no other conclusion , reflect as 
 anxiously as I might , than that it be good for I to speak candidly at 
 all hazard . I could be candid enough when it suit my purpose ! 

 it be not till the next day , when the time approach for my interview 
 with Mr. Sherwin , that I thoroughly rouse myself to face the 
 plain necessity of my position . determined to try what impression 
 appearance could make on he , I take unusual pain with my dress ; and 
 more , I apply to a friend whom I could rely on as likely to ask no 
 question - I write this in shame and sorrow : I tell truth here , where it 
 be hard penance to tell it - I apply , I say , to a friend for the loan 
 of one of his carriage to take I to North Villa ; fear the risk 
 of borrow my father 's carriage , or my sister 's - know the common 
 weakness of rank - worship and wealth - worship in man of Mr. Sherwin 's 
 order , and meanly determine to profit by it to the utmost . my friend 's 
 carriage be willingly lend I . by my direction , it take I up at the 
 appoint hour , at a shop where I be a regular customer . 

 x. 

 on my arrival at North Villa , I be show into what I presume be the 
 drawing - room . 

 everything be oppressively new . the brilliantly - varnish door crack 
 with a report like a pistol when it be open ; the paper on the wall , 
 with its gaudy pattern of bird , trelli - work , and flower , in gold , 
 red , and green on a white ground , look hardly dry yet ; the showy 
 window - curtain of white and sky - blue , and the still showy carpet of 
 red and yellow , seem as if they have come out of the shop yesterday ; 
 the round rosewood table be in a painfully high state of polish ; the 
 morocco - bind picture book that lie on it , look as if they have never 
 be move or open since they have be buy ; not one leaf even 
 of the music on the piano be dog - eared or worn . never be a richly 
 furnish room more thoroughly comfortless than this - the eye ache at 
 look round it . there be no repose anywhere . the print of the Queen , 
 hang lonely on the wall , in its heavy gilt frame , with a large crown 
 at the top , glare on you : the paper , the curtain , the carpet glare 
 on you : the book , the wax - flower in glass - case , the chair in flare 
 chintz - cover , the china plat on the door , the blue and pink glass 
 vas and cup range on the chimney - piece , the over - ornament 
 chiffonier with Tonbridge toy and long - neck smell bottle on 
 their upper shelf - all glare on you . there be no look of shadow , 
 shelter , secrecy , or retirement in any one nook or corner of those four 
 gaudy wall . all surround object seem startlingly near to the eye ; 
 much near than they really be . the room would have give a nervous 
 man the headache , before he have be in it a quarter of an hour . 

 I be not keep wait long . another violent crack from the new door , 
 announce the entrance of Mr. Sherwin himself . 

 he be a tall , thin man : rather round - shoulder ; weak at the knee , and 
 try to conceal the weakness in the breadth of his trowser . he wear 
 a white cravat , and an absurdly high shirt collar . his complexion 
 be sallow ; his eye be small , black , bright , and incessantly in 
 motion - indeed , all his feature be singularly mobile : they be 
 affect by nervous contraction and spasm which be constantly 
 draw up and down in all direction the brow , the mouth , and the 
 muscle of the cheek . his hair have be black , but be now turn to a 
 sort of iron - grey ; it be very dry , wiry , and plentiful , and part of 
 it project almost horizontally over his forehead . he have a habit of 
 stretch it in this direction , by irritably comb it out , from time 
 to time , with his finger . his lip be thin and colourless , the line 
 about they be numerous and strongly marked . have I see he under 
 ordinary circumstance , I should have set he down as a little - minded 
 man ; a small tyrant in his own way over those dependent on he ; 
 a pompous parasite to those above he - a great stickler for the 
 conventional respectability of life , and a great believer in his own 
 infallibility . but he be Margaret 's father ; and I be determined to be 
 pleased with he . 

 he make I a low and rather a cringe bow - then look to the window , 
 and see the carriage wait for I at his door , make another bow , 
 and insist on relieve I of my hat with his own hand . this do , he 
 cough , and beg to know what he could do for I . 

 I feel some difficulty in open my business to he . it be necessary 
 to speak , however , at once - I begin with an apology . 

 " I be afraid , Mr. Sherwin , that this intrusion on the part of a perfect 
 stranger - " 

 " not entirely a stranger , Sir , if I may be allow to say so . " 

 " indeed ! " 

 " I have the great pleasure , Sir , and profit , and - and , indeed , 
 advantage - of be show over your town residence last year , when the 
 family be absent from London . a very beautiful house - I happen to be 
 acquaint with the steward of your respected father : he be kind enough 
 to allow I to walk through the room . a treat ; quite an intellectual 
 treat - the furniture and hanging , and so on , arrange in such a chaste 
 style - and the picture , some of the fine piece I ever see - I be 
 delighted - quite delighted , indeed . " 

 he speak in under - tone , lay great stress upon particular word that 
 be evidently favourite with he - such as , " indeed . " not only his 
 eye , but his whole face , seem to be nervously blink and wink 
 all the time he be address I , in the embarrassment and anxiety 
 which I then feel , this peculiarity fidgette and bewilder I more 
 than I can describe . I would have give the world to have have his back 
 turn , before I speak to he again . 

 " I be delighted to hear that my family and my name be not unknown to 
 you , Mr. Sherwin , " I resume . " under those circumstance , I shall feel 
 less hesitation and difficulty in make you acquaint with the object 
 of my visit . " 

 " just so . may I offer you anything ? - a glass of sherry , a - " 

 " nothing , thank you . in the first place , Mr. Sherwin , I have reason 
 for wish that this interview , whatever result it may lead to , may 
 be consider strictly confidential . I be sure I can depend on your 
 favour I thus far ? " 

 " certainly - most certainly - the strict secrecy of course - pray go 
 on . " 

 he draw his chair a little near to I . through all his blink and 
 winking , I could see a latent expression of cunning and curiosity in his 
 eye . my card be in his hand : he be nervously roll and unroll 
 it , without a moment 's cessation , in his anxiety to hear what I have to 
 say . 

 " I must also beg you to suspend your judgment until you have hear I 
 to the end . you may be dispose to view - to view , I say , unfavourably at 
 first - in short , Mr. Sherwin , without further preface , the object of my 
 visit be connect with your daughter , with Miss Margaret Sherwin - " 

 " my daughter ! bless my soul - God bless my soul , I really can not 
 imagine - " 

 he stop , half - breathless , bend forward towards I , and crumple 
 my card between his finger into the small possible dimension . 

 " rather more than a week ago , " I continue , " I accidentally meet Miss 
 Sherwin in an omnibus , accompany by a lady old than herself - " 

 " my wife ; Mrs. Sherwin , " he say , impatiently motion with his 
 hand , as if " Mrs. Sherwin " be some insignificant obstacle to the 
 conversation , which he wish to clear out of the way as fast as 
 possible . 

 " you will not probably be surprised to hear that I be strike by Miss 
 Sherwin 's extreme beauty . the impression she make on I be something 
 more , however , than a mere momentary feeling of admiration . to speak 
 candidly , I feel - you have hear of such a thing as love at first sight , 
 Mr. Sherwin ? " 

 " in book , Sir . " he tap one of the morocco - bind volume on the 
 table , and smile - a curious smile , partly deferential and partly 
 sarcastic . 

 " you would be incline to laugh , I dare say , if I ask you to believe 
 that there be such a thing as love at first sight , out of book . but , 
 without dwell far on that , it be my duty to confess to you , in 
 all candour and honesty , that the impression Miss Sherwin produce on I 
 be such as to make I desire the privilege of become acquaint with 
 she . in plain word , I discover her place of residence by follow 
 she to this house . " 

 " upon my soul this be the most extraordinary proceeding - - ! " 

 " pray hear I out , Mr. Sherwin : you will not condemn my conduct , I 
 think , if you hear all I have to say . " 

 he mutter something unintelligible ; his complexion turn yellower ; he 
 drop my card , which he have by this time crush into fragment ; and 
 run his hand rapidly through his hair until he have stretch it out like 
 a penthouse over his forehead - blink all the time , and regard I 
 with a lower , sinister expression of countenance . I see that it 
 be useless to treat he as I should have treat a gentleman . he have 
 evidently put the mean and the foul construction upon my delicacy 
 and hesitation in speak to he : so I alter my plan , and come to the 
 point abruptly - " come to business , " as he would have call it . 

 " I ought to have be plainer , Mr. Sherwin ; I ought perhaps to have tell 
 you at the outset , in so many word , that I come to - "   I be about 
 to say , " to ask your daughter 's hand in marriage ; " but a thought of my 
 father move darkly over my mind at that moment , and the word would not 
 pass my lip . 

 " well , Sir ! to what ? " 

 the tone in which he say this be harsh enough to rouse I . it give I 
 back my self - possession immediately . 

 " to ask your permission to pay my address to Miss Sherwin - or , to be 
 plainer still , if you like , to ask of you her hand in marriage . " 

 the word be speak . even if I could have do so , I would not have 
 recall what I have just say ; but still , I tremble in spite of myself 
 as I express in plain , blunt word what I have only rapturously think 
 over , or delicately hint at to Margaret , up to this time . 

 " God bless I ! " cry Mr. Sherwin , suddenly sit back bolt upright 
 in his chair , and star at I in such surprise , that his restless 
 feature be actually strike with immobility for the moment - " God 
 bless I , this be quite another story . Most gratifying , most 
 astonishing - highly flattered I be sure ; highly indeed , my dear Sir ! 
 do not   suppose , for one moment , I ever doubt your honourable feeling . 
 young gentleman in your station of life do sometimes fail in respect 
 towards the wife and daughter of their - in short , of those who be 
 not in their rank exactly . but that be not the question - quite a 
 misunderstanding - extremely stupid of I , to be sure . pray let I 
 offer you a glass of wine ! " 

 " no wine , thank you , Mr. Sherwin . I must beg your attention a little 
 long , while I state to you , in confidence , how I be situate with 
 regard to the proposal I have make . there be certain circumstance - " 

 " yes - yes ? " 

 he bend forward again eagerly towards I , as he speak ; look more 
 inquisitive and more cunning than ever . 

 " I have acknowledge to you , Mr. Sherwin , that I have find mean 
 to speak to your daughter - to speak to she twice . I make my advance 
 honourably . she receive they with a modesty and a reluctance worthy of 
 herself , worthy of any lady , the high lady in the land . "   Mr. Sherwin 
 look round reverentially to his print of the queen ; then look back 
 at I , and bow solemnly .   " now , although in so many word she directly 
 discourage I - it be she due that I should say this - still , I think I 
 may without vanity venture to hope that she do so as a matter of duty , 
 more than as a matter of inclination . " 

 " ah - yes , yes ! I understand . she would do nothing without my authority , 
 of course ? " 

 " no doubt that be one reason why she receive I as she do ; but she 
 have another , which she communicate to I in the plain term - the 
 difference in our rank of life . " 

 " ah ! she say that , do she ? exactly so - she see a difficulty there ? 
 yes - yes ! high principle , Sir - high principle , thank God ! " 

 " I need hardly tell you , Mr. Sherwin , how deeply I feel the delicate 
 sense of honour which this objection show on your daughter 's part . you 
 will easily imagine that it be no objection to I , personally . the 
 happiness of my whole life depend on Miss Sherwin ; I desire no 
 high honour , as I can conceive no great happiness , than to be 
 your daughter 's husband . I tell she this : I also tell she that I would 
 explain myself on the subject to you . she make no objection ; and I be , 
 therefore , I think , justify in consider that if you authorise the 
 removal of scruple which do her honour at present , she would not feel 
 the delicacy she do now at sanction my address . " 

 " very proper - a very proper way of put it . practical , if I may be 
 allow to say so . and now , my dear Sir , the next point be : how about 
 your own honour family - eh ? " 

 " it be exactly there that the difficulty lie . my father , on whom I be 
 dependent as the young son , have very strong prejudice - conviction I 
 ought perhaps to call they - on the subject of social inequality . " 

 " quite so - most natural ; most become , indeed , on the part of your 
 respected father . I honour his conviction , sir . such estate , such 
 house , such a family as his - connected , I believe , with the nobility , 
 especially on your late lamented mother 's side . my dear Sir , I 
 emphatically repeat it , your father 's conviction do he honour ; I 
 respect they as much as I respect he ; I do , indeed . " 

 " I be glad you can view my father 's idea on social subject in so 
 favourable a light , Mr. Sherwin . you will be less surprised to hear how 
 they be likely to affect I in the step I be now take . " 

 " he disapprove of it , of course - strongly , perhaps . well , though 
 my dear girl be worthy of any station ; and a man like I , devote to 
 mercantile interest , may hold his head up anywhere as one of the prop 
 of this commercial country , "   he run his finger rapidly through his 
 hair , and try to look independent , ' still I be prepared to admit , 
 under all the circumstance - I say under all the circumstance - that his 
 disapproval be very natural , and be very much to be expect - very much 
 indeed . " 

 " he have express no disapproval , Mr. Sherwin . " 

 " you do not   say so ! " 

 " I have not give he an opportunity . my meeting with your daughter 
 have be keep a profound secret from he , and from every member of my 
 family ; and a secret it must remain . I speak from my intimate knowledge 
 of my father , when I say that I hardly know of any mean that he would 
 not be capable of employ to frustrate the purpose of this visit , if I 
 have mention it to he . he have be the kind and good of father 
 to I ; but I firmly believe , that if I wait for his consent , no 
 entreaty of mine , or of any one belong to I , would induce he to 
 give his sanction to the marriage I have come to you to propose . " 

 " bless my soul ! this be carry thing rather far , though - dependent as 
 you be on he , and all that . why , what on earth can we do - eh ? " 

 " we must keep both the courtship and the marriage secret . " 

 " secret ! good gracious , I do not   at all see my way - " 

 " yes , secret - a profound secret among ourselves , until I can divulge my 
 marriage to my father , with the good chance of - " 

 " but I tell you , Sir , I can not   see my way through it at all . chance ! what 
 chance would there be , after what you have tell I ? " 

 " there might be many chance . for instance , when the marriage 
 be solemnise , I might introduce your daughter to my father 's 
 notice - without disclose who she be - and leave she , gradually and 
 unsuspectedly , to win his affection and respect   as with her beauty , 
 elegance , and amiability , she could not fail to do , while I wait 
 until the occasion be ripe for confess everything . then if I say 
 to he , ' this young lady , who have so interested and delight you , be my 
 wife ; ' do you think , with that powerful argument in my favour , he could 
 fail to give we his pardon ? if , on the other hand , I could only say , 
 ' this young lady be about to become my wife , ' his prejudice would 
 assuredly induce he to recall his most favourable impression , and 
 refuse his consent . in short , Mr. Sherwin , before marriage , it would be 
 impossible to move he - after marriage , when opposition could no long 
 be of any avail , it would be quite a different thing : we might be sure 
 of produce , soon or later , the most favourable result . this be why 
 it would be absolutely necessary to keep our union secret at first . " 

 I wonder then - I have since wonder more - how it be that I contrive 
 to speak thus , so smoothly and so unhesitatingly , when my conscience be 
 give the lie all the while to every word I utter . 

 " yes , yes ; I see - oh , yes , I see ! " say Mr. Sherwin , rattle a bunch of 
 key in his pocket , with an expression of considerable perplexity ; 
 " but this be a ticklish business , you know - a very queer and ticklish 
 business indeed . to have a gentleman of your birth and breeding for a 
 son - in - law , be of course - but then there be the money question . 
 suppose you fail with your father after all - my money be out in my 
 speculation - I can do nothing . upon my word , you have place I in a 
 position that I never be place in before . " 

 " I have influential friend , Mr. Sherwin , in many direction - there be 
 appointment , good appointment , which would be open to I , if I 
 push my interest . I might provide in this way against the chance of 
 failure . " 

 " ah ! - well - yes . there be something in that , certainly . " 

 " I can only assure you that my attachment to Miss Sherwin be not of a 
 nature to be overcome by any pecuniary consideration . I speak in all 
 our interest , when I say that a private marriage give we a chance for 
 the future , as opportunity arise of gradually disclose it . my offer 
 to you may be make under some disadvantage and difficulty , perhaps ; 
 for , with the exception of a very small independence , leave I by my 
 mother , I have no certain prospect . but I really think my proposal 
 have some compensate advantage to recommend they - " 

 " certainly ! most decidedly so ! I be not insensible , my dear Sir , to the 
 great advantage , and honour , and so forth . but there be something so 
 unusual about the whole affair . what would be my feeling , if your 
 father should not come round , and my dear girl be disown by the 
 family ? well , well ! that could hardly happen , I think , with her 
 accomplishment and education , and manner too , so distinguished - though 
 perhaps I ought not to say so . her schooling alone be a hundred a - year , 
 Sir , without include extras - " 

 " I be sure , Mr. Sherwin - " 

 " - a school , Sir , where it be a rule to take in no thing low than 
 the daughter of a professional man - they only waive the rule in 
 my case - the most genteel school , perhaps , in all London ! a 
 drawing - room - deportment day once every week - the girl teach how 
 to enter a room and leave a room with dignity and ease - a model of a 
 carriage door and step , in the back drawing - room , to practise the girl 
  with the footman of the establishment in attendance   in get into 
 a carriage and get out again , in a lady - like manner ! no duchess have 
 have a well education than my Margaret ! - " 

 " permit I to assure you , Mr. Sherwin - " 

 " and then , her knowledge of language - her French , and italian , and 
 German , not discontinue in holiday , or after she leave school   she have 
 only just leave it ; but all keep up and improve every evening , by the 
 kind attention of Mr. Mannion - " 

 " may I ask who Mr. Mannion be ? " the tone in which I put this question , 
 cool his enthusiasm about his daughter 's education immediately . he 
 answer in his former tone , and with one of his former bow : 

 " Mr. Mannion be my confidential clerk , Sir - a most superior person , most 
 highly talented , and well read , and all that . " 

 " be he a young man ? " 

 " young ! oh , dear no ! Mr. Mannion be forty , or a year or two more , if 
 he be a day - an admirable man of business , as well as a great scholar . 
 he be at Lyons now , buy silk for I . when he come back I shall be 
 delighted to introduce - - " 

 " I beg your pardon , but I think we be wander away from the point , a 
 little . " 

 " I beg yours - so we be . well , my dear Sir , I must be allow a day or 
 two - say two day - to ascertain what my daughter 's feeling be , and to 
 consider your proposal , which have take I very much by surprise , 
 as you may in fact see . but I assure you I be most flattered , most 
 honour , most anxious - " . 

 " I hope you will consider my anxiety , Mr. Sherwin , and let I know the 
 result of your deliberation as soon as possible . " 

 " without fail , depend upon it . let I see : shall we say the second day 
 from this , at the same time , if you can favour I with a visit ? " 

 " certainly . " 

 " and between that time and this , you will engage not to hold any 
 communication with my daughter ? " 

 " I promise not , Mr. Sherwin - because I believe that your answer will be 
 favourable . " 

 " ah , well - well ! lover , they say , should never despair . a little 
 consideration , and a little talk with my dear girl - really now , will not 
 you change your mind and have a glass of sherry ?   no again ?   very well , 
 then , the day after tomorrow , at five o'clock . " 

 with a loud crack than ever , the brand - new drawing - room door be 
 open to let I out . the noise be instantly succeed by the rustling 
 of a silk dress , and the banging of another door , at the opposite end of 
 the passage . have anybody be listen ? where be Margaret ? 

 Mr. Sherwin stand at the garden - gate to watch my departure , and to make 
 his farewell bow . thick as be the atmosphere of illusion in which I now 
 live , I shudder involuntarily as I return his parting salute , and 
 think of he as my father - in - law ! 

 XI . 

 the nearer I approach to our own door , the more reluctance I feel to 
 pass the short interval between my first and second interview with Mr. 
 Sherwin , at home . when I enter the house , this reluctance increase to 
 something almost like dread . I feel unwilling and unfit to meet the eye 
 of my near and dear relative . it be a relief to I to hear that 
 my father be not at home . my sister be in the house : the servant say 
 she have just go into the library , and inquire whether he should tell 
 she that I have come in . I desire he not to disturb she , as it be my 
 intention to go out again immediately . 

 I go into my study , and write a short note there to Clara ; merely 
 tell she that I should be absent in the country for two day . I have 
 seal and lay it on the table for the servant to deliver , and be 
 about to leave the room , when I hear the library door open . I instantly 
 draw back , and half - close my own door again . Clara have get the book she 
 want , and be take it up to her own sitting - room . I wait till she 
 be out of sight , and then leave the house . it be the first time I have 
 ever avoid my sister - my sister , who have never in her life ask a 
 question , or utter a word that could annoy I ; my sister , who have 
 confide all her own little secret to my keeping , ever since we have 
 be child . as I think on what I have do , I feel a sense of 
 humiliation which be almost punishment enough for the meanness of which 
 I have be guilty . 

 I go round to the stable , and have my horse saddle immediately . no 
 idea of proceed in any particular direction occur to I . I 
 simply feel resolve to pass my two day ' ordeal of suspense away from 
 home - far enough away to keep I faithful to my promise not to see 
 Margaret . soon after I start , I leave my horse to his own guidance , and 
 give myself up to my thought and recollection , as one by one they rise 
 within I . the animal take the direction which he have be oftenest use 
 to take during my residence in London - the northern road . 

 it be not until I have ride half a mile beyond the suburb that I 
 look round I , and discover towards what part of the country I be 
 proceed . I draw the rein directly , and turn my horse 's head back 
 again , towards the south . to follow the favourite road which I have so 
 often follow with Clara ; to stop perhaps at some place where I 
 have often stop with she , be more than I have the courage or the 
 insensibility to do at that moment . 

 I ride as far as Ewell , and stop there : the darkness have overtake 
 I , and it be useless to tire my horse by go on any great 
 distance . the next morning , I be up almost with sunrise ; and pass 
 the great part of the day in walk about among village , lane , and 
 field , just as chance lead I . during the night , many thought that I 
 have banish for the last week have return - those thought of evil oman 
 under which the mind seem to ache , just as the body ache under a dull , 
 heavy pain , to which we can assign no particular place or cause . 
 Absent from Margaret , I have no resource against the oppression that 
 now overcome I . I could only endeavour to alleviate it by keep 
 incessantly in action ; by walk or riding , hour after hour , in the 
 vain attempt to quiet the mind by weary out the body . apprehension of 
 the failure of my application to Mr. Sherwin have nothing to do with the 
 vague gloom which now darken my thought ; they keep too near home 
 for that . besides , what I have observe of Margaret 's father , especially 
 during the latter part of my interview with he , show I plainly 
 enough that he be try to conceal , under exaggerated surprise and 
 assume hesitation , his secret desire to profit at once by my 
 offer ; which , whatever condition might clog it , be infinitely more 
 advantageous in a social point of view , than any he could have hop 
 for . it be not his delay in accept my proposal , but the burden 
 of deceit , the fetter of concealment force on I by the proposal 
 themselves , which now hang heavy on my heart . 

 that evening I leave Ewell , and ride towards home again , as far as 
 Richmond , where I remain for the night and the forepart of the next 
 day . I reach London in the afternoon ; and get to North Villa - without 
 go home first - about five o'clock . 

 the oppression be still on my spirit . even the sight of the house 
 where Margaret live fail to invigorate or arouse I . 

 on this occasion , when I be show into the drawing - room , both Mr. and 
 Mrs. Sherwin be await I there . on the table be the sherry which 
 have be so perseveringly press on I at the last interview , and by it 
 a new pound cake . Mrs. Sherwin be cut the cake as I come in , while 
 her husband watch the process with critical eye . the poor woman 's 
 weak white finger tremble as they move the knife under conjugal 
 inspection . 

 " most happy to see you again - most happy indeed , my dear Sir , " say Mr. 
 Sherwin , advance with hospitable smile and outstretche hand . " allow 
 I to introduce my well half , Mrs. S. " 

 his wife rise in a hurry , and curtsey , leave the knife stick 
 in the cake ; upon which Mr. Sherwin , with a stern look at she , 
 ostentatiously pull it out , and set it down rather violently on the 
 dish . 

 Poor Mrs. Sherwin ! I have hardly notice she on the day when she get into 
 the omnibus with her daughter - it be as if I now see she for the first 
 time . there be a natural communicativeness about woman 's emotion . a 
 happy woman imperceptibly diffuse her happiness around she ; she have an 
 influence that be something akin to the influence of a sunshiny day . 
 so , again , the melancholy of a melancholy woman be invariably , though 
 silently , infectious ; and Mrs. Sherwin be one of this latter order . her 
 pale , sickly , moist - look skin ; her large , mild , watery , light - blue 
 eye ; the restless timidity of her expression ; the mixture of useless 
 hesitation and involuntary rapidity in every one of her action - all 
 furnish the same significant betrayal of a life of incessant fear 
 and restraint ; of a disposition full of modest generosity and meek 
 sympathy , which have be crush down past rousing to self - assertion , 
 past ever see the light . there , in that mild , wan face of her - in 
 those painful starting and hurrying when she move ; in that tremulous , 
 faint utterance when she speak - there , I could see one of those 
 ghastly heart - tragedy lay open before I , which be act and 
 re - act , scene by scene , and year by year , in the secret theatre of 
 home ; tragedy which be ever shadow by the slow falling of the black 
 curtain that drop lower and low every day - that drop , to hide all at 
 last , from the hand of death . 

 " we have have very beautiful weather lately , Sir , " say Mrs. Sherwin , 
 almost inaudibly ; look as she speak , with anxious eye towards her 
 husband , to see if she be justify in utter even those piteously 
 common - place word . " very beautiful weather to be sure , " continue the 
 poor woman , as timidly as if she have become a little child again , and 
 have be order to say her first lesson in a stranger 's presence . 

 " delightful weather , Mrs. Sherwin . I have be enjoy it for the 
 last two day in the country - in a part of Surrey   the neighbourhood of 
 Ewell   that I have not see before . " 

 there be a pause . Mr. Sherwin cough ; it be evidently a warning 
 matrimonial peal that he have often ring before - for Mrs. Sherwin 
 start , and look up at he directly . 

 " as the lady of the house , Mrs. S. , it strike I that you might offer 
 a visitor , like this gentleman , some cake and wine , without make any 
 particular hole in your manner ! " 

 " oh dear I ! I beg your pardon ! I be very sorry , I be sure " - and she 
 pour out a glass of wine , with such a trembling hand that the decanter 
 tinkle all the while against the glass . though I want nothing , I 
 eat and drank something immediately , in common consideration for Mrs. 
 Sherwin 's embarrassment . 

 Mr. Sherwin fill himself a glass - hold it up admiringly to the 
 light - say , " your good health , Sir , your very good health ; " and drank 
 the wine with the air of a connoisseur , and a most expressive smacking 
 of the lip . his wife   to whom he offer nothing   look at he all the 
 time with the most reverential attention . 

 " you be take nothing yourself , Mrs. Sherwin , " I say . 

 " Mrs. Sherwin , Sir , " interpose her husband , " never drink wine , and 
 can not   digest cake . a bad stomach - a very bad stomach . have another glass 
 yourself . will not   you , indeed ? this sherry stand I in six shilling a 
 bottle - ought to be first - rate wine at that price : and so it be . 
 well , if you will not   have any more , we will proceed to business . ha ! ha ! 
 business as I call it ; pleasure I hope it will be to you . " 

 Mrs. Sherwin cough - a very weak , small cough , half - stifle in its 
 birth . 

 " there you be again ! " he say , turn fiercely towards she - " cough 
 again ! six month of the doctor - a six month ' bill to come out of my 
 pocket - and no good do - no good , Mrs. S. " 

 " oh , I be much well , thank you - it be only a little - " 

 " well , Sir , the evening after you leave I , I have what you may call 
 an explanation with my dear girl . she be naturally a little confused 
 and - and embarrassed , indeed . a very serious thing of course , to decide 
 at her age , and at so short a notice , on a point involve the happiness 
 of her whole life to come . " 

 here Mrs. Sherwin put she handkerchief to her eye - quite noiselessly ; 
 for she have doubtless acquire by long practice the habit of weeping in 
 silence . her husband 's quick glance turn on she , however , immediately , 
 with anything but an expression of sympathy . 

 " Good God , Mrs. S. ! what be the use of go on in that way ? " he say , 
 indignantly . " what be there to cry about ? Margaret be not   ill , and be not 
 unhappy - what on earth 's the matter now ? upon my soul this be a most 
 annoying circumstance : and before a visitor too ! you have well leave I 
 to discuss the matter alone - you always be in the way of business , 
 and it be my opinion you always will be . " 

 Mrs. Sherwin prepare , without a word of remonstrance , to leave the 
 room . I sincerely feel for she ; but could say nothing . in the impulse 
 of the moment , I rise to open the door for she ; and immediately repent 
 have do so . the action add so much to her embarrassment that she 
 kick her foot against a chair , and utter a suppress exclamation of 
 pain as she go out . 

 Mr. Sherwin help himself to a second glass of wine , without take the 
 small notice of this . 

 " I hope Mrs. Sherwin have not hurt herself ? " I say . " oh dear no ! not 
 worth a moment 's thought - awkwardness and nervousness , nothing else - she 
 always be nervous - the doctor   all humbug   can do nothing with 
 she - it be very sad , very sad indeed ; but there be no help for it . " 

 by this time   in spite of all my effort to preserve some respect 
 for he , as Margaret 's father   he have sink to his proper place in my 
 estimation . 

 " well , my dear Sir , " he resume , " to go back to where I be interrupt 
 by Mrs. S. let I see : I be say that my dear girl be a little 
 confused , and so forth . as a matter of course , I put before she all the 
 advantage which such a connection as yours promise - and at the same 
 time , mention some of the little embarrassing circumstance - the 
 private marriage , you know , and all that - besides tell she of certain 
 restriction in reference to the marriage , if it come off , which I 
 should feel it my duty as a father to impose ; and which I shall proceed , 
 in short , to explain to you . as a man of the world , my dear Sir , you 
 know as well as I do , that young lady do not   give very straightforward 
 answer on the subject of their prepossession in favour of young 
 gentleman . but I get enough out of she to show I that you have make 
 pretty good use of your time - no occasion to despond , you know - I leave 
  you to make she speak plain ; it be more in your line than mine , more a 
 good deal . and now let we come to the business part of the transaction . 
 all I have to say be this : - if you agree to my proposal , then I agree 
 to your . I think that be fair enough - eh ? " 

 " quite fair , Mr. Sherwin . " 

 " just so . now , in the first place , my daughter be too young to be 
 marry yet . she be only seventeen last birthday . " 

 " you astonish I ! I should have imagine she three year old at 
 least . " 

 " everybody think she old than she be - everybody , my dear Sir - and she 
 certainly look it . she be more form , more developed I may say , than 
 most girl at her age . however , that be not the point . the plain fact be , 
 she be too young to be marry now - too young in a moral point of view ; 
 too young in an educational point of view ; too young altogether . well : 
 the upshot of this be , that I could not give my consent to Margaret 's 
 marrying , until another year be out - say a year from this time . one 
 year 's courtship for the finishing off of her education , and the 
 formation of her constitution - you understand I , for the formation of 
 her constitution . " 

 a year to wait ! at first , this seem a long trial to endure , a trial 
 that ought not to be impose on I . but the next moment , the delay 
 appear in a different light . would it not be the dearest of privilege 
 to be able to see Margaret , perhaps every day , perhaps for hour at a 
 time ? would it not be happiness enough to observe each development of 
 her character , to watch her first maiden love for I , advance nearer 
 and near towards confidence and maturity the oftener we meet ? as I 
 think on this , I answer Mr. Sherwin without further hesitation . 

 " it will be some trial , " I say , " to my patience , though none to my 
 constancy , none to the strength of my affection - I will wait the year . " 

 " exactly so , " rejoin Mr. Sherwin ; ' such candour and such 
 reasonableness be to be expect from one who be quite the gentleman . 
 and now come my grand difficulty in this business - in fact , the little 
 stipulation I have to make . " 

 he stop , and run his finger through his hair , in all direction ; his 
 feature fidgette and distort themselves ominously , while he look 
 at I . 

 " pray explain yourself , Mr. Sherwin . your silence give I some 
 uneasiness at this particular moment , I assure you . " 

 " quite so - I understand . now , you must promise I not to be 
 huff - offended , I should say - at what I be go to propose . " 

 " certainly not . " 

 " well , then , it may seem odd ; but under all the circumstance - that be 
 to say , as far as the case concern you personally - I want you and my 
 dear girl to be marry at once , and yet not to be marry exactly , for 
 another year . I do not   know whether you understand I ? " 

 " I must confess I do not . " 

 he cough rather uneasily ; turn to the table , and pour out another 
 glass of sherry - his hand tremble a little as he do so . he drink off 
 the wine at a draught ; clear his throat three or four time after it ; 
 and then speak again . 

 " well , to be still plainer , this be how the matter stand : if you be 
 a party in our rank of life , come to court Margaret with your father 's 
 full approval and permission when once you have consent to the year 's 
 engagement , everything would be do and settle ; the bargain would 
 have be strike on both side ; and there would be an end of it . but , 
 situate as you be , I can not   stop here safely - I mean , I can not   end the 
 agreement exactly in this way . " 

 he evidently feel that he get fluent on wine ; and help himself , at 
 this juncture , to another glass . 

 " you will see what I be drive at , my dear Sir , directly , " he 
 continue . " suppose now , you come court my daughter for a year , as 
 we settle ; and suppose your father find it out - we should keep it a 
 profound secret of course : but still , secret be sometimes find out , 
 nobody know how . suppose , I say , your father get scent of the thing , 
 and the match be break off ; where do you think Margaret 's reputation 
 would be ? if it happen with somebody in her own station , we might 
 explain it all , and be believe : but happen with somebody in your , 
 what would the world say ? would the world believe you have ever intend 
 to marry she ? that be the point - that be the point precisely . " 

 " but the case could not happen - I be astonish you can imagine it 
 possible . I have tell you already , I be of age . " 

 " properly urge - very properly , indeed . but you also tell I , if you 
 remember , when I first have the pleasure of see you , that your father , 
 if he know of this match , would stick at nothing to oppose it - at 
 nothing - I recollect you say so . now , know this , my dear 
 Sir - though I have the most perfect confidence in your honour , and 
  your resolution to fulfil your engagement - I can not   have confidence in 
 your be prepare beforehand to oppose all your father might do if he 
 find we out ; because you can not   tell yourself what he might be up to , or 
 what influence he might set to work over you . this sort of mess be not 
 very probable , you will say ; but if it be at all possible - and there be 
 a year for it to be possible in - by George , Sir , I must guard against 
 accident , for my daughter 's sake - I must indeed ! " 

 " in Heaven 's name , Mr. Sherwin , pass over all these impossible 
 difficulty of your ! and let I hear what you have finally to 
 propose . " 

 " gently , my dear Sir ! gently , gently , gently ! I propose to begin with : 
 that you should marry my daughter - privately marry she - in a week 's 
 time . now , pray compose yourself ! "   I be look at he in speechless 
 astonishment .   " take it easy ; pray take it easy ! Supposing , then , you 
 marry she in this way , I make one stipulation . I require you to give I 
 your word of honour to leave she at the church door ; and for the space 
 of one year never to attempt to see she , except in the presence of a 
 third party . at the end of that time , I will engage to give she to you , 
 as your wife in fact , as well as in name . there ! what do you say to 
 that - eh ? " 

 I be too astounded , too overwhelmed , to say anything at that moment ; 
 Mr. Sherwin go on : 

 " this plan of mine , you see , reconcile everything . if any accident 
  do happen , and we be discover , why your father can do nothing to 
 stop the match , because the match will have be already make . and , 
 at the same time , I secure a year 's delay , for the formation of her 
 constitution , and the finishing of her accomplishment , and so forth . 
 besides , what an opportunity this give of sailing as near the wind as 
 you choose , in break the thing , bit by bit , to your father , without 
 fear of consequence , in case he should run rough after all . upon my 
 honour , my dear Sir , I think I deserve some credit for hit on this 
 plan - it make everything so right and straight , and suit of course 
 the wish of all party ! I need hardly say that you shall have 
 every facility for see Margaret , under the restriction - under the 
 restriction , you understand . People may talk about your visit ; but 
 have get the certificate , and know it be all safe and settle , I 
 shall not   care for that . well , what do you say ? take time to think , if you 
 wish it - only remember that I have the most perfect confidence in your 
 honour , and that I act from a fatherly feeling for the interest of my 
 dear girl ! " he stop , out of breath from the extraordinary volubility 
 of his long harangue . 

 some man more experienced in the world , less master by love than I 
 be , would , in my position , have recognise this proposal an unfair 
 trial of self - restraint - perhaps , something like an unfair humiliation 
 as well . other have detect the selfish motif which suggest it : 
 the mean distrust of my honour , integrity , and firmness of purpose which 
 it imply ; and the equally mean anxiety on Sherwin 's part to clench 
 his profitable bargain at once , for fear it might be repent of . I 
 discern nothing of this . as soon as I have recover from the natural 
 astonishment of the first few moment , I only see in the strange plan 
 propose to I , a certainty of assure - no matter with what sacrifice , 
 what hazard , or what delay - the ultimate triumph of my love . when Mr. 
 Sherwin have cease speak , I reply at once : 

 " I accept your condition - I accept they with all my heart . " 

 he be hardly prepare for so complete and so sudden an acquiescence in 
 his proposal , and look absolutely startled by it , at first . but 
 soon resume his self - possession - his wily , " business - like " 
 self - possession - he start up , and shake I vehemently by the hand . 

 " Delighted - most delighted , my dear Sir , to find how soon we understand 
 each other , and that we pull together so well . we must have another 
 glass ; hang it , we really must ! a toast , you know ; a toast you can not 
 help drink - your wife ! ha ! ha ! - I have you there ! - my dear , dear 
 Margaret , God bless she ! " 

 " we may consider all difficulty finally settle then , " I say , anxious 
 to close my interview with Mr. Sherwin as speedily as possible . 

 " decidedly so . do , and double do , I may say . there will be a 
 little insurance on your life , that I shall ask you to effect for dear 
 Margaret 's sake ; and perhaps , a memorandum of agreement , engage to 
 settle a certain proportion of any property you may become possess of , 
 on she and her child . you see I be look forward to my grandfather 
 day already ! but this can wait for a future occasion - say in a day or 
 two . " 

 " then I presume there will be no objection to my see Miss Sherwin 
 now ? " 

 " none whatever - -at once , if you like . this way , my dear Sir ; this way , " 
 and he lead I across the passage , into the dining - room . 

 this apartment be furnish with less luxury , but with more bad taste 
  if possible   than the room we have just leave . near the window sit 
 Margaret - it be the same window at which I have see she , on the evening 
 when I wander into the square , after our meeting in the omnibus . the 
 cage with the canary - bird hang in the same place . I just notice - with 
 a momentary surprise - that Mrs. Sherwin be sit far away from 
 her daughter , at the other end of the room ; and then place myself by 
 Margaret 's side . she be dress in pale yellow - a colour which give new 
 splendour to her dark complexion and magnificently dark hair . once more , 
 all my doubt , all my self - upbraiding vanish , and give place to the 
 exquisite sense of happiness , the glow of joy and hope and love which 
 seem to rush over my heart , the moment I look at she . 

 after stay in the room about five minute , Mr. Sherwin whisper to 
 his wife , and leave we . Mrs. Sherwin still keep she place ; but she say 
 nothing , and hardly turn to look round at we more than once or twice . 
 perhaps she be occupy by her own thought ; perhaps , from a motive of 
 delicacy , she abstain even from an appearance of watch her daughter 
 or watch I . whatever feeling influence she , I care not to 
 speculate on they . it be enough that I have the privilege of speak 
 to Margaret uninterruptedly ; of declare my love at last , without 
 hesitation and without reserve . 

 how much I have to say to she , and how short a time seem to be leave I 
 that evening to say it in ! how short a time to tell she all the thought 
 of the past which she have create in I ; all the self - sacrifice to which 
 I have cheerfully consent for her sake ; all the anticipation of future 
 happiness which be concentrate in she , which draw their very breath 
 of life , only from the prospect of her rewarding love ! she speak but 
 little ; yet even that little it be a new delight to hear . she smile 
 now ; she let I take her hand , and make no attempt to withdraw it . 
 the evening have close in ; the darkness be steal fast upon we ; the 
 still , dead - still figure of Mrs. Sherwin , always in the same place 
 and the same attitude , grow fainter and fainter to the eye , across the 
 distance of the room - but no thought of time , no thought of home ever 
 once cross my mind . I could have sit at the window with Margaret 
 the long night through ; without an idea of number the hour as they 
 pass . 

 Ere long , however , Mr. Sherwin enter the room again , and effectually 
 rouse I by approach and speak to we . I see that I have stay 
 long enough , and that we be not to be leave together again , that 
 night . so I rise and take my leave , have first fix a time for see 
 Margaret on the morrow . Mr. Sherwin accompany I with great ceremony 
 to the outer door . just as I be leave he , he touch I on the arm , 
 and say in his most confidential tone : 

 " come an hour early , to - morrow ; and we will go and get the licence 
 together . no objection to that - eh ? and the marriage , shall we say this 
 day week ? just as you like , you know - do not   let I seem to dictate . 
 ah ! no objection to that , either , I see , and no objection on Margaret 's 
 side , I will warrant ! with respect to consent , in the marry part of 
 the business , there be complete mutuality - be not   there ? good night : God 
 bless you ! " 

 XII . 

 that night I go home with none of the reluctance or the apprehension 
 which I have feel on the last occasion , when I approach our own door . 
 the assurance of success contain in the event of the afternoon , give 
 I a trust in my own self - possession - a confidence in my own capacity 
 to parry all dangerous question - which I have not experience before . 
 I care not how soon , or for how long a time , I might find myself in 
 company with Clara or my father . it be well for the preservation of my 
 secret that I be in this frame of mind ; for , on open my study door , 
 I be astonish to see both of they in my room . 

 Clara be measure one of my over - crowd book - shelf , with a piece of 
 string ; and be apparently just about to compare the length of it with 
 a vacant space on the wall close by , when I come in . see I , she 
 stop ; and look round significantly at my father , who be stand 
 near she , with a file of paper in his hand . 

 " you may well feel surprised , Basil , at this invasion of your 
 territory , " he say , with peculiar kindness of manner - " you must , 
 however , apply there , to the prime minister of the household , " point 
 to Clara , " for an explanation . I be only the instrument of a domestic 
 conspiracy on your sister 's part . " 

 Clara seem doubtful whether she should speak . it be the first time I 
 have ever see such an expression in her face , when she look into mine . 

 " we be discover , papa , " she say , after a momentary silence , " and we 
 must explain : but you know I always leave as many explanation as I can 
 to you . " 

 " very well , " say my father smile ; " my task in this instance will be 
 an easy one . I be intercept , Basil , on my way to my own room by your 
 sister , and take in here to advise about a new set of bookcase for 
 you , when I ought to have be attend to my own money matter . 
 Clara 's idea be to have have these new bookcase make in secret , and put 
 up as a surprise , some day when you be not at home . however , as you 
 have catch she in the act of measure space , with all the skill of 
 an experienced carpenter , and all the impetuosity of an arbitrary young 
 lady who rule supreme over everybody , further concealment be out of the 
 question . we must make a virtue of necessity , and confess everything . " 

 Poor Clara ! this be she only return for ten day ' utter neglect - and 
 she have be half afraid to tell I of it herself . I approach and 
 thank she ; not very gratefully , I be afraid , for I feel too confused 
 to speak freely . it seem like a fatality . the more evil I be do 
 in secret , evil to family tie and family principle , the more good be 
 unconsciously return to I by my family , through my sister 's hand . 

 " I make no objection , of course , to the bookcase plan , " continue my 
 father . " More room be really want for the volume on volume that you 
 have collect about you ; but I certainly suggest a little delay in 
 the execution of the project . the bookcase will , at all event , not be 
 require here for five month to come . this day week we return to the 
 country . " 

 I could not repress a start of astonishment and dismay . here be a 
 difficulty which I ought to have provide for ; but which I have most 
 unaccountably never once think of , although it be now the period 
 of the year at which on all former occasion we have be accustom to 
 leave London . this day week too ! the very day fix by Mr. Sherwin for 
 my marriage ! 

 " I be afraid , Sir , I shall not be able to go with you and Clara so soon 
 as you propose . it be my wish to remain in London some time long . " I 
 say this in a low voice , without venture to look at my sister . but I 
 could not help hear her exclamation as I speak , and the tone in which 
 she utter it . 

 my father move near to I a step or two , and look in my face 
 intently , with the firm , penetrate expression which peculiarly 
 characterize he . 

 " this seem an extraordinary resolution , " he say , his tone and manner 
 altering ominously while he speak . " I think your sudden absence for 
 the last two day rather odd ; but this plan of remain in London by 
 yourself be really incomprehensible . what can you have to do ? " 

 an excuse - no ! not an excuse ; let I call thing by their right name 
 in these page - a lie be rise to my lip ; but my father check the 
 utterance of it . he detect my embarrassment immediately , anxiously as 
 I strove to conceal it . 

 " stop , " he say coldly , while the red flush which mean so much when it 
 rise on his cheek , begin to appear there for the first time . " stop ! if 
 you must make excuse , Basil , I must ask no question . you have a secret 
 which you wish to keep from I ; and I beg you will keep it . I have 
 never be accustom to treat my son as I would not treat any other 
 gentleman with whom I may happen to be associate . if they have private 
 affair , I can not interfere with those affair . my trust in their honour 
 be my only guarantee against their deceive I ; but in the intercourse 
 of gentleman that be guarantee enough . remain here as long as you like : 
 we shall be happy to see you in the country , when you be able to leave 
 town . " 

 he turn to Clara . " I suppose , my love , you want I no long . while I 
 settle my own matter of business , you can arrange about the bookcase 
 with your brother . whatever you wish , I shall be glad to do . " and he 
 leave the room without speak to I , or look at I again . I sink 
 into a chair , feel disgrace in my own estimation by the last word 
 he have speak to I . his trust in my honour be his only guarantee 
 against my deceive he . as I think over that declaration , every 
 syllable of it seem to sear my conscience ; to brand Hypocrite on my 
 heart . 

 I turn towards my sister . she be stand at a little distance from 
 I , silent and pale , mechanically twist the measuring - string , which 
 she still hold between her trembling finger ; and fix her eye upon 
 I so lovingly , so mournfully , that my fortitude give way when I look 
 at she . at that instant , I seem to forget everything that have pass 
 since the day when I first meet Margaret , and to be restore once more 
 to my old way of life and my old home - sympathy . my head droop on my 
 breast , and I feel the hot tear force themselves into my eye . 

 Clara step quietly to my side ; and sit down by I in silence , put 
 her arm round my neck . 

 when I be calm , she say gently : 

 " I have be very anxious about you , Basil ; and perhaps I have allow 
 that anxiety to appear more than I ought . perhaps I have be accustom 
 to exact too much from you - you have be too ready to please I . but I 
 have be use to it so long ; and I have nobody else that I can speak to 
 as I can to you . papa be very kind ; but he can not   be what you be to I 
 exactly ; and Ralph do not live with we now , and care little about I , 
 I be afraid , when he do . I have friend , but friend be not - " 

 she stop again ; her voice be fail she . for a moment , she 
 struggle to keep her self - possession - struggle as only woman can - and 
 succeed in the effort . she press her arm close round my neck ; but 
 her tone be steady and clear when she resume : 

 " it will not be very easy for I to give up our country ride and walk 
 together , and the evening talk that we always have at dusk in the old 
 library at the park . but I think I can resign all this , and go away 
 alone with papa , for the first time , without make you melancholy by 
 anything I say or do at parting , if you will only promise that when you 
 be in any difficulty you will let I be of some use . I think I could 
 always be of use , because I should always feel an interest in anything 
 that concern you . I do not   want to intrude on your secret ; but if that 
 secret should ever bring you trouble or distress   which I hope and pray 
 it may not , I want you to have confidence in my be able to help you , 
 in some way , through any mischance . let I go into the country , Basil , 
 know that you can still put trust in I , even though a time should 
 come when you can put trust in no one else - let I know this : do let 
 I ! " 

 I give she the assurance she desire - give it with my whole heart . she 
 seem to have recover all her old influence over I by the few simple 
 word she have speak . the thought cross my mind , whether I ought not 
 in common gratitude to confide my secret to she at once , know as I 
 do , that it would be safe in her keeping , however the disclosure might 
 startle or pain she , I believe I should have tell she all , in another 
 minute , but for a mere accident - the trifling interruption cause by a 
 knock at the door . 

 it come from one of the servant . my father desire to see Clara on some 
 matter connect with their impending departure for the country . she be 
 unfit enough to obey such a summon at such a time ; but with her usual 
 courage in discipline her own feeling into subserviency to the 
 wish of any one whom she love , she determine to obey immediately 
 the message which have be deliver to she . a few moment of silence ; 
 a slight trembling soon repress ; a parting kiss for I ; these few 
 farewell word of encouragement at the door ; " do not   grieve about what 
 papa have say ; you have make I feel happy about you , Basil ; I will 
 make he feel happy too , " and Clara be go . 

 with those few minute of interruption , the time for the disclosure of 
 my secret have pass by . as soon as my sister be out of the room , my 
 former reluctance to trust it to home - keeping return , and remain 
 unchanged throughout the whole of the long year 's probation which I have 
 engage to pass . but this matter little . as event turn out , if 
 I have tell Clara all , the end would have come in the same way , the 
 fatality would have be accomplish by the same mean . 

 I go out shortly after my sister have leave I . I could give myself to 
 no occupation at home , for the rest of that night ; and I know that it 
 would be useless to attempt to sleep just then . as I walk through 
 the street , bitter thought against my father rise in my mind - bitter 
 thought against his inexorable family pride , which impose on I the 
 concealment and secrecy , under the oppression of which I have already 
 suffer so much - bitter thought against those social tyranny , which 
 take no account of human sympathy and human love , and which my father 
 now impersonate , as it be , to my idea . gradually these reflection 
 merge in other that be well . I think of Clara again ; console 
 myself with the belief , that , however my father might receive the news 
 of my marriage , I might count upon my sister as certain to love my 
 wife and be kind to she , for my sake . this thought lead my heart back to 
 Margaret - lead it gently and happily . I go home , calm and reassure 
 again - at least for the rest of the night . 

 the event of that week , so fraught with importance for the future of my 
 life , pass with ominous rapidity . 

 the marriage license be procure ; all remain preliminary with Mr. 
 Sherwin be adjust ; I see Margaret every day , and give myself up more 
 and more unreservedly to the charm that she exercise over I , at each 
 succeed interview . at home , the bustle of approach departure ; the 
 farewell visiting ; the multitudinous minor arrangement precede a 
 journey to the country , seem to hurry the hour on fast and fast , 
 as the parting day for Clara , and the marriage day for I , draw near . 
 incessant interruption prevent any more lengthened or private 
 conversation with my sister ; and my father be hardly ever accessible 
 for more than five minute together , even to those who specially wish 
 to speak with he . nothing arise to embarrass or alarm I now , out of my 
 intercourse with home . 

 the day come . I have not sleep during the night that precede it ; so I 
 rise early to look out on the morning . 

 it be strange how frequently that instinctive belief in omen and 
 predestination , which we flippantly term Superstition , assert its 
 natural prerogative even over mind train to repel it , at the moment 
 of some great event in our life . I believe this have happen to many 
 more man than ever confess it ; and it happen to I . at any former 
 period of my life , I should have laugh at the bare imputation of a 
 ' superstitious " feeling ever have rise in my mind . but now , as I 
 look on the sky , and see the black cloud that overspread the 
 whole firmament , and the heavy rain that pour down from they , an 
 irrepressible sinking of the heart come over I . for the last ten day 
 the sun have shine almost uninterruptedly - with my marriage - day come 
 the cloud , the mist and the rain . I try to laugh myself out of the 
 foreboding which this suggest , and try in vain . 

 the departure for the country be to take place at an early hour . we 
 all breakfast together ; the meal be hurry over comfortlessly and 
 silently . my father be either write note , or examine the steward 's 
 account , almost the whole time ; and Clara be evidently incapable of 
 utter a single word , without risk the loss of her self - possession . 
 the silence be so complete , while we sit together at the table , that 
 the fall of the rain outside   which have grow soft and thick as the 
 morning advanced , and the quick , quiet tread of the servant , as they 
 move about the room , be audible with a painful distinctness . the 
 oppression of our last family breakfast in London , for that year , have 
 an influence of wretchedness which I can not describe - which I can never 
 forget . 

 at last the hour of start come . Clara seem afraid to trust herself 
 even to look at I now . she hurriedly draw down her veil the moment the 
 carriage be announce . my father shake hand with I rather coldly . I 
 have hop he would have say something at parting ; but he only bid I 
 farewell in the simple and short manner . I have rather he would have 
 speak to I in anger than restrain himself as he do , to what the 
 commonest form of courtesy require . there be but one more slight , 
 after this , that he could cast on I ; and he do not spare it . while my 
 sister be take leave of I , he wait at the door of the room to 
 lead her down stair , as if he know by intuition that this be the last 
 little parting attention which I have hop to show she myself . 

 Clara whisper   in such low , tremble tone that I could hardly hear 
 she : 

 " think of what you promise in your study , Basil , whenever you think of 
  I : I will write often . " 

 as she raise her veil for a moment , and kiss I , I feel on my own 
 cheek the tear that be fall fast over her . I follow she and 
 my father down stair . when they reach the street , she give I her 
 hand - it be cold and powerless . I know that the fortitude she have 
 promise to show , be give way , in spite of all her effort to 
 preserve it ; so I let she hurry into the carriage without detain 
 she by any last word . the next instant she and my father be drive 
 rapidly from the door . 

 when I re - enter the house , my watch show I that I have still an hour 
 to wait , before it be time to go to North Villa . 

 between the different emotion produce by my impression of the scene I 
 have just pass through , and my anticipation of the scene that be yet 
 to come , I suffer in that one hour as much mental conflict as most man 
 suffer in a life . it seem as if I be live out all my feeling in 
 this short interval of delay , and must die at heart when it be over . 
 my restlessness be a torture to I ; and yet I could not overcome it . I 
 wander through the house from room to room , stop nowhere . I take 
 down book after book from the library , open they to read , and put they 
 back on the shelf the next instant . over and over again I walk to 
 the window to occupy myself with what be pass in the street ; and 
 each time I could not stay there for one minute together . I go into 
 the picture - gallery , look along the wall , and yet know not what I be 
 look at . at last I wander into my father 's study - the only room I 
 have not yet visit . 

 a portrait of my mother hang over the fireplace : my eye turn towards 
 it , and for the first time I come to a long pause . the picture have an 
 influence that quiet I ; but what influence I hardly know . perhaps 
 it lead my spirit up to the spirit that have go from we - perhaps those 
 secret voice from the unknown world , which only the soul can listen to , 
 be loose at that moment , and speak within I . while I sit look up 
 at the portrait , I grow strangely and suddenly calm before it . my memory 
 fly back to a long illness that I have suffer from , as a child , when 
 my little cradle - couch be place by my mother 's bedside , and she use 
 to sit by I in the dull evening and hush I to sleep . the remembrance 
 of this bring with it a dread imagine that she might now be hush 
 my spirit , from her place among the angel of God . a stillness and awe 
 creep over I ; and I hide my face in my hand . 

 the striking of the hour from a clock in the room , startle I back to 
 the outer world . I leave the house and go at once to North Villa . 

 Margaret and her father and mother be in the drawing - room when I 
 enter it . I see immediately that neither of the two latter have pass 
 the morning calmly . the impending event of the day have exercise its 
 agitate influence over they , as well as over I . Mrs. Sherwin 's 
 face be pale to her very lip : not a word escape she . Mr. Sherwin 
 endeavour to assume the self - possession which he be evidently far 
 from feel , by walk briskly up and down the room , and talk 
 incessantly - ask the most common - place question , and make the most 
 common - place joke . Margaret , to my surprise , show few symptom of 
 agitation than either of her parent . except when the colour come and 
 go occasionally on her cheek , I could detect no outward evidence of 
 emotion in she at all . 

 the church be near at hand . as we proceed to it , the rain fall 
 heavily , and the mist of the morning be thicken to a fog . we have 
 to wait in the vestry for the officiating clergyman . all the gloom and 
 dampness of the day seem to be collect in this room - a dark , cold , 
 melancholy place , with one window which open on a burial - ground 
 steaming in the wet . the rain patter monotonously on the pavement 
 outside . while Mr. Sherwin exchange remark on the weather with the 
 clerk ,   a tall , lean man , array in a black gown , I sit silent , near 
 Mrs. Sherwin and Margaret , look with mechanical attention at the 
 white surplice which hang before I in a half - open cupboard - at the 
 bottle of water and tumbler , and the long - shape book , bind in brown 
 leather , which be on the table . I be incapable of speak - incapable 
 even of thinking - during that interval of expectation . 

 at length the clergyman arrive , and we go into the church - the 
 church , with its desolate array of empty pew , and its chill , heavy , 
 week - day atmosphere . as we range ourselves round the altar , a confusion 
 overspread all my faculty . my sense of the place I be in , and even of 
 the ceremony in which I take part , grow more and more vague and doubtful 
 every minute . my attention wander throughout the whole service . I 
 stammer and make mistake in utter the response . once or twice 
 I detect myself in feel impatient at the slow progress of the 
 ceremony - it seem to be doubly , trebly long than its usual length . 
 mix up with this impression be another , wild and monstrous as if 
 it have be produce by a dream - an impression that my father have 
 discover my secret , and be watch I from some hide place in 
 the church ; watch through the service , to denounce and abandon I 
 publicly at the end . this morbid fancy grow and grow on I until the 
 termination of the ceremony , until we have leave the church and return 
 to the vestry once more . 

 the fee be pay ; we write our name in the book and on the 
 certificate ; the clergyman quietly wish I happiness ; the clerk 
 solemnly imitate he ; the pew - opener smile and curtsey ; Mr. Sherwin 
 make congratulatory speech , kiss his daughter , shake hand with I , 
 frown a private rebuke at his wife for shed tear , and , finally , 
 lead the way with Margaret out of the vestry . the rain be still fall , 
 as they get into the carriage . the fog be still thicken , as I stand 
 alone under the portico of the church , and try to realise to myself 
 that I be marry . 

  marry ! the son of the proud man in England , the inheritor of a 
 name write on the roll of Battle Abbey , wed to a linen - draper 's 
 daughter ! and what a marriage ! what a condition weigh on it ! what a 
 probation be now to follow it ! why have I consent so easily to Mr. 
 Sherwin 's proposal ? would he not have give way , if I have only be 
 resolute enough to insist on my own condition ? 

 how useless to inquire ! I have make the engagement and must abide by 
 it - abide by it cheerfully until the year be over , and she be mine 
 for ever . this must be my all - sufficing thought for the future . no more 
 reflection on consequence , no more foreboding about the effect of the 
 disclosure of my secret on my family - the leap into a new life have 
 be take , and , lead where it might , it be a leap that could never be 
 retrace ! 

 Mr. Sherwin have insist , with the immovable obstinacy which 
 characterise all feeble - minded people in the management of their 
 important affair , that the first clause in our agreement   the leaving 
 my wife at the church - door   should be perform to the letter . as a due 
 compensation for this , I be to dine at North Villa that day . how should 
 I employ the interval that be to elapse before the dinner - hour ? 

 I go home , and have my horse saddle . I be in no mood for remain in 
 an empty house , in no mood for call on any of my friend - I be fit 
 for nothing but a gallop through the rain . all my wear and depress 
 emotion of the morning , have now merge into a wild excitement of body 
 and mind . when the horse be bring round , I see with delight that the 
 groom could hardly hold he . " keep he well in hand , Sir , " say the man , 
 " he be not be out for three day . " I be just in the humour for such a 
 ride as the caution promise I . 

 and what a ride it be , when I fairly get out of London ; and the 
 afternoon brightening of the foggy atmosphere , show the smooth , empty 
 high road before I ! the dashing through the rain that still fall ; the 
 feel of the long , powerful , regular stride of the horse under I ; the 
 thrill of that physical sympathy which establish itself between the 
 man and the steed ; the whirling past cart and waggon , salute by the 
 frantic barking of dog inside they ; the fly by roadside alehouse , 
 with the cheering of boy and half - drunken man sound for an instant 
 behind I , then lose in the distance - this be indeed to occupy , to 
 hurry on , to annihilate the tardy hour of solitude on my wedding day , 
 exactly as my heart desire ! 

 I get home wet through ; but with my body in a glow from the exercise , 
 with my spirit boil up at fever heat . when I arrive at North Villa , 
 the change in my manner astonish every one . at dinner , I require no 
 press now to partake of the sherry which Mr. Sherwin be so fond 
 of extoll , nor of the port which he bring out afterwards , with a 
 preliminary account of the vintage - date of the wine , and the price of 
 each bottle . my spirit , factitious as they be , never flag . every 
 time I look at Margaret , the sight of she stimulate they afresh . she 
 seem pre - occupy , and be unusually silent during dinner ; but her 
 beauty be just that voluptuous beauty which be lovely in repose . I 
 have never feel its influence so powerful over I as I feel it then . 

 in the drawing - room , Margaret 's manner grow more familiar , more 
 confident towards I than it have ever be before . she speak to I in 
 warm tone , look at I with warm look . a hundred little incident 
 mark our wedding - evening - trifle that love treasure up - which still 
 remain in my memory . one among they , at least , will never depart from 
 it : I first kiss she on that evening . 

 Mr. Sherwin have go out of the room ; Mrs. Sherwin be at the other end 
 of it , water some plant at the window ; Margaret , by her father 's 
 desire , be show I some rare print . she hand I a magnifying 
 glass , through which I be to look at a particular part of one of the 
 engraving , that be consider a master - piece of delicate workmanship . 
 instead of apply the magnifying test to the print , for which I care 
 nothing , I laughingly apply it to Margaret 's face . her lovely lustrous 
 black eye seem to flash into mine through the glass ; her warm , quick 
 breathing play on my cheek - it be but for an instant , and in that 
 instant I kiss she for the first time . what sensation the kiss give 
 I then ! - what remembrance it have leave I now ! 

 it be one more proof how tenderly , how purely I love she , that , before 
 this time , I have fear to take the first love - privilege which I have 
 long to assert , and might well have assert , before . man may not 
 understand this ; woman , I believe , will . 

 the hour of departure arrive ; the inexorable hour which be to separate 
 I from my wife on my wedding evening . shall I confess what I feel , on 
 the first performance of my ill - consider promise to Mr. Sherwin ? no : I 
 keep this a secret from Margaret ; I will keep it a secret here . 

 I take leave of she as hurriedly and abruptly as possible - I could not 
 trust myself to quit she in any other way . she have contrive to slip 
 aside into the dark part of the room , so that I only see her face 
 dimly at part . 

 I go home at once . when I lie down to sleep - then the ordeal which I 
 have be unconsciously prepare for myself throughout the day , begin 
 to try I . every nerve in my body , string up to the extreme point 
 of tension since the morning , now at last give way . I feel my limb 
 quivering , till the bed shake under I . I be possess by a gloom and 
 horror , cause by no thought , and produce no thought : the thinking 
 faculty seem paralysed within I , altogether . the physical and mental 
 reaction , after the fever and agitation of the day , be so sudden and 
 severe , that the faint noise from the street now terrify - yes , 
 literally terrify I . the whistling of the wind - which have rise since 
 sunset - make I start up in bed , with my heart throbbing , and my blood 
 all chill . when no sound be audible , then I listen for they to 
 come - listen breathlessly , without dare to move . at last , the agony 
 of nervous prostration grow more than I could bear - grow bad even than 
 the child 's horror of walk in the darkness , and sleep alone on the 
 bed - room floor , which have overcome I , almost from the first moment when 
 I lay down . I grope my way to the table and light the candle again ; then 
 wrap my dressing - gown round I , and sit shudder near the light , to 
 watch the weary hour out till morning . 

 and this be my wedding - night ! this be how the day end which have 
 begin by my marriage with Margaret Sherwin ! 




 PART II . 


 I. 

 an epoch in my narrative have now arrive . up to the time of my marriage , 
 I have appear as an active agent in the different event I have 
 describe . after that period , and - with one or two exceptional 
 case - throughout the whole year of my probation , my position change 
 with the change in my life , and become a passive one . 

 during this interval year , certain event happen , some of which , at 
 the time , excite my curiosity , but none my apprehension - some affect 
 I with a temporary disappointment , but none with even a momentary 
 suspicion . I can now look back on they , as so many timely warning which 
 I treat with fatal neglect . it be in these event that the history 
 of the long year through which I wait to claim my wife as my own , 
 be really comprise . they mark the lapse of time broadly and 
 significantly ; and to they I must now confine myself , as exclusively as 
 may be , in the present portion of my narrative . 

 it will be first necessary , however , that I should describe what be the 
 nature of my intercourse with Margaret , during the probationary period 
 which follow our marriage . 

 Mr. Sherwin 's anxiety be to make my visit to North Villa as few as 
 possible : he evidently fear the consequence of my see his daughter 
 too often . but on this point , I be resolute enough in assert my own 
 interest , to overpower any resistance on his part . I require he 
 to concede to I the right of see Margaret every day - leave all 
 arrangement of time to depend on his own convenience . after the due 
 number of objection , he reluctantly acquiesce in my demand . I be 
 bind by no engagement whatever , limit the number of my visit to 
 Margaret ; and I let he see at the outset , that I be now ready in my 
 turn , to impose condition on he , as he have already impose they on I . 

 accordingly , it be settle that Margaret and I be to meet every day . 
 I usually see she in the evening . when any alteration in the hour of my 
 visit take place , that alteration be produce by the necessity   which 
 we all recognise alike   of avoid a meeting with any of Mr. Sherwin 's 
 friend . 

 those portion of the day or the evening which I spend with Margaret , 
 be seldom pass altogether in the elysian idleness of love . not 
 content with only enumerate his daughter 's school - accomplishment to 
 I at our first interview , Mr. Sherwin boastfully refer to they again 
 and again , on many subsequent occasion ; and even oblige Margaret to 
 display before I , some of her knowledge of language - which he never 
 forget to remind we have be lavishly pay for out of his own pocket . it 
 be at one of these exhibition that the idea occur to I of make 
 a new pleasure for myself out of Margaret 's society , by teach she 
 really to appreciate and enjoy the literature which she have evidently 
 hitherto only study as a task . my fancy revel by anticipation in 
 all the delight of such an employment as this . it would be like act 
 the story of Abelard and Heloise over again - revive all the poetry and 
 romance in which those immortal love - study of old have begin , with none 
 of the guilt and none of the misery that have darken their end . 

 I have a definite purpose , besides , in wish to assume the direction of 
 Margaret 's study . whenever the secret of my marriage be reveal , my 
 pride be concern in be able to show my wife to every one , as the 
 all - sufficient excuse for any imprudence I might have commit for her 
 sake . I be determined that my father , especially , should have no other 
 argument against she than the one ungracious argument of her birth - that 
 he should see she , fit by the beauty of her mind , as well as by all 
 her other beauty , for the high station that society could offer . 
 the thought of this give I fresh ardour in my project ; I assume my new 
 duty without delay , and continue they with a happiness which never 
 once suffer even a momentary decrease . 

 of all the pleasure which a man find in the society of a woman whom he 
 love , be there any superior , be there many equal , to the pleasure 
 of read out of the same book with she ? on what other occasion do the 
 sweet familiarity of the sweetest of all companionship last so long 
 without cloying , and pass and re - pass so naturally , so delicately , so 
 inexhaustibly between you and she ? when be your face so constantly close 
 to hers as it be then ? - when can your hair mingle with her , your cheek 
 touch her , your eye meet her , so often as they can then ? that be , of 
 all time , the only time when you can breathe with her breath for hour 
 together ; feel every little warming of the colour on her cheek mark 
 its own change on the temperature of your ; follow every slight 
 fluttering of her bosom , every faint gradation of her sigh , as if 
  her heart be beat , her life glow , within your . surely it be 
 then - if ever - that we realize , almost revive , in ourselves , the love 
 of the first two of our race , when angel walk with they on the same 
 garden path , and their heart be pure from the pollution of the fatal 
 tree ! 

 evening after evening pass away - one more happily than another - in 
 what Margaret and I call our lesson . never be lesson of literature 
 so like lesson of love we read oftenest the light italian poet - we 
 study the poetry of love , write in the language of love . but , as for 
 the steady , utilitarian purpose I have propose to myself of practically 
 improve Margaret 's intellect , that be a purpose which insensibly and 
 deceitfully abandon I as completely as if it have never exist . the 
 little serious teaching I try with she at first , lead to very poor 
 result . perhaps , the lover interfere too much with the tutor ; perhaps , 
 I have over - estimate the fertility of the faculty I design to 
 cultivate - but I care not , and think not to inquire where the fault 
 lay , then . I give myself up unreservedly to the exquisite sensation 
 which the mere act of look on the same page with Margaret procure 
 for I ; and neither detect , nor wish to detect , that it be I 
 who read the difficult passage , and leave only a few even of the very 
 easy to be attempt by she . 

 happily for my patience under the trial impose on I by the term on 
 which Mr. Sherwin 's restriction , and my promise to obey they , oblige 
 I to live with Margaret , it be Mrs. Sherwin who be generally select 
 to remain in the room with we . by no one could such ungrateful duty of 
 supervision as those impose on she , have be more delicately and more 
 considerately perform . 

 she always keep far enough away to be out of hearing when we whisper 
 to each other . we rarely detect she even in look at we . she have a 
 way of sit for hour together in the same part of the room , without 
 ever change her position , without occupation of any kind , without 
 utter a word , or breathe a sigh . I soon discover that she be not 
 lose in thought , at these period   as I have at first suppose : but lose 
 in a strange lethargy of body and mind ; a comfortless , wake trance , 
 into which she fall from sheer physical weakness - it be like the 
 vacancy and feebleness of a first convalescence , after a long illness . 
 she never change : never look well , never bad . I often speak 
 to she : I try hard to show my sympathy , and win her confidence and 
 friendship . the poor lady be always thankful , always speak to I 
 gratefully and kindly , but very briefly . she never tell I what be her 
 suffering or her sorrow . the story of that lonely , linger life 
 be an impenetrable mystery for her own family - for her husband and her 
 daughter , as well as for I . it be a secret between she and God . 

 with Mrs. Sherwin as the guardian to watch over Margaret , it may easily 
 be imagine that I feel none of the heavy oppression of restraint . 
 her presence , as the third person appoint to remain with we , be not 
 enough to repress the little endearment to which each evening 's lesson 
 give rise ; but be just sufficiently perceptible to invest they with the 
 character of steal endearment , and to make they all the more precious 
 on that very account . Mrs. Sherwin never know , I never thoroughly know 
 myself till later , how much of the secret of my patience under my year 's 
 probation lie in her conduct , while she be sit in the room with 
 Margaret and I . 

 in this solitude where I now write - in the change of life and of all 
 life 's hope and enjoyment which have come over I - when I look back to 
 those evening at North Villa , I shudder as I look . at this moment , 
 I see the room again - as in a dream - with the little round table , the 
 reading lamp , and the open book . Margaret and I be sit together : 
 her hand be in mine ; my heart be with her . love , and Youth , and 
 Beauty - the mortal Trinity of this world 's worship - be there , in that 
 quiet softly - light room ; but not alone . away in the dim light behind , be a 
 solitary figure , ever mournful and ever still . it be a woman 's form ; 
 but how wasted and how weak ! - a woman 's face ; but how ghastly and 
 changeless , with those eye that be vacant , those lip that be 
 motionless , those cheek that the blood never ting , that the freshness 
 of health and happiness shall never visit again ! woeful , warning figure 
 of dumb sorrow and patient pain , to fill the background of a picture of 
 Love , and Beauty , and Youth ! 

 I be stray from my task . let I return to my narrative : its course 
 begin to darken before I apace , while I now write . 

 the partial restraint and embarrassment , cause at first by the strange 
 term on which my wife and I be live together , gradually vanish 
 before the frequency of my visit to North Villa . we soon begin to speak 
 with all the ease , all the unpremeditated frankness of a long intimacy . 
 Margaret 's power of conversation be generally only employ to lead 
 I to exert mine . she be never tired of induce I to speak of my 
 family . she listen with every appearance of interest , while I 
 talk of my father , my sister , or my eld brother ; but whenever she 
 question I directly about any of they , her inquiry invariably 
 lead away from their character and disposition , to their personal 
 appearance , their every - day habit , their dress , their intercourse with 
 the gay world , the thing they spend their money on , and other topic of 
 a similar nature . 

 for instance ; she always listen , and listen attentively , to what I 
 tell she of my father 's character , and of the principle which regulate 
 his life . she show every disposition to profit by the instruction I 
 give she beforehand , about how she should treat his peculiarity when 
 she be introduce to he . but , on all these occasion , what really 
 interested she most , be to hear how many servant wait on he ; how 
 often he go to Court ; how many lord and lady he know ; what he say 
 or do to his servant , when they commit mistake ; whether he be 
 ever angry with his child for ask he for money ; and whether he 
 limit my sister to any give number of dress in the course of the 
 year ? 

 again ; whenever our conversation turn on Clara , if I begin by 
 describe her kindness , her gentleness and goodness , her simple win 
 manner - I be sure to be lead insensibly into a digression about her 
 height , figure , complexion , and style of dress . the latter subject 
 especially interested Margaret ; she could question I on it , over and 
 over again . what be Clara 's usual morning dress ? how do she wear her 
 hair ? what be her evening dress ? do she make a difference between a 
 dinner party and a ball ? what colour do she prefer ? what dressmaker 
 do she employ ? do she wear much jewellery ? which do she like well in 
 her hair , and which be most fashionable , flower or pearl ? how many 
 new dress do she have in a year ; and be there more than one maid 
 especially to attend on she ? 

 then , again : have she a carriage of her own ? what lady take care of 
 she when she go out ? do she like dancing ? what be the fashionable 
 dance at nobleman 's house ? do young lady in the great world 
 practise the pianoforte much ? how many offer have my sister have ? do she 
 go to Court , as well as my father ? what do she talk about to gentleman , 
 and what do gentleman talk about to she ? if she be speak to a 
 duke , how often would she say " your grace " to he ? and would a duke get 
 she a chair , or an ice , and wait on she just as gentleman without title 
 wait on lady , when they meet they in society ? 

 my reply to these and hundred of other question like they , be 
 receive by Margaret with the most eager attention . on the favourite 
 subject of Clara 's dress , my answer be an unending source of 
 amusement and pleasure to she . she especially enjoy overcome the 
 difficulty of interpret aright my clumsy , circumlocutory phrase 
 in attempt to describe shawl , gown , and bonnet ; and teach I the 
 exact millinery language which I ought to have make use of with an arch 
 expression of triumph and a burlesque earnestness of manner , that 
 always enchant I . at that time , every word she utter , no matter how 
 frivolous , be the sweetest of all music to my ear . it be only by the 
 stern test of after - event that I learn to analyse her conversation . 
 sometimes , when I be away from she , I might think of lead her 
 girlish curiosity to high thing ; but when we meet again , the thought 
 vanish ; and it become delight enough for I simply to hear her speak , 
 without once care or consider what she speak of . 

 those be the day when I live happy and unreflecte in the broad 
 sunshine of joy which love shower round I - my eye be dazzle ; my 
 mind lie asleep under it . once or twice , a cloud come threaten , with 
 chill and shadowy influence ; but it pass away , and then the sunshine 
 return to I , the same sunshine that it be before . 

 II . 

 the first change that pass over the calm uniformity of the life at 
 North Villa , come in this manner : 

 one evening , on enter the drawing - room , I miss Mrs. Sherwin ; and 
 find to my great disappointment that her husband be apparently 
 settle there for the evening . he look a little flurry , and be more 
 restless than usual . his first word , as we meet , inform I of an event 
 in which he appear to take the deep interest . 

 " News , my dear sir ! " he say . " Mr. Mannion have come back - at least two 
 day before I expect he ! " 

 at first , I feel inclined to ask who Mr. Mannion be , and what 
 consequence it could possibly be to I that he have come back . but 
 immediately afterwards , I remember that this Mr. Mannion 's name have 
 be mention during my first conversation with Mr. Sherwin ; and then 
 I recall to mind the description I have hear of he , as " confidential 
 clerk ; " as forty year of age ; and as an educate man , who have make his 
 information of some use to Margaret in keep up the knowledge she have 
 acquire at school . I know no more than this about he , and I feel no 
 curiosity to discover more from Mr. Sherwin . 

 Margaret and I sit down as usual with our book about we . 

 there have be something a little hurried and abrupt in her manner 
 of receive I , when I come in . when we begin to read , her attention 
 wander incessantly ; she look round several time towards the door . 
 Mr. Sherwin walk about the room without intermission , except when 
 he once pause on his restless course , to tell I that Mr. Mannion be 
 come that evening ; and that he hop I should have no objection to be 
 introduce to a person who be " quite like one of the family , and well 
 enough read to be sure to please a great reader like I . " I ask myself 
 rather impatiently , who be this Mr. Mannion , that his arrival at his 
 employer 's house should make a sensation ? when I whisper something of 
 this to Margaret , she smile rather uneasily , and say nothing . 

 at last the bell be rung . Margaret start a little at the sound . 
 Mr. Sherwin sit down ; compose himself into rather an elaborate 
 attitude - the door open , and Mr. Mannion come in . 

 Mr. Sherwin receive his clerk with the assumed superiority of the 
 master in his word ; but his tone and manner flatly contradict they . 
 Margaret rise hastily , and then as hastily sit down again , while the 
 visitor very respectfully take her hand , and make the usual inquiry . 
 after this , he be introduce to I ; and then Margaret be send away to 
 summon her mother down stair . while she be out of the room , there be 
 nothing to distract my attention from Mr. Mannion . I look at he with 
 a curiosity and interest , which I could hardly account for at first . 

 if extraordinary regularity of feature be alone sufficient to make 
 a handsome man , then this confidential clerk of Mr. Sherwin 's be 
 assuredly one of the handsome man I ever behold . view separately 
 from the head   which be rather large , both in front and behind   his 
 face exhibit , throughout , an almost perfect symmetry of proportion . 
 his bald forehead be smooth and massive as marble ; his high brow and 
 thin eyelid have the firmness and immobility of marble , and seem 
 as cold ; his delicately - form lip , when he be not speak , close 
 habitually , as changelessly still as if no breath of life ever pass 
 they . there be not a wrinkle or line anywhere on his face . but for the 
 baldness in front , and the greyness of the hair at the back and side 
 of his head , it would have be impossible from his appearance to have 
 guess his age , even within ten year of what it really be . 

 such be his countenance in point of form ; but in that which be the 
 outward assertion of our immortality - in expression - it be , as I now 
 behold it , an utter void . never have I before see any human face 
 which baffle all inquiry like his . no mask could have be make 
 expressionless enough to resemble it ; and yet it look like a mask . 
 it tell you nothing of his thought , when he speak : nothing of his 
 disposition , when he be silent . his cold grey eye give you no help in 
 try to study he . they never vary from the steady , straightforward 
 look , which be exactly the same for Margaret as it be for I ; for Mrs. 
 Sherwin as for Mr. Sherwin - exactly the same whether he speak or whether 
 he listen ; whether he talk of indifferent , or of important matter . 
 who be he ? what be he ? his name and calling be poor reply to those 
 question . be he naturally cold and unimpressible at heart ? or have some 
 fierce passion , some terrible sorrow , ravage the life within he , and 
 leave it dead for ever after ? impossible to conjecture ! there be the 
 impenetrable face before you , wholly inexpressive - so inexpressive that 
 it do not even look vacant - a mystery for your eye and your mind to 
 dwell on - hide something ; but whether vice or virtue you could not 
 tell . 

 he be dress as unobtrusively as possible , entirely in black ; and be 
 rather above the middle height . his manner be the only part of he that 
 betray anything to the observation of other . view in connection 
 with his station , his demeanour   unobtrusive though it be   proclaim 
 itself as above his position in the world . he have all the quietness and 
 self - possession of a gentleman . he maintain his respectful bearing , 
 without the slight appearance of cringing ; and display a decision , 
 both in word and action , that could never be mistake for obstinacy 
 or over - confidence . before I have be in his company five minute , his 
 manner assure I that he must have descend to the position he now 
 occupy . 

 on his introduction to I , he bow without say anything . when he 
 speak to Mr. Sherwin , his voice be as void of expression as his face : 
 it be rather low in tone , but singularly distinct in utterance . he 
 speak deliberately , but with no emphasis on particular word , and 
 without hesitation in choose his term . 

 when Mrs. Sherwin come down , I watch her conduct towards he . she 
 could not repress a slight nervous shrinking , when he approach and 
 place a chair for she . in answer his inquiry after her health , she 
 never once look at he ; but fix her eye all the time on Margaret 
 and I , with a sad , anxious expression , wholly indescribable , which 
 often recur to my memory after that day . she always look more or 
 less frightened , poor thing , in her husband 's presence ; but she seem 
 positively awe - strike before Mr. Mannion . 

 in truth , my first observation of this so - call clerk , at North Villa , 
 be enough to convince I that he be master there - master in his own 
 quiet , unobtrusive way . that man 's character , of whatever element it 
 might be compose , be a character that rule . I could not see this 
 in his face , or detect it in his word ; but I could discover it in the 
 look and manner of his employer and his employer 's family , as he now 
 sit at the same table with they . Margaret 's eye avoid his countenance 
 much less frequently than the eye of her parent ; but then he rarely 
 look at she in return - rarely look at she at all , except when common 
 courtesy oblige he to do so . 

 if any one have tell I beforehand , that I should suspend my ordinary 
 evening 's occupation with my young wife , for the sake of observe the 
 very man who have interrupt it , and that man only Mr. Sherwin 's 
 clerk , I should have laugh at the idea . yet so it be . our book lay 
 neglect on the table - neglect by I , perhaps by Margaret too , for 
 Mr. Mannion . 

 his conversation , on this occasion at least , baffle all curiosity as 
 completely as his face . I try to lead he to talk . he just answer 
 I , and that be all ; speak with great respect of manner and phrase , 
 very intelligibly , but very briefly . Mr. Sherwin - after refer to 
 the business expedition on which he have be absent , for the purchase 
 of silk at Lyons - ask he some question about France and the French , 
 which evidently proceed from the most ludicrous ignorance both of the 
 country and the people . Mr. Mannion just set he right ; and do no more . 
 there be not the small inflection of sarcasm in his voice , not the 
 slight look of sarcasm in his eye , while he speak . when we talk 
 among ourselves , he do not join in the conversation ; but sit quietly 
 wait until he might be pointedly and personally address again . at 
 these time a suspicion cross my mind that he might really be study 
 my character , as I be vainly try to study his ; and I often turn 
 suddenly round on he , to see whether he be look at I . this be 
 never the case . his hard , chill grey eye be not on I , and not on 
 Margaret : they rest most frequently on Mrs. Sherwin , who always shrink 
 before they . 

 after stay little more than half an hour , he rise to go away . while 
 Mr. Sherwin be vainly press he to remain long , I walk to the 
 round table at the other end of the room , on which the book be place 
 that Margaret and I have intend to read during the evening . I be 
 stand by the table when he come to take leave of I . he just glance 
 at the volume under my hand , and say in tone too low to be hear at 
 the other end of the room : 

 " I hope my arrival have not interrupt any occupation to - night , Sir . 
 Mr. Sherwin , aware of the interest I must feel in whatever concern the 
 family of an employer whom I have serve for year , have inform I in 
 confidence - a confidence which I know how to respect and preserve - of 
 your marriage with his daughter , and of the peculiar circumstance 
 under which the marriage have be contract . I may at least venture to 
 congratulate the young lady on a change of life which must procure her 
 happiness , have begin already by procure the increase of her mental 
 resource and pleasure . " he bow , and point to the book on the 
 table . 

 " I believe , Mr. Mannion , " I say , " that you have be of great 
 assistance in lay a foundation for the study to which I presume you 
 refer . " 

 " I endeavour to make myself useful in that way , Sir , as in all other , 
 when my employer desire it . " he bow again , as he say this ; and then 
 go out , follow by Mr. Sherwin , who hold a short colloquy with he in 
 the hall . 

 what have he say to I ? only a few civil word , speak in a very 
 respectful manner . there have be nothing in his tone , nothing in his 
 look , to give any peculiar significance to what he utter . still , the 
 moment his back be turn , I find myself speculate whether his word 
 contain any hidden meaning ; try to recall something in his voice or 
 manner which might guide I in discover the real sense he attach 
 to what he say . it seem as if the most powerful whet to my curiosity , 
 be supply by my own experience of the impossibility of penetrate 
 beneath the unassailable surface which this man present to I . 

 I question Margaret about he . she could not tell I more than I know 
 already . he have always be very kind and useful ; he be a clever man , 
 and could talk a great deal sometimes , when he choose ; and he have teach 
 she more of foreign language and foreign literature in a month , than 
 she have learn at school in a year . while she be tell I this , 
 I hardly notice that she speak in a very hurried manner , and busy 
 herself in arrange the book and work that lie on the table . my 
 attention be more closely direct to Mrs. Sherwin . to my surprise , I 
 see she eagerly lean forward while Margaret be speak , and fix her 
 eye on her daughter with a look of penetrate scrutiny , of which I 
 could never have suppose a person usually so feeble and unenergetic 
 to be capable . I think of transfer to she my questioning on the 
 subject of Mr. Mannion ; but at that moment her husband enter the room , 
 and I address myself for further enlightenment to he . 

 " Aha ! " - cry Mr. Sherwin , rub his hand triumphantly - " I know 
 mannion would please you . I tell you so , my dear Sir , if you remember , 
 before he come . curious look person - be not   he ? " 

 " so curious , that I may safely say I never see a face in the slight 
 degree resemble his in my life . your clerk , Mr. Sherwin , be a complete 
 walking mystery that I want to solve . Margaret can not give I much help , 
 I be afraid . when you come in , I be about to apply to Mrs. Sherwin for 
 a little assistance . " 

 " do not   do any such thing ! you will be quite in the wrong box there . 
 Mrs. S. be as sulky as a bear , whenever Mannion and she be in company 
 together . consider her behaviour to he , I wonder he can be so civil 
 to she as he be . " 

 " what can you tell I about he yourself , Mr. Sherwin ? " 

 " I can tell you there be not a house of business in London have such a 
 manage man as he be : he be my factotum - my right hand , in short ; and 
 my leave too , for the matter of that . he understand my way of do 
 business ; and , in fact , carry thing out in first - rate style . why , 
 he would be worth his weight in gold , only for the knack he have of keep 
 the young man in the shop in order . poor devil ! they do not   know how he 
 do it ; but there be a particular look of Mr. Mannion 's that be as bad 
 as transportation and hang to they , whenever they see it . I will pledge 
 you my word of honour he be never have a day 's illness , or make a single 
 mistake , since he be be with I . he be a quiet , steady - go , regular 
 dragon at his work - he be ! and then , so oblige in other thing . I have 
 only get to say to he : ' here be Margaret at home for the holiday ; ' or , 
 ' here be Margaret a little out of sort , and go to be nurse at home 
 for the half - year - what be to be do about keep up her lesson ? I 
 can not   pay for a governess   bad lot , governess !   and school too . ' - I have 
 only get to say that ; and up get mannion from his book and his 
 fireside at home , in the evening - which begin to be something , you 
 know , to a man of his time of life - and turn tutor for I , gratis ; and 
 a first - rate tutor , too ! that be what I call have a treasure ! and yet , 
 though he be be with we for year , Mrs. S. there will not   take to he ! - I 
 defy she or anybody else to say why , or wherefore ! " 

 " do you know how he be employ before he come to you ? " 

 " ah ! now you have   hit it - that be where you be right in say he be a 
 mystery . what he do before I know he , be more than I can tell - a good 
 deal more . he come to I with a capital recommendation and security , 
 from a gentleman whom I know to be of the high respectability . I have 
 a vacancy in the back office , and try he , and find out what he be 
 worth , in no time - I flatter myself I have   a knack at that with everybody . 
 well : before I get use to his curious - looking face , and his quiet 
 way , I want badly enough to know something about he , and who his 
 connection be . first , I ask his friend who have recommend 
 he - the friend be not   at liberty to answer for anything but his perfect 
 trustworthiness . then I ask Mannion himself point - blank about it , one 
 day . he just tell I that he have reason for keep his family affair 
 to himself - nothing more - but you know the way he have with he ; and , 
 damn it , he put the stopper on I , from that time to this . I be not 
 go to risk lose the good clerk that ever man have , by worry 
 he about his secret . they do not   interfere with business , and do not 
 interfere with I ; so I put my curiosity in my pocket . I know nothing 
 about he , but that he be my right - hand man , and the honest fellow 
 that ever stand in shoe . he may be the Great Mogul himself , in 
 disguise , for anything I care ! in short , you may be able to find out all 
 about he , my dear Sir ; but I can not . " 

 " there do not seem much chance for I , Mr. Sherwin , after what you 
 have say . " 

 " well : I be not so sure of that - plenty of chance here , you know . 
 you will see he often enough : he live near , and drop in constantly 
 of evening . we settle business matter that will not   come into business 
 hour , in my private snuggery up stair . in fact , he be one of the 
 family ; treat he as such , and get anything out of he you can - the more 
 the well , as far as regard that . ah ! Mrs. S. , you may stare , Ma'am ; 
 but I say again , he be one of the family ; may be , he will be my partner 
 some of these day - you will have to get use to he then , whether you 
 like it or not . " 

 " one more question : be he married or single ? " 

 " Single , to be sure - a regular old bachelor , if ever there be one yet . " 

 during the whole time we have be speak , Mrs. Sherwin have look 
 at we with far more earnestness and attention than I have ever see she 
 display before . even her languid faculty seem susceptible of active 
 curiosity on the subject of Mr. Mannion - the more so , perhaps , from she 
 very dislike of he . Margaret have move her chair into the background , 
 while her father be talk ; and be apparently little interested 
 in the topic under discussion . in the first interval of silence , she 
 complain of headache , and ask leave to retire to her room . 

 after she leave we , I take my departure : for Mr. Sherwin evidently have 
 nothing more to tell I about his clerk that be worth hear . on my 
 way home , Mr. Mannion occupy no small share of my thought . the idea 
 of try to penetrate the mystery connect with he be an idea 
 that please I ; there be a promise of future excitement in it of no 
 ordinary kind . I determine to have a little private conversation with 
 Margaret about he ; and to make she an ally in my new project . if there 
 really have be some romance connect with Mr. Mannion 's early life - if 
 that strange and striking face of his be indeed a seal book which 
 contain a secret story , what a triumph and a pleasure , if Margaret and 
 I should succeed in discover it together ! 

 when I wake the next morning , I could hardly believe that this 
 tradesman 's clerk have so interested my curiosity that he have actually 
 share my thought with my young wife , during the evening before . and 
 yet , when I next see he , he produce exactly the same impression on I 
 again . 

 III . 

 some week pass away ; Margaret and I resume our usual employment and 
 amusement ; the life at North Villa run on as smoothly and obscurely as 
 usual - and still I remain ignorant of Mr. Mannion 's history and Mr. 
 Mannion 's character . he come frequently to the house , in the evening ; 
 but be generally closet with Mr. Sherwin , and seldom accept 
 his employer 's constant invitation to he to join the party in 
 the drawing - room . at those rare interval when we do see he , his 
 appearance and behaviour be exactly the same as on the night when I 
 have meet he for the first time ; he speak just as seldom , and resist 
 just as resolutely and respectfully the many attempt make on my part to 
 lead he into conversation and familiarity . if he have really be try 
 to excite my interest , he could not have succeed more effectually . I 
 feel towards he much as a man feel in a labyrinth , when every fresh 
 failure in gain the centre , only produce fresh obstinacy in renew 
 the effort to arrive at it . 

 from Margaret I gain no sympathy for my newly - arouse curiosity . she 
 appear , much to my surprise , to care little about Mr. Mannion ; and 
 always change the conversation , if it relate to he , whenever it 
 depend upon she to continue the topic or not . 

 Mrs. Sherwin 's conduct be far from resemble her daughter 's , when I 
 speak to she on the same subject . she always listen intently to what 
 I say ; but her answer be invariably brief , confused , and sometimes 
 absolutely incomprehensible . it be only after great difficulty that I 
 induce she to confess her dislike of Mr. Mannion . whence it proceed 
 she could never tell . do she suspect anything ? in answer this 
 question , she always stammer , tremble , and look away from I . " how 
 could she suspect anything ? if she do suspect , it would be very wrong 
 without good reason : but she ought not to suspect , and do not , of 
 course . " 

 I never obtain any reply from her more intelligible than these . 
 attribute their confusion to the nervous agitation which more or less 
 affect she when she speak on any subject , I soon cease make any 
 effort to induce she to explain herself ; and determine to search for 
 the clue to Mr. Mannion 's character , without seek assistance from any 
 one . 

 accident at length give I an opportunity of know something of his 
 habit and opinion ; and so far , therefore , of know something about 
 the man himself . 

 one night , I meet he in the hall at North Villa , about to leave the 
 house at the same time that I be , after a business - consultation in 
 private with Mr. Sherwin . we go out together . the sky be unusually 
 black ; the night atmosphere unusually oppressive and still . the roll 
 of distant thunder sound faint and dreary all about we . the sheet 
 lightning , flash quick and low in the horizon , make the dark 
 firmament look like a thick veil , rise and fall incessantly , over 
 a heaven of dazzle light behind it . such few foot - passenger as pass 
 we , pass running - for heavy , warning drop be fall already from 
 the sky . we quicken our pace ; but before we have walk more than 
 two hundred yard , the rain come down , furious and drenching ; and the 
 thunder begin to peal fearfully , right over our head . 

 " my house be close by , " say my companion , just as quietly and 
 deliberately as usual - " pray step in , Sir , until the storm be over . " 

 I follow he down a bye street ; he open a door with his own key ; and 
 the next instant I be shelter under Mr. Mannion 's roof . 

 he lead I at once into a room on the ground floor . the fire be blaze 
 in the grate ; an arm - chair , with a read easel attach , be place by 
 it ; the lamp be ready light ; the tea - thing be place on the table ; 
 the dark , thick curtain be draw close over the window ; and , as if to 
 complete the picture of comfort before I , a large black cat lie on the 
 rug , bask luxuriously in the heat of the fire . while Mr. Mannion 
 go out to give some direction , as he say , to his servant , I have 
 an opportunity of examine the apartment more in detail . to study the 
 appearance of a man 's dwelling - room , be very often nearly equivalent to 
 study his own character . 

 the personal contrast between Mr. Sherwin and his clerk be remarkable 
 enough , but the contrast between the dimension and furnishing of the 
 room they live in , be to the full as extraordinary . the apartment I 
 now survey be less than half the size of the sitting - room at North 
 Villa . the paper on the wall be of a dark red ; the curtain be of 
 the same colour ; the carpet be brown , and if it bear any pattern , that 
 pattern be too quiet and unpretending to be visible by candlelight . one 
 wall be entirely occupy by row of dark mahogany shelf , completely 
 fill with book , most of they cheap edition of the classical work of 
 ancient and modern literature . the opposite wall be thickly hang with 
 engraving in maple - wood frame from the work of modern painter , 
 English and French . all the minor article of furniture be of the 
 plainest and neat order - even the white china tea - pot and tea - cup 
 on the table , have neither pattern nor colour of any kind . what a 
 contrast be this room to the drawing - room at North Villa ! 

 on his return , Mr. Mannion find I look at his tea - equipage . " I 
 be afraid , Sir , I must confess myself an epicure and a prodigal in two 
 thing , " he say ; " an epicure in tea , and a prodigal   at least for a 
 person in my situation   in book . however , I receive a liberal salary , 
 and can satisfy my taste , such as they be , and save money too . what 
 can I offer you , Sir ? " 

 see the preparation on the table , I ask for tea . while he be 
 speak to I , there be one peculiarity about he that I observe . 
 almost all man , when they stand on their own hearth , in their own 
 home , instinctively alter more or less from their out - of - door manner : 
 the stiff people expand , the cold thaw a little , by their own 
 fireside . it be not so with Mr. Mannion . he be exactly the same man 
 at his own house that he be at Mr. Sherwin 's . 

 there be no need for he to have tell I that he be an epicure in tea ; 
 the manner in which he make it would have betray that to anybody . he 
 put in nearly treble the quantity which would generally be consider 
 sufficient for two person ; and almost immediately after he have 
 fill the tea - pot with boiling water , begin to pour from it into the 
 cup - thus preserve all the aroma and delicacy of flavour in the herb , 
 without the alloy of any of the coarser part of its strength . when we 
 have finish our first cup , there be no pouring of dreg into a basin , 
 or of fresh water on the leaf . a middle - aged female servant , neat and 
 quiet , come up and take away the tray , bring it to we again with the 
 tea - pot and tea - cup clean and empty , to receive a fresh infusion from 
 fresh leaf . these be trifle to notice ; but I think of other 
 tradesman 's clerk who be drink their gin - and - water jovially , at 
 home or at a tavern , and find Mr. Mannion a more exasperating mystery 
 to I than ever . 

 the conversation between we turn at first on trivial subject , and 
 be but ill sustain on my part - there be peculiarity in my present 
 position which make I thoughtful . once , our talk cease altogether ; 
 and , just at that moment , the storm begin to rise to its height . hail 
 mingle with the rain , and rattle heavily against the window . the 
 thunder , burst louder and louder with each successive peal , seem 
 to shake the house to its foundation . as I listen to the fearful 
 crashing and roaring that seem to fill the whole measureless void of 
 upper air , and then look round on the calm , dead - calm face of the man 
 beside I - without one human emotion of any kind even faintly picture 
 on it - I feel strange , unutterable sensation creep over I ; our 
 silence grow oppressive and sinister ; I begin to wish , I hardly know 
 why , for some third person in the room - for somebody else to look at and 
 to speak to . 

 he be the first to resume the conversation . I should have imagine it 
 impossible for any man , in the midst of such thunder as now rag above 
 our head , to think or talk of anything but the storm . and yet , when he 
 speak , it be merely on a subject connect with his introduction to 
 I at North Villa . his attention seem as far from be attract or 
 impress by the mighty elemental tumult without , as if the tranquillity 
 of the night be uninvade by the slight murmur of sound . 

 " may I inquire , Sir , " he begin , " whether I be right in apprehend that 
 my conduct towards you , since we first meet at Mr. Sherwin 's house , may 
 have appear strange , and even discourteous , in your eye ? " 

 " in what respect , Mr. Mannion ? " I ask , a little startle by the 
 abruptness of the question . 

 " I be perfectly sensible , Sir , that you have kindly set I the example , 
 on many occasion , in try to better our acquaintance . when such 
 advance be make by one in your station to one in mine , they ought to 
 be immediately and gratefully respond to . " 

 why do he pause ? be he about to tell I he have discover that my 
 advance spring from curiosity to know more about he than he be 
 willing to reveal ? I wait for he to proceed . 

 " I have only fail , " he continue , " in the courtesy and gratitude you 
 have a right to expect from I , because , know how you be situate 
 with Mr. Sherwin 's daughter , I think any intrusion on my part , while 
 you be with the young lady , might not be so acceptable as you , Sir , in 
 your kindness , be willing to lead I to believe . " 

 " let I assure you , " I answer ; relieve to find myself unsuspecte , 
 and really impress by his delicacy - " let I assure you that I fully 
 appreciate the consideration you have show - " 

 just as the last word pass my lip , the thunder peal awfully over 
 the house . I say no more : the sound silence I . 

 " as my explanation have satisfy you , Sir , " he go on ; his clear 
 and deliberate utterance rise discordantly audible above the long , 
 retire roll of the last burst of thunder - " may I feel justified in 
 speak on the subject of your present position in my employer 's house , 
 with some freedom ? I mean , if I may say so without offence , with the 
 freedom of a friend . " 

 I beg he would use all the freedom he wish ; feel really desirous 
 that he should do so , apart from any purpose of lead he to talk 
 unreservedly on the chance of hear he talk of himself . the profound 
 respect of manner and phrase which he have hitherto testify - observe 
 by a man of his age , to a man of mine - make I feel ill at ease . he be 
 most probably my equal in acquirement : he have the manner and taste 
 of a gentleman , and might have the birth too , for aught I know to the 
 contrary . the difference between we be only in our worldly position . 
 I have not enough of my father 's pride of caste to think that this 
 difference alone , make it right that a man whose year nearly double 
 mine , whose knowledge perhaps surpass mine , should speak to I as Mr. 
 Mannion have speak up to this time . 

 " I may tell you then , " he resume , " that while I be anxious to commit no 
 untimely intrusion on your hour at North Villa , I be at the same time 
 desirous of be something more than merely inoffensive towards you . I 
 should wish to be positively useful , as far as I can . in my opinion 
 Mr. Sherwin have hold you to rather a hard engagement - he be try your 
 discretion a little too severely I think , at your year and in your 
 situation . feel thus , it be my sincere wish to render what connection 
 and influence I have with the family , useful in make the probation you 
 have still to pass through , as easy as possible . I have more mean of 
 do this , Sir , than you might at first imagine . " 

 his offer take I a little by surprise . I feel with a sort of shame , 
 that candour and warmth of feeling be what I have not expect from 
 he . my attention insensibly wander away from the storm , to attach 
 itself more and more closely to he , as he go on : 

 " I be perfectly sensible , " he resume , " that such a proposition as I 
 now make to you , proceed from one little well than a stranger , may 
 cause surprise and even suspicion , at first . I can only explain it , by 
 ask you to remember that I have know the young lady since childhood ; 
 and that , have assist in form her mind and develop her 
 character , I feel towards she almost as a second father , and be 
 therefore naturally interested in the gentleman who have choose she for a 
 wife . " 

 be there a tremor at last in that changeless voice , as he speak ? 
 I think so ; and look anxiously to catch the answer gleam of 
 expression , which might now , for the first time , be soften his iron 
 feature , animate the blank stillness of his countenance . if any such 
 expression have be visible , I be too late to detect it . just as I 
 look at he he stoop down to poke the fire . when he turn towards 
 I again , his face be the same impenetrable face , his eye the same 
 hard , steady , inexpressive eye as before . 

 " besides , " he continue , " a man must have some object in life for his 
 sympathy to be employ on . I have neither wife nor child ; and no near 
 relation to think of - I have nothing but my routine of business in the 
 day , and my book here by my lonely fireside , at night . our life be not 
 much ; but it be make for a little more than this . my former pupil at 
 North Villa be my pupil no long . I can not   help feel that it would 
 be an object in existence for I to occupy myself with her happiness and 
 your ; to have two young people , in the heyday of youth and first love , 
 look towards I occasionally for the promotion of some of their 
 pleasure - no matter how trifling . all this will seem odd and 
 incomprehensible to you . if you be of my age , Sir , and in my 
 position , you would understand it . " 

 be it possible that he could speak thus , without his voice faltering , 
 or his eye soften in the slight degree ? yes : I look at he and 
 listen to he intently ; but here be not the faint change in his 
 face or his tone - there be nothing to show outwardly whether he 
 feel what he say , or whether he do not . his word have paint such a 
 picture of forlornness on my mind , that I have mechanically half raise 
 my hand to take his , while he be address I ; but the sight of he 
 when he cease , check the impulse almost as soon as it be form . 
 he do not appear to have notice either my involuntary gesture , or its 
 immediate repression ; and go on speak . 

 " I have say perhaps more than I ought , " he resume . " if I have not 
 succeed in make you understand my explanation as I could wish , we 
 will change the subject , and not return to it again , until you have 
 know I for a much long time . " 

 " on no account change the subject , Mr. Mannion , " I say ; unwilling 
 to let it be imply that I would not put trust in he . " I be deeply 
 sensible of the kindness of your offer , and the interest you take in 
 Margaret and I . we shall both , I be sure , accept your good office - " 

 I stop . the storm have decrease a little in violence : but my 
 attention be now strike by the wind , which have rise as the thunder and 
 rain have partially lull . how drearily it be moan down the street ! 
 it seem , at that moment , to be wail over I ; to be wail over 
  he ; to be wail over all mortal thing ! the strange sensation I 
 then feel , move I to listen in silence ; but I check they , and speak 
 again . 

 " if I have not answer you as I should , " I continue , " you must 
 attribute it partly to the storm , which I confess rather discompose 
 my idea ; and partly to a little surprise - a very foolish surprise , I 
 own - that you should still be able to feel so strong a sympathy with 
 interest which be generally only consider of importance to the 
 young . " 

 " it be only in their sympathy , that man of my year can , and do , 
 live their youth over again , " he say . " you may be surprised to hear a 
 tradesman 's clerk talk in this manner ; but I be not always what I be 
 now . I have gather knowledge , and suffer in the gathering . I have 
 grow old before my time - my forty year be like the fifty of other 
 man - " 

 my heart beat quick - be he , unasked , about to disclose the mystery 
 which evidently hang over his early life ? no : he drop the subject 
 at once , when he continue . I long to ask he to resume it , but could 
 not . I fear the same repulse which Mr. Sherwin have receive : and 
 remain silent . 

 " what I be , " he proceed , " matter little ; the question be what can 
 I do for you ? any aid I can give , may be poor enough ; but it may be of 
 some use notwithstanding . for instance , the other day , if I mistake not , 
 you be a little hurt at Mr. Sherwin 's take his daughter to a party 
 to which the family have be invite . this be very natural . you 
 could not be there to watch over she in your real character , without 
 disclose a secret which must be keep safe ; and you could not know 
 what young man she might meet , who would imagine she to be Miss Sherwin 
 still , and would regulate their conduct accordingly . now , I think I 
 might be of use here . I have some influence - perhaps in strict truth I 
 ought to say great influence - with my employer ; and , if you wish it , 
 I would use that influence to back your , in induce he to forego , for 
 the future , any intention of take his daughter into society , except 
 when you desire it . again : I think I be not wrong in assume that you 
 infinitely prefer the company of Mrs. Sherwin to that of Mr. Sherwin , 
 during your interview with the young lady ? " 

 how he have find that out ? at any rate , he be right ; and I tell he so 
 candidly . 

 " the preference be on many account a very natural one , " he say ; " but 
 if you suffer it to appear to Mr. Sherwin , it might , for obvious 
 reason , produce a most unfavourable effect . I might interfere in the 
 matter , however , without suspicion ; I should have many opportunity of 
 keep he away from the room , in the evening , which I could use if you 
 wish it . and more than that , if you want long and more frequent 
 communication with North Villa than you now enjoy , I might be able to 
 effect this also . I do not mention what I could do in these , and in 
 other matter , in any disparagement , Sir , of the influence which you 
 have with Mr. Sherwin , in your own right ; but because I know that in 
 what concern your intercourse with his daughter , my employer have 
 ask , and will ask my advice , from the habit of do so in other 
 thing . I have hitherto decline give he this advice in your affair ; 
 but I will give it , and in your favour and the young lady 's , if you and 
 she choose . " 

 I thank he - but not in such warm term as I should have employ , if 
 I have see even the faint smile on his face , or have hear any change 
 in his steady , deliberate tone , as he speak . while his word attract , 
 his immovable look repel I , in spite of myself . 

 " I must again beg you " - he proceed - " to remember what I have already 
 say , in your estimate of the motif of my offer . if I still appear to 
 be interfere officiously in your affair , you have only to think that 
 I have presume impertinently on the freedom you have allow I , and 
 to treat I no long on the term of to - night . I shall not complain of 
 your conduct , and shall try hard not to consider you unjust to I , if 
 you do . " 

 such an appeal as this be not to be resist : I answer he at once 
 and unreservedly . what right have I to draw bad inference from a man 's 
 face , voice , and manner , merely because they impress I , as out of the 
 common ? do I know how much share the influence of natural infirmity , 
 or the outward trace of unknown sorrow and suffering , might have have in 
 produce the external peculiarity which have strike I ? he would 
 have every right to upbraid I as unjust - and that in the strong 
 term - unless I speak out fairly in reply . 

 " I be quite incapable , Mr. Mannion , " I say , " of view your offer with 
 any other than grateful feeling . you will find I shall prove this by 
 employ your good office for Margaret and myself in perfect faith , 
 and soon perhaps than you may imagine . " 

 he bow and say a few cordial word , which I hear but 
 imperfectly - for , as I address he , a blast of wind fiercer than 
 usual , rush down the street , shake the window shutter violently as 
 it pass , and die away in a low , melancholy , dirge swell , like a 
 spirit - cry of lamentation and despair . 

 when he speak again , after a momentary silence , it be to make some 
 change in the conversation . he talk of Margaret - dwelling in term of 
 high praise rather on her moral than on her personal quality . he 
 speak of Mr. Sherwin , refer to solid and attractive point in 
 his character which I have not detect . what he say of Mrs. Sherwin 
 appear to be equally dictate by compassion and respect - he even 
 hint at her coolness towards himself , considerately attribute it 
 to the involuntary caprice of settle nervousness and ill - health . his 
 language , in touch on these subject , be just as unaffected , just as 
 devoid of any peculiarity , as I have hitherto find it when occupy by 
 other topic . 

 it be grow late . the thunder still rumble at long interval , with 
 a dull , distant sound ; and the wind show no symptom of subside . but 
 the pattering of the rain against the window cease to be audible . there 
 be little excuse for stay long ; and I wish to find none . I have 
 acquire quite knowledge enough of Mr. Mannion to assure I , that any 
 attempt on my part at extract from he , in spite of his reserve , 
 the secret which might be connect with his early life , would prove 
 perfectly fruitless . if I must judge he at all , I must judge he by 
 the experience of the present , and not by the history of the past . I have 
 hear good , and good only , of he from the shrewd master who know he 
 good , and have try he longest . he have show the great delicacy 
 towards my feeling , and the strong desire to do I service - it would 
 be a mean return for those act of courtesy , to let curiosity tempt I 
 to pry into his private affair . 

 I rise to go . he make no effort to detain I ; but , after unbar the 
 shutter and look out of the window , simply remark that the rain have 
 almost entirely cease , and that my umbrella would be quite sufficient 
 protection against all that remain . he follow I into the passage to 
 light I out . as I turn round upon his door - step to thank he for his 
 hospitality , and to bid he good night , the thought come across I , that 
 my manner must have appear cold and repel to he - especially when 
 he be offer his service to my acceptance . if I have really produce 
 this impression , he be my inferior in station , and it would be cruel to 
 leave it . I try to set myself right at part . 

 " let I assure you again , " I say , " that it will not be my fault if 
 Margaret and I do not thankfully employ your good office , as the good 
 office of a well - wisher and a friend . " 

 the lightning be still in the sky , though it only appear at long 
 interval . strangely enough , at the moment when I address he , a flash 
 come , and seem to pass right over his face . it give such a hideously 
 livid hue , such a spectral look of ghastliness and distortion to his 
 feature , that he absolutely seem to be glare and grin on I 
 like a fiend , in the one instant of its duration . for the moment , it 
 require all my knowledge of the settle calmness of his countenance , 
 to convince I that my eye must have be only dazzle by an optical 
 illusion produce by the lightning . 

 when the darkness have come again , I bid he good night - first 
 mechanically repeat what I have just say , almost in the same word . 

 I walk home thoughtful . that night have give I much matter to think 
 of . 

 IV . 

 about the time of my introduction to Mr. Mannion - or , to speak more 
 correctly , both before and after that period - certain peculiarity in 
 Margaret 's character and conduct , which come to my knowledge by pure 
 accident , give I a little uneasiness and even a little displeasure . 
 neither of these feeling last very long , it be true ; for the 
 incident which give rise to they be of a trifling nature in 
 themselves . while I now write , however , these domestic occurrence be 
 all vividly present to my recollection . I will mention two of they as 
 instance . subsequent event , yet to be relate , will show that they be 
 not out of place at this part of my narrative . 

 one lovely autumn morning , I call rather before the appoint time 
 at North Villa . as the servant open the front garden - gate , the idea 
 occur to I of give Margaret a surprise , by enter the drawing 
 room unexpectedly , with a nosegay gather for she from her own 
 flower - bed . tell the servant not to announce I , I go round to the 
 back garden , by a gate which open into it at the side of the house . 
 the progress of my flower - gathering lead I on to the lawn under one of 
 the drawing - room window , which be leave a little open . the voice of my 
 wife and her mother reach I from the room . it be this part of their 
 conversation which I unintentionally overheard : - 

 " I tell you , mamma , I must and will have the dress , whether papa choose 
 or not . " 

 this be speak loudly and resolutely ; in such tone as I have never 
 hear from Margaret before . 

 " pray - pray , my dear , do not   talk so , " answer the weak , falter voice 
 of Mrs. Sherwin ; " you know you have have more than your year 's allowance 
 of dress already . " 

 " I will not   be allowance . his sister be not   allowance : why should I be ? " 

 " my dear love , surely there be some difference - " 

 " I be sure there be not , now I be his wife . I shall ride some day in my 
 carriage , just as his sister do . he give I my way in everything ; 
 and so ought you . " 

 " it be not   I , Margaret : if I could do anything , I be sure I would ; but 
 I really could not   ask your papa for another new dress , after his have 
 give you so many this year , already . " 

 " that be the way it always be with you , mamma - you can not   do this , and 
 you can not   do that - you be so excessively tiresome ! but I will have the 
 dress , I be determined . he say his sister wear light blue crape of an 
 evening ; and I will have light blue crape , too - see if I do not ! I will get 
 it somehow from the shop , myself . Papa never take any notice , I be sure , 
 what I have on ; and he need not   find out anything about what be go out 
 of the shop , until they ' take stock , ' or whatever it be he call it . and 
 then , if he fly into one of his passion - " 

 " my dear ! my dear ! you really ought not to talk so of your papa - it be 
 very wrong , Margaret , indeed - what would Mr. Basil say if he hear you ? " 

 I determine to go in at once , and tell Margaret that I have hear 
 she - resolving , at the same time , to exert some firmness , and 
 remonstrate with she , for her own good , on much of what she have say , 
 which have really surprise and displease I . on my unexpected entrance , 
 Mrs. Sherwin start , and look more timid than ever . Margaret , 
 however , come forward to meet I with her wonte smile , and hold out 
 her hand with her wonte grace . I say nothing until we have get into our 
 accustomed corner , and be talk together in whisper as usual . 
 then I begin my remonstrance - very tenderly , and in the low possible 
 tone . she take precisely the right way to stop I in full career , 
 in spite of all my resolution . her beautiful eye fill with tear 
 directly - the first I have ever see in they : cause , too , by what I have 
 say ! - and she murmur a few plaintive word about the cruelty of be 
 angry with she for only want to please I by be dress as my 
 sister be , which upset every intention I have form but the moment 
 before . I involuntarily devote myself to soothe she for the rest 
 of the morning . need I say how the matter end ? I never mention the 
 subject more ; and I make she a present of the new dress . 

 some week after the little home - breeze which I have just relate , have 
 die away into a perfect calm , I be accidentally witness of another 
 domestic dilemma in which Margaret bear a principal share . on this 
 occasion , as I walk up to the house   in the morning again , I find 
 the front door open . a pail be on the step - the servant have evidently 
 be wash they , have be interrupt in her work , and have forget 
 to close the door when she leave it . the nature of the interruption I 
 soon discover as I enter the hall . 

 " for God 's sake , Miss ! " cry the housemaid 's voice , from the 
 dining - room , " for God 's sake , put down the poker ! Missus will be here 
 directly ; and it be her cat ! " 

 " I will kill the vile brute ! I will kill the hateful cat ! I do not   care whose 
 it be ! - my poor dear , dear , dear bird ! " the voice be Margaret 's . at 
 first , its tone be tone of fury ; they be afterwards break by 
 hysterical sob . 

 " poor thing , " continue the servant , soothingly , " I be sorry for it , and 
 for you too , Miss ! but , oh ! do please to remember it be you leave the 
 cage on the table , in the cat 's reach - " 

 " hold your tongue , you wretch ! how dare you hold I ? - let I go ! " 

 " oh , you must not   - you must not   indeed ! it be missus 's cat , recollect - poor 
 missus 's , who be always ill , and have not   get nothing else to amuse she . " 

 " I do not   care ! the cat have kill my bird , and the cat shall be kill 
 for do it ! - it shall ! - it shall ! ! - it shall ! ! ! I will call in the first 
 boy from the street to catch it , and hang it ! let I go ! I will go ! " 

 " I will let the cat go first , Miss , as sure as my name 's Susan ! " 

 the next instant , the door be suddenly open , and puss sprang past 
 I , out of harm 's way , closely follow by the servant , who star 
 breathless and aghast at see I in the hall . I go into the 
 dining - room immediately . 

 on the floor lie a bird - cage , with the poor canary dead inside   it be 
 the same canary that I have see my wife play with , on the evening of 
 the day when I first meet she . the bird 's head have be nearly drag 
 through the bent wire of the cage , by the murderous claw of the cat . 
 near the fire - place , with the poker she have just drop on the floor by 
 her side , stand Margaret . never have I see she look so beautiful as 
 she now appear , in the fury of passion which possess she . her 
 large black eye be flash grandly through her tear - the blood be 
 glow crimson in her cheek - her lip be part as she gasp for 
 breath . one of her hand be clench , and rest on the mantel - piece ; 
 the other be press tight over her bosom , with the finger 
 convulsively clasp her dress . grieve as I be at the paroxysm of 
 passion into which she have allow herself to be betray , I could not 
 repress an involuntary feeling of admiration when my eye first rest 
 on she . even anger itself look lovely in that lovely face ! 

 she never move when she see I . as I approach she , she drop down 
 on her knee by the cage , sob with frightful violence , and pour 
 forth a perfect torrent of ejaculation of vengeance against the cat . 
 Mrs. Sherwin come down ; and by her total want of tact and presence 
 of mind , make matter bad . in brief , the scene end by a fit of 
 hysteric . 

 to speak to Margaret on that day , as I wish to speak to she , be 
 impossible . to approach the subject of the canary 's death afterwards , 
 be useless . if I only hint in the gentle way , and with the 
 strong sympathy for the loss of the bird , at the distress and 
 astonishment she have cause I by the extremity to which she have 
 allow her passion to hurry she , a burst of tear be sure to be her 
 only reply - just the reply , of all other , which be well calculate to 
 silence I . if I have be her husband in fact , as well as in name ; if I 
 have be her father , her brother , or her friend , I should have let 
 her first emotion have their way , and then have expostulate with she 
 afterwards . but I be her lover still ; and , to my eye , Margaret 's tear 
 make virtue even of Margaret 's fault . 



 such occurrence as these , happen but at rare interval , form 
 the only interruption to the generally even and happy tenour of our 
 intercourse . week and week glide away , and not a hasty or a hard word 
 pass between we . neither , after one preliminary difference have be 
 adjust , do any subsequent disagreement take place between Mr. Sherwin 
 and I . this last element in the domestic tranquillity of North Villa 
 be , however , less attributable to his forbearance , or to mine , than to 
 the private interference of Mr. Mannion . 

 for some day after my interview with the manage clerk , at his 
 own house , I have abstain from call his offer service into 
 requisition . I be not conscious of any reason for this course of 
 conduct . all that have be say , all that have happen during the night 
 of the storm , have produce a powerful , though vague impression on I . 
 strange as it may appear , I could not determine whether my brief but 
 extraordinary experience of my new friend have attract I towards he , 
 or repel I from he . I feel an unwillingness to lay myself under an 
 obligation to he , which be not the result of pride , or false delicacy , 
 or sullenness , or suspicion - it be an inexplicable unwillingness , that 
 spring from the fear of encounter some heavy responsibility ; but of 
 what nature I could not imagine . I delay and hold back , by instinct ; 
 and , on his side , Mr. Mannion make no further advance . he maintain 
 the same manner , and continue the same habit , during his intercourse 
 with the family at North Villa , which I have observe as characterise 
 he before I take shelter from the storm , in his house . he never 
 refer again to the conversation of that evening , when we now meet . 

 Margaret 's behaviour , when I mention to her Mr. Mannion 's willingness 
 to be useful to we both , rather increase than diminish the vague 
 uncertainty which perplex I , on the subject of accept or 
 reject his overture . 

 I could not induce she to show the small interest about he . neither 
 his house , his personal appearance , his peculiar habit , or his secrecy 
 in relation to his early life - nothing , in short , connect with 
 he - appear to excite her attention or curiosity in the slight 
 degree . on the evening of his return from the continent , she have 
 certainly show some symptom of interest in his arrival at North Villa , 
 and some appearance of attention to he , when he join our party . now , 
 she seem completely and incomprehensibly change on this point . she 
 manner become almost petulant , if I persist long in make Mr. Mannion 
 a topic of conversation - it be as if she resent his share my 
 thought with she in the slight degree . as to the difficult question 
 whether we should engage he in our interest or not , that be a matter 
 which she always seem to think too trifle to be discuss between we 
 at all . 

 Ere long , however , circumstance decide I as to the course I should 
 take with Mr. Mannion . 

 a ball be give by one of Mr. Sherwin 's rich commercial friend , 
 to which he announce his intention of take Margaret . besides the 
 jealousy which I feel - naturally enough , in my peculiar situation - at 
 the idea of my wife go out as Miss Sherwin , and dance in the 
 character of a young unmarried lady with any young gentleman who be 
 introduce to she , I have also the strong possible desire to keep 
 Margaret out of the society of her own class , until my year 's probation 
 be over , and I could hope to instal she permanently in the society of 
 my class . I have privately mention to she my idea on this subject , and 
 find that she fully agree with they . she be not want in ambition 
 to ascend to the high degree in the social scale ; and have already 
 begin to look with indifference on the society which be offer to she 
 by those in her own rank . 

 to Mr. Sherwin I could confide nothing of this . I could only object , 
 generally , to his take Margaret out , when neither she nor I desire 
 it . he declare that she like party - that all girl do - that she 
 only pretend to dislike they , to please I - and that he have make no 
 engagement to keep she moping at home a whole year on my account . in the 
 case of the particular ball now under discussion , he be determined to 
 have his own way ; and he bluntly tell I as much . 

 irritate by his obstinacy and gross want of consideration for my 
 defenceless position , I forget all doubt and scruple ; and privately 
 apply to Mr. Mannion to exert the influence which he have promise to 
 use , if I wish it , in my behalf . 

 the result be as immediate as it be conclusive . the very next evening , 
 Mr. Sherwin come to we with a note which he have just write , and 
 inform I that it be an excuse for Margaret 's non - appearance at the 
 ball . he never mention Mr. Mannion 's name , but sulkily and shortly 
 say , that he have reconsider the matter , and have alter his first 
 decision for reason of his own . 

 have once take a first step in the new direction , I soon follow it 
 up , without hesitation , by take many other . whenever I wish to call 
 oftener than once a - day at North Villa , I have but to tell Mr. Mannion , 
 and the next morning I find the permission immediately accord to I 
 by the rule power . the same secret machinery enable I to regulate 
 Mr. Sherwin 's incoming and outgoing , just as I choose , when Margaret 
 and I be together in the evening . I could feel almost certain , now , 
 of never have any one with we , but Mrs. Sherwin , unless I desire 
 it - which , as may be easily imagine , be seldom enough . 

 my new ally 's ready interference for my advantage be exert quietly , 
 easily , and as a matter of course . I never know how , or when , he 
 influence his employer , and Mr. Sherwin on his part , never breathe a 
 word of that influence to I . he accord any extra privilege I might 
 demand , as if he act entirely under his own will , little suspecting 
 how well I know what be the real motive power which direct he . 

 I be the more easily reconcile to employ the service of Mr. 
 Mannion , by the great delicacy with which he perform they . he do 
 not allow I to think - he do not appear to think himself - that he be 
 oblige I in the small degree . he affect no sudden intimacy with 
 I ; his manner never alter ; he still persist in not join we in 
 the evening , but at my express invitation ; and if I refer in any way 
 to the advantage I derive from his devotion to my interest , he always 
 reply in his brief undemonstrative way , that he consider himself the 
 favour person , in be permit to make his service of some use to 
 Margaret and I . 

 I have tell Mr. Mannion , when I be leave he on the night of the 
 storm , that I would treat his offer as the offer of a friend ; and I 
 have now make good my word , much soon and much more unreservedly than 
 I have ever intend , when we part at his own house - door . 

 V. 

 the autumn be now over ; the winter - a cold , gloomy winter - have fairly 
 come . five month have nearly elapse since Clara and my father have 
 depart for the country . what communication do I hold with they , 
 during that interval ? 

 no personal communication with either - write communication only with 
 my sister . Clara 's letter to I be frequent . they studiously avoid 
 anything like a reproach for my long absence ; and be confine almost 
 exclusively to such detail of country life as the writer think likely 
 to interest I . their tone be as affectionate - nay , more affectionate , 
 if possible - than usual ; but Clara 's gaiety and quiet humour , as a 
 correspondent , be go . my conscience teach I only too easily and 
 too plainly how to account for this change - my conscience tell I 
 who have alter the tone of my sister 's letter , by alter all the 
 favourite purpose and favourite pleasure of her country life . 

 I be selfishly enough devoted to my own passion and my own interest , 
 at this period of my life ; but I be not so totally dead to every one 
 of the influence which have guide I since childhood , as to lose 
 all thought of Clara and my father , and the ancient house that be 
 associate with my early and happy recollection . sometimes , even 
 in Margaret 's beloved presence , a thought of Clara put away from I 
 all other thought . and , sometimes , in the lonely London house , I 
 dream - with the strange sleeping oblivion of my marriage , and of all 
 the new interest which it have crowd into my life - of country rid 
 with my sister , and of quiet conversation in the old gothic library 
 at the Hall . under such influence as these , I twice resolve to make 
 amend for my long absence , by join my father and my sister in the 
 country , even though it be only for a few day - and , each time , I 
 fail in my resolution . on the second occasion , I have actually muster 
 firmness enough to get as far as the railway station ; and only at the 
 last moment falter and hang back . the struggle that it cost I to 
 part for any length of time from Margaret , I have overcome ; but the 
 apprehension , as vivid as it be vague , that something - I know not 
 what - might happen to she in my absence , turn my step backward at 
 start . I feel heartily ashamed of my own weakness ; but I yield to 
 it nevertheless . 

 at last , a letter arrive from Clara , contain a summon to the 
 country , which I could not disobey . 

 " I have never ask you , " she write , " to come and see we for my sake ; 
 for I would not interfere with any of your interest or any of your 
 plan ; but I now ask you to come here for your own sake - just for one 
 week , and no more , unless you like to remain long . you remember papa 
 tell you , in your room in London , that he believe you keep some 
 secret from he . I be afraid this be prey on his mind : your long 
 absence be make he uneasy about you . he do not say so ; but he never 
 send any message , when I write ; and if I speak about you , he always 
 change the subject directly . pray come here , and show yourself for a 
 few day - no question will be ask , you may be sure . it will do so 
 much good ; and will prevent - what I hope and pray may never happen - a 
 serious estrangement between papa and you . Recollect , Basil , in a month 
 or six week we shall come back to town ; and then the opportunity will 
 be go . " 

 as I read these line , I determine to start for the country at once , 
 while the effect of they be still fresh on my mind . Margaret , when 
 I take leave of she , only say that she should like to be go with 
 I - " it would be such a sight for she , to see a grand country house like 
 our ! " Mr. Sherwin laugh as coarsely as usual , at the difficulty 
 I make about only leave his daughter for a week . Mrs. Sherwin very 
 earnestly , and very inaccountably as I then think , recommend I not 
 to be away any long than I have propose . Mr. Mannion privately assure 
 I , that I might depend on he in my absence from North Villa , exactly 
 as I have always depend on he , during my presence there . it be 
 strange that his parting word should be the only word which soothe 
 and satisfy I on take leave of London . 

 the winter afternoon be grow dim with the evening darkness , as I 
 drive up to the Hall . snow on the ground , in the country , have always 
 a cheerful look to I . I could have wish to see it on the day of my 
 arrival at home ; but there have be a thaw for the last week - mud and 
 water be all about I - a drizzle rain be fall - a raw , damp wind 
 be blow - a fog be rise , as the evening steal on - and the ancient 
 leafless elm in the park avenue groan and creak above my head 
 drearily , as I approach the house . 

 my father receive I with more ceremony than I like . I have know , from 
 a boy , what it mean when he choose to be only polite to his own son . 
 what construction he have put on my long absence and my persistence in 
 keep my secret from he , I could not tell ; but it be evident that 
 I have lose my usual place in his estimation , and lose it past regain 
 merely by a week 's visit . the estrangement between we , which my sister 
 have fear , have begin already . 

 I have be chill by the desolate aspect of nature , as I approach the 
 Hall ; my father 's reception of I , when I enter the house , increase 
 the comfortless and melancholy impression produce on my mind ; it 
 require all the affectionate warmth of Clara 's welcome , all the 
 pleasure of hear she whisper her thank , as she kiss I , for my 
 readiness in follow her advice , to restore my equanimity . but even 
 then , when the first hurry and excitement of meeting have pass away , in 
 spite of her kind word and look , there be something in her face which 
 depress I . she seem thin , and her constitutional paleness be 
 more marked than usual . care and anxiety have evidently oppress 
 she - be I the cause of they ? 

 the dinner that evening proceed very heavily and gloomily . my father 
 only talk on general and commonplace topic , as if a mere acquaintance 
 have be present . when my sister leave we , he too quit the room , to 
 see some one who have arrive on business . I have no heart for the company 
 of the wine bottle , so I follow Clara . 

 at first , we only speak of her occupation since she have be in the 
 country ; I be unwilling , and she forbore , to touch on my long stay in 
 London , or on my father 's evident displeasure at my protract absence . 
 there be a little restraint between we , which neither have the courage 
 to break through . before long , however , an accident , trifle enough 
 in itself , oblige I to be more candid ; and enable she to speak 
 unreservedly on the subject near to her heart . 

 I be seat opposite to Clara , at the fire - place , and be play 
 with a favourite dog which have follow I into the room . while I be 
 stoop towards the animal , a locket contain some of Margaret 's 
 hair , fall out of its place in my waistcoat , and swing towards my sister 
 by the string which attach it round my neck . I instantly hide it again ; 
 but not before Clara , with a woman 's quickness , have detect the trinket 
 as something new , and draw the right inference , as to the use to which 
 I devote it . 

 an expression of surprise and pleasure pass over her face ; she rise , 
 and put her hand on my shoulder , as if to keep I still in the 
 place I occupy , look at I intently . 

 " Basil ! " she exclaim , " if that be all the secret you have be keep 
 from we , how glad I be ! when I see a new locket drop out of my brother 's 
 waistcoat - " she continue , observe that I be too confused to 
 speak - " and when I find he colour very deeply , and hide it again 
 in a great hurry , I should be no true woman if I do not make my own 
 discovery , and begin to talk about they directly . " 

 I make an effort - a very poor one - to laugh the thing off . her 
 expression grow serious and thoughtful , while she still fix her eye 
 on I . she take my hand gently , and whisper in my ear : " be you go 
 to be marry , Basil ? shall I love my new sister almost as much as I 
 love you ? " 

 at that moment the servant come in with tea . the interruption give I 
 a minute for consideration . should I tell she all ? Impulse answer , 
 yes - reflection , no . if I disclose my real situation , I know that I 
 must introduce Clara to Margaret . this would necessitate take she 
 privately to Mr. Sherwin 's house , and expose to she the humiliating 
 term of dependence and prohibition on which I live with my own wife . a 
 strange medley of feeling , in which pride be uppermost , forbid I 
 to do that . then again , to involve my sister in my secret , would be to 
 involve she with I in any consequence which might be produce by 
 its disclosure to my father . the mere idea of make she a partaker in 
 responsibility which I alone ought to bear , be not to be entertain 
 for a moment . as soon as we be leave together again , I say to she : 

 " will you not think the bad of I , Clara , if I leave you to draw your 
 own conclusion from what you have see ? only ask you to keep strict 
 silence on the subject to every one . I can not   speak yet , love , as I 
 wish to speak : you will know why , some day , and say that my reserve be 
 right . in the meantime , can you be satisfied with the assurance , that 
 when the time come for make my secret know , you shall be the first 
 to know it - the first I put trust in ? " 

 " as you have not starve my curiosity altogether , " say Clara , smile , 
 " but have give it a little hope to feed on for the present , I think , 
 woman though I be , I can promise all you wish . seriously , Basil , " she 
 continue , " that telltale locket of yours have so pleasantly brighten 
 some very gloomy thought of mine about you , that I can now live happily 
 on expectation , without once mention your secret again , till you give 
 I leave to do so . " 

 here my father enter the room , and we say no more . his manner towards 
 I have not alter since dinner ; and it remain the same during the 
 week of my stay at the Hall . one morning , when we be alone , I take 
 courage , and determine to try the dangerous ground a little , with a 
 view towards my guidance for the future ; but I have no soon begin by 
 some reference to my stay in London , and some apology for it , than he 
 stop I at once . 

 " I tell you , " he say , gravely and coldly , ' some month ago , that I have 
 too much faith in your honour to intrude on affair which you choose 
 to keep private . until you have perfect confidence in I , and can speak 
 with complete candour , I will hear nothing . you have not that confidence 
 now - you speak hesitatingly - your eye do not meet mine fairly and 
 boldly . I tell you again , I will hear nothing which begin with such 
 common - place excuse as you have just address to I . excuse lead to 
 prevarication , and prevarication to - what I will not insult you by 
 imagine possible in your case . you be of age , and must know your 
 own responsibility and mine . choose at once , between say nothing , 
 and say all . " 

 he wait a moment after he have speak , and then quit the room . if 
 he could only have know how I suffer , at that instant , under the base 
 necessity of concealment , I might have confess everything ; and he 
 must have pity , though he might not have forgive I . 

 this be my first and last attempt at venture towards the revelation 
 of my secret to my father , by hint and half - admission . as to boldly 
 confess it , I persuade myself into a sophistical conviction that 
 such a course could do no good , but might do much harm . when the wed 
 happiness I have already wait for , and be to wait for still , through 
 so many month , come at last , be it not good to enjoy my married 
 life in convenient secrecy , as long as I could ? - well , to abstain from 
 disclose my secret to my father , until necessity absolutely oblige , 
 or circumstance absolutely invite I to do so ? my inclination 
 conveniently decide the question in the affirmative ; and a decision of 
 any kind , right or wrong , be enough to tranquillise I at that time . 

 so far as my father be concern , my journey to the country do no 
 good . I might have return to London the day after my arrival at the 
 Hall , without alter his opinion of I - but I stay the whole week 
 nevertheless , for Clara 's sake . 

 in spite of the pleasure afford by my sister 's society , my visit be a 
 painful one . the selfish longing to be back with Margaret , which I could 
 not wholly repress ; my father 's coldness ; and the winter gloom and rain 
 which confine we almost incessantly within door , all tend in their 
 different degree to prevent my living at ease in the Hall . but , besides 
 these cause of embarrassment , I have the additional mortification of 
 feeling , for the first time , as a stranger in my own home . 

 nothing in the house look to I what it use to look in former year . 
 the room , the old servant , the walk and view , the domestic animal , 
 all appear to have alter , or to have lose something , since I have 
 see they last . particular room that I have once be fond of occupy , 
 be favourite no long : particular habit that I have hitherto always 
 practise in the country , I could only succeed in resume by an effort 
 which vex and fret I . it be as if my life have run into a new 
 channel since my last autumn and winter at the Hall , and now refuse to 
 flow back at my bidding into its old course . Home seem home no long , 
 except in name . 

 as soon as the week be over , my father and I part exactly as we have 
 meet . when I take leave of Clara , she refrain from make any allusion 
 to the shortness of my stay ; and merely say that we should soon meet 
 again in London . she evidently see that my visit have weigh a little 
 on my spirit , and be determined to give to our short farewell as happy 
 and hopeful a character as possible . we now thoroughly understand each 
 other ; and that be some consolation on leave she . 

 immediately on my return to London I repair to North Villa . 

 nothing , I be tell , have happen in my absence , but I remark some 
 change in Margaret . she look pale and nervous , and be more silent 
 than I have ever know she to be before , when we meet . she account 
 for this , in answer to my inquiry , by say that confinement to the 
 house , in consequence of the raw , wintry weather , have a little affected 
 she ; and then change the subject . in other direction , household 
 aspect have not deviate from their accustomed monotony . as usual , Mrs. 
 Sherwin be at her post in the drawing - room ; and her husband be read 
 the evening paper , over his renowned old port , in the dining - room . after 
 the first five minute of my arrival , I adapt myself again to my old 
 way of life at Mr. Sherwin 's , as easily as if I have never interrupt 
 it for a single day . henceforth , wherever my young wife be , there , and 
 there only , would it be home for I ! 

 late in the evening , Mr. Mannion arrive with some business letter for 
 Mr. Sherwin 's inspection . I send for he into the hall to see I , as I 
 be go away . his hand be never a warm one ; but as I now take it , on 
 greet he , it be so deadly cold that it literally chill mine for 
 the moment . he only congratulate I , in the usual term , on my safe 
 return ; and say that nothing have take place in my absence - but in his 
 utterance of those few word , I discover , for the first time , a change 
 in his voice : his tone be low , and his articulation quick than 
 usual . this , join to the extraordinary coldness of his hand , make 
 I inquire whether he be unwell . yes , he too have be ill while I be 
 away - harass with hard work , he say . then apologise for leave I 
 abruptly , on account of the letter he have bring with he , he return 
 to Mr. Sherwin , in the dining - room , with a great appearance of hurry 
 in his manner than I have ever remark in it on any former occasion . 

 I have leave Margaret and Mr. Mannion both well - I return , and find 
 they both ill . surely this be something that have take place in my 
 absence , though they all say that nothing have happen . but trifling 
 illness seem to be little regard at North Villa - perhaps , because 
 serious illness be perpetually present there , in the person of Mrs. 
 Sherwin . 

 VI . 

 about six week after I have leave the Hall , my father and Clara return 
 to London for the season . 

 it be not my intention to delay over my life either at home or at North 
 Villa , during the spring and summer . this would be merely to repeat much 
 of what have be already relate . it be well to proceed at once to the 
 closing period of my probation ; to a period which it tax my resolution 
 severely to write of at all . a few week more of toil at my narrative , 
 and the penance of this poor task - work will be over . 

            

 imagine then , that the final day of my long year of expectation have 
 arrive ; and that on the morrow , Margaret , for whose sake I have 
 sacrifice and suffer so much , be at last really to be mine . 

 on the eve of the great change in my life that be now to take place , 
 the relative position in which I , and the different person with whom I 
 be associate , stand towards each other , may be sketch thus : - 

 my father 's coldness of manner have not alter since his return to 
 London . on my side , I carefully abstain from utter a word before 
 he , which bear the small reference to my real situation . although 
 when we meet , we outwardly preserve the usual relation of parent and 
 child , the estrangement between we have now become complete . 

 Clara do not fail to perceive this , and grieve over it in secret . 
 other and happy feeling , however , become awaken within she , when I 
 privately hint that the time for disclose my secret to my sister be 
 not far off . she grow almost as much agitated as I be , though by 
 very different expectation - she could think of nothing else but the 
 explanation and the surprise in store for she . sometimes , I almost 
 fear to keep she any long in suspense ; and half regret have 
 say anything on the subject of the new and absorbing interest of my 
 life , before the period when I could easily have say all . 

 Mr. Sherwin and I have not latterly meet on the most cordial term . he be 
 dissatisfied with I for not have boldly approach the subject of my 
 marriage in my father 's presence ; and consider my reason for still 
 keep it secret , as dictate by morbid apprehension , and as show a 
 total want of proper firmness . on the other hand , he be oblige to set 
 against this omission on my part , the readiness I have show in meet 
 his wish on all remain point . my life be insure in Margaret 's 
 favour ; and I have arrange to be call to the bar immediately , so as 
 to qualify myself in good time for every possible place within 
 place - hunt range . my assiduity in make these preparation for 
 secure Margaret 's prospect and mine against any evil chance that 
 might happen , fail in produce the favourable effect on Mr. Sherwin , 
 which they must assuredly have produce on a less selfish man . but they 
 oblige he , at least , to stop short at occasional grumbling about 
 my reserve with my father , and to maintain towards I a sort of 
 sulky politeness , which be , after all , less offensive than the usual 
 infliction of his cordiality , with its unfailing accompaniment of dull 
 story and dull joke . 

 during the spring and summer , Mrs. Sherwin appear to grow feebler 
 and feebler , from continued ill - health . occasionally , her word and 
 action - especially in her intercourse with I - suggest fear that her 
 mind be begin to give way , as well as her body . for instance , on 
 one occasion , when Margaret have leave the room for a minute or two , 
 she suddenly hurry up to I , whisper with eager look and anxious 
 tone : - " watch over your wife - mind you watch over she , and keep all bad 
 people from she ! I have   try to do it - mind you do it , too ! " I ask 
 immediately for an explanation of this extraordinary injunction ; but 
 she only answer by mutter something about a mother 's anxiety , and 
 then return hastily to her place . it be impossible to induce she to 
 be more explicit , try how I might . 

 Margaret once or twice occasion I much perplexity and distress , by 
 certain inconsistency and variation in her manner , which begin to 
 appear shortly after my return to North Villa from the country . at one 
 time , she would become , on a sudden , strangely sullen and silent - at 
 another , irritable and capricious . then , again , she would abruptly 
 change to the most affectionate warmth of speech and demeanour , 
 anxiously anticipate every wish I could form , eagerly show she 
 gratitude for the slight attention I pay she . these unaccountable 
 alteration of manner vex and irritate I indescribably . I 
 love Margaret too well to be able to look philosophically on the 
 imperfection of her character ; I know of no cause give by I for 
 the frequent change in her conduct , and , if they only proceed 
 from coquetry , then coquetry , as I once tell she , be the last female 
 accomplishment that could charm I in any woman whom I really love . 
 however , these cause of annoyance and regret - her caprice , and my 
 remonstrance - all pass happily away , as the term of my engagement 
 with Mr. Sherwin approach its end , Margaret 's well and lovely 
 manner return . occasionally , she might betray some symptom of 
 confusion , some evidence of unusual thoughtfulness - but I remember 
 how near be the day of the emancipation of our love , and look on 
 her embarrassment as a fresh charm , a new ornament to the beauty of my 
 maiden wife . 

 Mr. Mannion continue - as far as attention to my interest go - to be 
 the same ready and reliable friend as ever ; but he be , in some other 
 respect , an altered man . the illness of which he have complain month 
 back , when I return to London , seem to have increase . his face be 
 still the same impenetrable face which have so powerfully impress 
 I when I first see he , but his manner , hitherto so quiet and 
 self - possess , have now grow abrupt and variable . sometimes , when he 
 join we in the drawing - room at North Villa , he would suddenly stop 
 before we have exchange more than three or four word , murmur something , 
 in a voice unlike his usual voice , about an attack of spasm and 
 giddiness , and leave the room . these fit of illness have something in 
 their nature of the same secrecy which distinguish everything else 
 connect with he : they produce no external sign of distortion , 
 no unusual paleness in his face - you could not guess what pain he be 
 suffering , or where he be suffer it . latterly , I abstain from ever 
 ask he to join we ; for the effect on Margaret of his sudden attack 
 of illness be , naturally , such as to discompose she seriously for the 
 remainder of the evening . whenever I see he accidentally , at later 
 period of the year , the influence of the genial summer season appear 
 to produce no alteration for the well in he . I remark that his cold 
 hand , which have chill I when I take it on the raw winter night of my 
 return from the country , be as cold as ever , on the warm summer day 
 which precede the close of my engagement at North Villa . 



 such be the posture of affair at home , and at Mr. Sherwin 's , when I 
 go to see Margaret for the last time in my old character , on the last 
 night which yet remain to separate we from each other . 

 I have be all day prepare for our reception , on the morrow , in a 
 cottage which I have take for a month , in a retired part of the country , 
 at some distance from London . one month 's unalloye happiness with 
 Margaret , away from the world and all worldly consideration , be the 
 Eden upon earth towards which my dear hope and anticipation have 
 point for a whole year past - and now , now at last , those aspiration 
 be to be realize ! all my arrangement at the cottage be complete 
 in time to allow I to return home , just before our usual late dinner 
 hour . during the meal , I provide for my month 's absence from London , by 
 inform my father that I propose visit one of my country friend . 
 he hear I as coldly and indifferently as usual ; and , as I anticipate , 
 do not even ask to what friend 's house I be go . after dinner , I 
 privately inform Clara that on the morrow , before start , I 
 would , in accordance with my promise , make she the depositary of my 
 long - treasure secret - which , as yet , be not to be divulge to any one 
 beside . this do , I hurry away , between nine and ten o'clock , for 
 a last half - hour 's visit to North Villa ; hardly able to realise my own 
 situation , or to comprehend the fulness and exaltation of my own joy . 

 a disappointment be in store for I . Margaret be not in the house ; she 
 have go out to an evening party , give by a maiden aunt of her , who 
 be know to be very rich , and be , accordingly , a person to be court 
 and humour by the family . 

 I be angry as well as disappoint at what have take place . to 
 send Margaret out , on this evening of all other , show a want of 
 consideration towards both of we , which revolt I . Mr. and Mrs. 
 Sherwin be in the room when I enter ; and to he I speak my opinion 
 on the subject , in no very conciliatory term . he be suffer from a 
 bad attack of headache , and a bad attack of ill - temper , and answer 
 as irritably as he dare . 

 " my good Sir ! " he say , in sharp , querulous tone , " do , for once , allow 
 I to know what be good . you will have it all your way to - morrow - just 
 let I have mine , for the last time , to - night . I be sure you have   be 
 humour often enough about keep Margaret away from party - and we 
 should have humour you this time , too ; but a second letter come from 
 the old lady , say she should be affront if Margaret be not   one of 
 her guest . I could not   go and talk she over , because of this infernal 
 headache of mine - hang it ! it be your interest that Margaret should keep 
 in with her aunt ; she will have all the old girl 's money , if she only 
 play her card decently well . that be why I send she to the party - she 
 going will be worth some thousand to both of you one of these day . 
 she will be back by half - past twelve , or before . mannion be ask ; and 
 though he be all out of sort , he be go to take care of she , and bring 
 she back . I will warrant she come home in good time , when he be with 
 she . so you see there be nothing to make a fuss about , after all . " 

 it be certainly a relief to hear that Mr. Mannion be take care of 
 Margaret . he be , in my opinion , much fitter for such a trust than her 
 own father . of all the good service he have do for I , I think this 
 the good - but it would have be even well still , if he have prevent 
 Margaret from go to the party . 

 " I must say again , " resume Mr. Sherwin , still more irritably , find 
 I do not at once answer he , " there be nothing that any reasonable 
 be need make a fuss about . I have   be do everything for Margaret 's 
 interest and yours - and she will be back by twelve - and Mr. Mannion take 
 care of she - and I do not   know what you would have - and it be devilish 
 hard , so ill as I be too , to cut up rough with I like this - devilish 
 hard ! " 

 " I be sorry for your illness , Mr. Sherwin ; and I do not   doubt your good 
 intention , or the advantage of Mr. Mannion 's protection for Margaret ; 
 but I feel disappointed , nevertheless , that she should have go out 
 to - night . " 

 " I say she ought not   to go at all , whatever her aunt write - I say 
 that . " 

 this bold speech actually proceed from Mrs. Sherwin ! I have never 
 before hear she utter an opinion in her husband 's presence - such an 
 outburst from she , be perfectly inexplicable . she pronounce the 
 word with desperate rapidity , and unwonted power of tone , fix her 
 eye all the while on I with a very strange expression . 

 " damn it , Mrs. S. ! " roar her husband in a fury , " will you hold your 
 tongue ? what the devil do you mean by give your opinion , when nobody 
 want it ? upon my soul I begin to think you be get a little cracked . 
 you have   be meddle and bother lately , so that I do not   know what 
 the deuce have come to you ! I will tell you what it be , Mr. Basil , " he 
 continue , turn snappishly round upon I , " you have well stop that 
 fidgetty temper of your , by go to the party yourself . the old lady 
 tell I she want gentleman ; and would be glad to see any friend of 
 mine I like to send she . you have only to mention my name : mannion will 
 do the civil in the way of introduction . there ! there be an envelope 
 with the address to it - they will not   know who you be , or what you be , at 
 Margaret 's aunt 's - you have   get your black dress thing on , all right 
 and ready - for Heaven 's sake , go to the party yourself , and then I hope 
 you will be satisfy ! " 

 here he stop ; and vent the rest of his ill - humour by ring the 
 bell violently for " his arrow - root , " and abuse the servant when she 
 bring it . 

 I hesitate about accept his proposal . while I be in doubt , Mrs. 
 Sherwin take the opportunity , when her husband 's eye be off she , of 
 nod her head at I significantly . she evidently wish I to join 
 Margaret at the party - but why ? what do her behaviour mean ? 

 it be useless to inquire . long bodily suffering and weakness have but 
 too palpably produce a correspond feebleness in her intellect . what 
 should I do ? I be resolve to see Margaret that night ; but to wait for 
 she between two and three hour , in company with her father and mother 
 at North Villa , be an infliction not to be endure . I determine to go 
 to the party . no one there would know anything about I . they would be 
 all people who live in a different world from mine ; and whose manner 
 and habit I might find some amusement in study . at any rate , I 
 should spend an hour or two with Margaret , and could make it my own 
 charge to see she safely home . without further hesitation , therefore 
 I take up the envelope with the address on it , and bade Mr. and Mrs. 
 Sherwin good - night . 

 it strike ten as I leave North Villa . the moonlight which be just 
 begin to shine brilliantly on my arrival there , now appear but at 
 rare interval ; for the cloud be spread thick and thick over 
 the whole surface of the sky , as the night advance . 

 VII . 

 the address to which I be now proceed , lead I some distance away 
 from Mr. Sherwin 's place of abode , in the direction of the populous 
 neighbourhood which lie on the western side of the Edgeware Road . the 
 house of Margaret 's aunt be plainly enough indicate to I , as soon 
 as I enter the street where it stand , by the glare of light from the 
 window , the sound of dance music , and the nondescript group of cabman 
 and linkman , with their little train of idler in attendance , assemble 
 outside the door . it be evidently a very large party . I hesitate about 
 go in . 

 my sensation be not those which fit a man for exchange conventional 
 civility with perfect stranger ; I feel that I show outwardly the 
 fever of joy and expectation within I . could I preserve my assume 
 character of a mere friend of the family , in Margaret 's presence ? - and 
 on this night too , of all other ? it be far more probable that my 
 behaviour , if I go to the party , would betray everything to everybody 
 assemble . I determine to walk about in the neighbourhood of the house , 
 until twelve o'clock ; and then to go into the hall , and send up my card 
 to Mr. Mannion , with a message on it , intimate that I be wait 
 below to accompany he to North Villa with Margaret . 

 I cross the street , and look up again at the house from the pavement 
 opposite . then linger a little , listen to the music as it reach 
 I through the window , and imagine to myself Margaret 's occupation 
 at that moment . after this , I turn away ; and set forth eastward on my 
 walk , careless in which direction I trace my step . 

 I feel little impatience , and no sense of fatigue ; for in less than 
 two hour more I know that I should see my wife again . until then , 
 the present have no existence for I - I live in the past and future . 
 I wander indifferently along lonely bye - street , and crowd 
 thoroughfare . of all the sight which attend a night - walk in a great 
 city , not one attract my notice . uninformed and unobservant , neither 
 sadden nor startle , I pass through the glitter highway of 
 London . all sound be silent to I save the love - music of my own 
 thought ; all sight have vanish before the bright form that move 
 through my bridal dream . where be my world , at that moment ? narrow to 
 the cottage in the country which be to receive we on the morrow . where 
 be the being in the world ? all merge in one - Margaret . 

 sometimes , my thought glide back , dreamily and voluptuously , to the 
 day when I first meet she . sometimes , I recall the summer evening when 
 we sit and read together out of the same book ; and , once more , it be as 
 if I breathe with the breath , and hop with the hope , and long with 
 the old longing of those day . but oftenest it be with the morrow that 
 my mind be occupy . the first dream of all young man - the dream of 
 live rapturously with the woman they love , in a secret retirement kept 
 sacred from friend and from stranger alike , be now my dream ; to be 
 realise in a few hour , to be realise with my waking on the morning 
 which be already at hand ! 

 for the last quarter of an hour of my walk , I must have be 
 unconsciously retrace my step towards the house of Margaret 's aunt . I 
 come in sight of it again , just as the sound of the neighbouring church 
 clock , strike eleven , rouse I from my abstraction . More cab be 
 in the street ; more people be gather about the door , by this time . 
 be all this bustle , the bustle of arrival or of departure ? be the 
 party about to break up , at an hour when party usually begin ? I 
 determine to go near to the house , and ascertain whether the music 
 have cease , or not . 

 I have approach close enough to hear the note of the harp and 
 pianoforte still sound as gaily as ever , when the house - door be 
 suddenly fling open for the departure of a lady and gentleman . the light 
 from the hall - lamp fall on their face ; and show I Margaret and Mr. 
 Mannion . 

 go home already ! an hour and a half before it be time to return ! 
 why ? 

 there could be but one reason . Margaret be think of I , and of what 
 I should feel if I call at North Villa , and have to wait for she till 
 past midnight . I run forward to speak to they , as they descend the 
 step ; but exactly at the same moment , my voice be overpower , and my 
 further progress bar , by a scuffle on the pavement among the people 
 who stand between we . one man say that his pocket have be pick ; 
 other roar to he that they have catch the thief . there be a 
 fight - the police come up - I be surround on all side by a shouting , 
 struggle mob that seem to have gather in an instant . 

 before I could force myself out of the crowd , and escape into the road , 
 Margaret and Mr. Mannion have hurry into a cab . I just see the vehicle 
 drive off rapidly , as I get free . an empty cab be stand near I - I 
 jump into it directly - and tell the man to overtake they . after have 
 wait my time so patiently , to let a mere accident stop I from go 
 home with they , as I have resolve , be not to be think of for a 
 moment . I be hot and angry , after my contest with the crowd ; and could 
 have flog on the miserable cab - horse with my own hand , rather than 
 have fail in my purpose . 

 we be just get close behind they : I have just put my head out of 
 the window to call to they , and to bid the man who be drive I , call , 
 too - when their cab abruptly turn down a bye - street , in a direction 
 exactly opposite to the direction which lead to North Villa . 

 what do this mean ? why be they not go straight home ? 

 the cabman ask I whether he should not hail they before they get 
 far away from we ; frankly confessing , as he put the question , 
 that his horse be nothing like equal to the pace of the horse ahead . 
 mechanically , without assignable purpose or motive , I decline his 
 offer , and tell he simply to follow at any distance he could . while the 
 word pass my lip , a strange sensation steal over I : I seem to be 
 speak as the mere mouthpiece of some other voice . from feel hot , 
 and move about restlessly the moment before , I feel unaccountably 
 cold , and sit still now . what cause this ? 

 my cab stop . I look out , and see that the horse have fall . " we have 
 lot of time , Sir , " say the driver , as he coolly step off the box , 
 " they be just pull up far down the road . " I give he some money , 
 and get out immediately - determine to overtake they on foot . 

 it be a very lonely place - a colony of half - finish street , and 
 half - inhabit house , which have grow up in the neighbourhood of a 
 great railway station . I hear the fierce scream of the whistle , and 
 the heaving , heavy throb of the engine start on its journey , as I 
 advance along the gloomy Square in which I now find myself . the cab 
 I have be follow stand at a turning which lead into a long street , 
 occupy towards the farth end , by shop close for the night , and at 
 the end near I , apparently by private house only . Margaret and Mr. 
 Mannion hastily leave the cab , and without look either to the right 
 or the left , hurry down the street . they stop at the ninth house . I 
 follow just in time to hear the door close on they , and to count the 
 number of door intervene between that door and the Square . 

 the awful thrill of a suspicion which I hardly know yet for what it 
 really be , begin to creep over I - to creep like a dead - cold touch 
 crawl through and through I to the heart . I look up at the house . 
 it be an hotel - a neglect , deserted , dreary - look building . 
 still act mechanically ; still with no definite impulse that I could 
 recognise , even if I feel it , except the instinctive resolution to 
 follow they into the house , as I have already follow they through the 
 street - I walk up to the door , and ring the bell . 

 it be answer by a waiter - a mere lad . as the light in the passage 
 fall on my face , he pause in the act of address I , and draw back 
 a few step . without stop for any explanation , I close the door 
 behind I , and say to he at once : 

 " a lady and gentleman come into this hotel a little while ago . " 

 " what may your business be ? " - he hesitate , and add in an altered 
 tone , " I mean , what may you want with they , Sir ? " 

 " I want you to take I where I can hear their voice , and I want nothing 
 more . here be a sovereign for you , if you do what I ask . " 

 his eye fasten covetously on the gold , as I hold it before they . he 
 retire a few step on tiptoe , and listen at the end of the passage . 
 I hear nothing but the thick , rapid beating of my own heart . he come 
 back , mutter to himself : " Master 's safe at supper down stair - I will 
 risk it ! you will promise to go away directly , " he add , whisper to 
 I , " and not disturb the house ? we be quiet people here , and can not   have 
 anything like a disturbance . just say at once , will you promise to step 
 soft , and not speak a word ? " 

 " I promise . " 

 " this way then , Sir - and mind you do not   forget to step soft . " 

 a strange coldness and stillness , an icy insensibility , a 
 dream - sensation of be impel by some hidden , irresistible agency , 
 possess I , as I follow he upstairs . he show I softly into an 
 empty room ; point to one of the wall , whispering , " it be only board 
 paper over - " and then wait , keep his eye anxiously and steadily 
 fix upon all my movement . 

 I listen ; and through the thin partition , I hear voice - her voice , 
 and his voice . I hear and I know - know my degradation in all its 
 infamy , know my wrong in all their nameless horror . he be exult 
 in the patience and secrecy which have bring success to the foul plot , 
 foully hide for month on month ; foully hide until the very day 
 before I be to have claim as my wife , a wretch as guilty as himself ! 

 I could neither move nor breathe . the blood surge and heave upward to 
 my brain ; my heart strain and writhe in anguish ; the life within I 
 rag and tear to get free . whole year of the dire mental and bodily 
 agony be concentrate in that one moment of helpless , motionless 
 torment . I never lose the consciousness of suffering . I hear the 
 waiter say , under his breath , " my God ! he be die . " I feel he loosen my 
 cravat - I know that he dash cold water over I ; drag I out of the 
 room ; and , open a window on the landing , hold I firmly where the 
 night - air blow upon my face . I know all this ; and know when the paroxysm 
 pass , and nothing remain of it , but a shiver helplessness in 
 every limb . 

 Erelong , the power of thinking begin to return to I by degree . 

 misery , and shame , and horror , and a vain yearning to hide myself from 
 all human eye , and weep out my life in secret , overcome I . then , these 
 subside ; and one thought slowly arise in their stead - arose , and 
 cast down before it every obstacle of conscience , every principle of 
 education , every care for the future , every remembrance of the past , 
 every weaken influence of present misery , every repress tie of 
 family and home , every anxiety for good fame in this life , and every 
 idea of the next that be to come . before the fell poison of that 
 Thought , all other thought - good or evil - die . as it speak secretly 
 within I , I feel my bodily strength come back ; a quick vigour leapt 
 hotly through my frame . I turn , and look round towards the room we 
 have just leave - my mind be look at the room beyond it , the room they 
 be in . 

 the waiter be still stand by my side , watch I intently . he 
 suddenly start back ; and , with pale face and star eye , point 
 down the stair . 

 " you go , " he whisper , " go directly ! you be well now - I be afraid to 
 have you here any long . I see your look , your horrid look at that 
 room ! you have   hear what you want for your money - go at once ; or , if 
 I lose my place for it , I will call out murder , and raise the house . and 
 mind this : as true as God 's in heaven , I will warn they both before they 
 go outside our door ! " 

 Hearing , but not heed he , I leave the house . no voice that ever 
 speak , could have call I back from the course on which I be now 
 bind . the waiter watch I vigilantly from the door , as I go out . 
 see this , I make a circuit , before I return to the spot where , as I 
 have suspect , the cab they have ride in be still wait for they . 

 the driver be asleep inside . I awake he ; tell he I have be send 
 to say that he be not want again that night : and secure his ready 
 departure , by at once pay he on his own term . he drive off ; and 
 the first obstacle on the fatal path which I have resolve to tread 
 unopposed , be now remove . 

 as the cab disappear from my sight , I look up at the sky . it be 
 grow very dark . the ragged black cloud , fantastically part from 
 each other in island shape over the whole surface of the heaven , be 
 fast draw together into one huge , formless , lower mass , and 
 have already hide the moon for , good . I go back to the street , and 
 station myself in the pitch darkness of a passage which lead down a 
 mew , situate exactly opposite to the hotel . 

 in the silence and obscurity , in the sudden pause of action while I 
 now wait and watch , my Thought rise to my lip , and my speech 
 mechanically form it into word . I whisper softly to myself : I will 
 kill he when he come out . my mind never swerve for an instant from 
 this thought - never swerve towards myself ; never swerve towards she . 
 Grief be numb at my heart ; and the consciousness of my own misery be 
 numb with grief . death chill all before it - and Death and my Thought 
 be one . 

 once , while I stand on the watch , a sharp agony of suspense try I 
 fiercely . 

 just as I have calculate that the time be come which would force they 
 to depart , in order to return to North Villa by the appoint hour , I 
 hear the slow , heavy , regular tramp of a footstep advance along the 
 street . it be the policeman of the district go his round . as he 
 approach the entrance to the mew he pause , yawn , stretch his 
 arm , and begin to whistle a tune . if Mannion should come out while he 
 be there ! my blood seem to stagnate on its course , while I think 
 that this might well happen . suddenly , the man cease whistle , look 
 steadily up and down the street , and try the door of a house near 
 he - advance a few step - then pause again , and try another 
 door - then mutter to himself , in drowsy tone - " I have   see all safe 
 here already : it be the other street I forget just now . " he turn , and 
 retrace his way . I fix my ache eye vigilantly on the hotel , while 
 I hear the sound of his footstep grow fainter and fainter in the 
 distance . it cease altogether ; and still there be no change - still the 
 man whose life I be wait for , never appear . 

 ten minute after this , so far as I can guess , the door open ; and I 
 hear Mannion 's voice , and the voice of the lad who have let I in . " look 
 about you before you go out , " say the waiter , speak in the 
 passage ; " the street be not safe for you . " disbelieve , or affect to 
 disbelieve , what he hear , Mannion interrupt the waiter angrily ; and 
 endeavour to reassure his companion in guilt , by assert that the 
 warning be nothing but an attempt to extort money by way of reward . the 
 man retort sulkily , that he care nothing for the gentleman 's money , 
 or the gentleman either . immediately afterwards an inner door in the 
 house bang violently ; and I know that Mannion have be leave to his 
 fate . 

 there be a momentary silence ; and then I hear he tell his accomplice 
 that he would go alone to look for the cab , and that she have well 
 close the door and wait quietly in the passage till he come back . this 
 be do . he walk out into the street . it be after twelve o'clock . no 
 sound of a strange footfall be audible - no soul be at hand to witness , 
 and prevent , the come struggle . his life be mine . his death follow 
 he as fast as my foot follow , while I be now walk on his track . 

 he look up and down , from the entrance to the street , for the cab . 
 then , see that it be go , he hastily turn back . at that instant I 
 meet he face to face . before a word could be speak , even before a look 
 could be exchange , my hand be on his throat . 

 he be a tall and heavy man than I be ; and struggle with I , 
 know that he be struggle for his life . he never shake my grasp on 
 he for a moment ; but he drag I out into the road - drag I away 
 eight or ten yard from the street . the heavy gasp of approach 
 suffocation beat thick on my forehead from his open mouth : he swerve 
 to and fro furiously , from side to side ; and strike at I , swing his 
 clench fist high above his head . I stand firm , and hold he away at 
 arm 's length . as I dig my foot into the ground to steady myself , I hear 
 the crunching of stone - the road have be newly mend with granite . 
 instantly , a savage purpose goad into fury the deadly resolution by 
 which I be possess . I shift my hold to the back of his neck , and 
 the collar of his coat , and hurl he , with the whole impetus of the 
 rag strength that be let loose in I , face downwards , on to the 
 stone . 

 in the mad triumph of that moment , I have already stoop towards he , as 
 he lie insensible beneath I , to lift he again , and beat out of he , on 
 the granite , not life only , but the semblance of humanity as well ; when , 
 in the blank stillness that follow the struggle , I hear the door of 
 the hotel in the street open once more . I leave he directly , and run 
 back from the square - I know not with what motive , or what idea - to the 
 spot . 

 on the step of the house , on the threshold of that accurse place , 
 stand the woman whom God 's minister have give to I in the sight of God , 
 as my wife . 

 one long pang of shame and despair shoot through my heart as I look at 
 she , and torture out of its trance the spirit within I . thousand on 
 thousand of thought seem to be whirl in the wildest confusion 
 through and through my brain - thought , whose track be a track of 
 fire - thought that strike I with a hellish torment of dumbness , at 
 the very time when I would have purchase with my life the power of a 
 moment 's speech . voiceless and tearless , I go up to she , and take 
 she by the arm , and draw she away from the house . there be some vague 
 purpose in I , as I do this , of never quit my hold of she , never 
 let her stir from I by so much as an inch , until I have speak 
 certain word to she . what word they be , and when I should utter 
 they , I could not tell . 

 the cry for mercy be on her lip , but the instant our eye meet , it die 
 away in long , low , hysterical moaning . her cheek be ghastly , she 
 feature be rigid , her eye glare like an idiot 's ; guilt and terror 
 have make her hideous to look upon already . 

 I draw she onward a few pace towards the Square . then I stop , 
 remember the body that lie face downwards on the road . the savage 
 strength of a few moment before , have leave I from the time when I first 
 see she . I now reel where I stand , from sheer physical weakness . 
 the sound of her panting and shuddering , of her abject inarticulate 
 murmuring for mercy , strike I with a supernatural terror . my finger 
 tremble round her arm , the perspiration drip down my face , like 
 rain ; I catch at the railing by my side , to keep myself from fall . 
 as I do so , she snatch her arm from my grasp , as easily as if I have 
 be a child ; and , with a cry for help , flee towards the further end of 
 the street . 

 still , the strange instinct of never lose hold of she , influence I . 
 I follow , staggering like a drunken man . in a moment , she be out of 
 my reach ; in another , out of my sight . I go on , nevertheless ; on , and 
 on , and on , I know not whither . I lose all idea of time and distance . 
 sometimes I go round and round the same street , over and over again . 
 sometimes I hurry in one direction , straight forward . wherever I go , 
 it seem to I that she be still just before ; that her track and my 
 track be one ; that I have just lose my hold of she , and that she be 
 just start on her flight . 

 I remember pass two man in this way , in some great thoroughfare . they 
 both stop , turn , and walk a few step after I . one laugh at 
 I , as a drunkard . the other , in serious tone , tell he to be silent ; 
 for I be not drunk , but mad - he have see my face as I pass under a 
 gas - lamp , and he know that I be mad . 

 " MAD ! " - that word , as I hear it , rang after I like a voice of 
 judgment . " MAD ! " - a fear have come over I , which , in all its frightful 
 complication , be express by that one word - a fear which , to the man 
 who suffer it , be bad even than the fear of death ; which no human 
 language ever have convey , or ever will convey , in all its horrible 
 reality , to other . I have press onward , hitherto , because I see a 
 vision that lead I after it - a beckon shadow , ahead , dark even 
 than the night darkness . I still press on , now ; but only because I be 
 afraid to stop . 

 I know not how far I have go , when my strength utterly fail I , and 
 I sink down helpless , in a lonely place where the house be few and 
 scatter , and tree and field be dimly discernible in the obscurity 
 beyond . I hide my face in my hand , and try to assure myself that I be 
 still in possession of my sens . I strove hard to separate my thought ; 
 to distinguish between my recollection ; to extricate from the confusion 
 within I any one idea , no matter what - and I could not do it . in that 
 awful struggle for the mastery over my own mind , all that have pass , 
 all the horror of that horrible night , become as nothing to I . I 
 raise myself , and look up again , and try to steady my reason by 
 the simple means - even by endeavour to count all the house within 
 sight . the darkness bewilder I . darkness ? - be it dark ? or be day 
 break yonder , far away in the murky eastern sky ? do I know what I 
 see ? do I see the same thing for a few moment together ? what be this 
 under I ? Grass ? yes ! cold , soft , dewy grass . I bent down my forehead 
 upon it , and try , for the last time , to steady my faculty by 
 pray ; try if I could utter the prayer which I have know and 
 repeat every day from childhood - the Lord 's Prayer . the Divine Words 
 come not at my call - no ! not one of they , from the beginning to the end ! 
 I start up on my knee . a blaze of lurid sunshine flash before my 
 eye ; a hell - blaze of brightness , with fiend by million , rain 
 down out of it on my head ; then a rayless darkness - the darkness of the 
 blind - then God 's mercy at last - the mercy of utter oblivion . 

          

 when I recover my consciousness , I be lie on the couch in my own 
 study . my father be support I on the pillow ; the doctor have his 
 finger on my pulse ; and a policeman be tell they where he have find 
 I , and how he have bring I home . 




 PART III . 


 I. 

 when the blind be operate on for the restoration of sight , the same 
 succouring hand which have open to they the visible world , immediately 
 shut out the bright prospect again , for a time . a bandage be pass 
 over the eye , lest in the first tenderness of the recovered sense , it 
 should be fatally affect by the sudden transition from darkness to 
 light . but between the awful blank of total privation of vision , and 
 the temporary blank of vision merely veil , there lie the wide 
 difference . in the moment of their restoration , the blind have have 
 one glimpse of light , flash on they in an overpowering gleam of 
 brightness , which the thick , close veiling can not extinguish . the 
 new darkness be not like the void darkness of old ; it be fill with 
 change vision of brilliant colour and ever - vary form , rise , 
 fall , whirl hither and thither with every second . even when 
 the handkerchief be pass over they , the once sightless eye , though 
 bandage fast , be yet not blind as they be before . 

 it be so with my mental vision . after the utter oblivion and darkness 
 of a deep swoon , consciousness flash like light on my mind , when I 
 find myself in my father 's presence , and in my own home . but , almost 
 at the very moment when I first awaken to the bewildering influence 
 of that sight , a new darkness fall upon my faculty - a darkness , this 
 time , which be not utter oblivion ; a peopled darkness , like that which 
 the bandage cast over the open eye of the blind . 

 I have sensation , I have thought , I have vision , now - but they all act 
 in the frightful self - concentration of delirium . the lapse of time , the 
 march of event , the alternation of day and night , the person who move 
 about I , the word they speak , the office of kindness they do for 
 I - all these be annihilate from the period when I close my eye 
 again , after have open they for an instant on my father , in my own 
 study . 

 my first sensation   how soon it come after I have be bring home , I 
 know not   be of a terrible heat ; a steady , blaze heat , which seem 
 to have shrivel and burn up the whole of the little world around I , 
 and to have leave I alone to suffer , but never to consume in it . after 
 this , come a quick , restless , unintermittent toiling of obscure thought , 
 ever in the same darken sphere , ever on the same impenetrable subject , 
 ever fail to reach some distant and visionary result . it be as if 
 something be imprison in my mind , and move always to and fro in 
 it - move , but never get free . 

 soon , these thought begin to take a form that I could recognise . 

 in the cling heat and fierce seething fever , to which neither wake 
 nor sleep bring a breath of freshness or a dream of change , I 
 begin to act my part over again , in the event that have pass , but in 
 a strangely alter character . now , instead of place implicit trust in 
 other , as I have do ; instead of fail to discover a significance and 
 a warning in each circumstance as it arise , I be suspicious from the 
 first - suspicious of Margaret , of her father , of her mother , of Mannion , 
 of the very servant in the house . in the hideous phantasmagoria of 
 my own calamity on which I now look , my position be reverse . every 
 event of the doomed year of my probation be revive . but the doom 
 itself , the night - scene of horror through which I have pass , have 
 utterly vanish from my memory . this lost recollection , it be the one 
 unende toil of my wandering mind to recover , and I never get it back . 
 none who have not suffer as I suffer then , can imagine with what a 
 burn rage of determination I follow past event in my delirium , one 
 by one , for day and night together , - follow , to get to the end which 
 I know be beyond , but which I never could see , not even by glimpse , 
 for a moment at a time . 

 however my vision might alter in their course of succession , they 
 always begin with the night when Mannion return from the continent 
 to North Villa . I stand again in the drawing - room ; I see he enter ; I 
 mark the slight confusion of Margaret ; and instantly doubt she . 
 I notice his unwillingness to meet her eye or mine ; I look on the 
 sinister stillness of his face ; and suspect he . from that moment , 
 love vanish , and hatred come in its place . I begin to watch ; to garner 
 up slight circumstance which confirm my suspicion ; to wait craftily 
 for the day when I should discover , judge , and punish they both - the day 
 of disclosure and retribution that never come . 

 sometimes , I be again with Mannion , in his house , on the night of the 
 storm . I detect in every word he speak an artful lure to trap I into 
 trust he as my second father , more than as my friend . I hear in 
 the temp sound which mysteriously interrupt , or mingle with , my 
 answer , voice supernaturally warn I of my enemy , each time that I 
 speak to he . I see once more the hideous smile of triumph on his face , 
 as I take leave of he on the doorstep : and see it , this time , not as 
 an illusion produce by a flash of lightning , but as a frightful reality 
 which the lightning disclose . 

 sometimes , I be again in the garden at North Villa accidentally 
 overhear the conversation between Margaret and her 
 mother - overhear what deceit she be willing to commit , for the sake 
 of get a new dress - then go into the room , and see she assume 
 her usual manner on meet I , as if no such word as I have listen to 
 but the moment before , have ever proceed from her lip . or , I see she 
 on that other morning , when , to revenge the death of her bird , she would 
 have kill with her own hand the one pet companion that her sick 
 mother possess . now , no generous , trust love blind I to the 
 real meaning of such event as these . now , instead of regard they as 
 little weakness of beauty , and little error of youth , I see they as 
 timely warning , which bid I remember when the day of my vengeance 
 come , that in the contriving of the iniquity on which they be both 
 bent , the woman have be as vile as the man . 

 sometimes , I be once more on my way to North Villa , after my week 's 
 absence at our country house . I see again the change in Margaret since 
 I have leave she - the paleness , the restlessness , the appearance of 
 agitation . I take the hand of Mannion , and start as I feel its deadly 
 coldness , and remark the strange alteration in his manner . when they 
 account for these change by tell I that both have be ill , in 
 different way , since my departure , I detect the miserable lie at 
 once ; I know that an evil advantage have be take of my absence ; that 
 the plot against I be fast advance towards consummation : and that , 
 at the sight of their victim , even the two wretch who be compass 
 my dishonour could not repress all outward manifestation of their guilt . 

 sometimes , the figure of Mrs. Sherwin appear to I , wan and weary , and 
 mournful with a ghostly mournfulness . again I watch she , and listen 
 to she ; but now with eager curiosity , with breathless attention . once 
 more , I see her shudder when Mannion 's cold eye turn on her face - I 
 mark the anxious , implore look that she cast on Margaret and on 
 I - I hear she confused , unwilling answer , when I inquire the cause 
 of her dislike of the man in whom her husband place the most implicit 
 trust - I listen to her abrupt , inexplicable injunction to " watch 
 continually over my wife , and keep bad people from she . " all these 
 different circumstance occur again as vividly as in the reality ; 
 but I do not now account for they , as I have once account for they , by 
 convince myself that Mrs. Sherwin 's mind be wander , and that she 
 bodily suffering have affect her intellect . I see immediately , that 
 she suspect Mannion , and dare not openly confess her suspicion ; I 
 see , that in the stillness , and abandonment , and self - concentration of 
 her neglect life , she have be watch more vigilantly than other 
 have watch ; I detect in every one of her despise gesture , and 
 look , and halting word , the same conceal warning ever lie beneath 
 the surface ; I know they have not succeed in deceive she ; I be 
 determined they should not succeed in deceive I . 

 it be often at this point , that my restless memory recoil before 
 the impenetrable darkness which forbid it to see far - to see on 
 to the last evening , to the fatal night . it be often at this point , 
 that I toil and struggle back , over and over again , to seek once more 
 the lose event of the end , through the event of the beginning . how 
 often my wander thought thus incessantly and desperately trace and 
 retrace their way over their own fever track , I can not tell : but there 
 come a time when they suddenly cease to torment I ; when the heavy 
 burden that be on my mind fall off ; when a sudden strength and fury 
 possess I , and I plunge down through a vast darkness into a world 
 whose daylight be all radiant flame . giant phantom muster by 
 million , flash white as lightning in the ruddy air . they rush on 
 I with hurricane speed ; their wing fan I with fiery breeze ; and 
 the echo of their thunder - music be like the groaning and rend of an 
 earthquake , as they tear I away with they on their whirlwind course . 

 away ! to a City of Palaces , to measureless hall , and arch , and dome , 
 soar one above another , till their flash ruby summit be lose 
 in the burn void , high overhead . on ! through and through these 
 mountain - pile , into countless , limitless corridor , rear on pillar 
 lurid and rosy as molten lava . far down the corridor rise vision 
 of fly phantom , ever at the same distance before us - their raving 
 voice clang like the hammer of a thousand forge . still on and 
 on ; fast and fast , for day , year , century together , till there 
 come , steal slowly forward to meet we , a shadow - a vast , stealthy , 
 glide shadow - the first darkness that have ever be shed over that 
 world of blaze light ! it come nearer - nearer and nearer softly , till 
 it touch the front rank of our phantom troop . then in an instant , our 
 rush progress be check : the thunder - music of our wild march stop ; 
 the rave voice of the spectre ahead , cease ; a horror of blank 
 stillness be all about we - and as the shadow creep onward and onward , 
 until we be envelop in it from front to rear , we shiver with icy cold 
 under the fiery air and amid the lurid lava pillar which hem we in on 
 either side . 

 a silence , like no silence ever know on earth ; a darkening of the 
 shadow , blacker than the black night in the thick wood - a 
 pause - then , a sound as of the heavy air be cleft asunder ; and then , 
 an apparition of two figure come on out of the shadow - two monster 
 stretch forth their gnarl yellow talon to grasp at we ; leave 
 on their track a green decay , ooze and shin with a sickly light . 
 beyond and around I , as I stand in the midst of they , the phantom troop 
 drop into formless mass , while the monster advance . they come 
 close to I ; and I alone , of all the myriad around , change not at 
 their approach . each lay a talon on my shoulder - each raise a veil 
 which be one hideous net - work of twin worm . I see through the 
 ghastly corruption of their face the look that tell I who they 
 be - the monstrous iniquity incarnate in monstrous form ; the 
 fiend - soul make visible in fiend - shape - Margaret and Mannion ! 

 a moment more ! and I be alone with those two . not a wreck of the 
 phantom - multitude remain ; the tower city , the gleam corridor , 
 the fire - bright radiance have vanish . we stand on a wilderness - a 
 still , black lake of dead water be before we ; a white , faint , misty 
 light shine on we . outspread over the noisome ground lie the ruin of a 
 house , root up and overthrow to its foundation . the demon figure , 
 still watch on either side of I , draw I slowly forward to the 
 fall stone , and point to two dead body lie among they . 

 my father ! - my sister ! - both cold and still , and whiter than the white 
 light that show they to I . the demon at my side stretch out their 
 crooked talon , and forbid I to kneel before my father , or to kiss 
 Clara 's wan face , before I go to torment . they strike I motionless 
 where I stand - and unveil their hideous face once more , jeer at I 
 in triumph . Anon , the lake of black water heave up and overflow , 
 and noiselessly suck we away into its central depth - depth that be 
 endless ; depth of rayless darkness , in which we slowly eddy round 
 and round , deep and deep down at every turn . I feel the body of 
 my father and my sister touch I in cold contact : I stretch out my 
 arm to clasp they and sink with they ; and the demon pair glide between 
 we , and separate I from they . this vain strive to join myself to my 
 dead kindre when we touch each other in the slow , endless whirlpool , 
 ever continue and be ever frustrated in the same way . still we sink 
 apart , down the black gulph of the lake ; still there be no light , 
 no sound , no change , no pause of repose - and this be eternity : the 
 eternity of Hell ! 

          

 such be one dream - vision out of many that I see . it must have be at 
 this time that man be set to watch I day and night   as I afterwards 
 hear , in order that I might be hold down in my bed , when a paroxysm of 
 convulsive strength make I dangerous to myself and to all about I . the 
 period too when the doctor announce that the fever have seize on my 
 brain , and be get the well of their skill , must have be this 
 period . 

 but though they give up my life as lose , I be not to die . there come a 
 time , at last , when the gnawing fever lose its hold ; and I awake faintly 
 one morning to a new existence - to a life frail and helpless as the life 
 of a new - bear babe . 

 I be too weak to move , to speak , to open my eye , to exert in the 
 small degree any one faculty , bodily or mental , that I possess . the 
 first sense of which I regain the use , be the sense of hearing ; 
 and the first sound that I recognise , be of a light footstep which 
 mysteriously approach , paused , and then retire again gently outside 
 my door . the hearing of this sound be my first pleasure , the waiting 
 for its repetition my first source of happy expectation , since I have 
 be ill . once more the footstep approach - pause a moment - then 
 seem to retire as before - then return slowly . a sigh , very faint and 
 trembling ; a whisper of which I could not yet distinguish the import , 
 catch my ear - and after that , there be silence . still I wait   oh , 
 how happily and calmly !   to hear the whisper soon repeat , and to hear 
 it well when it next come . Ere long , for the third time , the footstep 
 advance , and the whisper accent sound again . I could now hear 
 that they pronounce my name - once , twice , three time - very softly and 
 imploringly , as if to beg the answer which I be still too weak to give . 
 but I know the voice : I know it be Clara 's . long after it have cease , 
 the whisper linger gently on my ear , like a lullaby that alternately 
 soothe I to slumber , and welcome I to wakefulness . it seem to be 
 thrill through my frame with a tender , revive influence - the same 
 influence which the sunshine have , week afterwards , when I enjoy it 
 for the first time out of door . 

 the next sound that come to I be audible in my room ; audible 
 sometimes , close at my pillow . it be the simple sound 
 imaginable - nothing but the soft rustling of a woman 's dress . and yet , 
 I hear in it innumerable harmony , sweet change , and pause minute 
 beyond all definition . I could only open my eye for a minute at a time , 
 and even then , could not fix they steadily on anything ; but I know that 
 the rustle dress be Clara 's ; and fresh sensation seem to throng 
 upon I , as I listen to the sound which tell I that she be in the 
 room . I feel the soft summer air on my face ; I enjoy the sweet scent 
 of flower , waft on that air ; and once , when my door be leave open for 
 a moment , the twittering of bird in the aviary down stair , ring 
 with exquisite clearness and sweetness on my ear . it be thus that my 
 faculty strengthen , hour by hour , always in the same gradual way , 
 from the time when I first hear the footstep and the whisper outside my 
 chamber - door . 

 one evening I awake from a cool , dreamless sleep ; and , see Clara 
 sit by my bedside , faintly utter her name , and move my waste 
 hand to take her . as I see the calm , familiar face bend over I ; 
 the anxious eye look tenderly and lovingly into mine - as the last 
 melancholy glory of sunset hover on my bed , and the air , sink 
 already into its twilight repose , come softly and more softly into 
 the room - as my sister take I in her arm , and raise I on my weary 
 pillow , bid I for her sake lie hush and patient a little long - the 
 memory of the ruin and the shame that have overwhelm I ; the memory of 
 my love that have become an infamy ; and of my brief year 's hope miserably 
 fulfil by a life of despair , swell darkly over my heart . the red , 
 retire ray of sunset just linger at that moment on my face . Clara 
 knelt down by my pillow , and hold up her handkerchief to shade my 
 eye - " God have give you back to we , Basil , " she whisper , " to make we 
 happy than ever . " as she speak , the spring of the grief so long pen 
 up within I be loosen ; hot tear drop heavily and quickly from 
 my eye ; and I weep for the first time since the night of horror which 
 have stretch I where I now lay - wept in my sister 's arm , at that 
 quiet evening hour , for the lost honour , the lost hope , the lose 
 happiness that have go from I for ever in my youth ! 

 II . 

 darkly and wearily the day of my recovery go on . after that first 
 outburst of sorrow on the evening when I recognise my sister , and 
 murmur her name as she sit by my side , there sink over all my 
 faculty a dull , heavy trance of mental pain . 

 I dare not describe what remembrance of the guilty woman who have 
 deceive and ruin I , now gnaw unceasingly and poisonously at my 
 heart . my bodily strength feebly revive ; but my mental energy 
 never show a sign of recover with they . my father 's considerate 
 forbearance , Clara 's sorrowful reserve in touch on the subject of my 
 long illness , or of the wild word which have escape I in my delirium , 
 mutely and gently warn I that the time be come when I owe the tardy 
 atonement of confession to the family that I have disgrace ; and still , 
 I have no courage to speak , no resolution to endure . the great misery 
 of the past , shut out from I the present and the future alike - every 
 active power of my mind seem to be destroy hopelessly and for ever . 

 there be moment - most often at the early morning hour , while 
 the heaviness of the night 's sleep still hang over I in my 
 wakefulness - when I could hardly realise the calamity which have 
 overwhelm I ; when it seem that I must have dream , during the 
 night , of scene of crime and woe and heavy trial which have never 
 actually take place . what be the secret of the terrible influence 
 which - let she even be the vilest of the vile - Mannion must have 
 possess over Margaret Sherwin , to induce she to sacrifice I to he ? 
 even the crime itself be not more hideous and more incredible than the 
 mystery in which its evil motif , and the manner of its evil ripening , 
 be still impenetrably veil . 

 Mannion ! it be a strange result of the mental malady under which I 
 suffer , that , though the thought of Mannion be now inextricably 
 connect with every thought of Margaret , I never once ask myself , or 
 have an idea of ask myself , for day together , after my convalescence , 
 what have be the issue of our struggle , for he . in the despair of 
 first awakening to a perfect sense of the calamity which have be 
 hurl on I from the hand of my wife - in the misery of first clearly 
 connect together , after the wandering of delirium , the Margaret to 
 whom with my hand I have give all my heart , with the Margaret who have 
 trample on the gift and ruin the giver - all minor thought and 
 minor feeling , all motif of revengeful curiosity or of personal 
 apprehension be suppress . and yet , the time be soon to arrive when 
 that lose thought of inquiry into Mannion 's fate , be to become the 
 one master - think that possess I - the thought that give back its 
 vigilance to my intellect , and its manhood to my heart . 

 one evening I be sit alone in my room . my father have take Clara 
 out for a little air and exercise , and the servant have go away at my 
 own desire . it be in this quiet and solitude , when the darkness be 
 fast approach , when the view from my window be at its loneliest , 
 when my mind be grow listless and confused as the weary day 
 wear out - it be exactly at this time that the thought suddenly and 
 mysteriously flash across I : have Mannion be take up from the 
 stone on which I have hurl he , a live man or a dead ? 

 I instinctively start to my foot with something of the vigour of 
 my former health ; repeat the question to myself ; and feel , as I 
 unconsciously murmur aloud the few word which express it , that my 
 life have purpose and duty , trial and achievement , which be yet to 
 be fulfil . how could I instantly solve the momentous doubt which have 
 now , for the first time , cross my mind ? 

 one moment I pause in eager consideration - the next , I descend to the 
 library . a daily newspaper be keep there , file for reference . I might 
 possibly decide the fatal question in a few moment by consult it . 
 in my burn anxiety and impatience I could hardly handle the leaf or 
 see the letter , as I try to turn back to the right date - the day   oh 
 anguish of remembrance !   on which I be to have claim Margaret Sherwin 
 as my wife ! 

 at last , I find the number I desire ; but the closely - print column 
 swam before I as I look at they . a glass of water stand on a table 
 near I - I dip my handkerchief in it , and cool my throb eye . 
 the destiny of my future life might be decide by the discovery I be 
 now about to make ! 

 I lock the door to guard against all intrusion , and then return to 
 my task - return to my momentous search - slowly trace my way through 
 the paper , paragraph by paragraph , column by column . 

 on the last page , and close to the end , I read these line : 

  " MYSTERIOUS occurrence . 

 " about one o'clock this morning , a gentleman be discover lie on his 
 face in the middle of the road , in Westwood Square , by the policeman on 
 duty . the unfortunate man be to all appearance dead . he have fall on 
 a part of the road which have be recently macadamise ; and his face , we 
 be inform , be frightfully mutilate by contact with the granite . 
 the policeman convey he to the neighbouring hospital , where it be 
 discover that he be still alive , and the prompt attention be 
 immediately pay he . we understand that the surgeon in attendance 
 consider it absolutely impossible that he could have be injure as he 
 be , except by have be violently throw down on his face , either 
 by a vehicle drive at a furious rate , or by a savage attack from some 
 person or person unknown . in the latter case , robbery could not have 
 be the motive ; for the unfortunate man 's watch , purse , and ring be 
 all find about he . no card of address or letter of any kind be 
 discover in his pocket , and his linen and handkerchief be only 
 mark with the letter M. he be dress in evening costume - entirely in 
 black . after what have be already say about the injury to his 
 face , any recognisable personal description of he be , for the present , 
 unfortunately out of the question . we wait with much anxiety to gain 
 some further insight into this mysterious affair , when the sufferer be 
 restore to consciousness . the last particular which our reporter be 
 able to collect at the hospital be , that the surgeon expect to save 
 his patient 's life , and the sight of one of his eye . the sight of the 
 other be understand to be entirely destroy . " 



 with sensation of horror which I could not then , and can not now 
 analyse , I turn to the next day 's paper ; but find in it no further 
 reference to the object of my search . in the number for the day after , 
 however , the subject be resume in these word : 

 " the mystery of the accident in Westwood Square thicken . the sufferer 
 be restore to consciousness ; he be perfectly competent to hear and 
 understand what be say to he , and be able to articulate , but not very 
 plainly , and only for a moment or so , at a time . the authority at the 
 hospital anticipate , as we do , that , on the patient 's regain his 
 sens , some information of the manner in which the terrible accident 
 from which he be suffer be cause , would be obtain from he . but , 
 to the astonishment of every one , he positively refuse to answer any 
 question as to the circumstance under which his frightful injury 
 be inflict . with the same unaccountable secrecy , he decline to tell 
 his name , his place of abode , or the name of any friend to whom notice 
 of his situation might be communicate . it be quite in vain to press he 
 for any reason for this extraordinary course of conduct - he appear 
 to be a man of very unusual firmness of character ; and his refusal to 
 explain himself in any way , be evidently no mere caprice of the moment . 
 all this lead to the conjecture that the injury he have sustain be 
 inflict on he from some motive of private vengeance ; and that certain 
 person be concern in this disgraceful affair , whom he be unwilling 
 to expose to public odium , for some secret reason which it be impossible 
 to guess at . we understand that he bear the severe pain consequent 
 upon his situation , in such a manner as to astonish every person about 
 he - no agony draw from he a word or a sigh . he display no emotion 
 even when the surgeon inform he that the sight of one of his eye 
 be hopelessly destroy ; and merely ask to be supply with writing 
 material as soon as he could see to use they , when he be tell that the 
 sight of the other would be save . he far add , we be inform , 
 that he be in a position to reward the hospital authority for any 
 trouble he give , by make a present to the fund of the charity , as 
 soon as he should be discharge as cure . his coolness in the midst of 
 suffering which would deprive most other man of all power of thinking 
 or speaking , be as remarkable as his unflinche secrecy - a secrecy 
 which , for the present at least , we can not hope to penetrate . " 



 I close the newspaper . even then , a vague forewarning of what Mannion 's 
 inexplicable reserve bode towards I , cross my mind . there be yet 
 more difficulty , danger , and horror to be face , than I have hitherto 
 confront . the slough of degradation and misery into which I have 
 fall , have its bad peril yet in store for I . 

 as I become impressed by this conviction , the enervating remembrance 
 of the wickedness to which I have be sacrifice , grow weak in its 
 influence over I ; the bitter tear that I have shed in secret for so 
 many day past , dry sternly at their source ; and I feel the power 
 to endure and to resist come back to I with my sense of the come 
 strife . on leave the library , I ascend again to my own room . in a 
 basket , on my table , lie several unopened letter , which have arrive 
 for I during my illness . there be two which I at once suspect , 
 in hastily turn over the collection , might be all - important in 
 enlighten I on the vile subject of Mannion 's female accomplice . the 
 address of both these letter be in Mr. Sherwin 's handwriting . the 
 first that I open be date nearly a month back , and run thus : 


  " North Villa , Hollyoake Square . 

 " DEAR SIR , 

 " with agonised feeling which no one but a parent , and I will add , an 
 affectionate parent , can possibly form an idea of , I address you on 
 the subject of the act of atrocity commit by that perjure villain , 
 Mannion . you will find that I and my innocent daughter have be , like 
 you , victim of the most devilish deceit that ever be practise on 
 respectable and unsuspecting people . 

 " let I ask you , Sir , to imagine the state of my feeling on the night 
 of that most unfortunate party , when I see my beloved Margaret , instead 
 of come home quietly as usual , rush into the room in a state border 
 on distraction , with a tale the most horrible that ever be address 
 to a father 's ear . the double - faced villain   I really can not   mention his 
 name again   have , I blush to acknowledge , attempt to take advantage of 
 her innocence and confidence - all our innocence and confidence , I may 
 say - but my dear Margaret show a virtuous courage beyond her year , 
 the natural result of the pious principle and the moral bringing up 
 which I have give she from her cradle . need I say what be the upshot ? 
 Virtue triumph , as virtue always do , and the villain leave she to 
 herself . it be when she be approach the door - step to fly to 
 the bosom of her home that , I be give to understand , you , by a most 
 remarkable accident , meet she . as a man of the world , you will easily 
 conceive what must have be the feeling of a young female , under such 
 peculiar and shocking circumstance . besides this , your manner , as I be 
 inform , be so terrifying and extraordinary , and my poor Margaret feel 
 so strongly that deceitful appearance might be against she , that she 
 lose all heart , and flee at once , as I say before , to the bosom of her 
 home . 

 " she be still in a very nervous and unhappy state ; she fear that 
 you may be too ready to believe appearance ; but I know well . her 
 explanation will be enough for you , as it be for I . we may have our 
 little difference on minor topic , but we have both the same manly 
 confidence , I be sure - you in your wife , and I in my daughter . 

 " I call at your worthy father 's mansion , to have a full 
 explanation with you than I can give here , the morning after this 
 to - all - party - most - distressing occurrence happen : and be then 
 inform of your serious illness , for which pray accept my good 
 condolence . the next thing I think of do be to write to your 
 respected father , request a private interview . but on maturer 
 consideration , I think it perhaps slightly injudicious to take such a 
 step , while you , as the principal party concern , be ill in bed , and 
 not able to come forward and back I . I be anxious , you will observe , 
 to act for your interest , as well as the interest of my darling 
 girl - of course , know at the same time that I have the marriage 
 certificate in my possession , if need as a proof , and suppose I be 
 drive to extremity and oblige to take my own course in the matter . 
 but , as I say before , I have a fatherly and friendly confidence in your 
 feeling as convince of the spotless innocence of my child as I do . so 
 will write no more on this head . 

 " have determine , as well under all circumstance , to wait till your 
 illness be over , I have keep my dear Margaret in strict retirement 
 at home   which , as she be your wife , you will acknowledge I have no 
 obligation to do , until you be well enough to come forward and do she 
 justice before her family and your . I have not omit to make almost 
 daily inquiry after you , up to the time of pen these line , and 
 shall continue so to do until your convalescence , which I sincerely 
 hope may be speedily at hand ; I be unfortunately oblige to ask that our 
 first interview , when you be able to see I and my daughter , may not 
 take place at North Villa , but at some other place , any you like to fix 
 on . the fact be , my wife , whose wretched health have be a trouble and 
 annoyance to we for year past , have now , I grieve to say , under pressure 
 of this sad misfortune , quite lose her reason . I be sorry to say that 
 she would be capable of interrupt we here , in a most undesirable 
 manner to all party , and therefore request that our first happy 
 meeting may not take place at my house . 

 " trust that this letter will quite remove all unpleasant feeling 
 from your mind , and that I shall hear from you soon , on your 
 much - to - be - desire recovery , 

 " I remain , dear Sir , 

 " your faithful , obedient servant , 

  " STEPHEN SHERWIN . 

 " P. S. - I have not be able to find out where that scoundrel Mannion , 
 have betake himself to ; but if you should know , or suspect , I wish to 
 tell you , as a proof that my indignation at his villany be as great as 
 your , that I be ready and anxious to pursue he with the utmost rigour 
 of the law , if law can only reach he - pay out of my own pocket all 
 expense of punish he and break he for the rest of his life , if 
 I go through every court in the country to do it ! - S. S. " 



 hurriedly as I read over this wretched and revolting letter , I detect 
 immediately how the new plot have be frame to keep I still deceive ; 
 to heap wrong after wrong on I with the same impunity . she be not 
 aware that I have follow she into the house , and have hear all from 
 her voice and Mannion 's - she believe that I be still ignorant of 
 everything , until we meet at the door - step ; and in this conviction she 
 have forge the miserable lie which her father 's hand have write down . 
 do he really believe it , or be he write as her accomplice ? it be 
 not worth while to inquire : the bad and darkest discovery which it 
 concern I to make , have already proclaim itself - she be a liar and 
 a hypocrite to the very last ! 

 and it be this woman 's light glance which have once be to I as 
 the star that my life look to ! - -it be for this woman that I have 
 practise a deceit on my family which it now revolt I to think 
 of ; have brave whatever my father 's anger might inflict ; have risk 
 cheerfully the loss of all that birth and fortune could bestow ! why have 
 I ever rise from my weary bed of sickness ? - it would have be well , 
 far well , that I have die ! 

 but , while life remain , life have its trial and its toil , from which 
 it be useless to shrink . there be still another letter to be open : 
 there be yet more wickedness which I must know how to confront . 

 the second of Mr. Sherwin 's letter be much short than the first , and 
 have apparently be write not more than a day or two back . his tone 
 be change ; he truckle to I no long - he begin to threaten . I 
 be remind that the servant 's report pronounce I to have be 
 convalescent for several day past : and be ask why , under these 
 circumstance , I have never even write . I be warn that my silence 
 have be construe greatly to my disadvantage ; and that if it continue 
 long , the writer would assert his daughter 's cause loudly and 
 publicly , not to my father only , but to all the world . the letter 
 end by accord to I three day more of grace , before the full 
 disclosure would be make . 

 for a moment , my indignation get the well of I . I rise , to go that 
 instant to North Villa and unmask the wretch who still think to 
 make their market of I as easily as ever . but the mere momentary delay 
 cause by open the door of my room , restore I to myself . I feel 
 that my first duty , my paramount obligation , be to confess all to my 
 father immediately ; to know and accept my future position in my own 
 home , before I go out from it to denounce other . I return to the 
 table , and gather up the letter scatter on it . my heart beat fast , 
 my head feel confused ; but I be resolute in my determination to tell 
 my father , at all hazard , the tale of degradation which I have tell in 
 these page . 

 I wait in the stillness and loneliness , until it grow nearly dark . the 
 servant bring in candle . why could I not ask he whether my father 
 and Clara have come home yet ? be I falter in my resolution already ? 

 shortly after this , I hear a step on the stair and a knock at my 
 door . - my father ? no ! Clara . I try to speak to she unconcernedly , when 
 she come in . 

 " why , you have be walk till it be quite dark , Clara ! " 

 " we have only be in the garden of the Square - neither papa nor I 
 notice how late it be . we be talk on a subject of the deep 
 interest to we both . " 

 she pause a moment , and look down ; then hurriedly come near to I , 
 and draw a chair to my side . there be a strange expression of sadness 
 and anxiety in her face , as she continue : 

 " can not   you imagine what the subject be ? it be you , Basil . papa be 
 come here directly , to speak to you . " 

 she stop once more . her cheek reddened a little , and she 
 mechanically busy herself in arrange some book that lie on the 
 table . suddenly , she abandon this employment ; the colour leave she 
 face ; it be quite pale when she address I again , speak in very 
 altered tone ; so alter , that I hardly recognise they as her . 

 " you know , Basil , that for a long time past , you have keep some secret 
 from we ; and you promise that I should know it first ; but I - I have 
 change my mind ; I have no wish to know it , dear : I would rather we 
 never say anything about it . "   she colour , and hesitate a little 
 again , then proceed quickly and earnestly :   " but I hope you will tell 
 it all to papa : he be come here to ask you - oh , Basil ! be candid with 
 he , and tell he everything ; let we all be to one another what we be 
 before this time last year ! you have nothing to fear , if you only speak 
 openly ; for I have beg he to be gentle and forgiving with you , and 
 you know he refuse I nothing . I only come here to prepare you ; to beg 
 you to be candid and patient . hush ! there be a step on the stair . speak 
 out , Basil , for my sake - pray , pray , speak out , and then leave the rest 
 to I . " 

 she hurriedly leave the room . the next minute , my father enter it . 

 perhaps my guilty conscience deceive I , but I think he look at I 
 more sadly and severely than I have ever see he look before . his voice , 
 too , be trouble when he speak . this be a change , which mean much in 
 he . 

 " I have come to speak to you , " he say , " on a subject about which I have 
 much rather you have speak to I first . " 

 " I think , Sir , I know to what subject you refer . I - " 

 " I must beg you will listen to I as patiently as you can , " he rejoin ; 
 " I have not much to say . " 

 he pause , and sigh heavily . I think he look at I more kindly . my 
 heart grow very sad ; and I yearn to throw my arm round his neck , to 
 give freedom to the repressed tear which half choke I , to weep out on 
 his bosom my confession that I be no more worthy to be call his son . 
 oh , that I have obey the impulse which move I to do this ! 

 " Basil , " pursue my father , gravely and sadly ; " I hope and believe that 
 I have little to reproach myself with in my conduct towards you . I think 
 I be justify in say , that very few father would have act towards 
 a son as I have act for the last year or more . I may often have 
 grieve over the secresy which have estrange you from we ; I may even 
 have show you by my manner that I resent it ; but I have never use my 
 authority to force you into the explanation of your conduct , which you 
 have be so uniformly unwilling to volunteer . I rest on that implicit 
 faith in the honour and integrity of my son , which I will not yet 
 believe to have be ill - place , but which , I fear , have lead I 
 to neglect too long the duty of inquiry which I owe to your own 
 well - being , and to my position towards you . I be now here to atone for 
 this omission ; circumstance have leave I no choice . it deeply concern 
 my interest as a father , and my honour as the head of our family , to 
 know what heavy misfortune it be   I can imagine it to be nothing else 
 that stretch my son senseles in the open street , and afflict he 
 afterwards with an illness which threaten his reason and his life . 
 you be now sufficiently recover to reveal this ; and I only use my 
 legitimate authority over my own child , when I tell you that I must 
 now know all . if you persist in remain silent , the relation between 
 we must henceforth change for life . " 

 " I be ready to make my confession , Sir . I only ask you to believe 
 beforehand , that if I have sin grievously against you , I have be 
 already heavily punish for the sin . I be afraid it be impossible that 
 your bad foreboding can have prepare you - " 

 " the word you speak in your delirium - word which I hear , but will not 
 judge you by - justify the bad foreboding . " 

 " my illness have spar I the hard part of a hard trial , Sir , if it 
 have prepare you for what I have to confess ; if you suspect - " 

 " I do not suspect - I feel but too sure , that you , my second son , 
 from whom I have expect far well thing , have imitate in secret - I 
 be afraid , outstrip - the bad vice of your eld brother . " 

 " my brother ! - my brother 's fault mine ! Ralph ! " 

 " yes , Ralph . it be my last hope that you will now imitate Ralph 's 
 candour . take example from that good part of he , as you have already 
 take example from the bad . " 

 my heart grow faint and cold as he speak . Ralph 's example ! Ralph 's 
 vice ! - vice of the reckless hour , or the idle day ! - vice whose stain , 
 in the world 's eye , be not a stain for life ! - convenient , reclaimable 
 vice , that man be mercifully unwilling to associate with grinning 
 infamy and irreparable disgrace ! how far - how fearfully far , my father 
 be from the remotest suspicion of what have really happen ! I try to 
 answer his last word , but the apprehension of the life - long humiliation 
 and grief which my confession might inflict on he - absolutely 
 incapable , as he appear to be , of forebode even the least degrading 
 part of it - keep I speechless . when he resume , after a momentary 
 silence , his tone be stern , his look search - pitilessly 
 search , and bent full upon my face . 

 " a person have be call , name Sherwin , " he say , " and inquire 
 about you every day . what intimate connection between you authorise 
 this perfect stranger to I to come to the house as frequently as he 
 do , and to make his inquiry with a familiarity of tone and manner 
 which have strike every one of the servant who have , on different 
 occasion , open the door to he ? who be this Mr. Sherwin ? " 

 " it be not with he , Sir , that I can well begin . I must go back - " 

 " you must go back far , I be afraid , than you will be able to return . 
 you must go back to the time when you have nothing to conceal from I , 
 and when you could speak to I with the frankness and directness of a 
 gentleman . " 

 " pray be patient with I , Sir ; give I a few minute to collect myself . 
 I have much need for a little self - possession before I tell you all . " 

 " All ? your tone mean more than your word - they be candid , at least ! 
 have I fear the bad , and yet not fear as I ought ? Basil ! - do you 
 hear I , Basil ? you be tremble very strangely ; you be grow pale ! " 

 " I shall be well directly , Sir . I be afraid I be not quite so strong 
 yet as I think myself . Father ! I be heart - break and spirit - break : be 
 patient and kind to I , or I can not speak to you . " 

 I think I see his eye moisten . he shade they a moment with his hand , 
 and sigh again - the same long , tremble sigh that I have hear before . 
 I try to rise from my chair , and throw myself on my knee at his foot . 
 he mistake the action , and catch I by the arm , believe that I be 
 faint . 

 " no more to - night , Basil , " he say , hurriedly , but very gently ; " no more 
 on this subject till to - morrow . " 

 " I can speak now , Sir ; it be well to speak at once . " 

 " no : you be too much agitated ; you be weak than I think . 
 to - morrow , in the morning , when you be strong after a night 's rest . 
 no ! I will hear nothing more . go to bed now ; I will tell your sister not 
 to disturb you to - night . to - morrow , you shall speak to I ; and speak in 
 your own way , without interruption . good - night , Basil , good - night . " 

 without wait to shake hand with I , he hasten to the door , as if 
 anxious to hide from my observation the grief and apprehension which have 
 evidently overcome he . but , just at the moment when he be leave 
 the room , he hesitate , turn round , look sorrowfully at I for an 
 instant , and then , retrace his step , give I his hand , press mine 
 for a moment in silence , and leave I . 

 after the morrow be over , would he ever give I that hand again ? 

 III . 

 the morning which be to decide all between my father and I , the 
 morning on whose event hang the future of my home life , be the 
 bright and loveliest that my eye ever look on . a cloudless sky , 
 a soft air , sunshine so joyous and dazzle that the commonest object 
 look beautiful in its light , seem to be mock at I for my heavy 
 heart , as I stand at my window , and think of the hard duty to be 
 fulfil , on the hard judgment that might be pronounce , before the 
 dawning of another day . 

 during the night , I have arrange no plan on which to conduct the 
 terrible disclosure which I be now bind to make - the greatness of the 
 emergency deprive I of all power of prepare myself for it . I think 
 on my father 's character , on the inbreed principle of honour which rule 
 he with the stern influence of a fanaticism : I think on his pride of 
 caste , so unobtrusive , so rarely hint at in word , and yet so firmly 
 root in his nature , so intricately entwine with every one of his 
 emotion , his aspiration , his simple feeling and idea : I think 
 on his almost feminine delicacy in shrink from the bare mention of 
 impurity which other man could carelessly discuss , or could laugh over 
 as good material for an after - dinner jest . I think over all this , 
 and when I remember that it be to such a man that I must confess the 
 infamous marriage which I have contract in secret , all hope from his 
 fatherly affection desert I ; all idea of appeal to his chivalrous 
 generosity become a delusion in which it be madness to put a moment 's 
 trust . 

 the faculty of observation be generally sharpen , in proportion 
 as the faculty of reflection be dull , under the influence of 
 an absorbing suspense . while I now wait alone in my room , the most 
 ordinary sound and event in the house , which I never remember 
 noticing before , absolutely enthral I . it seem as if the noise of 
 a footstep , the echo of a voice , the shutting or opening of door down 
 stair , must , on this momentous day , presage some mysterious calamity , 
 some strange discovery , some secret project form against I , I 
 know not how , or by whom . two or three time I find myself listen 
 intently on the staircase , with what object I could hardly tell . it be 
 always , however , on those occasion , that a dread , significant quiet 
 appear to have fall suddenly on the house . Clara never come to 
 I , no message arrive from my father ; the door - bell seem strangely 
 silent , the servant strangely neglectful of their duty above stair . 
 I catch myself return to my own room softly , as if I expect that 
 some hide catastrophe might break forth , if sound of my footstep be 
 hear . 

 would my father seek I again in my own room , or would he send for I 
 down stair ? it be not long before the doubt be decide . one of the 
 servant knock at my door - the servant whose special duty it have 
 be to wait on I in my illness . I long to take the man 's hand , and 
 implore his sympathy and encouragement while he address I . 

 " my master , Sir , desire I to say that , if you feel well enough , he 
 wish to see you in his own room . " 

 I rise , and immediately follow the servant . on our way , we pass the 
 door of Clara 's private sitting - room - it open , and my sister come 
 out and lay her hand on my arm . she smile as I look at she ; but the 
 tear stand thick in her eye , and her face be deadly pale . 

 " think of what I say last night , Basil , " she whisper , " and , if hard 
 word be speak to you , think of I . all that our mother would have 
 do for you , if she have be still among we , I will do . remember 
 that , and keep heart and hope to the very last . " 

 she hastily return to her room , and I go on down stair . in the 
 hall , the servant be wait for I , with a letter in his hand . 

 " this be leave for you , Sir , a little while ago . the messenger who 
 bring it say he be not to wait for an answer . " 

 it be no time for read letter - the interview with my father be too 
 close at hand . I hastily put the letter into my pocket , barely noticing , 
 as I do so , that the handwriting on the address be very irregular , and 
 quite unknown to I . 

 I go at once into my father 's room . 

 he be sit at his table , cut the leaf of some new book 
 that lie on it . point to a chair place opposite to he , he briefly 
 inquire after my health ; and then add , in a low tone - 

 " take any time you like , Basil , to compose and collect yourself . this 
 morning my time be yours . " 

 he turn a little away from I , and go on cut the leaf of the 
 book place before he . still utterly incapable of prepare myself in 
 any way for the disclosure expect from I ; without thought or hope , 
 or feeling of any kind , except a vague sense of thankfulness for the 
 reprieve grant I before I be call on to speak - I mechanically 
 look round and round the room , as if I expect to see the sentence 
 to be pronounce against I , already write on the wall , or grimly 
 foreshadow in the face of the old family portrait which hang above 
 the fireplace . 

 what man have ever feel that all his think power be absorb , even 
 by the most poignant mental misery that could occupy they ? in moment 
 of imminent danger , the mind can still travel of its own accord over the 
 past , in spite of the present - in moment of bitter affliction , it can 
 still recur to every - day trifle , in spite of ourselves . while I now 
 sit silent in my father 's room , long - forget association of childhood 
 connect with different part of it , begin to rise on my memory in the 
 strange and most startling independence of any influence or control , 
 which my present agitation and suspense might be suppose to exercise 
 over they . the remembrance that should have be the last to be 
 awaken at this time of heavy trial , be the very remembrance which 
 now move within I . 

 with burden heart and ache eye I look over the wall around I . 
 there , in that corner , be the red cloth door which lead to the library . 
 as child , how often Ralph and I have peep curiously through that 
 very door , to see what my father be about in his study , to wonder 
 why he have so many letter to write , and so many book to read . how 
 frighten we both be , when he discover we one day , and reprove 
 we severely ! how happy the moment afterwards , when we have beg he 
 to pardon we , and be send back to the library again with a great 
 picture - book to look at , as a token that we be both forgive ! then , 
 again , there be the high , old - fashioned , mahogany press before the 
 window , with the same large illustrate folio about jewish antiquity 
 lie on it , which , year and year ago , Clara and I be sometimes 
 allow to look at , as a special treat , on Sunday afternoon ; and which 
 we always examine and re - examine with never - end delight - stand 
 together on two chair to reach up to the thick , yellow - look leaf , 
 and turn they over with our own hand . and there , in the recess between 
 two bookcase , still stand the ancient desk - table , with its row of 
 little inlaid drawer ; and on the bracket above it the old french clock , 
 which have once belong to my mother , and which always chime the hour 
 so sweetly and merrily . it be at that table that Ralph and I always 
 bid my father farewell , when we be go back to school after the 
 holiday , and be receive our allowance of pocket - money , give to we 
 out of one of the tiny inlaid drawer , just before we start . near that 
 spot , too , Clara - then a little rosy child - use to wait gravely and 
 anxiously , with her doll in her arm , to say good - bye for the last time , 
 and to bid we come back soon , and then never go away again . I turn , 
 and look abruptly towards the window ; for such memory as the room 
 suggest be more than I could bear . 

 outside , in the dreary strip of garden , the few stunt , dusky tree 
 be now rustle as pleasantly in the air , as if the breeze that 
 stir they come serenely over an open meadow , or sweep freshly under 
 their branch from the ripple surface of a brook . distant , but yet 
 well within hearing , the mighty murmur from a large thoroughfare - the 
 great mid - day voice of London - swell grandly and joyously on the ear . 
 while , near still , in a street that run past the side of the house , 
 the note of an organ ring out shrill and fast ; the instrument be 
 play its lively waltz tune - a tune which I have dance to in 
 the ball - room over and over again . what mock memory within , what 
 mocking sound without , to herald and accompany such a confession as I 
 have now to make ! 

 Minute after minute glide on , inexorably fast ; and yet I never break 
 silence . my eye turn anxiously and slowly on my father . 

 he be still look away from I , still cut the leaf of the book 
 before he . even in that trifling action , the strong emotion which he 
 be try to conceal , be plainly and terribly betray . his hand , 
 usually so steady and careful , tremble perceptibly ; and the paper - knife 
 tear through the leaf fast and fast - cut they awry , rend 
 they one from another , so as to spoil the appearance of every page . 
 I believe he feel that I be look at he ; for he suddenly 
 discontinue his employment , turn round towards I , and speak - 

 " I have resolve to give you your own time , " he say , " and from that 
 resolve I have no wish to depart - I only ask you to remember that every 
 minute of delay add to the suffering and suspense which I be endure 
 on your account . " he open the book before he again , add in low 
 and colder tone , as he do so - " in your place , Ralph would have 
 speak before this . " 

 Ralph , and Ralph 's example quote to I again ! - I could remain silent no 
 long . 

 " my brother 's fault towards you , and towards his family , be not such 
 fault as mine , Sir , " I begin . " I have not imitate his vice ; I have 
 act as he would not have act . and yet , the result of my error will 
 appear far more humiliating , and even disgraceful , in your eye , than 
 the result of any error of Ralph 's . " 

 as I pronounce the word " disgraceful , " he suddenly look I full in 
 the face . his eye lighten up sternly , and the warning red spot rise 
 on his pale cheek . 

 " what do you mean by ' disgraceful ? ' " he ask abruptly ; " what do you 
 mean by associate such a word as disgrace with your conduct - with 
 the conduct of a son of mine ? " 

 " I must reply to your question indirectly , Sir , " I continue . " you ask 
 I last night who the Mr. Sherwin be who have call here so often - " 

 " and this morning I ask it again . I have other question to put to you , 
 besides - you call constantly on a woman 's name in your delirium . but I 
 will repeat last night 's question first - who be Mr. Sherwin ? " 

 " he live - " 

 " I do not   ask where he live . who be he ? what be he ? " 

 " Mr. Sherwin be a linen - draper - " 

 " you owe he money ? - you have borrow money of he ? why do you not 
 tell I this before ? you have degrade my house by let a man call at 
 the door - I know it ! - in the character of a dun . he have inquire about 
 you as his ' friend , ' - the servant tell I of it . this money - lending 
 tradesman , your ' friend ! ' if I have hear that the poor labourer 
 on my land call you ' friend , ' I should have hold you honour by the 
 attachment and gratitude of an honest man . when I hear that name give 
 to you by a tradesman and money - lender , I hold you contaminate by 
 connection with a cheat . you be right , Sir ! - this be disgrace ; how 
 much do you owe ? where be your dishonour acceptance ? where have you 
 use my name and my credit ? tell I at once - I insist on it ! " 

 he speak rapidly and contemptuously , and rise from his chair as he 
 end , walk impatiently up and down the room . 

 " I owe no money to Mr. Sherwin , Sir - no money to any one . " 

 he stop suddenly : 

 " no money to any one ? " he repeat very slowly , and in very altered 
 tone . " you speak of disgrace just now . there be a bad disgrace then 
 that you have hide from I , than debt dishonourably contract ? " 

 at this moment , a step pass across the hall . he instantly turn 
 round , and lock the door on that side of the room - then continue : 

 " speak ! and speak honestly if you can . how have you be deceive I ? 
 a woman 's name escape you constantly , when your delirium be at its 
 bad . you use some very strange expression about she , which it be 
 impossible altogether to comprehend ; but you say enough to show that 
 her character be one of the most abandon ; that her licentiousness - it 
 be too revolt to speak of she - I return to you . I insist on 
 know how far your vice have compromise you with that vicious 
 woman . " 

 " she have wrong I - cruelly , horribly , wrong I - " I could say no 
 more . my head droop on my breast ; my shame overpower I . 

 " who be she ? you call she Margaret , in your illness - who be she ? " 

 " she be Mr. Sherwin 's daughter - " the word that I would fain have 
 speak next , seem to suffocate I . I be silent again . 

 I hear he mutter to himself : 

  " that man 's daughter ! - a bad bait than the bait of money ! " 

 he bend forward , and look at I searchingly . a frightful paleness flew 
 over his face in an instant . 

 " Basil ! " he cry , " in God 's name , answer I at once ! what be Mr. 
 Sherwin 's daughter to you ? " 

 " she be my wife ! " 

 I hear no answer - not a word , not even a sigh . my eye be blind 
 with tear , my face be bent down ; I see nothing at first . when I raise 
 my head , and dash away the blind tear , and look up , the blood 
 chill at my heart . 

 my father be lean against one of the bookcase , with his hand 
 clasp over his breast . his head be draw back ; his white lip move , 
 but no sound come from they . over his upturned face there have pass 
 a ghastly change , as indescribable in its awfulness as the change of 
 death . 

 I run horror - stricken to his side , and attempt to take his hand . 
 he start instantly into an erect position , and thrust I from he 
 furiously , without utter a word . at that fearful moment , in that 
 fearful silence , the sound out of door penetrate with harrowing 
 distinctness and merriment into the room . the pleasant rustling of 
 the tree mingle musically with the soften , monotonous rolling of 
 carriage in the distant street , while the organ - tune , now change to 
 the lively measure of a song , ring out clear and cheerful above both , 
 and pour into the room as lightly and happily as the very sunshine 
 itself . 

 for a few minute we stand apart , and neither of we move or speak . I 
 see he take out his handkerchief , and pass it over his face , breathe 
 heavily and thickly , and lean against the bookcase once more . when he 
 withdraw the handkerchief and look at I again , I know that the sharp 
 pang of agony have pass away , that the last hard struggle between his 
 parental affection and his family pride be over , and that the great 
 gulph which be hence - forth to separate father and son , have now open 
 between we for ever . 

 he point peremptorily to I to go back to my former place , but do not 
 return to his own chair . as I obey , I see he unlock the door of the 
 bookcase against which he have be lean , and place his hand on one of 
 the book inside . without withdraw it from its place , without turn 
 or look towards I , he ask if I have anything more to say to he . 

 the chilling calmness of his tone , the question itself , and the time at 
 which he put it , the unnatural repression of a single word of rebuke , 
 of passion , or of sorrow , after such a confession as I have just make , 
 strike I speechless . he turn a little away from the bookcase - still 
 keep his hand on the book inside - and repeat the question . his 
 eye , when they meet mine , have a pining , weary look , as if they have be 
 long condemn to rest on woeful and revolting object ; his expression 
 have lose its natural refinement , its gentleness of repose , and have 
 assume a hard , lower calmness , under which his whole countenance 
 appear to have shrink and change - year of old age seem to have 
 fall on it , since I have speak the last fatal word ! 

 " have you anything more to say to I ? " 

 on the repetition of that terrible question , I sink down in the chair at 
 my side , and hide my face in my hand . unconscious how I speak , or why I 
 speak ; with no hope in myself , or in he ; with no motive but to invite 
 and bear the whole penalty of my disgrace , I now disclose the miserable 
 story of my marriage , and of all that follow it . I remember nothing of 
 the word I use - -nothing of what I urge in my own defence . the sense 
 of bewilderment and oppression grow heavy and heavy on my brain ; 
 I speak more and more rapidly , confusedly , unconsciously , until I be 
 again silence and recall to myself by the sound of my father 's voice . 
 I believe I have arrive at the last , bad part of my confession , when 
 he interrupt I . 

 " spare I any more detail , " he say , bitterly , " you have humiliate I 
 sufficiently - you have speak enough . " 

 he remove the book on which his hand have hitherto rest from the case 
 behind he , and advance with it to the table - pause for a moment , pale 
 and silent - then slowly open it at the first page , and resume his 
 chair . 

 I recognise the book instantly . it be a biographical history of his 
 family , from the time of his early ancestor down to the date of 
 the birth of his own child . the thick quarto page be beautifully 
 illuminate in the manner of the ancient manuscript ; and the narrative , 
 in write character , have be produce under his own inspection . this 
 book have cost he year of research and perseverance . the birth and 
 death , the marriage and possession , the battle achievement and 
 private feud of the old Norman baron from whom he trace his descent , 
 be all enrol in regular order on every leaf - head , sometimes 
 merely by representation of the Knight 's favourite weapon ; sometimes by 
 copy of the Baron 's effigy on his tombstone in a foreign land . as 
 the history advance to later date , beautiful miniature portrait be 
 inlay at the top of each leaf ; and the illumination be so manage as 
 to symbolize the remarkable merit or the peculiar taste of the subject 
 of each biography . thus , the page devote to my mother be surround 
 by her favourite violet , cluster thick round the last melancholy 
 line of writing which tell the story of her death . 

 slowly and in silence , my father turn over the leaf of the book 
 which , next to the Bible , I believe he most reverence in the world , 
 until he come to the last - write page but one - the page which I know , 
 from its position , to be occupy by my name . at the top , a miniature 
 portrait of I , when a child , be let into the leaf . under it , be the 
 record of my birth and name , of the School and College at which I have 
 be teach , and of the profession that I have adopt . below , a large 
 blank space be leave for the entry of future particular . on this page 
 my father now look , still not utter a word , still with the same 
 ghastly calmness on his face . the organ - note sound no more ; but 
 the tree rustle as pleasantly , and the roar of the distant carriage 
 swell as joyously as ever on the ear . some child have come out to 
 play in the garden of a neighbouring house . as their voice reach 
 we , so fresh , and clear , and happy - but another modulation of the 
 thanksgiving song to God which the tree be sing in the summer 
 air - I see my father , while he still look on the page before he , 
 clasp his trembling hand over my portrait so as to hide it from sight . 

 then he speak ; but without look up , and more as if he be speak 
 to himself than to I . his voice , at other time clear and gentle in its 
 tone , be now so hard and harsh in its forced calmness and deliberation 
 of utterance , that it sound like a stranger 's . 

 " I come here , this morning , " he begin , " prepare to hear of fault and 
 misfortune which should pain I to the heart ; which I might never , 
 perhaps , be able to forget , however willing and even predetermine 
 to forgive . but I do not come prepared to hear , that unutterable 
 disgrace have be cast on I and mine , by my own child . I have no word 
 of rebuke or of condemnation for this : the reproach and the punishment 
 have fall already where the guilt be - and not there only . my son 's 
 infamy defile his brother 's birthright , and put his father to shame . 
 even his sister 's name - " 

 he stop , shudder . when he proceed , his voice falter , and his 
 head droop low . 

 " I say it again : - you be below all reproach and all condemnation ; but I 
 have a duty to perform towards my two who be absent , and I have a last 
 word to say to you when that duty be do . on this page - "   as he 
 point to the family history , his tone strengthen again   - " on this 
 page there be a blank space leave , after the last entry , for write the 
 future event of your life . here , then , if I still acknowledge you to 
 be my son ; if I think your presence and the presence of my daughter 
 possible in the same house , must be write such a record of dishonour 
 and degradation as have never yet defile a single page of this 
 book - here , the foul stain of your marriage , and its consequence , must 
 be admit to spread over all that be pure before it , and to taint to 
 the last whatever come after . this shall not be . I have no faith or 
 hope in you more . I know you now , only as an enemy to I and to my 
 house - it be mockery and hypocrisy to call you son ; it be an insult to 
 Clara , and even to Ralph , to think of you as my child . in this record 
 your place be destroy - and destroy for ever . would to God I could 
 tear the past from my memory , as I tear the leaf from this book ! " 

 as he speak , the hour strike ; and the old french clock ring out gaily 
 the same little silvery chime which my mother have so often take I 
 into her room to listen to , in the bygone time . the shrill , lively peal 
 mingle awfully with the sharp , tear sound , as my father rent out 
 from the book before he the whole of the leaf which contain my name ; 
 tear it into fragment , and cast they on the floor . 

 he rise abruptly , after he have close the book again . his cheek flush 
 once more ; and when he next speak , his voice grow louder and louder 
 with every word he utter . it seem as if he still distrust his 
 resolution to abandon I ; and seek , in his anger , the strength of 
 purpose which , in his calm mood , he might even yet have be unable to 
 command . 

 " now , Sir , " he say , " we treat together as stranger . you be Mr. 
 Sherwin 's son - not mine . you be the husband of his daughter - not a 
 relation of my family . rise , as I do : we sit together no long in the 
 same room . write ! "   he push pen , ink , and paper before I , 
 " write your term there - I shall find mean to keep you to a write 
 engagement - the term of your absence , for life , from this country ; 
 and of her : the term of your silence , and of the silence of your 
 accomplice ; of all of they . write what you please ; I be ready to pay 
 dearly for your absence , your secrecy , and your abandonment of the name 
 you have degrade . my God ! that I should live to bargain for hush up 
 the dishonour of my family , and to bargain for it with you . " 

 I have listen to he hitherto without plead a word in my own behalf ; 
 but his last speech rouse I . some of his pride stir in my heart 
 against the bitterness of his contempt . I raise my head , and meet his 
 eye steadily for the first time - then , thrust the writing material away 
 from I , and leave my place at the table . 

 " stop ! " he cry . " do you pretend that you have not understand I ? " 

 " it be because I have understand you , Sir , that I go . I have deserve 
 your anger , and have submit without a murmur to all that it could 
 inflict . if you see in my conduct towards you no mitigation of my 
 offence ; if you can not view the shame and wrong inflict on I , with 
 such grief as may have some pity mix with it - I have , I think , the 
 right to ask that your contempt may be silent , and your last word to 
 I , not word of insult . " 

 " Insult ! after what have happen , be it for you to utter that word in 
 the tone in which you have just speak it ? I tell you again , I insist 
 on your write engagement as I would insist on the engagement of a 
 stranger - I will have it , before you leave this room ! " 

 " All , and more than all , which that degrading engagement could imply , I 
 will do . but I have not fall so low yet , as to be bribe to perform 
 a duty . you may be able to forget that you be my father ; I can never 
 forget that I be your son . " 

 " the remembrance will avail you nothing as long as I live . I tell you 
 again , I insist on your write engagement , though it be only to show 
 that I have cease to believe in your word . write at once - do you hear 
 I ? - write ! " 

 I neither move nor answer . his face change again , and grow livid ; 
 his finger tremble convulsively , and crumple the sheet of paper , as 
 he try to take it up from the table on which it lay . 

 " you refuse ? " he say quickly . 

 " I have already tell you , Sir - " 

 " go ! " he interrupt , point passionately to the door , " go out from 
 this house , never to return to it again - go , not as a stranger to I , 
 but as an enemy ! I have no faith in a single promise you have make : 
 there be no baseness which I do not believe you will yet be guilty of . 
 but I tell you , and the wretch with whom you be league , to take 
 warning : I have wealth , power , and position ; and there be no use to 
 which I will not put they against the man or woman who threaten the 
 fair fame of this family . leave I , remember that - and leave I for 
 ever ! " 

 just as he utter the last word , just as my hand be on the lock of 
 the door , a faint sound - something between breathing and speak - be 
 audible in the direction of the library . he start , and look round . 
 impel , I know not how , I pause on the point of go out . my eye 
 follow his , and fix on the cloth door which lead into the library . 

 it open a little - then shut again - then open wide . slowly and 
 noiselessly , Clara come into the room . 

 the silence and suddenness of her entrance at such a moment ; the look 
 of terror which change to unnatural vacancy the wonte softness and 
 gentleness of her eye , her pale face , her white dress , and slow , 
 noiseless step , make her first appearance in the room seem almost 
 supernatural ; it be as if an apparition have be walk towards we , 
 and not Clara herself ! as she approach my father , he pronounce she 
 name in astonishment ; but his voice sink to a whisper , while he speak 
 it . for an instant , she pause , hesitate - I see her tremble as her 
 eye meet his - then , as they turn towards I , the brave girl come on ; 
 and , take my hand , stand and face my father , stand by my side . 

 " Clara ! " he exclaim again , still in the same whispering tone . 

 I feel her cold hand close fast on mine ; the grasp of the chill , 
 frail finger be almost painful to I . her lip move , but her quick , 
 hysterical breathing make the few word she utter inarticulate . 

 " Clara ! " repeat my father , for the third time , his voice rise , but 
 sink again immediately - when he speak his next word , " Clara , " he 
 resume , sadly and gently , " let go his hand ; this be not a time for 
 your presence , I beg you to leave we . you must not take his hand ! he have 
 cease to be my son , or your brother . Clara , do you not hear I ? " 

 " yes , Sir , I hear you , " she answer . " God grant that my mother in 
 heaven may not hear you too ! " 

 he be approach while she reply ; but at her last word , he 
 stop instantly , and turn his face away from we . who shall say what 
 remembrance of other day shake he to the heart ? 

 " you have speak , Clara , as you should not have speak , " he go on , 
 without look up . " your mother - " his voice falter and fail he . 
 " can you still hold his hand after what I have say ? I tell you 
 again , he be unworthy to be in your presence ; my house be his home no 
 long - must I command you to leave he ? " 

 the deeply plant instinct of gentleness and obedience prevail ; she 
 drop my hand , but do not move away from I , even yet . 

 " now leave we , Clara , " he say . " you be wrong , my love , to be in that 
 room , and wrong to come in here . I will speak to you up - stair - you must 
 remain here no long . " 

 she clasp her tremble finger together , and sigh heavily . 

 " I can not go , Sir , " she say quickly and breathlessly . 

 " must I tell you for the first time in your life , that you be act 
 disobediently ? " he ask . 

 " I can not go , " she repeat in the same manner , " till you have say you 
 will let he atone for his offence , and will forgive he . " 

 " for his offence there be neither atonement nor forgiveness . Clara ! 
 be you so changed , that you can disobey I to my face ? " 

 he walk away from we as he say this . 

 " oh , no ! no ! " she run towards he ; but stop halfway , and look back 
 at I affrightedly , as I stand near the door . " Basil , " she cry , " you 
 have not do what you promise I ; you have not be patient . oh , Sir , 
 if I have ever deserve kindness from you , be kind to he for my sake ! 
 Basil ! speak , Basil ! ask his pardon on your knee . Father , I promise 
 he he should be forgive , if I ask you . not a word ; not a word from 
 either ? Basil ! you be not go yet - not go at all ! remember , Sir , 
 how good and kind he have always be to I . my poor mother ,   I must 
 speak of she , my poor mother 's favourite son - you have tell I so 
 yourself ! and he have always be my favourite brother ; I think because 
 my mother love he so ! his first fault , too ! his first grief ! and will 
 you tell he for this , that our home be his home no long ? punish 
  I , Sir ! I have do wrong like he ; when I hear your voice so loud , 
 I listen in the library . he be go ! no , no , no ! not yet ! " 

 she run to the door as I open it , and push it to again . overwhelmed 
 by the violence of her agitation , my father have sink into a chair while 
 she be speak . 

 " come back - come back with I to his knee ! " she whisper , fix her 
 wild , tearless eye on mine , fling her arm round my neck , and try 
 to lead I with she from the door . " come back , or you will drive I 
 mad ! " she repeat loudly , draw I away towards my father . 

 he rise instantly from his chair . 

 " Clara , " he say , " I command you , leave he ! " he advance a few step 
 towards I . " go ! " he cry ; " if you be human in your villany , you will 
 release I from this ! " 

 I whisper in her ear , " I will write , love - I will write , " and 
 disengage her arm from my neck - they be hang round it weakly , 
 already ! as I pass the door , I turn back , and look again into the 
 room for the last time . 

 Clara be in my father 's arm , her head lie on his shoulder , her face 
 be as still in its heavenly calmness as if the world and the world 's 
 look know it no more , and the only light that fall on it now , be light 
 from the angel 's eye . she have faint . 

 he be stand with one arm round she , his disengaged hand be 
 search impatiently over the wall behind he for the bell , and his 
 eye be fix in anguish and in love unutterable on the peaceful face , 
 hush in its sad repose so close beneath his own . for one moment , I see 
 he thus , ere I close the door - the next , I have leave the house . 

 I never enter it again - I have never see my father since . 

 IV . 

 we be seldom able to discover under any ordinary condition of 
 self - knowledge , how intimately that spiritual part of we , which be 
 undying , can attach to itself and its operation the poor object 
 of that external world around we , which be perishable . in the ravel 
 skein , the slight thread be the hard to follow . in analyse the 
 association and sympathy which regulate the play of our passion , the 
 simple and homely be the last that we detect . it be only when the 
 shock come , and the mind recoil before it - when joy be change into 
 sorrow , or sorrow into joy - that we really discern what trifle in the 
 outer world our noble mental pleasure , or our severe mental pain , 
 have make part of themselves ; atom which the whirlpool have draw into 
 its vortex , as greedily and as surely as the large mass . 

 it be reserve for I to know this , when - after a moment 's pause before 
 the door of my father 's house , more homeless , then , than the poor 
 wretch who pass I on the pavement , and have wife or kindre to shelter 
 he in a garret that night - my step turn , as of old , in the direction 
 of North Villa . 

 again I pass over the scene of my daily pilgrimage , always to the same 
 shrine , for a whole year ; and now , for the first time , I know that 
 there be hardly a spot along the entire way , which my heart have not 
 unconsciously make beautiful and beloved to I by some association with 
 Margaret Sherwin . here be the friendly , familiar shop - window , fill 
 with the glitter trinket which have so often lure I in to buy 
 present for she , on my way to the house . there be the noisy street 
 corner , void of all adornment in itself , but once bright to I with the 
 fairy - land architecture of a dream , because I know that at that place 
 I have pass over half the distance which separate my home from her . 
 far on , the Park tree come in sight - tree that no autumn decay or 
 winter nakedness could make dreary , in the bygone time ; for she and I 
 have walk under they together . and far yet , be the turning which 
 lead from the long , suburban road into Hollyoake Square - the lonely , 
 dust - whitened place , around which my past happiness and my wasted hope 
 have fling their golden illusion , like jewel hang round the coarse 
 wooden image of a roman saint . dishonoured and ruin , it be among 
 such association as these - too homely to have be recognise by I in 
 former time - that I journey along the well - remember way to North 
 Villa . 

 I go on without hesitate , without even a thought of turn back . I 
 have say that the honour of my family should not suffer by the calamity 
 which have fall on I ; and , while life remain , I be determined that 
 nothing should prevent I from hold to my word . it be from this 
 resolution that I draw the faith in myself , the confidence in my 
 endurance , the sustain calmness under my father 's sentence of 
 exclusion , which nerve I to go on . I must inevitably see Mr. Sherwin 
  perhaps even suffer the humiliation of see she !   - must inevitably 
 speak such word , disclose such truth , as should show he that deceit 
 be henceforth useless . I must do this and more , I must be prepare to 
 guard the family to which - though banish from it - I still belong , 
 from every conspiracy against they that detect crime or shameless 
 cupidity could form , whether in the desire of revenge , or in the hope of 
 gain .. a hard , almost an impossible task - but , nevertheless , a task that 
 must be do ! 

 I keep the thought of this necessity before my mind unceasingly ; not 
 only as a duty , but as a refuge from another thought , to which I dare 
 not for a moment turn . the still , pale face which I have see lie 
 hush on my father 's breast - CLARA ! - that way , lie the grief that 
 weaken , the yearning and the terror that be near despair ; that way be 
 not it for I . 

 the servant be at the garden - gate of North Villa - the same servant whom 
 I have see and question in the first day of my fatal delusion . she 
 be receive a letter from a man , very poorly dress , who walk away 
 the moment I approach . her confusion and surprise be so great as she 
 let I in , that she could hardly look at , or speak to I . it be only 
 when I be ascend the door - step that she say - 

 " Miss Margaret " -   she still give she that name !   - " Miss Margaret be 
 upstairs , Sir . I suppose you would like - " 

 " I have no wish to see she : I want to speak to Mr. Sherwin . " 

 look more bewildered , and even frighten , than before , the girl 
 hurriedly open one of the door in the passage . I see , as I enter , 
 that she have show I , in her confusion , into the wrong room . Mr. 
 Sherwin , who be in the apartment , hastily draw a screen across the 
 low end of it , apparently to hide something from I ; which , however , I 
 have not see as I come in . 

 he advance , hold out his hand ; but his restless eye wander 
 unsteadily , look away from I towards the screen . 

 " so you have come at last , have you ? just let us step into the 
 drawing - room : the fact be - I think I write to you about it - ? " 

 he stop suddenly , and his outstretched arm fall to his side . I have 
 not say a word . something in my look and manner must have tell he 
 already on what errand I have come . 

 " why do not   you speak ? " he say , after a moment 's pause . " what be you 
 look at I like that for ? stop ! let us say our say in the other room . " 
 he walk past I towards the door , and half open it . 

 why be he so anxious to get I away ? who , or what , be he hide behind 
 the screen ? the servant have say his daughter be upstairs ; remember 
 this , and suspect every action or word that come from he , I 
 determine to remain in the room , and discover his secret . it be 
 evidently connect with I . 

 " now then , " he continue , open the door a little wide , " it be only 
 across the hall , you know ; and I always receive visitor in the good 
 room . " 

 " I have be admit here , " I reply , " and have neither time nor 
 inclination to follow you from room to room , just as you like . what 
 I have to say be not much ; and , unless you give I fit reason to the 
 contrary , I shall say it here . " 

 " you will , will you ? let I tell you that be damned like what we plain 
 mercantile man call downright incivility . I say it again - incivility ; 
 and rudeness too , if you like it well . " he see I be determine , and 
 close the door as he speak , his face twitch and work violently , 
 and his quick , evil eye turn again in the direction of the screen . 

 " well , " he continue , with a sulky defiance of manner and look , " do as 
 you like ; stop here - you will wish you have not   before long , I will be bind ! 
 you do not   seem to hurry yourself much about speak , so I shall sit 
 down . you can do as you please . now then ! just let us cut it short - do 
 you come here in a friendly way , to ask I to send for my girl 
 downstair , and to show yourself the gentleman , or do you not ? " 

 " you have write I two letter , Mr. Sherwin - " 

 " yes : and take devilish good care you should get they - I leave they 
 myself . " 

 " in write those letter , you be either grossly deceive ; and , in 
 that case , be only to be pity , or - " 

 " pitied ! what the devil do you mean by that ? nobody want your pity 
 here . " 

 " or you have be try to deceive I ; and in that case , I have to 
 tell you that deceit be henceforth useless . I know all - more than you 
 suspect : more , I believe , than you would wish I to have know . " 

 " oh , that be your tack , be it ? by God , I expect as much the moment you 
 come in ! what ! you do not   believe my girl - do not   you ? you be go to 
 fight shy , and behave like a scamp - be you ? damn your infernal coolness 
 and your aristocratic air and grace ! you shall see I will be even with 
 you - you shall . ha ! ha ! look here ! - here be the marriage certificate safe 
 in my pocket . you will not   do the honourable by my poor child - will not   you ? 
 come out ! come away ! you would well - I be off to your father to blow the 
 whole business ; I be , as sure as my name 's Sherwin ! " 

 he strike his fist on the table , and start up , livid with passion . the 
 screen tremble a little , and a slight rustle noise be audible behind 
 it , just as he advance towards I . he stop instantly , with an oath , 
 and look back . 

 " I warn you to remain here , " I say . " this morning , my father have hear 
 all from my lip . he have renounce I as his son , and I have leave his 
 house for ever . " 

 he turn round quickly , star at I with a face of mingled fury and 
 dismay . 

 " then you come to I a beggar ! " he burst out ; " a beggar who have take 
 I in about his fine family , and his fine prospect ; a beggar who can not 
 support my child - yes ! I say it again , a beggar who look I in the 
 face , and talk as you do . I do not   care a damn about you or your father ! 
 I know my right ; I be an Englishman , thank God ! I know my right , and 
  my Margaret 's right ; and I will have they in spite of you both . yes ! 
 you may stare as angry as you like ; star do not   hurt . I be an honest 
 man , and my girl be an honest girl ! " 

 I be look at he , at that moment , with the contempt that I really 
 feel ; his rage produce no other sensation in I . all high and quick 
 emotion seem to have be dry at their source by the event of the 
 morning . 

 " I say my girl be an honest girl , " he repeat , sit down again ; 
 " and I dare you , or anybody - I do not   care who - to prove the contrary . 
 you tell I you know all , just now . what all ? come ! we will have this 
 out before we do anything else . she say she be innocent , and I say she be 
 innocent : and if I could find out that damnation scoundrel Mannion , and 
 get he here , I would make he say it too . now , after all that , what have 
 you get against she ? - against your lawful wife ; and I will make you own 
 she as such , and keep she as such , I can promise you ! " 

 " I be not here to ask question , or to answer they , " I reply - " my 
 errand in this house be simply to tell you , that the miserable 
 falsehood contain in your letter , will avail you as little as the 
 foul insolence of language by which you be now endeavour to support 
 they . I tell you before , and I now tell you again , I know all . I have 
 be inside that house , before I see your daughter at the door ; and have 
 hear , from her voice and his voice , what such shame and misery as 
 you can not comprehend forbid I to repeat . to your past duplicity , and 
 to your present violence , I have but one answer to give : - I will never 
 see your daughter again . " 

 " but you shall see she again - yes ! and keep she too ! do you think I 
 can not   see through you and your precious story ? your father 's cut you 
 off with a shilling ; and now you want to curry favour with he again 
 by trump up a case against my girl , and try to get she off your 
 hand that way . but it will not   do ! you have   marry she , my fine gentleman , 
 and you shall stick to she ! do you think I would not   soon believe she , 
 than believe you ? do you think I will stand this ? here she be up - stair , 
 half heart - break , on my hand ; here be my wife " -   his voice sink 
 suddenly as he say this   - " with her mind in such a state that I be keep 
 away from business , day after day , to look after she ; here be all this 
 crying and misery and mad going - on in my house , because you choose to 
 behave like a scamp - and do you think I will put up with it quietly ? I will 
 make you do your duty to my girl , if she go to the parish to appeal 
 against you ! your story indeed ! who will believe that a young female , 
 like Margaret , could have take to a fellow like Mannion ? and keep it 
 all a secret from you ? who believe that , I should like to know ? " 

  " I believe it ! " 

 the third voice which pronounce those word be Mrs. Sherwin 's . 

 but be the figure that now come out from behind the screen , the same 
 frail , shrink figure which have so often move my pity in the past 
 time ? the same wan figure of sickness and sorrow , ever watch in the 
 background of the fatal love - scene at North Villa ; ever look like 
 the same spectre - shadow , when the evening darken in as I sit by 
 Margaret 's side ? 

 have the grave give up its dead ? I stand awe - strike , neither speak 
 nor move while she walk towards I . she be clothe in the white 
 garment of the sick - room - they look on she like the raiment of the 
 tomb . her figure , which I only remember as droop with premature 
 infirmity , be now straighten convulsively to its proper height ; her 
 arm hang close at her side , like the arm of a corpse ; the natural 
 paleness of her face have turn to an earthy hue ; its natural 
 expression , so meek , so patient , so melancholy in uncomplaine sadness , 
 be go ; and , in its stead , be leave a pin stillness that never 
 change ; a weary repose of lifeless wake - the awful seal of Death 
 stamp ghastly on the live face ; the awful look of death star out 
 from the chill , shin eye . 

 her husband keep his place , and speak to she as she stop opposite to 
 I . his tone be alter , but his manner show as little feeling as 
 ever . 

 " there now ! " he begin , " you say you be sure he would come here , and that 
 you would never take to your bed , as the doctor want you , till you have see 
 he and speak to he . well , he have come ; there he be . he come in 
 while you be asleep , I rather think ; and I let he stop , so that if 
 you wake up and want to see he , you might . you can not   say - nobody can 
 say - I have not   give in to your whim and fancy after that . there ! 
 you have   have your way , and you have   say you believe he ; and now , if I ring 
 for the nurse , you will go upstairs at last , and make no more worry about 
 it - eh ? " 

 she move her head slowly , and look at he . as those die eye meet 
 his , as that face on which the light of life be darken fast , turn 
 on he , even his gross nature feel the shock . I see he shrink - his 
 sallow cheek whiten , he move his chair away , and say no more . 

 she look back to I again , and speak . her voice be still the same 
 soft , low voice as ever . it be fearful to hear how little it have 
 alter , and then to look on the change face . 

 " I be die , " she say to I . " many night have pass since that night 
 when Margaret come home by herself and I feel something move down into 
 my heart , when I look at she , which I know be death - many night , 
 since I have be use to say my prayer , and think I have say they 
 for the last time , before I dare shut my eye in the darkness and the 
 quiet . I have live on till to - day , very weary of my life ever since 
 that night when Margaret come in ; and yet , I could not die , because I 
 have an atonement to make to you , and you never come to hear it and 
 forgive I . I be not fit for God to take I till you come - I know that , 
 know it to be truth from a dream . " 

 she pause , still look at I , but with the same deathly blank of 
 expression . the eye have cease to speak already ; nothing but the voice 
 be leave . 

 " my husband have ask , who will believe you ? " she go on ; her weak 
 tone gathering strength with every fresh word she utter . " I have 
 answer that I will ; for you have speak the truth . now , when the 
 light of this world be fade from my eye ; here , in this earthly home 
 of much sorrow and suffering , which I must soon quit - in the presence of 
 my husband - under the same roof with my sinful child - I bear you witness 
 that you have speak the truth . I , her mother , say it of she : Margaret 
 Sherwin be guilty ; she be no more worthy to be call your wife . " 

 she pronounce the last word slowly , distinctly , solemnly . till that 
 fearful denunciation be speak , her husband have be look sullenly 
 and suspiciously towards we , as we stand together ; but while she utter 
 it , his eye fall , and he turn away his head in silence . 

 he never look up , never move , or interrupt she , as she continue , 
 still address I ; but now speak very slowly and painfully , pausing 
 long and long between every sentence . 

 " from this room I go to my death - bed . the last word I speak in this 
 world shall be to my husband , and shall change his heart towards you . I 
 have be weak of purpose , "   as she say this , a strange sweetness and 
 mournfulness begin to steal over her tone ,   " miserably , guiltily weak , 
 all my life . much sorrow and pain and heavy disappointment , when I be 
 young , do some great harm to I which I have never recover since . I 
 have live always in fear of other , and doubt of myself ; and this have 
 make I guilty of a great sin towards you . forgive I before I die ! I 
 suspect the guilt that be prepare - I forebode the shame that be 
 to come - they hide it from other ' eye ; but , from the first , they could 
 not hide it from mine - and yet I never warn you as I ought ! that man 
 have the power of Satan over I ! I always shudder before he , as I use 
 to shudder at the darkness when I be a little child ! my life have be 
 all fear - fear of he ; fear of my husband , and even of my daughter ; 
 fear , bad still , of my own thought , and of what I have discover that 
 should be tell to you . when I try to speak , you be too generous 
 to understand I - I be afraid to think my suspicion be right , long 
 after they should have be suspicion no long . it be misery ! - oh , 
 what misery from then till now ! " 

 her voice die away for a moment , in faint , breathless murmuring . she 
 struggle to recover it , and repeat in a whisper : 

 " forgive I before I die ! I have make a terrible atonement ; I have bear 
 witness against the innocence of my own child . my own child ! I dare 
 not bid God bless she , if they bring she to my bedside ! - forgive 
 I ! - forgive I before I die ! " 

 she take my hand , and press it to her cold lip . the tear gush into 
 my eye , as I try to speak to she . 

 " no tear for I ! " she murmur gently . " Basil ! - let I call you as 
 your mother would call you if she be alive - basil ! pray that I may be 
 forgive in the dreadful Eternity to which I go , as you have forgive 
 I ! and , for she ? - oh ! who will pray for she when I be go ? " 

 those word be the last I hear her pronounce . exhaust beyond the 
 power of speak more , though it be only in a whisper , she try to 
 take my hand again , and express by a gesture the irrevocable farewell . 
 but her strength fail she even for this - fail she with awful 
 suddenness . her hand move halfway towards mine ; then stop , and 
 tremble for a moment in the air ; then fall to her side , with the 
 finger distort and clench together . she reel where she stand , and 
 sink helplessly as I stretch out my arm to support she . 

 her husband rise fretfully from his chair , and take she from I . when 
 his eye meet mine , the look of sullen self - restraint in his countenance 
 be cross , in an instant , by an expression of triumphant 
 malignity . he whisper to I : " if you do not   change your tone by 
 to - morrow ! " - pause - and then , without finish the sentence , move 
 away abruptly , and support his wife to the door . 

 just when her face be turn towards where I stand , as he take she out , 
 I think I see the cold , vacant eye soften as they rest on I , and 
 change again tenderly to the old look of patience and sadness which I 
 remember so well . be my imagination mislead I ? or have the light 
 of that meek spirit shine out on earth , for the last time at parting , in 
 token of farewell to mine ? she be go to I , go for ever - before I 
 could look nearer , and know . 

          

 I be tell , afterwards , how she die . 

 for the rest of that day , and throughout the night , she lie speechless , 
 but still alive . the next morning , the faint pulse still flutter . as 
 the day wear on , the doctor apply fresh stimulant , and watch she 
 in astonishment ; for they have predict her death as impend every 
 moment , at least twelve hour before . when they speak of this to her 
 husband , his behaviour be notice as very altered and unaccountable by 
 every one . he sulkily refuse to believe that her life be in danger ; he 
 roughly accuse anybody who speak of her death , as want to fix on 
 he the imputation of have ill - use she , and so be the cause of her 
 illness ; and more than this , he angrily vindicate himself to every one 
 about she - even to the servant - by quote the indulgence he have show 
 to her fancy for see I when I call , and his patience while she 
 be   as he term it   wander in her mind in try to talk to I . the 
 doctor , suspect how his uneasy conscience be accuse he , forbore 
 in disgust all expostulation . except when he be in his daughter 's room , 
 he be shun by everybody in the house . 

 just before noon , on the second day , Mrs. Sherwin rally a little under 
 the stimulant administer to she , and ask to see her husband 
 alone . both her word and manner give the lie to his assertion that her 
 faculty be impair - it be observe by all her attendant , that 
 whenever she have strength to speak , her speech never wander in the 
 slight degree . her husband quit her room more fretfully uneasy , 
 more sullenly suspicious of the word and look of those about he than 
 ever - go instantly to seek his daughter - and send she in alone to her 
 mother 's bedside . in a few minute , she hurriedly come out again , pale , 
 and violently agitated ; and be hear to say , that she have be speak 
 to so unnaturally , and so shockingly , that she could not , and would not , 
 enter that room again until her mother be well . well ! the father 
 and daughter be both agree in that ; both agree that she be not 
 die , but only out of her mind . 

 during the afternoon , the doctor order that Mrs. Sherwin should 
 not be allow to see her husband or her child again , without their 
 permission . there be little need of take such a precaution to 
 preserve the tranquillity of her last moment . as the day begin to 
 decline , she sink again into insensibility : her life be just not death , 
 and that be all . she linger on in this quiet way , with her eye 
 peacefully close , and her breathe so gentle as to be quite inaudible , 
 until late in the evening . just as it grow quite dark , and the candle 
 be light in the sick room , the servant who be help to watch by she , 
 draw aside the curtain to look at her mistress ; and see that , though 
 her eye be still closed , she be smile . the girl turn round , 
 and beckon to the nurse to come to the bedside . when they lift the 
 curtain again to look at she , she be dead . 

          

 let I return to the day of my last visit to North Villa . More remain 
 to be record , before my narrative can advance to the morrow . 

 after the door have close , and I know that I have look my last on Mrs. 
 Sherwin in this world , I remain a few minute alone in the room , until 
 I have steady my mind sufficiently to go out again into the street . as 
 I walk down the garden - path to the gate , the servant whom I have see 
 on my entrance , run after I , and eagerly entreat that I would wait 
 one moment and speak to she . 

 when I stop and look at the girl , she burst into tear . " I be afraid 
 I have   be do wrong , Sir , " she sob out , " and at this dreadful time 
 too , when my poor mistress be die ! if you please , Sir , I must tell 
 you about it ! " 

 I give she a little time to compose herself ; and then ask what she have 
 to say . 

 " I think you must have see a man leave a letter with I , Sir , " she 
 continue , " just when you come up to the door , a little while ago ? " 

 " yes : I see he . " 

 " it be for Miss Margaret , Sir , that letter ; and I be to keep it 
 secret ; and - and - it be not   the first I have   take in for she . it be week 
 and week ago , Sir , that the same man come with a letter , and give I 
 money to let nobody see it but Miss Margaret - and that time , Sir , he 
 wait ; and she send I with an answer to give he , in the same secret 
 way . and now , here be this second letter ; I do not   know who it come 
 from - but I have not   take it to she yet ; I wait to show it to you , 
 Sir , as you come out , because - " 

 " why , Susan ? - tell I candidly why ? " 

 " I hope you will not   take it amiss , Sir , if I say that have live in the 
 family so long as I have , I can not   help know a little about what 
 you and Miss Margaret use to be to each other , and that something be 
 happen wrong between you lately ; and so , Sir , it seem to be very 
 bad and dishonest in I   after first help you to come together , as I 
 do , to be give her strange letter , unknown to you . they may be bad 
 letter . I be sure I would not   wish to say anything disrespectful , or that 
 do not   become my place ; but - " 

 " go on , Susan - speak as freely and as truly to I as ever . " 

 " well , Sir , Miss Margaret 's be very much alter , ever since that 
 night when she come home alone , and frighten we so . she shut herself 
 up in her room , and will not   speak to anybody except my master ; she do not 
 seem to care about anything that happen ; and sometimes she look so at 
 I , when I be wait on she , that I be almost afraid to be in the same 
 room with she . I have   never hear she mention your name once , Sir ; and I be 
 fearful there be something on her mind that there ought not   to be . he be 
 a very shabby man that leave the letter - would you please to look at 
 this , and say whether you think it be right in I to take it up - stair . " 

 she hold out a letter . I hesitate before I look at it . 

 " oh , Sir ! please , please do take it ! " say the girl earnestly . " I do 
 wrong , I be afraid , in give she the first ; but I can not   do wrong again , 
 when my poor mistress be die in the house . I can not   keep secret , Sir , 
 that may be bad secret , at such a dreadful time as this ; I could not 
 have lay down in my bed to - night , when there be likely to be death in 
 the house , if I have not   confess what I have   do ; and my poor mistress 
 have always be so kind and good to us servant - well than ever we 
 deserve . " 

 weep bitterly as she say this , the kind - hearted girl hold out the 
 letter to I once more . this time I take it from she , and look at the 
 address . 

 though I do not know the handwriting , still there be something in 
 those unsteady character which seem familiar to I . be it possible 
 that I have ever see they before ? I try to consider ; but my memory 
 be confuse , my mind weary out , after all that have happen since the 
 morning . the effort be fruitless : I give back the letter . 

 " I know as little about it , Susan , as you do . " 

 " but ought I to take it up - stair , Sir ? only tell I that ! " 

 " it be not for I to say . all interest or share on my part , Susan , in 
 what she - in what your young mistress receive , be at an end . " 

 " I be very sorry to hear you say that , Sir ; very , very sorry . but what 
 would you advise I to do ? " 

 " let I look at the letter once more . " 

 on a second view , the handwriting produce the same effect on I as 
 before , end too with just the same result . I return the letter 
 again . 

 " I respect your scruple , Susan , but I be not the person to remove or 
 to justify they . why should you not apply in this difficulty to your 
 master ? " 

 " I dare not , Sir ; I dare not for my life . he be be bad than ever , 
 lately ; if I say as much to he as I have   say to you , I believe he would 
 kill I ! " she hesitate , then continue more composedly ; " well , at any 
 rate I have   tell you , Sir , and that be make my mind easy ; and - and I will 
 give she the letter this once , and then take in no more - if they come , 
 unless I hear a proper account of they . " 

 she curtsey ; and , bid I farewell very sadly and anxiously , 
 return to the house with the letter in her hand . if I have guess at 
 that moment who it be write by ! if I could only have suspect what 
 be its content ! 

 I leave Hollyoake Square in a direction which lead to some field a little 
 distance on . it be very strange ; but that unknown handwriting still 
 occupy my thought : that wretched trifle absolutely take possession of 
 my mind , at such a time as this ; in such a position as mine be now . 

 I stop wearily in the field at a lonely spot , away from the 
 footpath . my eye ache at the sunlight , and I shade they with my hand . 
 exactly at the same instant , the lose recollection flash back on I so 
 vividly that I start almost in terror . the handwriting show I by the 
 servant at North Villa , be the same as the handwriting on that unopened 
 and forget letter in my pocket , which I have receive from the servant 
 at home - receive in the morning , as I cross the hall to enter my 
 father 's room . 

 I take out the letter , open it with tremble finger , and look 
 through the cramp , closely - write page for the signature . 

 it be " ROBERT MANNION . " 

 V. 

 Mannion ! I have never suspect that the note show to I at North Villa 
 might have come from he . and yet , the secrecy with which it have be 
 deliver ; the person to whom it be address ; the mystery connect 
 with it even in the servant 's eye , all point to the discovery which 
 I have so incomprehensibly fail to make . I have suffer a letter , which 
 might contain write proof of her guilt , to be take , from under my own 
 eye , to Margaret Sherwin ! how have my perception become thus strangely 
 blind ? the confusion of my memory , the listless incapacity of all my 
 faculty , answer the question but too readily , of themselves . 

 " Robert Mannion ! " I could not take my eye from that name : I still hold 
 before I the crowd , closely - write line of his writing , and delay 
 to read they . something of the horror which the presence of the man 
 himself would have inspire in I , be produce by the mere sight of his 
 letter , and that letter address to I . the vengeance which my 
 own hand have wreak on he , he be , of all man the sure to repay . 
 perhaps , in these line , the dark future through which his way and mine 
 might lie , would be already shadow forth . Margaret too ! could he write 
 so much , and not write of she ? not disclose the mystery in which the 
 motif of her crime be still hide ? I turn back again to the 
 first page , and resolve to read the letter . it begin abruptly , in the 
 follow term : - 



  " St. Helen 's Hospital . 

 " you may look at the signature when you receive this , and may be tempt 
 to tear up my letter , and throw it from you unread . I warn you to read 
 what I have write , and to estimate , if you can , its importance to 
 yourself . destroy these page afterwards if you like - they will have 
 serve their purpose . 

 " do you know where I be , and what I suffer ? I be one of the patient 
 of this hospital , hideously mutilate for life by your hand . if I could 
 have know certainly the day of my dismissal , I should have wait to 
 tell you with my own lip what I now write - but I be ignorant of this . 
 at the very point of recovery I have suffer a relapse . 

 " you will silence any uneasy upbraiding of conscience , should you feel 
 they , by say that I have deserve death at your hand . I will tell 
 you , in answer , what you deserve and shall receive at mine . 

 " but I will first assume that it be knowledge of your wife 's guilt 
 which prompt your attack on I . I be well aware that she have declare 
 herself innocent , and that her father support her declaration . by the 
 time you receive this letter   my injury oblige I to allow myself 
 a whole fortnight to write it in , I shall have take measure which 
 render further concealment unnecessary . therefore , if my confession 
 avail you aught , you have it here : - she be guilty : willingly guilty , 
 remember , whatever she may say to the contrary . you may believe this , 
 and believe all I write hereafter . deception between we two be at an 
 end . 

 " I have tell you Margaret Sherwin be guilty . why be she guilty ? what 
 be the secret of my influence over she ? 

 " to make you comprehend what I have now to communicate , it be necessary 
 for I to speak of myself ; and of my early life . to - morrow , I will 
 undertake this disclosure - to - day , I can neither hold the pen , nor see 
 the paper any long . if you could look at my face , where I be now lay , 
 you would know why ! " 

      

 " when we meet for the first time at North Villa , I have not be five 
 minute in your presence before I detect your curiosity to know 
 something about I , and perceive that you doubt , from the first , 
 whether I be bear and breed for such a situation as I hold under Mr. 
 Sherwin . failing - as I know you would fail - to gain any information 
 about I from my employer or his family , you try , at various time , 
 to draw I into familiarity , to get I to talk unreservedly to you ; and 
 only give up the attempt to penetrate my secret , whatever it might 
 be , when we part after our interview at my house on the night of the 
 storm . on that night , I determine to baulk your curiosity , and yet to 
 gain your confidence ; and I succeed . you little think , when you 
 bid I farewell at my own door , that you have give your hand and your 
 friendship to a man , who - long before you meet with Margaret Sherwin - have 
 inherit the right to be the enemy of your father , and of every 
 descendant of your father 's house . 

 " do this declaration surprise you ? read on , and you will understand 
 it . 

 " I be the son of a gentleman . my father 's mean be miserably limited , 
 and his family be not an old family , like your . nevertheless , he be a 
 gentleman in anybody 's sense of the word ; he know it , and that knowledge 
 be his ruin . he be a weak , kind , careless man ; a worshipper of 
 conventionality ; and a great respecter of the wide gap which lay 
 between social station in his time . thus , he determine to live like 
 a gentleman , by follow a gentleman 's pursuit - a profession , as 
 distinguish from a trade . fail in this , he fail to follow out his 
 principle , and starve like a gentleman . he die the death of a felon ; 
 leave I no inheritance but the name of a felon 's son . 

 " while still a young man , he contrive to be introduce to a gentleman 
 of great family , great position , and great wealth . he interest , or 
 fancy he interested , this gentleman ; and always look on he as the 
 patron who be to make his fortune , by get he the first government 
 sinecure   they be plenty enough in those day !   which might fall 
 vacant . in firm and foolish expectation of this , he live far beyond his 
 little professional income - live among rich people without the courage 
 to make use of they as a poor man . it be the old story : debt and 
 liability of all kind press heavy on he - creditor refuse to 
 wait - exposure and utter ruin threaten he - and the prospect of the 
 sinecure be still as far off as ever . 

 " nevertheless he believe in the advent of this office ; and all the more 
 resolutely now , because he look to it as his salvation . he be quite 
 confident of the interest of his patron , and of its speedy exertion 
 in his behalf . perhaps , that gentleman have overrate his own 
 political influence ; perhaps , my father have be too sanguine , and have 
 misinterpret polite general promise into special engagement . however 
 it be , the bailiff come into his house one morning , while help from 
 a government situation , or any situation , be as unattainable as 
 ever - come to take he to prison : to seize everything , in execution , 
 even to the very bed on which my mother   then seriously ill   be lie . 
 the whole fabric of false prosperity which he have be build up 
 to make the world respect he , be menace with instant and shameful 
 overthrow . he have not the courage to let it go ; so he take refuge from 
 misfortune in a crime . 

 " he forge a bond , to prop up his credit for a little time long . 
 the name he make use of be the name of his patron . in do this , he 
 believe - as all man who commit crime believe - that he have the good 
 possible chance of escape consequence . in the first place , he might 
 get the long - expect situation in time to repay the amount of the bond 
 before detection . in the second place , he have almost the certainty of a 
 legacy from a rich relative , old and in ill - health , whose death might 
 be fairly expect from day to day . if both these prospect fail   and 
 they do fail , there be still a third chance - the chance that his 
 rich patron would rather pay the money than appear against he . in those 
 day they hang for forgery . my father believe it to be impossible that 
 a man at whose table he have sit , whose relative and friend he have 
 amuse and instruct by his talent , would be the man to give evidence 
 which should condemn he to be hang on the public scaffold . 

 " he be wrong . the wealthy patron hold strict principle of honour 
 which make no allowance for temptation and weakness ; and be moreover 
 influence by high - fly notion of his responsibility as a legislator 
  he be a member of Parliament   to the law of his country . he appear 
 accordingly , and give evidence against the prisoner ; who be find 
 guilty , and leave for execution . 

 " then , when it be too late , this man of pitiless honour think himself 
 at last justify in lean to the side of mercy , and employ his 
 utmost interest , in every direction , to obtain a mitigation of the 
 sentence to transportation for life . the application fail ; even a 
 reprieve of a few day be deny . at the appoint time , my father die 
 on the scaffold by the hangman 's hand . 

 " have you suspect , while read this part of my letter , who the 
 high - bear gentleman be whose evidence hang he ? if you have not , I 
 will tell you . that gentleman be your father . you will now wonder 
 no long how I could have inherit the right to be his enemy , and the 
 enemy of all who be of his blood . 

 " the shock of her husband 's horrible death deprive my mother of reason . 
 she live a few month after his execution ; but never recover her 
 faculty . I be their only child ; and be leave penniless to begin life 
 as the son of a father who have be hang , and of a mother who have die 
 in a public madhouse . 

 " More of myself to - morrow - my letter will be a long one : I must pause 
 often over it , as I pause to - day . " 

      

 " well : I start in life with the hangman 's mark on I - with the 
 parent 's shame for the son 's reputation . wherever I go , whatever 
 friend I keep , whatever acquaintance I make - people know how my father 
 have die : and show that they know it . not so much by shun or 
 star at I   vile as human nature be , there be not many who do 
 that , as by insult I with over - act sympathy , and elaborate 
 anxiety to sham entire ignorance of my father 's fate . the gallows - brand 
 be on my forehead ; but they be too benevolently blind to see it . the 
 gallow - infamy be my inheritance ; but they be too resolutely generous 
 to discover it ! this be hard to bear . however , I be strong - hearted 
 even then , when my sensation be quick , and my sympathy young : so I 
 bear it . 

 " my only weakness be my father 's weakness - the notion that I be bear 
 to a station ready make for I , and that the great use of my life be to 
 live up to it . my station ! I battle for that with the world for year 
 and year , before I discover that the high of all station be the 
 station a man make for himself : and the low , the station that be 
 make for he by other . 

 " at start in life , your father write to make I offer of 
 assistance - assistance , after he have ruin I ! assistance to the child , 
 from hand which have tie the rope round the parent 's neck ! I send he 
 back his letter . he know that I be his enemy , his son 's enemy , and his 
 son 's son 's enemy , as long as I live . I never hear from he again . 

 " trust boldly to myself to carve out my own way , and to live down my 
 undeserved ignominy ; resolve in the pride of my integrity to combat 
 openly and fairly with misfortune , I shrank , at first , from disown my 
 parentage and abandon my father 's name . stand on my own character , 
 confide in my intellect and my perseverance , I try pursuit after 
 pursuit , and be beat afresh at every new effort . whichever way I 
 turn , the gallow still rise as the same immovable obstacle between I 
 and fortune , between I and station , between I and my fellowman . I 
 be morbidly sensitive on this point . the slight reference to my 
 father 's fate , however remote or accidental , curdle my blood . I see 
 open insult , or humiliating compassion , or force forbearance , in the 
 look and manner of every man about I . so I break off with old friend , 
 and try new ; and , in seek fresh pursuit , seek fresh connection , 
 where my father 's infamy might be unknown . wherever I go , the old 
 stain always break out afresh , just at the moment when I have deceive 
 myself into the belief that it be utterly effaced . I have a warm heart 
 then - it be some time before it turn to stone , and feel nothing . 
 those be the day when failure and humiliation could still draw tear 
 from I : that epoch in my life be mark in my memory as the epoch when 
 I could weep . 

 " at last , I give way before difficulty , and concede the first step to 
 the calamity which have stand front to front with I so long . I leave the 
 neighbourhood where I be know , and assume the name of a schoolfellow 
 who have die . for some time this succeed ; but the curse of my 
 father 's death follow I , though I see it not . after various 
 employment - still , mind , the employment of a gentleman ! - have first 
 support , then fail I , I become an usher at a school . it be there 
 that my false name be detect , and my identity discover again - I 
 never know through whom . the exposure be effect by some enemy , 
 anonymously . for several day , I think everybody in the school treat 
 I in an altered way . the cause come out , first in whisper , then in 
 reckless jest , while I be take care of the boy in the playground . 
 in the fury of the moment I strike one of the most insolent , and the 
 eld of they , and hurt he rather seriously . the parent hear of it , 
 and threaten I with prosecution ; the whole neighbourhood be arouse . 
 I have to leave my situation secretly , by night , or the mob would have 
 pelt the felon 's son out of the parish . 

 " I go back to London , bear another assume name ; and try , as a 
 last resource to save I from starvation , the resource of writing . I 
 serve my apprenticeship to literature as a hack - author of the low 
 degree . know I have talent which might be turn to account , I try 
 to vindicate they by write an original work . but my experience of the 
 world have make I unfit to dress my thought in popular costume : I could 
 only tell bitter truth bitterly ; I expose licenced hypocrisy too 
 openly ; I see the vicious side of many respectability , and say I see 
 it - in short , I call thing by their right name ; and no publisher 
 would treat with I . so I stick to my low task - work ; my penny - a lining 
 in third - class newspaper ; my translating from Frenchmen and Germans , 
 and plagiarise from dead author , to supply the raw material for 
 bookmongere by more accomplished bookmonger than i. in this life , 
 there be one advantage which compensate for much misery and meanness , 
 and bitter , bite disappointment : I could keep my identity securely 
 conceal . Character be of no consequence to I ; nobody care to know 
 who I be , or to inquire what I have be - the gallow - mark be smooth 
 out at last ! 

 " while I be live thus on the offal of literature , I meet with a woman 
 of good birth , and fair fortune , whose sympathy or whose curiosity 
 I happen to interest . she and her father and mother receive I 
 favourably , as a gentleman who have know well day , and an author 
 whom the public have undeservedly neglect . how I manage to gain their 
 confidence and esteem , without allude to my parentage , it be not worth 
 while to stop to describe . that I do so you will easily imagine , when 
 I tell you that the woman to whom I refer , consent , with her father 's 
 full approval , to become my wife . 

 " the very day of the marriage be fix . I believe I have successfully 
 parry all perilous inquiry - but I be wrong . a relation of the 
 family , whom I have never see , come to town a short time before the 
 wedding . we dislike each other on our first introduction . he be a 
 clever , resolute man of the world , and privately inquire about I to 
 much well purpose in a few day , than his family have do in 
 several month . accident favour he strangely , everything be 
 discover - literally everything - and I be contemptuously dismiss the 
 house . could a lady of respectability marry a man   no matter how worthy 
 in her eye   whose father have be hang , whose mother have die in a 
 madhouse , who have live under assume name , who have be drive from an 
 excellent country neighbourhood , for cruelty to a harmless school - boy ? 
 impossible ! 

 " with this event , my long strife and struggle with the world end . 

 " my eye open to a new view of life , and the purpose of life . my first 
 aspiration to live up to my birth - right position , in spite of adversity 
 and dishonour , to make my name sweet enough in man 's nostril , to 
 cleanse away the infamy on my father 's , be now no more . the ambition 
 which - whether I be a hack - author , a travel portrait - painter , or 
 an usher at a school - have once whisper to I : low down as you be in 
 dark , miry way , you be on the path which lead upward to high place 
 in the sunshine afar - off ; you be not work to scrape together wealth 
 for another man ; you be independent , self - reliant , labour in your 
 own cause - the daring ambition which have once counsel thus , sink 
 dead within I at last . the strong , stern spirit be beat by spirit 
 strong and sterner yet - Infamy and Want . 

 " I write to a man of character and wealth ; one of my friend of early 
 day , who have cease to hold communication with I , like other friend , 
 but , unlike they , have give I up in genuine sorrow : I write , and ask 
 he to meet I privately by night . I be too ragged to go to his house , 
 too sensitive still   even if I have go and have be admit   to risk 
 encounter people there , who either know my father , or know how he 
 have die . I wish to speak to my former friend , unseen , and make the 
 appointment accordingly . he keep it . 

 " when we meet , I say to he : - I have a last favour to ask of you . when 
 we part year ago , I have high hope and brave resolution - both be 
 wear out . I then believe that I could not only rise superior to my 
 misfortune , but could make that very misfortune the motive of my rise . 
 you tell I I be too quick of temper , too morbidly sensitive about 
 the slight reference to my father 's death , too fierce and changeable 
 under undeserved trial and disappointment . this might have be true 
 then ; but I be alter now : pride and ambition have be persecute and 
 starve out of I . an obscure , monotonous life , in which thought and 
 spirit may be lay asleep , never to wake again , be the only life I care 
 for . help I to lead it . I ask you , first , as a beggar , to give I from 
 your superfluity , apparel decent enough to bear the daylight . I ask you 
 next , to help I to some occupation which will just give I my bread , my 
 shelter , and my hour or two of solitude in the evening . you have plenty 
 of influence to do this , and you know I be honest . you can not choose I 
 too humble and obscure an employment ; let I descend low enough to be 
 lose to sight beneath the world I have live in ; let I go among people 
 who want to know that I work honestly for they , and want to know nothing 
 more . get I a mean hiding - place to conceal myself and my history in for 
 ever , and then neither attempt to see I nor communicate with I again . 
 if former friend chance to ask after I , tell they I be dead , or go 
 into another country . the wise life be the life the animal lead : I 
 want , like they , to serve my master for food , shelter , and liberty to 
 lie asleep now and then in the sunshine , without be drive away as a 
 pest or a trespasser . do you believe in this resolution ? - it be my last . 

 " he do believe in it ; and he grant what I ask . through his 
 interference and recommendation , I enter the service of Mr. Sherwin . - 

 " I must stop here for to - day . to - morrow I shall come to disclosure of 
 vital interest to you . have you be surprised that I , your enemy by 
 every cause of enmity that one man can have against another , should 
 write to you so fully about the secret of my early life ? I have do 
 so , because I wish the strife between we to be an open strife on my 
 side ; because I desire that you should know thoroughly what you have 
 to expect from my character , after such a life as I have lead . there 
 be purpose in my deceit , when I deceive you - there be purpose in my 
 frankness , when I now tell you all . " 

      

 " I begin in Mr. Sherwin 's employment , as the low clerk in his office . 
 both the master and the man look a little suspiciously on I , at 
 first . my account of myself be always the same - simple and credible ; 
 I have enter the counting - house with the good possible recommendation , 
 and I act up to it . these circumstance in my favour , join to a 
 manner that never vary , and to a steadiness at my work that never 
 relax , soon produce their effect - all curiosity about I gradually 
 die away : I be leave to pursue my avocation in peace . the friend who 
 have get I my situation , preserve my secret as I have desire he ; of 
 all the people whom I have formerly know , pitiless enemy and lukewarm 
 adherent , not one ever suspect that my hiding - place be the back 
 office of a linen - draper 's shop . for the first time in my life , I feel 
 that the secret of my father 's misfortune be mine , and mine only ; that 
 my security from exposure be at length complete . 

 " before long , I rise to the chief place in the counting - house . it be no 
 very difficult matter for I to discover , that my new master 's character 
 have other element besides that of the high respectability . in plain 
 term , I find he to be a pretty equal compound by nature , of the fool , 
 the tyrant , and the coward . there be only one direction in which what 
 grovel sympathy he have , could be touch to some purpose . save 
 he waste , or get he profit ; and he be really grateful . I succeed 
 in work both these marvel . his manage man cheat he ; I find 
 it out ; refuse to be bribe to collusion ; and expose the fraud to Mr. 
 Sherwin . this get I his confidence , and the place of chief clerk . in 
 that position , I discover a mean , which have never occur to my 
 employer , of greatly enlarge his business and its profit , with the 
 least possible risk . he try my plan , and it succeed . this gain I 
 his warm admiration , an increase of salary , and a firm foot in his 
 family circle . my project be more than fulfil : I have money enough , 
 and leisure enough ; and spend my obscure existence exactly as I have 
 propose . 

 " but my life be still not destine to be altogether devoid of an 
 animating purpose . when I first know Margaret Sherwin , she be just 
 change from childhood to girlhood . I mark the promise of future 
 beauty in her face and figure ; and secretly form the resolution which 
 you afterwards come forward to thwart , but which I have execute , and 
 will execute , in spite of you . 

 " the thought out of which that resolution sprang , counsel I more 
 calmly than you can suppose . I say within myself : ' the good year of my 
 life have be irrevocably waste ; misery and humiliation and disaster 
 have follow my step from my youth ; of all the pleasant draught which 
 other man drink to sweeten existence , not one have pass my lip . I will 
 know happiness before I die ; and this girl shall confer it . she shall 
 grow up to maturity for I : I will imperceptibly gain such a hold on 
 her affection , while they be yet young and impressible , that , when the 
 time come , and I speak the word - though my year more than double her , 
 though I be dependent on her father for the bread I eat , though parent ' 
 voice and lover 's voice unite to call she back - she shall still come to 
 my side , and of her own free will put her hand in mine , and follow I 
 wherever I go ; my wife , my mistress , my servant , which I choose . 

 " this be my project . to execute it , time and opportunity be mine ; and 
 I steadily and warily make use of they , hour by hour , day by day , year 
 by year . from first to last , the girl 's father never suspect I . 
 besides the security which he feel in my age , he have judge I by his 
 own small commercial standard , and have find I a model of integrity . 
 a man who have save he from be cheat , who have so enlarge and 
 consolidate his business as to place he among the top dignitary of 
 the trade ; who be the first to come to the desk in the morning , and the 
 last to remain there in the evening ; who have not only never demand , 
 but have absolutely refuse to take , a single holiday - such a man as 
 this be , morally and intellectually , a man in ten thousand ; a man to be 
 admire and trust in every relation of life ! 

 " his confidence in I know no bound . he be uneasy if I be not by to 
 advise he in the simple matter . my ear be the first to which he 
 confide his insane ambition on the subject of his daughter - his anxiety 
 to see she marry above her station - his stupid resolution to give 
 she the false , flippant , fashionable education which she subsequently 
 receive . I thwart his plan in nothing , openly - counteract they in 
 everything , secretly . the more I strengthen my source of influence 
 over Margaret , the more pleased he be . he be delighted to hear she 
 constantly refer to I about her home - lesson ; to see she come to 
 I , evening after evening , to learn new occupation and amusement . he 
 suspect I have be a gentleman ; he have be tell I speak pure English ; 
 he feel sure I have receive a first - rate education - I be nearly as good 
 for Margaret as good society itself ! when she grow old , and go to 
 the fashionable school , as her father have declare she should , my offer 
 to keep up her lesson in the holiday , and to examine what progress she 
 have make , when she come home regularly every fortnight for the Sunday , 
 be accept with greedy readiness , and acknowledge with servile 
 gratitude . at this time , Mr. Sherwin 's own estimate of I , among his 
 friend , be , that he have get I for half nothing , and that I be worth 
 more to he than a thousand a - year . 

 " but there be one member of the family who suspect my intention from 
 the first . Mrs. Sherwin - the weak , timid , sickly woman , whose opinion 
 nobody regard , whose character nobody understand - Mrs. Sherwin , of 
 all those who dwelt in the house , or come to the house , be the only one 
 whose look , word , and manner keep I constantly on my guard . the very 
 first time we see each other , that woman doubt I , as I doubt 
  she ; and for ever afterwards , when we meet , she be on the watch . 
 this mutual distrust , this antagonism of our two nature , never openly 
 proclaim itself , and never wear away . my chance of security lay , not 
 so much in my own caution , and my perfect command of look and action 
 under all emergency , as in the self - distrust and timidity of her 
 nature ; in the helpless inferiority of position to which her husband 's 
 want of affection , and her daughter 's want of respect , condemn she 
 in her own house ; and in the influence of repulsion - at time , even of 
 absolute terror - which my presence have the power of communicate to 
 she . suspect what I be assure she suspect - incapable as she be 
 of render her suspicion certainty - know beforehand , as she 
 must have know , that no word she could speak would gain the small 
 respect or credit from her husband or her child - that woman 's life , 
 while I be at North Villa , must have be a life of the dire mental 
 suffering to which any human being be ever condemn . 

 " as time pass , and Margaret grow old , her beauty both of face and 
 form approach nearer to perfection than I have foresee , closely as I 
 watch she . but neither her mind nor her disposition keep pace with 
 her beauty . I study she closely , with the same patient , penetrate 
 observation , which my experience of the world have make it a habit with 
 I to direct on every one with whom I be bring in contact - I study 
 she , I say , intently ; and find she worthy of nothing , not even of the 
 slave - destiny which I have in store for she . 

 " she have neither heart nor mind , in the high sense of those word . she 
 have simply instinct - most of the bad instinct of an animal ; none of 
 the good . the great motive power which really direct she , be 
 Deceit . I never meet with any human be so inherently disingenuous , 
 so naturally incapable of candour even in the most trifling affair of 
 life , as she be . the good training could never have wholly overcome 
 this vice in she : the education she actually get - an education under 
 false pretence - encourage it . everybody have read , some people 
 have know , of young girl who have commit the most extraordinary 
 imposture , or sustain the most infamous false accusation ; their 
 chief motive be often the sheer enjoyment of practise deceit . of 
 such character be the character of Margaret Sherwin . 

 " she have strong passion , but not their frequent accompaniment - strong 
 will , and strong intellect . she have some obstinacy , but no firmness . 
 appeal in the right way to her vanity , and you could make she do the 
 thing she have declare she would not do , the minute after she have 
 make the declaration . as for her mind , it be of the low schoolgirl 
 average . she have a certain knack at learn this thing , and remember 
 that ; but she understand nothing fairly , feel nothing deeply . if I have 
 not have my own motive in teach she , I should have shut the book 
 again , the first time she and I open they together , and have give she 
 up as a fool . 

 " all , however , that I discover of bad in her character , never make 
 I pause in the prosecution of my design ; I have carry it too far for 
 that , before I thoroughly know she . besides , what matter her duplicity 
 to I ? - I could see through it . her strong passion ? - I could control 
 they . her obstinacy ? - I could break it . her poverty of intellect ? - I 
 care nothing about her intellect . what I want be youth and beauty ; 
 she be young and beautiful and I be sure of she . 

 " yes ; sure . her showy person , showy accomplishment , and showy manner 
 dazzle all eye but mine - of all the people about she , I alone find 
 out what she really be ; and in that lie the main secret of my influence 
 over she . I dread no rivalry . her father , prompt by his ambitious 
 hope , keep most young man of her class away from the house ; the few who 
 do come be not dangerous ; they be as incapable of inspire , as 
  she be of feel , real love . her mother still watch I , and 
 still discover nothing ; still suspect I behind my back , and still 
 tremble before my face . month pass on monotonously , year succeed 
 to year ; and I bid my time as patiently , and keep my secret as 
 cautiously as at the first . no change occur , nothing happen to 
 weaken or alter my influence at North Villa , until the day arrive when 
 Margaret leave school and come home for good . 

      

 " exactly at the period to which I have refer , certain business 
 transaction of great importance require the presence of Mr. Sherwin , 
 or of some confidential person to represent he , at Lyons . secretly 
 distrust his own capability , he propose to I to go ; say that 
 it would be a pleasant trip for I , and a good introduction to his 
 wealthy manufacturing correspondent . after some consideration , I 
 accept his offer . 

 " I have never hint a word of my intention towards she to Margaret ; 
 but she understand they well enough - I be certain of that , from many 
 indication which no man could mistake . for reason which will presently 
 appear , I resolve not to explain myself until my return from Lyons . my 
 private object in go there , be to make interest secretly with Mr. 
 Sherwin 's correspondent for a situation in their house . I know that 
 when I make my proposal to Margaret , I must be prepare to act on they 
 on the instant ; I know that her father 's fury when he discover that I 
 have be help to educate his daughter only for myself , would lead 
 he to any extremity ; I know that we must fly to some foreign country ; 
 and , lastly , I know the importance of secure a provision for our 
 maintenance , when we get there . I have save money , it be true - nearly 
 two - third of my salary , every year - but have not save enough for two . 
 accordingly , I leave England to push my own interest , as well as my 
 employer 's ; leave it , confident that my short absence would not weaken 
 the result of year of steady influence over Margaret . the sequel show 
 that , cautious and calculate as I be , I have nevertheless overlook 
 the chance against I , which my own experience of her vanity and 
 duplicity ought to have enable I thoroughly to foresee . 

 " well : I have be some time at Lyons ; have manage my employer 's business 
  from first to last , I be faithful , as I have engage to be , to his 
 commercial interest ; and have arrange my own affair securely and 
 privately . already , I be look forward , with sensation of happiness 
 which be new to I , to my return and to the achievement of the 
 one success , the solitary triumph of my long life of humiliation and 
 disaster , when a letter arrive from Mr. Sherwin . it contain the news 
 of your private marriage , and of the extraordinary condition that have 
 be attach to it with your consent . 

 " other people be in the room with I when I read that letter ; but my 
 manner betray nothing to they . my hand never tremble when I fold 
 the sheet of paper again ; I be not a minute late in attend a 
 business engagement which I have accept ; the slight duty of 
 other kind which I have to do , I rigidly fulfil . never do I more 
 thoroughly and fairly earn the evening 's leisure by the morning 's work , 
 than I earn it that day . 

 " leave the town at the close of afternoon , I walk on till I come to 
 a solitary place on the bank of the great river which run near Lyons . 
 there I open the letter for the second time , and read it through again 
 slowly , with no necessity now for self - control , because no human being 
 be near to look at I . there I read your name , constantly repeat in 
 every line of writing ; and know that the man who , in my absence , have 
 step between I and my prize - the man who , in his insolence of youth , 
 and birth , and fortune , have snatch from I the one long - delay reward 
 for twenty year of misery , just as my hand be stretch forth to 
 grasp it , be the son of that honourable and high - bear gentleman who have 
 give my father to the gallow , and have make I the outcast of my social 
 privilege for life . 

 " the sun be set when I look up from the letter ; flash of 
 rose - light leapt on the leaping river ; the bird be wing nestward 
 to the distant tree , and the ghostly stillness of night be sail 
 solemnly over earth and sky , as the first thought of the vengeance I 
 would have on father and son begin to burn fiercely at my heart , to move 
 like a new life within I , to whisper to my spirit - Wait : be patient ; 
 they be both in your power ; you can now foul the father 's name as the 
 father foul yours - you can yet thwart the son , as the son have thwart 
  you . 

 " in the few minute that pass , while I linger in that lonely 
 place after read the letter , I imagine the whole scheme which it 
 afterwards take a year to execute . I lay the whole plan against you and 
 your father , the first half of which , through the accident that lead you 
 to your discovery , have alone be carry out . I believe then , as I 
 believe now , that I stand towards you both in the place of an injure 
 man , whose right it be , in self - defence and self - assertion , to injure 
 you . judge by your idea , this may read wickedly ; but to I , after 
 have live and suffer as I have , the modern common - place current 
 in the world be so many brazen image which society impudently 
 worship - like the Jews of old - in the face of live Truth . 

      

 " let we get back to England . 

 " that evening , when we meet for the first time , do you observe that 
 Margaret be unusually agitated before I come in ? I detect some 
 change , the moment I see she . do you notice that I avoid speak 
 to she , or look at she ? it be because I be afraid to do so . I see 
 that , with my return , my old influence over she be come back : and 
 I still believe that , hypocritical and heartless though she be , and 
 blind though you be by your passion for she , she would unconsciously 
 have betray everything to you on that evening , if I have not act as 
 I do . her mother , too ! how her mother watch I from the moment when I 
 come in ! 

 " afterwards , while you be try hard to open , undetected , the seal 
 history of my early life , I be warily discover from Margaret all 
 that I desire to know . I say ' warily , ' but the word poorly express my 
 consummate caution and patience , at that time . I never put myself in her 
 power , never risk offending , or frightening , or revolt she ; 
 never lose an opportunity of bring she back to her old habit 
 of familiarity ; and , more than all , never give her mother a single 
 opportunity of detect I . this be the sum of what I gather up , bit 
 by bit , from secret and scattered investigation , persevere in through 
 many week . 

 " her vanity have be hurt , her expectation disappoint , at my having 
 leave she for Lyons , with no other parting word than such as I might 
 have speak to any other woman whom I look on merely as a friend . that 
 she feel any genuine love for I I never have believe , and never shall : 
 but I have that practical ability , that firmness of will , that obvious 
 personal ascendancy over most of those with whom I come in contact , 
 which extort the respect and admiration of woman of all character , 
 and even of woman of no character at all . as far as her sens , her 
 instinct , and her pride could take she , I have win she over to I but 
 no far - because no far could she go . I mention pride among her 
 motif , advisedly . she be proud of be the object of such attention 
 as I have now pay to she for year , because she fancy that , through 
 those attention , I , who , more or less , rule everyone else in her 
 sphere , have yield to she the power of rule I . the manner of my 
 departure from England show she too plainly that she have miscalculate 
 her influence , and that the power , in her case , as in the case of 
 other , be all on my side . hence the wound to her vanity , to which I 
 have allude . 

 " it be while this wound be still fresh that you meet she , and appeal 
 to her self - esteem in a new direction . you must have see clearly 
 enough , that such proposal as yours far exceed the most ambitious 
 expectation form by her father . no man 's alliance could have lift 
 her much high out of her own class : she know this , and from that 
 knowledge marry you - marry you for your station , for your name , 
 for your great friend and connection , for your father 's money , and 
 carriage , and fine house ; for everything , in short , but yourself . 

 " still , in spite of the temptation of youth , wealth , and birth which 
 your proposal hold out to she , she accept they at first   I make she 
 confess it herself   with a secret terror and misgiving , produce by 
 the remembrance of I . these sensation , however , she soon quell , 
 or fancy she quell ; and these , it be now my last , good chance to 
 revive . I have a whole year for the work before I ; and I feel certain of 
 success . 

 " on your side , you have immense advantage . you have social superiority ; 
 you have her father 's full approbation ; and you be married to she . if 
 she have love you for yourself , love you for anything besides she 
 own sensual interest , her vulgar ambition , her reckless vanity , every 
 effort I could have make against you would have be defeat from the 
 first . but , set this out of the question , in spite of the utter 
 heartlessness of her attachment to you , if you have not consent to that 
 condition of wait a year for she after marriage ; or , consent to 
 it , if you have break it long before the year be out - know , as you 
 should have know , that in most woman 's eye a man be not dishonour by 
 break his promise , so long as he break it for a woman 's sake - if , 
 I say , you have take either of these course , I should still have 
 be powerless against you . but you remain faithful to your promise , 
 faithful to the condition , faithful to the ill - direct modesty of your 
 love ; and that very fidelity put you in my power . a pure - minded girl 
 would have love you a thousand time well for act as you do - but 
 Margaret Sherwin be not a pure - minded girl , not a maidenly girl : I have 
 look into her thought , and I know it . 

 " such be your chance against I ; and such be the manner in which 
 you misuse they . on my side , I have indefatigable patience ; personal 
 advantage equal , with the exception of birth and age , to your : 
 long - establish influence ; freedom to be familiar ; and more than all , 
 that stealthy , unflagge strength of purpose which only spring from 
 the desire of revenge . I first thoroughly test your character , and 
 discover on what point it be necessary for I to be on my guard 
 against you , when you take shelter under my roof from the storm . if your 
 father have be with you on that night , there be moment , while the 
 tempest be work to its full fury , when , if my voice could have 
 call the thunder down on the house to crush it and every one in it to 
 atom , I would have speak the word , and end the strife for all of 
 we . the wind , the hail , and the lightning madden my thought of your 
 father and you - I be nearly let you see it , when that flash come 
 between we as we part at my door . 

 " how I gain your confidence , you know ; and you know also , how I 
 contrive to make you use I , afterwards , as the secret friend who 
 procure you privilege with Margaret which her father would not grant 
 at your own request . this , at the outset , secure I from suspicion 
 on your part ; and I have only to leave it to your infatuation to do 
 the rest . with you my course be easy - with she it be beset by 
 difficulty ; but I overcome they . your fatal consent to wait through 
 a year of probation , furnish I with weapon against you , which I 
 employ to the most unscrupulous purpose . I can picture to myself what 
 would be your indignation and your horror , if I fully describe the use 
 which I make of the position in which your compliance with her father 's 
 condition place you towards Margaret . I spare you this avowal - it 
 would be useless now . consider I what you please ; denounce my conduct 
 in any term you like : my justification will always be the same . I 
 be the injure man , you be the aggressor ; I be right myself by 
 get back a possession of which you have rob I , and any mean be 
 sanctify by such an end as that . 

 " but my success , so far , be of little avail , in itself ; against the 
 all - powerful counter - attraction which you possess . contemptible , or 
 not , you still have this superiority over I - you could make a fine 
 lady of she . from that fact spring the ambition which all my influence , 
 date as it do from her childhood , could not destroy . there , be 
 fasten the main - spring which regulate her selfish devotion to you , 
 and which it be next to impossible to snap asunder . I never make the 
 attempt . 

 " the scheme which I propose to she , when she be fully prepared to hear 
 it , and to conceal that she have hear it , leave she free to enjoy all the 
 social advantage which your alliance could bestow - free to ride in her 
 carriage , and go into her father 's shop   that be one of her ambition ! 
 as a new customer add to his aristocratic connection - free even to 
 become one of your family , unsuspected , in case your rash marriage be 
 forgive . your credulity render the execution of this scheme easy . 
 in what manner it be to be carry out , and what object I propose to 
 myself in frame it , I abstain from avowing ; for the simple reason that 
 the discovery at which you arrive by follow we on the night of the 
 party , make my plan abortive , and have oblige I since to renounce it . I 
 need only say , in this place , that it threaten your father as well as 
 you , and that Margaret recoil from it at first - not from any horror of 
 the proposal , but through fear of discovery . gradually , I overcome her 
 apprehension : very gradually , for I be not thoroughly secure of her 
 devotion to my purpose , until your year of probation be nearly out . 

 " through all that year , daily visitor as you be at North Villa , 
 you never suspect either of we ! and yet , have you be one whit less 
 infatuate , how many warning you might have discover , which , in 
 spite of her duplicity and my caution , would then have show themselves 
 plainly enough to put you on your guard ! those abrupt change in her 
 manner , those alternate fit of peevish silence and capricious gaiety , 
 which sometimes display themselves even in your presence , have every 
 one of they their meaning - though you could not discern it . sometimes , 
 they mean fear of discovery , sometimes fear of I : now , they might be 
 trace back to hide contempt ; now , to passion swell under fancied 
 outrage ; now , to secret remembrance of disclosure I have just make , or 
 eager anticipation of disclosure I have yet to reveal . there be time 
 at which every step of the way along which I be advance be mark , 
 faintly yet significantly , in her manner and her speech , could you only 
 have interpret they aright . my first renewal of my old influence over 
 she , my first word that degrade you in her eye , my first successful 
 pleading of my own cause against your , my first appeal to those 
 passion in she which I know how to move , my first proposal to she 
 of the whole scheme which I have mature in solitude , in the foreign 
 country , by the bank of the great river - all these separate and gradual 
 advance on my part towards the end which I be vow to achieve , be 
 outwardly shadow forth in she , consummate as be her capacity for 
 deceit , and consummately as she learn to use they against you . 

 " do you remember notice , on your return from the country , how ill 
 Margaret look , and how ill I look ? we have some interview during 
 your absence , at which I speak such word to she as would have leave 
 their mark on the face of a Jezebel , or a Messalina . have you forget 
 how often , during the latter day of your year of expectation , I 
 abruptly leave the room after you have call I in to bear you company 
 in your evening reading ? my pretext be sudden illness ; and illness it 
 be , but not of the body . as the time approach , I feel less and less 
 secure of my own caution and patience . with you , indeed , I might still 
 have consider myself safe : it be the presence of Mrs. Sherwin that 
 drive I from the room . under that woman 's fatal eye I shrink , when the 
 last day draw near - I , who have defy her detection , and stand firmly 
 on my guard against her sleepless , silent , deadly vigilance , for month 
 and month - give way as the end approach ! I know that she have once 
 or twice speak strangely to you , and I dread lest she wandering , 
 incoherent word might yet take in time a recognisable direction , a 
 palpable shape . they do not ; the instinct of terror bind her tongue 
 to the last . perhaps , even if she have speak plainly , you would not have 
 believe she ; you would have be still true to yourself and to your 
 confidence in Margaret . Enemy as I be to you , enemy as I will be to the 
 day of your death , I will do you justice for the past : - your love for 
 that girl be a love which even the purest and good of woman could never 
 have thoroughly deserve . 

      

 " my letter be nearly do : my retrospect be finish . I have bring 
 it down to the date of event , about which you know as much as I do . 
 accident conduct you to a discovery which , otherwise , you might not 
 have make , perhaps for month , perhaps not at all , until I have lead you 
 to it of my own accord . I say accident , positively ; know that from 
 first to last I trust no third person . what you know , you know by 
 accident alone . 

 " but for that chance discovery , you would have see I bring she back to 
 North Villa at the appoint time , in my care , just as she go out . I 
 have no dread of her meet you . but enough of she ! I shall dispose of 
 her future , as I have resolve to dispose of it year ago ; careless how 
 she may be affect when she first see the hideous alteration which 
 your attack have work in I . enough , I say , of the Sherwins - father , 
 mother , and daughter - your destiny lie not with they , but with I . 

 " do you still exult in have deform I in every feature , in have 
 give I a face to revolt every human being who look at I ? do you 
 triumph in the remembrance of this atrocity , as you triumph in the 
 acting of it - believe that you have destroy my future with Margaret , 
 in destroy my very identity as a man ? I tell you , that with the hour 
 when I leave this hospital your day of triumph will be over , and your 
 day of expiation will begin - never to end till the death of one of we . 
 you shall live - refine educate gentleman as you be - to wish , like a 
 ruffian , that you have kill I ; and your father shall live to wish it 
 too . 

 " be I try to awe you with the fierce word of a boaster and a bully ? 
 test I , by look back a little , and discover what I have abstain 
 from for the sake of my purpose , since I have be here . a word or two 
 from my lip , in answer to the question with which I have be bait , 
 day after day , by those about I , would have call you before a 
 magistrate to answer for an assault - a shocking and a savage assault , 
 even in this country , where hand to hand brutality be a marketable 
 commodity between the Prisoner and the Law . your father 's name might 
 have be publicly couple with your dishonour , if I have but speak ; and 
 I be silent . I keep the secret - keep it , because to avenge myself 
 on you by a paltry scandal , which you and your family   oppose to it 
 wealth , position , previous character , and general sympathy   would live 
 down in a few day , be not my revenge : because to be right before 
 magistrate and judge by a beggarman 's exhibition of physical injury , 
 and a coward 's confession of physical defeat , be not my way of right 
 myself . I have a lifelong retaliation in view , which law and lawgiver 
 be powerless either to aid or to oppose - the retaliation which set a 
 mark upon Cain   as I will set a mark on you ; and then make his life his 
 punishment   as I will make your life yours . 

 " how ? remember what my career have be ; and know that I will make 
 your career like it . as my father 's death by the hangman affect my 
 existence , so the event of that night when you follow I shall affect 
  your . your father shall see you live the life to which his evidence 
 against my father condemn I - shall see the foul stain of your 
 disaster cling to you wherever you go . the infamy with which I be 
 determined to pursue you , shall be your own infamy that you can not get 
 quit of - for you shall never get quit of I , never get quit of the wife 
 who have dishonour you . you may leave your home , and leave England ; you 
 may make new friend , and seek new employment ; year and year may pass 
 away - and still , you shall not escape we : still , you shall never know 
 when we be near , or when we be distant ; when we be ready to appear 
 before you , or when we be sure to keep out of your sight . my deformed 
 face and her fatal beauty shall hunt you through the world . the terrible 
 secret of your dishonour , and of the atrocity by which you avenge it , 
 shall ooze out through strange channel , in vague shape , by tortuous 
 intangible process ; ever change in the manner of its exposure , 
 never remediable by your own resistance , and always direct to the same 
 end - your isolation as a marked man , in every fresh sphere , among every 
 new community to which you retreat . 

 " do you call this a very madness of malignity and revenge ? it be the 
 only occupation in life for which your mutilation of I have leave I 
 fit ; and I accept it , as work worthy of my deformity . in the prospect of 
 watch how you bear this hunting through life , that never quite hunt 
 you down ; how long you resist the poison - influence , as slow as it 
 be sure , of a crafty tongue that can not be silence , of a denouncing 
 presence that can not be flee , of a damn secret tear from you and 
 expose afresh each time you have hide it - there be the promise of a 
 nameless delight which it sometimes fever , sometimes chill my blood to 
 think of . lie in this place at night , in those hour of darkness and 
 stillness when the surround atmosphere of human misery press heavy 
 on I in my heavy sleep , prophecy of dread thing to come between 
 we , trouble my spirit in dream . at those time , I know , and shudder 
 in know , that there be something besides the motive of retaliation , 
 something less earthly and apparent than that , which urge I horribly 
 and supernaturally to link myself to you for life ; which make I feel 
 as the bearer of a curse that shall follow you ; as the instrument of a 
 fatality pronounce against you long ere we meet - a fatality begin 
 before our father be part by the hangman ; perpetuate itself in 
 you and I ; end who shall say how , or when ? 

 " beware of comfort yourself with a false security , by despise my 
 word , as the wild word of a madman , dream of the perpetration of 
 impossible crime . throughout this letter I have warn you of what 
 you may expect ; because I will not assail you at disadvantage , as you 
 assail I ; because it be my pleasure to ruin you , openly resist 
 I at every step . I have give you fair play , as the huntsman give fair 
 play at start to the animal they be about to run down . be warn 
 against seek a false hope in the belief that my faculty be shake , 
 and that my resolve be visionary - false , because such a hope be only 
 despair in disguise . 

 " I have do . the time be not far distant when my word will become 
 deed . they cure fast in a public hospital : we shall meet soon ! 

  " ROBERT MANNION . " 



 " we shall meet soon ! " 

 how ? where ? I look back at the last page of writing . but my attention 
 wander strangely ; I confuse one paragraph with another ; the long I 
 read , the less I be able to grasp the meaning , not of sentence merely , 
 but even of the simple word . 

 from the first line to the last , the letter have produce no distinct 
 impression on my mind . so utterly be I wear out by the previous event 
 of the day , that even those early portion of Mannion 's confession , 
 which reveal the connection between my father and his , and the 
 terrible manner of their separation , hardly rouse I to more than a 
 momentary astonishment . I just call to remembrance that I have never 
 hear the subject mention at home , except once or twice in vague hint 
 drop mysteriously by an old servant , and little regard by I at the 
 time , as refer to matter which have happen before I be bear . 
 I just reflect thus briefly and languidly on the narrative at the 
 commencement of the letter ; and then mechanically read on . except the 
 passage which contain the exposure of Margaret 's real character , 
 and those which describe the origin and progress of Mannion 's infamous 
 plot , nothing in the letter impress I , as I be afterwards destine 
 to be impress by it , on a second reading . the lethargy of all feeling 
 into which I have now sink , seem a very lethargy of death . 

 I try to clear and concentrate my faculty by think of other 
 subject ; but without success . all that I have hear and see since the 
 morning , now recur to I more and more vaguely and confusedly . I 
 could form no plan either for the present or the future . I know 
 as little how to meet Mr. Sherwin 's last threat of force I to 
 acknowledge his guilty daughter , as how to defend myself against the 
 life - long hostility with which I be menace by Mannion . a feeling of 
 awe and apprehension , which I could trace to no distinct cause , stole 
 irresistibly and mysteriously over I . a horror of the searching 
 brightness of daylight , a suspicion of the loneliness of the place to 
 which I have retreat , a yearning to be among my fellow - creature again , 
 to live where there be life - the busy life of London - overcome I . I 
 turn hastily , and walk back from the suburb to the city . 

 it be grow towards evening as I gain one of the great 
 thoroughfare . see some of the inhabitant of the house , as I walk 
 along , sit at their open window to enjoy the evening air , the 
 thought come to I for the first time that day : - where shall I lay my 
 head tonight ? home I have none . friend who would have gladly receive I 
 be not want ; but to go to they would oblige I to explain myself ; 
 to disclose something of the secret of my calamity ; and this I be 
 determined to keep conceal , as I have tell my father I would keep 
 it . my last - leave consolation be my knowledge of still preserve that 
 resolution , of still honourably hold by it at all hazard , cost what 
 it might . 

 so I think no more of succour or sympathy from any one of my friend . 
 as a stranger I have be drive from my home , and as a stranger I be 
 resign to live , until I have learn how to conquer my misfortune by 
 my own vigour and endurance . firm in this determination , though firm 
 in nothing else , I now look around I for the first shelter I could 
 purchase from stranger - the humbler the well . 

 I happen to be in the poor part , and on the poor side of the 
 great street along which I be walk - among the inferior shop , and 
 the house of few story . a room to let be not hard to find here . I 
 take the first I see ; escape question about name and reference 
 by pay my week 's rent in advance ; and then find myself leave in 
 possession of the one little room which I must be resign to look on 
 for the future - perhaps for a long future ! - as my home . 

 home ! a dear and a mournful remembrance be revive in the reflection 
 suggest by that simple word . through the darkness that thicken over 
 my mind , there now pass one faint ray of light which give promise of 
 the morning - the light of the calm face that I have last look on when 
 it be rest on my father 's breast . 

 Clara ! my parting word to she , when I have unclasp from my neck those 
 kind arm which would fain have hold I to home for ever , have express 
 a promise that be yet unfulfilled . I tremble as I now think on my 
 sister 's situation . not know whither I have turn my step on 
 leave home ; uncertain to what extremitie my despair might hurry I ; 
 absolutely ignorant even whether she might ever see I again - it be 
 terrible to reflect on the suspense under which she might be suffer , 
 at this very moment , on my account . my promise to write to she , be of 
 all promise the most vitally important , and the first that should be 
 fulfil . 

 my letter be very short . I communicate to she the address of the 
 house in which I be live   well know that nothing but positive 
 information on this point would effectually relieve her anxiety   - I 
 ask she to write in reply , and let I hear some news of she , the good 
 that she could give - and I entreat she to believe implicitly in my 
 patience and courage under every disaster ; and to feel assured that , 
 whatever happen , I should never lose the hope of soon meet she 
 again . of the peril that beset I , of the wrong and injury I might yet 
 be condemn to endure , I say nothing . those be truth which I be 
 determined to conceal from she , to the last . she have suffer for I 
 more than I dare think of , already ! 

 I send my letter by hand , so as to ensure its immediate delivery . in 
 write those few simple line , I have no suspicion of the important 
 result which they be destine to produce . in thinking of to - morrow , 
 and of all the event which to - morrow might bring with it , I little 
 think whose voice would be the first to greet I the next day , whose 
 hand would be hold out to I as the help hand of a friend . 

 VI . 

 it be still early in the morning , when a loud knock sound at 
 the house - door , and I hear the landlady call to the servant : " a 
 gentleman to see the gentleman who come in last night . " the moment the 
 word reach I , my thought recur to the letter of yesterday - Had 
 mannion find I out in my retreat ? as the suspicion cross my mind , 
 the door open , and the visitor enter . 

 I look at he in speechless astonishment . it be my eld brother ! it 
 be Ralph himself who now walk into the room ! 

 " well , Basil ! how be you ? " he say , with his old off - hand manner and 
 hearty voice . 

 " Ralph ! you in England ! - you here ! " 

 " I come back from Italy last night . Basil , how awfully you be change ! I 
 hardly know you again . " 

 his manner alter as he speak the last word . the look of sorrow and 
 alarm which he fix on I , go to my heart . I think of holiday - time , 
 when we be boy ; of Ralph 's boisterous way with I ; of his 
 good - humour school - frolic , at my expense ; of the strong bond of union 
 between we , so strangely compound of my weakness and his strength ; of 
 my passive and of his active nature ; I see how little he have change 
 since that time , and know , as I never know before , how miserably I be 
 alter . all the shame and grief of my banishment from home come back on 
 I , at sight of his friendly , familiar face . I struggle hard to keep my 
 self - possession , and try to bid he welcome cheerfully ; but the effort 
 be too much for I . I turn away my head , as I take his hand ; for the 
 old school - boy feeling of not let Ralph see that I be in tear , 
 influence I still . 

 " Basil ! Basil ! what be you about ? this will not   do . look up , and listen 
 to I . I have promise Clara to pull you through this wretched mess ; and 
 I will do it . get a chair , and give I a light . I be go to sit on your 
 bed , smoke a cigar , and have a long talk with you . " 

 while he be light his cigar , I look more closely at he than 
 before . though he be the same as ever in manner ; though his expression 
 still preserve its reckless levity of former day , I now detect that 
 he have change a little in some other respect . his feature have become 
 coarser - dissipation have begin to mark they . his spare , active , muscular 
 figure have fill out ; he be dress rather carelessly ; and of all 
 his trinket and chain of early time , not one appear about he now . 
 Ralph look prematurely middle - aged , since I have see he last . 

 " well , " he begin , " first of all , about my come back . the fact be , the 
 morganatic Mrs. Ralph - "   he refer to his last mistress   " want to 
 see England , and I be tired of be abroad . so I bring she back 
 with I ; and we be go to live quietly , somewhere in the Brompton 
 neighbourhood . that woman have be my salvation - you must come and see 
 she . she have break I of game altogether ; I be go to the devil 
 as fast as I could , when she stop I - but you know all about it , of 
 course . well : we get to London yesterday afternoon ; and in the evening 
 I leave she at the hotel , and go to report myself at home . there , the 
 first thing I hear , be that you have cut I out of my old original 
 distinction of be the family scamp . do not   look distressed , Basil ; I be 
 not laugh at you ; I have   come to do something well than that . never 
 mind my talk : nothing in the world ever be serious to I , and nothing 
 ever will be . " 

 he stop to knock the ash off his cigar , and settle himself more 
 comfortably on my bed ; then proceed . 

 " it have be my ill - luck to see my father pretty seriously offend on 
 more than one occasion ; but I never see he so very quiet and so very 
 dangerous as last night when he be tell I about you . I remember 
 well enough how he speak and look , when he catch I put away 
 my trout - fly in the page of that family history of his ; but it be 
 nothing to see he or hear he then , to what it be now . I can tell you 
 this , Basil - if I believe in what the poetical people call a break 
 heart   which I do not   , I should be almost afraid that he be 
 broken - hearted . I see it be no use to say a word for you just yet , so 
 I sit quiet and listen to he till I get my dismissal for the evening . 
 my next proceeding be to go up - stair , and see Clara . Upstairs , I give 
 you my word of honour , it be bad still . Clara be walk about the 
 room with your letter in her hand - just reach I the match : my cigar 's 
 out . some man can talk and smoke in equal proportion - I never could . 

 " you know as well as I do , " he continue when he have relit his cigar , 
 " that Clara be not usually demonstrative . I always think she rather a 
 cold temperament - but the moment I put my head in at the door , I find 
 I would be just as great a fool on that point as on most other . Basil , 
 the scream Clara give when she first see I , and the look in her eye 
 when she talk about you , positively frighten I . I can not   describe 
 anything ; and I hate description by other man   most likely on that very 
 account : so I will not   describe what she say and do . I will only tell you 
 that it end in my promising to come here the first thing this morning ; 
 promise to get you out of the scrape ; promising , in short , everything 
 she ask I . so here I be , ready for your business before my own . the 
 fair partner of my existence be at the hotel , half - frantic because I 
 will not   go lodge - hunting with she ; but Clara be paramount , Clara be the 
 first thought . somebody must be a good boy at home ; and now you have 
 resign , I be go to try and succeed you , by way of a change ! " 

 " Ralph ! Ralph ! can you mention Clara 's name , and that woman 's name , in 
 the same breath ? do you leave Clara quieter and well ! for God 's sake 
 be serious about that , though serious about nothing else ! " 

 " gently , Basil ! doucement mon ami ! I do leave her quieter : my promise 
 make she look almost like herself again . as for what you say about 
 mention Clara and Mrs. Ralph in the same breath , I have   be talk 
 and smoking till I have no second breath leave to devote to second - rate 
 virtue . there be an unanswerable reason for you , if you want one ! and 
 now let we get to the business that bring I here . I do not   want to 
 worry you by rake up this miserable mess again , from begin to end , 
 in your presence ; but I must make sure at the same time that I have get 
 hold of the right story , or I can not   be of any use to you . my father 
 be a little obscure on certain point . he talk enough , and more than 
 enough , about consequence to the family , about his own affliction , 
 about his give you up for ever ; and , in short , about everything but 
 the case itself as it really stand against we . now that be just what I 
 ought to be put up to , and must be put up to . let I tell you in three 
 word what I be tell last night . " 

 " go on , Ralph : speak as you please . " 

 " very good . first of all , I understand that you take a fancy to some 
 shopkeeper 's daughter - so far , mind , I do not   blame you : I have   spend 
 time very pleasantly among the lady of the counter myself . but in the 
 second place , I be tell that you actually marry the girl ! I do not 
 wish to be hard upon you , my good fellow , but there be an unparalleled 
 insanity about that act , worthy of a patient in Bedlam than of my 
 brother . I be not quite sure whether I understand exactly what virtuous 
 behaviour be ; but if that be virtuous behaviour - there ! there ! do not 
 look shocked . let us have do with the marriage , and get on . well , you 
 make the girl your wife ; and then innocently consent to a very 
 queer condition of wait a year for her   virtuous behaviour again , I 
 suppose !   at the end of that time - do not   turn away your head , Basil ! I 
  may be a scamp ; but I be not blackguard enough to make a joke - either 
 in your presence , or out of it - of this part of the story . I will pass 
 it over altogether , if you like ; and only ask you a question or two . you 
 see , my father either could not or would not speak plainly of the bad 
 part of the business ; and you know he well enough to know why . but 
 somebody must be a little explicit , or I can do nothing . about that man ? 
 you find the scoundrel out ? do you get within arm 's length of he ? " 

 I tell my brother of the struggle with Mannion in the Square . 

 he hear I almost with his former schoolboy delight , when I have 
 succeed , to his satisfaction , in a feat of strength or activity . he 
 jump off the bed , and seize both my hand in his strong grasp ; his 
 face radiant , his eye sparkle . " shake hand , Basil ! shake hand , as 
 we have not   shake hand yet : this make amend for everything ! one word 
 more , though , about that fellow ; where be he now ? " 

 " in the hospital . " 

 Ralph laugh heartily , and jump back on the bed . I remember 
 Mannion 's letter , and shudder as I think of it . 

 " the next question be about the girl , " say my brother . " what have become 
 of she ? where be she all the time of your illness ? " 

 " at her father 's house ; she be there still . " 

 " ah , yes ! I see ; the old story ; innocent , of course . and her father 
 back she , do not   he ? to be sure , that be the old story too . I have get 
 at our difficulty now ; we be threaten with an exposure , if you do not 
 acknowledge she . wait a minute ! have you any evidence against she , 
 besides your own ? " 

 " I have a letter , a long letter from her accomplice , contain a 
 confession of his guilt and her . " 

 " she be sure to call that confession a conspiracy . it be of no use to we , 
 unless we dare to go to law - and we dare not . we must hush the thing up 
 at any price ; or it will be the death of my father . this be a case for 
 money , just as I think it would be . Mr. and Miss Shopkeeper have get 
 a large assortment of silence to sell ; and we must buy it of they , over 
 the domestic counter , at so much a yard . have you be there yet , Basil , 
 to ask the price and strike the bargain ? " 

 " I be at the house , yesterday . " 

 " the deuce you be ! and who do you see ? - the father ? do you bring he 
 to term ? do you do business with Mr. Shopkeeper ? " 

 " his manner be brutal : his language , the language of a bully - ? " 

 " so much the well . those man be easy deal with : if he will only 
 fly into a passion with I , I engage for success beforehand . but the 
 end - how do it end ? " 

 " as it begin : - in threat on his part , in endurance on mine . " 

 " ah ! we will see how he like my endurance next : he will find it rather a 
 different sort of endurance from your . by - the - bye , Basil , what money 
 have you to offer he ? " 

 " I make no offer to he then . circumstance happen which render I 
 incapable of thinking of it . I intend to go there again , to - day ; and 
 if money would bribe he to silence , and save my family from share the 
 dishonour which have fall on I , to abandon to he the only money I 
 have of my own - the little income leave I by our mother . " 

 " do you mean to say that your only resource be in that wretched trifle , 
 and that you ever really intend to let it go , and start in the world 
 without a rap ? do you mean to say that my father give you up without 
 make the small provision for you , in such a mess as your 's ? Hang 
 it ! do he justice . he have be hard enough on you , I know ; but he can not 
 have coolly turn you over to ruin in that way . " 

 " he offer I money , at parting ; but with such word of contempt and 
 insult that I would have die rather than take it . I tell he that , 
 unaide by his purse , I would preserve he , and preserve his family from 
 the infamous consequence of my calamity - though I sacrifice my own 
 happiness and my own honour for ever in do it . and I go to - day to 
 make that sacrifice . the loss of the little I have to depend on , be the 
 least part of it . he may not see his injustice in doubt I , till too 
 late ; but he shall see it . " 

 " I beg your pardon , Basil ; but this be almost as great an insanity , 
 as the insanity of your marriage . I honour the independence of your 
 principle , my dear fellow ; but , while I be to the fore , I will take good 
 care that you do not   ruin yourself gratuitously , for the sake of any 
 principle whatever ! just listen to I , now . in the first place , 
 remember that what my father say to you , he say in a moment of violent 
 exasperation . you have be trample the pride of his life in the mud : 
 no man like that - my father least of any . and , as for the offer of your 
 poor little morsel of an income to stop these people 's greedy mouth , 
 it be not   a quarter enough for they . they know our family be a wealthy 
 family ; and they will make their demand accordingly . any other 
 sacrifice , even to take the girl back   though you never could bring 
 yourself to do that ! , would be of no earthly use . nothing but money 
 will do ; money cunningly dole out , under the strong possible 
 stipulation . now , I be just the man to do that , and I have get the 
 money - or , rather , my father have , which come to the same thing . write 
 I the fellow 's name and address ; there be no time to be lose - I be off to 
 see he at once ! " 

 " I can not   allow you , Ralph , to ask my father for what I would not ask he 
 myself - " 

 " give I the name and address , or you will sour my excellent temper for 
 the rest of my life . your obstinacy will not   do with I , Basil - it do not 
 at school , and it will not   now . I shall ask my father for money for myself ; 
 and use as much of it as I think proper for your interest . he will 
 give I anything I want , now I have turn good boy . I do not   owe fifty 
 pound , since my last debt be pay off - thank to Mrs. Ralph , who 
 be the most manage woman in the world . by - the - bye , when you see she , 
 do not   seem surprised at she be old than I be . oh ! this be the 
 address , be it ? Hollyoake Square ? where the devil 's that ! never mind , 
 I will take a cab , and shift the responsibility of find the place on 
 the driver . keep up your spirit , and wait here till I come back . you 
 shall have such news of Mr. Shopkeeper and his daughter as you little 
 expect ! Au revoir , my dear fellow - au revoir . " 

 he leave the room as rapidly as he have enter it . the minute afterwards , 
 I remember that I ought to have warn he of the fatal illness of 
 Mrs. Sherwin . she might be die - dead for aught I know - when he reach 
 the house . I run to the window , to call he back : it be too late . Ralph 
 be go . 

 even if he be admit at North Villa , would he succeed ? I be little 
 capable of estimate the chance . the unexpectedness of his visit ; the 
 strange mixture of sympathy and levity in his manner , of worldly wisdom 
 and boyish folly in his conversation , appear to be still confuse 
 I in his absence , just as they have confuse I in his presence . my 
 thought imperceptibly wander away from Ralph , and the mission he have 
 undertake on my behalf , to a subject which seem destine , for the 
 future , to steal on my attention , irresistibly and darkly , in all my 
 lonely hour . already , the fatality denounce against I in Mannion 's 
 letter have begin to act : already , that terrible confession of past 
 misery and crime , that monstrous declaration of enmity which be to last 
 with the lasting of life , begin to exercise its numb influence on my 
 faculty , to cast its blight shadow over my heart . 

 I open the letter again , and re - read the threat against I at its 
 conclusion . one by one , the question now arise in my mind : how can I 
 resist , or how escape the vengeance of this evil spirit ? how shun the 
 dread deformity of that face , which be to appear before I in secret ? 
 how silence that fiend 's tongue , or make harmless the poison which it 
 will pour drop by drop into my life ? when should I first look for that 
 avenge presence ? - now , or not till month hence ? where should I first 
 see it ? in the house ? - or in the street ? at what time would it steal 
 to my side ? by night - or by day ? should I show the letter to Ralph ? - it 
 would be useless . what would avail any advice or assistance which his 
 reckless courage could give , against an enemy who combine the ferocious 
 vigilance of a savage with the far - sight iniquity of a civilised man ? 

 as this last thought cross my mind , I hastily close the letter ; 
 determine   alas ! how vainly !   never to open it again . almost at the 
 same instant , I hear another knock at the house - door . could Ralph have 
 return already ? impossible ! besides , the knock be very different from 
 his - it be only just loud enough to be audible where I now sit . 

 Mannion ? but would he come thus ? openly , fairly , in the broad daylight , 
 through the populous street ? 

 a light , quick step ascend the stair - my heart bound ; I start to 
 my foot . it be the same step which I use to listen for , and love to 
 hear , in my illness . I run to the door , and open it . my instinct have 
 not deceive I ! it be my sister ! 

 " Basil ! " she exclaim , before I could speak - " have Ralph be here ? " 

 " yes , love - yes . " 

 " where have he go ? what have he do for you ? he promise I - " 

 " and he have keep his promise nobly , Clara : he be away help I now . " 

 " thank God ! thank God ! " 

 she sink breathless into a chair , as she speak . oh , the pang of look 
 at she at that moment , and see how she be change ! - see the 
 dimness and weariness of the gentle eye ; the fear and the sorrow that 
 have already overshadow the bright young face ! 

 " I shall be well directly , " she say , guess from my expression what 
 I then feel - " but , see you in this strange place , after what happen 
 yesterday ; and have come here so secretly , in terror of my father 
 find it out - I can not   help feel your altered position and mine a 
 little painfully at first . but we will not   complain , as long as I can get 
 here sometimes to see you : we will only think of the future now . what a 
 mercy , what a happiness it be that Ralph have come back ! we have always 
 do he injustice ; he be far kind and far well than we ever think 
 he . but , Basil , how worn and ill you be look ! have you not tell 
 Ralph everything ? be you in any danger ? " 

 " none , Clara - none , indeed ! " 

 " do not   grieve too deeply about yesterday ! try and forget that horrible 
 parting , and all that bring it about . he have not speak of it since , 
 except to tell I that I must never know more of your fault and your 
 misfortune , than the little - the very little - I know already . and I have 
 resolve not to think about it , as well as not to ask about it , for the 
 future . I have a hope already , Basil - very , very far off fulfilment - but 
 still a hope . can you not think what it be ? " 

 " your hope be far off fulfilment , indeed , Clara , if it be hope from my 
 father ! " 

 " hush ! do not   say so ; I know well . something occur , even so soon as 
 last night - a very trifling event - but enough to show that he think of 
 you , already , in grief far more than in anger . " 

 " I wish I could believe it , love ; but my remembrance of yesterday - " 

 " do not   trust that remembrance ; do not   recall it ! I will tell you what 
 occur . some time after you have go , and after I have recover myself 
 a little in my own room , I go downstairs again to see my father ; for 
 I be too terrified and too miserable at what have happen , to be alone . 
 he be not in his room when I get there . as I look round I for a 
 moment , I see the piece of your page in the book about our family , 
 scatter on the floor ; and the miniature likeness of you , when you be 
 a child , be lie among the other fragment . it have be tear out of 
 its setting in the paper , but not injure . I pick it up , Basil , and 
 put it on the table , at the place where he always sit ; and lay my own 
 little locket , with your hair in it , by the side , so that he might know 
 that the miniature have not be accidentally take up and put there by 
 the servant . then , I gather together the piece of the page and take 
 they away with I , think it well that he should not see they again . 
 just as I have get through the door that lead into the library , and be 
 about to close it , I hear the other door , by which you enter the study 
 from the hall , opening ; and he come in , and go directly to the table . 
 his back be towards I , so I could look at he unperceive . he observe 
 the miniature directly and stand quite still with it in his hand ; then 
 sigh - sigh so bitterly ! - and then take the portrait of our dear 
 mother from one of the drawer of the table , open the case in which 
 it be keep , and put your miniature inside , very gently and tenderly . I 
 could not trust myself to see any more , so I go up to my room again : 
 and shortly afterwards he come in with my locket , and give it I back , 
 only say - ' you leave this on my table , Clara . ' but if you have see his 
 face then , you would have hop all thing from he in the time to come , 
 as I hope now . " 

 " and as I will hope , Clara , though it be from no strong motive than 
 gratitude to you . " 

 " before I leave home , " she proceed , after a moment 's silence , " I 
 think of your loneliness in this strange place - know that I could 
 seldom come to see you , and then only by stealth ; by commit a fault 
 which , if my father find it out - but we will not   speak of that ! I think 
 of your lonely hour here ; and I have bring with I an old , forgotten 
 companion of your , to bear you company , and to keep you from think 
 too constantly on what you have suffer . look , Basil ! will not   you welcome 
 this old friend again ? " 

 she give I a small roll of manuscript , with an effort to resume her 
 kind smile of former day , even while the tear stand thick in her eye . 
 I untie the leaf , glance at the handwriting , and see before I , once 
 more , the first few chapter of my unfinished romance ! again I look on 
 the patiently - labour page , familiar relic of that early and good 
 ambition which I have abandon for love ; too faithful record of the 
 tranquil , ennoble pleasure which I have lose for ever ! oh , for one 
 Thought - Flower now , from the dream - garden of the happy past ! 

 " I take more care of those leaf of writing , after you have throw they 
 aside , than of anything else I have , " say Clara . " I always think the 
 time would come , when you would return again to the occupation which it 
 be once your great pleasure to pursue , and my great pleasure to 
 watch . and surely that time have arrive . I be certain , Basil , your book 
 will help you to wait patiently for happy time , as nothing else can . 
 this place must seem very strange and lonely ; but the sight of those 
 page , and the sight of I sometimes   when I can come , may make it look 
 almost like home to you ! the room be not - not very - " 

 she stop suddenly . I see her lip tremble , and her eye grow dim 
 again , as she look round she . when I try to speak all the 
 gratitude I feel , she turn away quickly , and begin to busy herself 
 in re - arrange the wretched furniture ; in set in order the glare 
 ornament on the chimney - piece ; in hide the hole in the ragged 
 window - curtain ; in change , as far as she could , all the tawdry 
 discomfort of my one miserable little room . she be still absorb in 
 this occupation , when the church - clock of the neighbourhood strike the 
 hour - the hour that warn she to stay no long . 

 " I must go , " she say ; " it be later than I think . do not   be afraid 
 about my get home : old Martha come here with I , and be wait 
 downstairs to go back   you know we can trust she . write to I as often 
 as you can ; I shall hear about you every day , from Ralph ; but I should 
 like a letter sometimes , as well . be as hopeful and as patient yourself , 
 dear , under misfortune , as you wish I to be ; and I shall despair of 
 nothing . do not   tell Ralph I have be here - he might be angry . I will 
 come again , the first opportunity . good - bye , Basil ! let we try and part 
 happily , in the hope of well day . good - bye , dear - good - bye , only for 
 the present ! " 

 her self - possession nearly fail she , as she kiss I , and then turn 
 to the door . she just sign to I not to follow her down - stair , and , 
 without look round again , hurry from the room . 

 it be well for the preservation of our secret , that she have so 
 resolutely refrain from delay her departure . she have be go but 
 for a few minute - the lovely and consoling influence of her presence 
 be still fresh in my heart - I be still look sadly over the once 
 precious page of manuscript which she have restore to I - when Ralph 
 return from North Villa . I hear he leap , rather than run , up 
 the ricketty wooden stair . he burst into my room more impetuously than 
 ever . 

 " all right ! " he say , jump back to his former place on the bed . " we 
 can buy Mr. Shopkeeper for anything we like - for nothing at all , if 
 we choose to be stingy . his innocent daughter have make the good of all 
 confession , just at the right time . Basil , my boy , she have leave she 
 father 's house ! " 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 " she have elope to the hospital ! " 

 " Mannion ! " 

 " yes , Mannion : I have get his letter to she . she be criminate by it , 
 even past her father 's contradiction - and he do not   stick at a trifle ! 
 but I will begin at the beginning , and tell you everything . hang it , 
 Basil , you look as if I would bring you bad news instead of good ! " 

 " never mind how I look , Ralph - pray go on ! " 

 " well : the first thing I hear , on get to the house , be that 
 Sherwin 's wife be die . the servant take in my name : but I think of 
 course I should not   be admit . no such thing ! I be let in at once , and 
 the first word this fellow , Sherwin , say to I , be , that his wife 
 be only ill , that the servant be exaggerate , and that he be quite 
 ready to hear what Mr. Basil 's ' highly - respect ' brother   fancy call 
  I ' highly - respect ! '   have to say to he . the fool , however , as 
 you see , be cunning enough to try civility to begin with . a more 
 ill - look human mongrel I never set eye on ! I take the measure of 
 my man directly , and in two minute tell he exactly what I come for , 
 without soften a single word . " 

 " and how do he answer you ? " 

 " as I anticipate , by begin to bluster immediately . I take he down , 
 just as he swear his second oath . ' Sir , ' I say very politely , ' if you 
 mean to make a cursing and a swearing conference of this , I think it 
 only fair to inform you before - hand that you be likely to get the bad 
 of it . when the whole collection of british oath be exhaust , I 
 can swear fluently in five foreign language : I have always make it a 
 principle to pay back abuse at compound interest , and I do not   exaggerate 
 in say , that I be quite capable of swear you out of your sens , 
 if you persist in set I the example . and now , if you like to go on , 
 pray do - I be ready to hear you . ' while I be speak , he star at 
 I in a state of helpless astonishment ; when I have do , he begin to 
 bluster again - but it be a pompous , dignified , parliamentary sort of 
 bluster , now , end in his pull your unlucky marriage - certificate 
 out of his pocket , assert for the fiftieth time , that the girl be 
 innocent , and declare that he would make you acknowledge she , if he go 
 before a magistrate to do it . that be what he say when you see he , I 
 suppose ? " 

 " yes : almost word for word . " 

 " I have my answer ready for he , before he could put the certificate back 
 in his pocket . ' now , Mr. Sherwin , ' I say , ' have the goodness to listen 
 to I . my father have certain family prejudice and nervous delicacy , 
 which I do not inherit from he , and which I mean to take good care to 
 prevent you from work on . at the same time , I beg you to understand 
 that I have come here without his knowledge . I be not my father 's 
 ambassador , but my brother 's - who be unfit to deal with you , himself ; 
 because he be not half hard - hearte , or half worldly enough . as my 
 brother 's envoy , therefore , and out of consideration for my father 's 
 peculiar feeling , I now offer you , from my own resource , a certain 
 annual sum of money , far more than sufficient for all your daughter 's 
 expense - a sum payable quarterly , on condition that neither you nor she 
 shall molest we ; that you shall never make use of our name anywhere ; 
 and that the fact of my brother 's marriage   hitherto preserve a secret 
 shall for the future be consign to oblivion . we keep our opinion of 
 your daughter 's guilt - you keep your opinion of her innocence . we 
 have silence to buy , and you have silence to sell , once a quarter ; and 
 if either of we break our condition , we both have our remedy - your 's 
 the easy remedy , our be the difficult . this arrangement - a very unfair 
 and dangerous for we ; a very advantageous and safe one for you - I 
 understand that you finally refuse ? ' ' Sir , ' say he , solemnly , ' I should 
 be unworthy the name of a father - ' ' thank you ' - I remark , feel 
 that he be fall back on paternal sentiment - ' thank you ; I quite 
 understand . we will get on , if you please , to the reverse side of the 
 question . ' " 

 " the reverse side ! what reverse side , Ralph ? what could you possibly say 
 more ? " 

 " you shall hear . ' be , on your part , thoroughly determine , ' I say , 
 ' to permit no compromise , and to make my brother   his family of course 
 include   acknowledge a woman , of whose guilt they entertain not the 
 slight doubt , you think you can gain your object by threaten 
 an exposure . do not   threaten any more ! make your exposure ! go to the 
 magistrate at once , if you like ! Gibbet our name in the newspaper 
 report , as a family connect by marriage with Mr. Sherwin the 
 linen - draper 's daughter , whom they believe to have disgrace herself 
 as a woman and a wife for ever . do your very bad ; make public every 
 shameful particular that you can - what advantage will you get by it ? 
 revenge , I grant you . but will revenge put a halfpenny into your pocket ? 
 will revenge pay a farthing towards your daughter 's keep ? will revenge 
 make we receive she ? not a bit of it ! we shall be drive into a corner ; 
 we shall have no exposure to dread after you have expose we ; we 
 shall have no remedy leave , but a desperate remedy , and we will go to 
 law - boldly , openly go to law , and get a divorce . we have write 
 evidence , which you know nothing about , and can call testimony which you 
 can not gag . I be no lawyer , but I will bet you five hundred to one   quite 
 in a friendly way , my dear Sir !   that we get our case . what follow ? we 
 send you back your daughter , without a shred of character leave to cover 
 she ; and we comfortably wash our hand of you altogether . ' " 

 " Ralph ! Ralph ! how could you - " 

 " stop ! hear the end of it . of course I know that we could not   carry out 
 this divorce - threat , without its be the death of my father ; but 
 I think a little quiet bullying on my part might do Mr. Shopkeeper 
 Sherwin some good . and I be right . you never see a man sit sorer on the 
 sharp edge of a dilemma than he do . I stick to my point in spite of 
 everything ; silence and money , or exposure and divorce - just which 
 he please . ' I deny every one of your infamous imputation , ' say he . 
 ' that be not the question , ' say I. ' I will go to your father , ' say he . 
 ' you will not   be let in , ' say I. ' I will write to he , ' say he . ' he will not 
 receive your letter , ' say I. there we come to a pull - up . he begin 
 to stammer , and I refresh myself with a pinch of snuff . find it 
 would not   do , he throw off the Roman at last , and resume the Tradesman . 
 ' even suppose I consent to this abominable compromise , what be to 
 become of my daughter ? ' he ask . ' just what become of other people who 
 have comfortable annuity to live on , ' I answer . ' affection for my 
 deeply - wrong child half incline I to consult her wish , before we 
 settle anything - I will go up - stair , ' say he . ' and I will wait for you 
 down here , ' say I. " 

 " do he object to that ? " 

 " not he . he go up - stair , and in a few minute run down again , with 
 an open letter in his hand , look as if the devil be after he before 
 his time . at the last three or four stair , he trip , catch at the 
 bannister , drop the letter over they in do so , tumble into the 
 passage in such a fury and fright that he look like a madman , tear his 
 hat off a peg , and rush out . I just hear he say his daughter should 
 come back , if he put a straight waistcoat on she , as he pass the door . 
 between his tumble , his passion , and his hurry , he never think of 
 come back for the letter he have drop over the bannister . I pick 
 it up before I go away , suspect it might be good evidence on our 
 side ; and I be right . read it yourself ; Basil ; you have every moral and 
 legal claim on the precious document - and here it be . " 

 I take the letter , and read   in Mannion 's handwriting   these word , 
 date from the hospital : - 



 " I have receive your last note , and can not wonder that you be get 
 impatient under restraint . but , remember , that if you have not act as 
 I warn you beforehand to act in case of accident - if you have not 
 protest innocence to your father , and preserve total silence towards 
 your mother ; if you have not keep in close retirement , behave like 
 a domestic martyr , and avoid , in your character of a victim , all 
 voluntary mention of your husband 's name - your position might have be 
 a very awkward one . not be able to help you , the only thing I could 
 do be to teach you how to help yourself . I give you the lesson , and you 
 have be wise enough to profit by it . 

 " the time have now come for a change in my plan . I have suffer 
 a relapse ; and the date of my discharge from this place be still 
 uncertain . I doubt the security , both on your account , and on mine , of 
 still leave you at your father 's house , to await my cure . come to 
 I here , therefore , to - morrow , at any hour when you can get away 
 unperceived . you will be let in as a visitor , and show to my bedside , 
 if you ask for Mr. Turner - the name I have give to the hospital 
 authority . through the help of a friend outside these wall , I have 
 arrange for a lodging in which you can live undiscovered , until I be 
 discharged and can join you . you can come here twice a week , if you 
 like , and you have well do so , to accustom yourself to the sight of 
 my injury . I tell you in my first letter how and where they have 
 be inflict - when you see they with your own eye , you will be good 
 prepared to hear what my future purpose be , and how you can aid they . 

 " R. M. " 


 this be evidently the letter about which I have be consult by the 
 servant at North Villa ; the date correspond with the date of Mannion 's 
 letter to I . I notice that the envelope be miss , and ask Ralph 
 whether he have get it . 

 " no , " he reply ; " Sherwin drop the letter just in the state in which 
 I have give it to you . I suspect the girl take away the envelope with 
 she , think that the letter which she leave behind she be inside . 
 but the loss of the envelope do not   matter . look there : the fellow have 
 write her name at the bottom of the leaf ; as coolly as if it be an 
 ordinary correspondence . she be identify with the letter , and that be 
 all we want in our future dealing with her father . " 

 " but , Ralph , do you think - " 

 " do I think her father will get she back ? if he be in time to catch she 
 at the hospital , he assuredly will . if not , we shall have some little 
 trouble on our side , I suspect . this seem to I to be how the matter 
 stand now , Basil : - after that letter , and she run away , Sherwin 
 will have nothing for it but to hold his tongue about her innocence ; we 
 may consider he as settle and do with . as for the other rascal , 
 Mannion , he certainly write as if he mean to do something dangerous . 
 if he really do attempt to annoy we , we will mark he again   I will 
 do it next time , by way of a little change ! ; he have no marriage 
 certificate to shake over our head , at any rate . what be the matter 
 now ? - you be look pale again . " 

 I feel that my colour be change , while he speak . there be 
 something ominous in the contrast which , at that moment , I could not 
 fail to draw between Mannion 's enmity , as Ralph ignorantly estimate it , 
 and as I really know it . already the first step towards the conspiracy 
 with which I be threaten , have be take by the departure of 
 Sherwin 's daughter from her father 's house . should I , at this early 
 warning of come event , show my brother the letter I have receive from 
 Mannion ? no ! such defence against the danger threaten in it as Ralph 
 would be sure to counsel , and to put in practice , might only include 
  he in the life - long persecution which menace I . when he repeat 
 his remark about my sudden paleness , I merely account for it by some 
 common - place excuse , and beg he to proceed . 

 " I suppose , Basil , " he say , " the truth be , that you can not   help be a 
 little shocked - though you could expect nothing well from the girl - at 
 she boldly follow this fellow Mannion , even to the hospital "   Ralph 
 be right ; in spite of myself , this feeling be one among the many which 
 now influence I .   " set that aside , however , we be quite ready , I 
 take it , to let she stick to her choice , and live just as she please , 
 so long as she do not   live under our name . there be the great fear and 
 great difficulty now ! if Sherwin can not   find she , we must ; otherwise , we 
 can never feel certain that she be not incur all sort of debt as 
 your wife . if her father get she back , I shall be able to bring she 
 to term at North Villa ; if not , I must get speech of she , wherever she 
 happen to be hide . she be the only thorn in our side now , and we must 
 pull she out with gold pincer immediately . do not   you see that , Basil ? " 

 " I see it , Ralph ! " 

 " very well . either to - night or to - morrow morning , I will communicate with 
 Sherwin , and find out whether he have lay hand on she . if he have not , 
 we must go to the hospital , and see what we can discover for ourselves . 
 do not   look miserable and downhearted , Basil , I will go with you : you 
 need not   see she again , or the man either ; but you must come with I , 
 for I may be oblige to make use of you . and now , I be off for to - day , in 
 good earnest . I must get back to Mrs. Ralph   unfortunately she happen 
 to be one of the most sensitive woman in the world , or she will be 
 send to advertise I in the newspaper . we shall pull through this , 
 my dear fellow - you will see we shall ! by the bye , you do not   know of a 
 nice little detach house in the Brompton neighbourhood , do you ? Most 
 of my old theatrical friend live about there - a detached house , mind ! 
 the fact be , I have take to the violin lately   I wonder what I shall 
 take to next ? ; Mrs. Ralph accompany I on the pianoforte ; and we 
 might be an execrable nuisance to very near neighbour - that be all ! you 
 do not   know of a house ? never mind ; I can go to an agent , or something of 
 that sort . Clara shall know to - night that we be move prosperously , 
 if I can only give the worthy creature in the world the slip : she be a 
 little obstinate , but , I assure you , a really superior woman . only think 
 of my dropping down to play the fiddle , and pay rent and taxis 
 in a suburban villa ! how be the fast man fall ! good bye , Basil , good 
 bye ! " 

 VII . 

 the next morning , Ralph never appear - the day pass on , and I hear 
 nothing - at last , when it be evening , a letter come from he . 

 the letter inform I that my brother have write to Mr. Sherwin , 
 simply ask whether he have recover his daughter . the answer to 
 this question do not arrive till late in the day ; and be in the 
 negative - Mr. Sherwin have not find his daughter . she have leave the 
 hospital before he get there ; and no one could tell he whither she 
 have go . his language and manner , as he himself admit , have be so 
 violent that he be not allow to enter the ward where Mannion lie . 
 when he return home , he find his wife at the point of death ; and on 
 the same evening she expire . Ralph describe his letter , as the letter 
 of a man half out of his sens . he only mention his daughter , to 
 declare , in term almost of fury , that he would accuse she before his 
 wife 's survive relative , of have be the cause of her mother 's 
 death ; and call down the most terrible denunciation on his own head , 
 if he ever speak to his child again , though he should see she starving 
 before he in the street . in a postscript , Ralph inform I that he 
 would call the next morning , and concert measure for track Sherwin 's 
 daughter to her present retreat . 

 every sentence in this letter bore warning of the crisis which be now 
 close at hand ; yet I have as little of the desire as of the power to 
 prepare for it . a superstitious conviction that my action be govern 
 by a fatality which no human foresight could alter or avoid , begin to 
 strengthen within I . from this time forth , I await event with the 
 uninquiring patience , the helpless resignation of despair . 

 my brother come , punctual to his appointment . when he propose that I 
 should at once accompany he to the hospital , I never hesitate at do 
 as he desire . we reach our destination ; and Ralph approach the 
 gate to make his first enquiry . 

 he be still speak to the porter , when a gentleman advance towards 
 they , on his way out of the hospital . I see he recognise my brother , 
 and hear Ralph exclaim : 

 " Bernard ! Jack Bernard ! have you come to England , of all the man in the 
 world ! " 

 " why not ? " be the answer . " I get every surgical testimonial the Hotel 
 Dieu could give I , six month ago ; and could not   afford to stay 
 in Paris only for my pleasure . do you remember call I a ' mute , 
 inglorious Liston , ' long ago , when we last meet ? well , I have come to 
 England to soar out of my obscurity and blaze into a shin light of 
 the profession . plenty of practice at the hospital , here - very little 
 anywhere else , I be sorry to say . " 

 " you do not   mean that you belong to this hospital ? " 

 " my dear fellow , I be regularly on the staff ; I be here every day of my 
 life . " 

 " you be the very man to enlighten we . here , Basil , cross over , and 
 let I introduce you to an old Paris friend of mine . Mr. Bernard - my 
 brother . you have   often hear I talk , Basil , of a young son of old Sir 
 William Bernard 's , who prefer a cure of body to a cure of soul ; 
 and actually insist on work in a hospital when he might have 
 idle in a family living . this be the man - the good of doctor and good 
 fellow . " 

 " be you bring your brother to the hospital to follow my mad 
 example ? " ask Mr. Bernard , as he shake hand with I . 

 " not exactly , Jack ! but we really have an object in come here . can you 
 give we ten minute ' talk , somewhere in private ? we want to know about 
 one of your patient . " 

 he lead we into an empty room , on the ground - floor of the building . 
 " leave the matter in my hand , " whisper Ralph to I , as we sit down . 
 " I will find out everything . " 

 " now , Bernard , " he say , " you have a man here , who call himself Mr. 
 Turner ? " 

 " be you a friend of that mysterious patient ? wonderful ! the student 
 call he ' the Great Mystery of London ; ' and I begin to think the 
 student be right . do you want to see he ? when he have not get his 
 green shade on , he be rather a startling sight , I can tell you , for 
 unprofessional eye . " 

 " no , no - at least , not at present ; my brother here , not at all . the fact 
 be , certain circumstance have happen which oblige we to look after 
 this man ; and which I be sure you will not   inquire into , when I tell you 
 that it be our interest to keep they secret . " 

 " certainly not ! " 

 " then , without any more word about it , our object here , to - day , be to 
 find out everything we can about Mr. Turner , and the people who have 
 be to see he . do a woman come , the day before yesterday ? " 

 " yes ; and behave rather oddly , I believe . I be not here when she come , 
 but be tell she ask for Turner , in a very agitated manner . she be 
 direct to the Victoria Ward , where he be ; and when she get there , 
 look excessively flurried and excited - see the Ward quite full , 
 and , perhaps , not be use to hospital . however it be , though the 
 nurse point out the right bed to she , she run in a mighty hurry to the 
 wrong one . " 

 " I understand , " say Ralph ; " just as some woman run into the wrong 
 omnibus , when the right one be straight before they . " 

 " exactly . well , she only discover her mistake   the room be rather 
 dark , after she have stoop down close over the stranger , who be lie 
 with his head away from she . by that time , the nurse be at her side , 
 and lead she to the right bed . there , I be tell , another scene happen . 
 at sight of the patient 's face , which be very frightfully disfigure , 
 she be on the point   as the nurse think   of go into a fit ; but 
 Turner stop she in an instant . he just lay his hand on her arm , and 
 whisper something to she ; and , though she turn as pale as ash , she 
 be quiet directly . the next thing they say he do , be to give she a 
 slip of paper , coolly direct she to go to the address write on 
 it , and to come back to the hospital again , as soon as she could show a 
 little more resolution . she go away at once - nobody know where . " 

 " have nobody ask where ? " 

 " yes ; a fellow who say he be her father , and who behave like a 
 madman . he come here about an hour after she have leave , and would not 
 believe that we know nothing about she   how the deuce should we know 
 anything !   he threaten Turner   whom , by the bye , he call Manning , 
 or some such name   in such an outrageous manner , that we be oblige 
 to refuse he admission . Turner himself will give no information on the 
 subject ; but I suspect that his injury be the result of a quarrel 
 with the father about the daughter - a pretty savage quarrel , I must say , 
 look to the consequence - I beg your pardon , but your brother seem 
 ill ! I be afraid , "   turn to I , " you find the room rather close ? " 

 " no , indeed ; not at all . I have just recover from a serious 
 illness - but pray go on . " 

 " I have very little more to say . the father go away in a fury , just 
 as he come ; the daughter have not yet make her appearance a second time . 
 but , after what be report to I of the first interview , I daresay she 
  will come . she must , if she want to see Turner ; he will not   be out , 
 I suspect , for another fortnight . he have be make himself bad by 
 perpetually write letter ; we be rather afraid of erysipela , but 
 he will get over that danger , I think . " 

 " about the woman , " say Ralph ; " it be of the great importance that we 
 should know where she be now live . be there any possibility   we will 
 pay well for it   of get some sharp fellow to follow her home from 
 this place , the next time she come here ? " 

 Mr. Bernard hesitate a moment , and consider . 

 " I think I can manage it for you with the porter , after you be go , " 
 he say , " provide you leave I free to give any remuneration I may 
 think necessary . " 

 " anything in the world , my dear fellow . have you get pen and ink ? I will 
 write down my brother 's address ; you can communicate result to he , as 
 soon as they occur . " 

 while Mr. Bernard go to the opposite end of the room , in search of 
 writing material , Ralph whisper to I - 

 " if he write to my address , Mrs. Ralph might see the letter . she be 
 the most amiable of her sex ; but if write information of a woman 's 
 residence , direct to I , fall into her hand - you understand , Basil ! 
 besides , it will be easy to let I know , the moment you hear from Jack . 
 look up , young one ! it be all right - we be sail with wind and tide . " 

 here Mr. Bernard bring we pen and ink . while Ralph be write my 
 address , his friend say to I : 

 " I hope you will not suspect I of wish to intrude on your secret , 
 if   assume your interest in Turner to be the reverse of a friendly 
 interest   I warn you to look sharply after he when he leave the 
 hospital . either there have be madness in his family , or his brain have 
 suffer from his external injury . legally , he may be quite fit to 
 be at large ; for he will be able to maintain the appearance of perfect 
 self - possession in all the ordinary affair of life . but , morally , I be 
 convince that he be a dangerous monomaniac ; his mania be connect 
 with some fix idea which evidently never leave he day or night . I 
 would lay a heavy wager that he die in a prison or a madhouse . " 

 " and I will lay another wager , if he be mad enough to annoy we , that we be 
 the people to shut he up , " say Ralph . " there be the address . and now , 
 we need not   waste your time any long . I have take a little place at 
 Brompton , Jack , - you and Basil must come and dine with I , as soon as 
 the carpet be down . " 

 we leave the room . as we cross the hall , a gentleman come forward , and 
 speak to Mr. Bernard . 

 " that man 's fever in the Victoria Ward have declare itself at last , " he 
 say . " this morning the new symptom have appear . " 

 " and what do they indicate ? " 

 " Typhus of the most malignant character - not a doubt of it . come up , and 
 look at he . " 

 I see Mr. Bernard start , and glance quickly at my brother . Ralph fix 
 his eye searchingly on his friend 's face ; exclaim : " Victoria Ward ! 
 why you mention that - ; " and then stop , with a very strange and 
 sudden alteration in his expression . the next moment he draw Mr. Bernard 
 aside , say : " I want to ask you whether the bed in Victoria Ward , 
 occupy by this man whose fever have turn to typhus , be the same bed , 
 or near the bed which - " the rest of the sentence be lose to I as they 
 walk away . 

 after talk together in whisper for a few moment , they rejoin I . 
 Mr. Bernard be explain the different theory of infection to Ralph . 

  " my notion , " he say , " be , that infection be take through the lung ; 
 one breath inhale from the infected atmosphere hang immediately 
 around the diseased person , and generally extend about a foot from 
 he , be enough to communicate his malady to the breather - provide 
 there exist , at the time , in the individual expose to catch 
 the malady , a constitutional predisposition to infection . this 
 predisposition we know to be greatly increase by mental agitation , or 
 bodily weakness ; but , in the case we have be talk of , "   he look 
 at I ,   " the chance of infection or non - infection may be equally 
 balanced . at any rate , I can predict nothing about they at this stage of 
 the discovery . " 

 " you will write the moment you hear anything ? " say Ralph , shake hand 
 with he . 

 " the very moment . I have your brother 's address safe in my pocket . " 

 we separate . Ralph be unusually silent and serious on our way back . 
 he take leave of I at the door of my lodging , very abruptly ; without 
 refer again to our visit to the hospital . 

 a week pass away , and I hear nothing from Mr. Bernard . during this 
 interval , I see little of my brother ; he be occupy in move into 
 his new house . towards the latter part of the week , he come to inform 
 I that he be about to leave London for a few day . my father have ask 
 he to go to the family house , in the country , on business connect 
 with the local management of the estate . Ralph still retain all his 
 old dislike of the steward 's account and the lawyer 's consultation ; 
 but he feel bound , out of gratitude for my father 's special kindness 
 to he since his return to England , to put a constraint on his own 
 inclination , and go to the country as he be desire . he do not expect 
 to be absent more than two or three day ; but earnestly charge I to 
 write to he , if I have any news from the hospital while he be away . 

 during the week , Clara come twice to see I - escape from home by 
 stealth , as before . on each occasion , she show the same affectionate 
 anxiety to set I an example of cheerfulness , and to sustain I in 
 hope . I see , with a sorrow and apprehension which I could not altogether 
 conceal from she , that the weary look in her face have never change , 
 never diminish since I have first observe it . Ralph have , from motif 
 of delicacy , avoid increase the hide anxiety which be but too 
 evidently prey upon her health , by keep she in perfect ignorance 
 of our visit to the hospital , and , indeed , of the particular of all our 
 proceeding since his return . I take care to preserve the same secrecy , 
 during her short interview with I . she bid I farewell after her 
 third visit , with a sadness which she vainly endeavour to hide . I 
 little thought , then , that the tone of her sweet , clear voice have 
 fall on my ear for the last time , before I wander to the far West of 
 England where I now write . 

 at the end of the week - it be on a Saturday , I remember - I leave my 
 lodging early in the morning , to go into the country ; with no intention 
 of return before evening . I have feel a sense of oppression , on 
 rise , which be almost unendurable . the perspiration stand thick on my 
 forehead , though the day be not unusually hot ; the air of London grow 
 hard and hard to breathe , with every minute ; my heart feel tighten 
 to burst ; my temple throb with fever - fury ; my very life seem to 
 depend on escape into pure air , into some place where there be shade 
 from tree , and water that run cool and refreshing to look on . so I set 
 forth , careless in what direction I go ; and remain in the country 
 all day . evening be change into night as I get back to London . 

 I inquire of the servant at my lodging , when she let I in , whether any 
 letter have arrive for I . she answer , that one have come just after I 
 have go out in the morning , and that it be lie on my table . my first 
 glance at it , show I Mr. Bernard 's name write in the corner of the 
 envelope . I eagerly open the letter , and read these word : 



 " private . 

 " Friday . 

 " my DEAR SIR , 

 " on the enclose slip of paper you will find the address of the young 
 woman , of whom your brother speak to I when we meet at the hospital . 
 I regret to say , that the circumstance under which I have obtain 
 information of her residence , be of the most melancholy nature . 

 " the plan which I arrange for discover her abode , in accordance with 
 your brother 's suggestion , prove useless . the young woman never come to 
 the hospital a second time . her address be give to I this morning , by 
 Turner himself ; who beg that I would visit she professionally , as he 
 have no confidence in the medical man who be then in attendance on 
 she . many circumstance combine to make my compliance with his request 
 anything but easy or desirable ; but know that you - or your brother 
 I ought , perhaps , rather to say - be interested in the young woman , 
 I determine to take the very early opportunity of see she , and 
 consult with her medical attendant . I could not get to she till late 
 in the afternoon . when I arrive , I find she suffering from one of the 
 bad attack of Typhus I ever remember to have see ; and I think it 
 my duty to state candidly , that I believe her life to be in imminent 
 danger . at the same time , it be right to inform you that the gentleman 
 in attendance on she do not share my opinion : he still think there be 
 a good chance of save she . 

 " there can be no doubt whatever , that she be infect with Typhus 
 at the hospital . you may remember my tell you , how her agitation 
 appear to have deprive she of self - possession , when she enter the 
 ward ; and how she run to the wrong bed , before the nurse could stop she . 
 the man whom she thus mistook for Turner , be suffer from fever which 
 have not then specifically declare itself ; but which do so declare 
 itself , as a Typhus fever , on the morning when you and your brother come 
 to the hospital . this man 's disorder must have be infectious when the 
 young woman stoop down close over he , under the impression that he 
 be the person she have come to see . although she start back at once , 
 on discover her mistake , she have breathe the infection into her 
 system - her mental agitation at the time , accompany   as I have since 
 understand   by some physical weakness , render she specially liable to 
 the danger to which she have accidentally expose herself . 

 " since the first symptom of her disease appear , on Saturday last , I 
 can not find that any error have be commit in the medical treatment , 
 as report to I . I remain some time by her bedside to - day , observe 
 she . the delirium which be , more or less , an invariable result of 
 Typhus , be particularly mark in her case , and manifest itself both 
 by speech and gesture . it have be find impossible to quiet she , by 
 any mean hitherto try . while I be watch by she , she never cease 
 call on your name , and entreat to see you . I be inform by her 
 medical attendant , that her wandering have almost invariably take this 
 direction for the last four - and - twenty hour . occasionally she mix 
 other name with your , and mention they in term of abhorrence ; but 
 her persistency in call for your presence , be so remarkable that I 
 be tempt , merely from what I have hear myself ; to suggest that you 
 really should go to she , on the bare chance that you might exercise some 
 tranquillising influence . at the same time , if you fear infection , or 
 for any private reason   into which I have neither the right nor the 
 wish to inquire   feel unwilling to take the course I have point out , 
 do not by any mean consider it your duty to accede to my proposal . I 
 can conscientiously assure you that duty be not involve in it . 

 " I have , however , another suggestion to make , which be of a positive 
 nature , and which I be sure will meet with your approval . it be , that 
 her parent , or some of her other relation , if her parent be not 
 alive , should be inform of her situation . possibly , you may know 
 something of her connection , and can therefore do this good office . she 
 be die in a strange place , among people who avoid she as they would 
 avoid a pestilence . even though it be only to bury she , some relation 
 ought to be immediately summon to her bed - side . 

 " I shall visit she twice to - morrow , in the morning and at night . if you 
 be not willing to risk see she   and I repeat that it be in no sense 
 imperative that you should combat such unwillingness , perhaps you will 
 communicate with I at my private address . 

 " I remain , dear Sir , 

 " faithfully your , 

 " JOHN BERNARD . 

 " P. S. - I open my letter again , to inform you that Turner , act 
 against all advice , have leave the hospital to - day . he attempt to go 
 on Tuesday last , when , I believe , he first receive information of the 
 young woman 's serious illness , but be seize with a violent attack of 
 giddiness , on attempt to walk , and fall down just outside the door of 
 the ward . on this second occasion , however , he have succeed in get 
 away without any accident - as far , at least , as the person employ 
 about the hospital can tell . " 



 when the letter fall from my trembling hand , when I first ask of my 
 own heart the fearful question : - " have I , to whom the mere thought of 
 ever see this woman again have be as a pollution to shrink from , the 
 strength to stand by her death - bed , the courage to see she die ? " - then , 
 and not till then , do I really know how suffering have fortify , while 
 it have humble I ; how affliction have the power to purify , as well as to 
 pain . 

 all bitter memory of the ill that she have do I , of the misery I have 
 suffer at her hand , lose its hold on my mind . once more , her mother 's 
 last word of earthly lament - " oh , who will pray for she when I be 
 go ! " seem to be murmur in my ear - murmur in harmony with 
 the divine word in which the Voice from the Mount of Olives teach 
 forgiveness of injury to all mankind . 

 she be die : die among stranger in the pin madness of fever - and 
 the one being of all who know she , whose presence at her bedside 
 might yet bring calmness to her last moment , and give she quietly and 
 tenderly to death , be the man whom she have pitilessly deceive and 
 dishonour , whose youth she have ruin , whose hope she have wreck 
 for ever . strangely have destiny bring we together - terribly have it 
 separate we - awfully would it now unite we again , at the end ! 

 what be my wrong , heavy as they have be ; what my suffering , 
 poignant as they still be , that they should stand between this die 
 woman , and the last hope of awaken she to the consciousness that 
 she be go before the throne of God ? the sole resource for she which 
 human skill and human pity could now suggest , embrace the sole chance 
 that she might still be recover for repentance , before she be 
 resign to death . how do I know , but that in those ceaseless cry 
 which have utter my name , there speak the last earthly anguish of 
 the torture spirit , call upon I for one drop of water to cool its 
 burn guilt - one drop from the water of Peace ? 

 I take up Mr. Bernard 's letter from the floor on which it have fall , 
 and re - direct it to my brother ; simply write on a blank place in the 
 inside , " I have go to soothe her last moment . " before I depart , I 
 write to her father , and summon he to she bedside . the guilt of his 
 absence - if his heartless and hardened nature do not change towards 
 she - would now rest with he , and not with I . I forbore from think 
 how he would answer my letter ; for I remember his write word to my 
 brother , declare that he would accuse his daughter of have cause 
 her mother 's death ; and I suspect he even then , of wish to shift 
 the shame of his conduct towards his unhappy wife from himself to his 
 child . 

 after write this second letter , I set forth instantly for the house 
 to which Mr. Bernard have direct I . no thought of myself ; no thought , 
 even , of the peril suggest by the ominous disclosure about Mannion , 
 in the postscript to the surgeon 's letter , ever cross my mind . in the 
 great stillness , in the heavenly serenity that have come to my spirit , 
 the waste fire of every sensation which be only of this world , seem 
 quench for ever . 

 it be eleven o'clock when I arrive at the house . a slatternly , sulky 
 woman open the door to I . " oh ! I suppose you be another doctor , " 
 she mutter , star at I with scowl eye . " I wish you be the 
 undertaker , to get she out of my house before we all catch our death of 
 she ! there ! there be the other doctor come down stair ; he will show you 
 the room - I will not   go near it . " 

 as I take the candle from her hand , I see that Mr. Bernard be 
 approach I from the stair . 

 " you can do no good , I be afraid , " he say , " but I be glad you have 
 come . " 

 " there be no hope , then ? " 

 " in my opinion , none . Turner come here this morning , whether she 
 recognise he , or not , in her delirium , I can not say ; but she grow so 
 much bad in his presence , that I insist on his not see she 
 again , except under medical permission . just now , there be no one in the 
 room - be you willing to go up stair at once ? " 

 " do she still speak of I in her wandering ? " 

 " yes , as incessantly as ever . " 

 " then I be ready to go to she bedside . " 

 " pray believe that I feel deeply what a sacrifice you be make . since 
 I write to you , much that she have say in her delirium have tell I " -   he 
 hesitate   - " have tell I more , I be afraid , than you would wish I to 
 have know , as a comparative stranger to you . I will only say , that 
 secret unconsciously disclose on the death - bed be secret sacre 
 to I , as they be to all who pursue my calling ; and that what I have 
 unavoidably hear above stair , be doubly sacred in my estimation , as 
 affect a near and dear relative of one of my old friend . " he 
 pause , and take my hand very kindly ; then add : " I be sure you will 
 think yourself reward for any trial to your feeling to - night , if you 
 can only remember in year to come , that your presence quiet she in 
 her last moment ! " 

 I feel his sympathy and delicacy too strongly to thank he in word ; I 
 could only look my gratitude as he ask I to follow he up stair . 

 we enter the room softly . once more , and for the last time in this 
 world , I stand in the presence of Margaret Sherwin . 

 not even to see she , as I have last see she , be such a sight of misery 
 as to behold she now , forsake on her deathbed , to look at she , as she 
 lie with her head turn from I , fretfully cover and uncover she 
 face with the loose tress of her long black hair , and mutter my 
 name incessantly in her fever - dream : " Basil ! Basil ! Basil ! I will never 
 leave off call for he , till he come . Basil ! Basil ! where be he ? oh , 
 where , where , where ! " 

 " he be here , " say the doctor , take the candle from my hand , and 
 hold it , so that the light fall full on my face . " look at she and 
 speak to she as usual , when she turn round , " he whisper to I . 

 still she never move ; still those hoarse , fierce , quick tone - that 
 voice , once the music that my heart beat to ; now the discord that it 
 writhe under - muttered fast and fast : " Basil ! Basil ! bring he 
 here ! bring I Basil ! " 

 " he be here , " repeat Mr. Bernard loudly . " look ! look up at he ! " 

 she turn in an instant , and tear the hair back from her face . for a 
 moment , I force myself to look at she ; for a moment , I confront the 
 smoulder fever in her cheek ; the glare of the bloodshot eye ; 
 the distortion of the parch lip ; the hideous clutching of the 
 outstretche finger at the empty air - but the agony of that sight be 
 more than I could endure : I turn away my head , and hide my face in 
 horror . 

 " compose yourself , " whisper the doctor . " now she be quiet , speak to 
 she ; speak to she before she begin again ; call she by her name . " 

 her name ! could my lip utter it at such a moment as this ? 

 " quick ! quick ! " cry Mr. Bernard . " try she while you have the chance . " 

 I struggle against the memory of the past , and speak to she - God 
 know as gently , if not as happily , as in the bygone time ! 

 " Margaret , " I say , " Margaret , you ask for I , and I have come . " 

 she toss her arm above her head with a shrill scream , frightfully 
 prolong till it end in low moaning and murmuring ; then turn she 
 face from we again , and pull her hair over it once more . 

 " I be afraid she be too far go , " say the doctor ; " but make another 
 trial . " 

 " Margaret , " I say again , " have you forget I ? Margaret ! " 

 she look at I once more . this time , her dry , dull eye seem to 
 soften , and her finger twin themselves less passionately in her hair . 
 she begin to laugh - a low , vacant , terrible laugh . 

 " yes , yes , " she say , " I know he be come at last ; I can make he do 
 anything . get I my bonnet and shawl ; any shawl will do , but a mourning 
 shawl be good , because we be go to the funeral of our wedding . come , 
 Basil ! let us go back to the church , and get unmarried again ; that be what 
 I want you for . we do not   care about each other . Robert Mannion want 
 I more than you do - he be not ashamed of I because my father 's a 
 tradesman ; he will not   make believe that he be in love with I , and then 
 marry I to spite the pride of his family . come ! I will tell the clergyman 
 to read the service backwards ; that make a marriage no marriage at all , 
 everybody know . " 

 as the last wild word escape she , some one below stair call to Mr. 
 Bernard . he go out for a minute , then return again , tell I that 
 he be summon to a case of sudden illness which he must attend without 
 a moment 's delay . 

 " the medical man whom I find here when I first come , " he say , " be 
 send for this evening into the country , to be consult about an 
 operation , I believe . but if anything happen , I shall be at your 
 service . there be the address of the house to which I be now go " 
  he write it down on a card ; " you can send , if you want I . I will get 
 back , however , as soon as possible , and see she again ; she seem to be 
 a little quieter already , and may become quieter still , if you stay 
 long . the night - nurse be below - I will send she up as I go downstairs . 
 keep the room well ventilate , the window open as they be now . do not 
 breathe too close to she , and you need fear no infection . look ! her eye 
 be still fix on you . this be the first time I have see she look in 
 the same direction for two minute together ; one would think she really 
 recognise you . wait till I come back , if you possibly can - I will not   be a 
 moment long than I can help . " 

 he hastily leave the room . I turn to the bed , and see that she be 
 still look at I . she have never cease murmur to herself while Mr. 
 Bernard be speak ; and she do not stop when the nurse come in . 

 the first sight of this woman , on her entrance , sicken and shock I . 
 all that be naturally repulsive in she , be make doubly revolt by 
 the characteristic of the habitual drunkard , lower and glare at 
 I in her purple , bloated face . to see her heavy hand shake at the 
 pillow , as they try mechanically to arrange it ; to see her stand , 
 alternately leer and scowl by the bedside , an incarnate blasphemy 
 in the sacred chamber of death , be to behold the most horrible of all 
 mockery , the most impious of all profanation . no loneliness in the 
 presence of mortal agony could try I to the quick , as the sight of that 
 foul old age of degradation and debauchery , defile the sick room , now 
 try I . I determine to wait alone by the bedside till Mr. Bernard 
 return . 

 with some difficulty , I make the wretched drunkard understand that she 
 might go downstairs again ; and that I would call she if she be want . 
 at last , she comprehend my meaning , and slowly quit the room . the 
 door close on she ; and I be leave alone to watch the last moment of 
 the woman who have ruin I ! 

 as I sit down near the open window , the sound outside in the street 
 tell of the waning of the night . there be an echo of many footstep , a 
 hoarse murmur of conflicting voice , now near , now afar off . the public 
 house be disperse their drunken crowd - the crowd of a Saturday 
 night : it be twelve o'clock . 

 through those street - sound of fierce ribaldry and ghastly mirth , 
 the voice of the die woman penetrate , speak more slowly , more 
 distinctly , more terribly than it have speak yet . 

 " I see he , " she say , star vacantly at I , and move her hand 
 slowly to and fro in the air . " I see he ! but he be a long way off ; he 
 can not   hear our secret , and he do not suspect you as mother do . 
 do not   tell I that about he any more ; my flesh creep at it ! what be 
 you look at I in that way for ? you make I feel on fire . you know 
 I like you , because I must like you ; because I can not   help it . it be no 
 use say hush : I tell you he can not   hear we , and can not   see we . he can 
 see nothing ; you make a fool of he , and I make a fool of he . but mind ! 
 I will ride in my own carriage : you must keep thing secret enough to 
 let I do that . I say I will ride in my carriage : and I will go where 
 father walk to business : I do not   care if I splash he with my 
 carriage wheel ! I will be even with he for some of the passion he be 
 be in with I . you see how I will go into our shop and order dress ! 
  be quiet ! I say he can not   hear we . I will have velvet where his sister 
 have silk , and silk where she have muslin : I be a fine girl than she be , 
 and I will be well dress . tell he anything , indeed ! what have I 
 ever let out ? it be not so easy always to make believe I be in love with 
 he , after what you have tell I . suppose he find we out ? - rash ? I be 
 no more rash than you be ! why do not   you come back from France in time , 
 and stop it all ? why do you let I marry he ? a nice wife I have   be to 
 he , and a nice husband he have be to I - a husband who wait a year ! 
 ha ! ha ! he call himself a man , do not   he ? a husband who wait a year ! " 

 I approach near to the bedside , and speak to she again , in the 
 hope to win she tenderly towards dream of well thing . I know not 
 whether she hear I , but her wild thought change - change darkly to 
 later event . 

 " bed ! bed ! " she cry , " bed everywhere , with die man on they ! and 
 one bed the most terrible of all - look at it ! the deformed face , with 
 the white of the pillow all round it ! his face ? his face , that 
 have not   a fault in it ? never ! it be the face of a devil ; the finger - nail 
 of the devil be on it ! take I away ! drag I out ! I can not   move for that 
 face : it be always before I : it be wall I up among the bed : it be 
 burn I all over . water ! water ! drown I in the sea ; drown I deep , 
 away from the burn face ! " 

 " Hush , Margaret ! hush ! drink this , and you will be cool again . " I give 
 she some lemonade , which stand by the bedside . 

 " yes , yes ; hush , as you say . where be Robert ? Robert Mannion ? not here ! 
 then I have   get a secret for you . when you go home to - night , Basil , and 
 say your prayer , pray for a storm of thunder and lightning ; and pray 
 that I may be strike dead in it , and Robert too . it be a fortnight to my 
 aunt 's party ; and in a fortnight you will wish we both dead , so you have 
 well pray for what I tell you in time . we shall make handsome corps . 
 put rose into my coffin - scarlet rose , if you can find any , because 
 that stand for Scarlet Woman - in the Bible , you know . scarlet ? what do 
 I care ! it be the bold colour in the world . Robert will tell you , and 
 all your family , how many woman be as scarlet as I be - virtue wear it 
 at home , in secret ; and vice wear it abroad , in public : that be the only 
 difference , he say . scarlet rose ! scarlet rose ! throw they into the 
 coffin by hundred ; smother I up in they ; bury I down deep ; in the 
 dark , quiet street - where there be a broad door - step in front of a house , 
 and a white , wild face , something like Basil 's , that be always star on 
 the doorstep awfully . oh , why do I meet he ! why do I marry he ! oh , 
 why ! why ! " 

 she utter the last word in slow , measured cadence - the horrible 
 mockery of a chaunt which she use to play to we at North Villa , on 
 Sunday evening . then her voice sink again ; her articulation thicken , 
 and grow indistinct . it be like the change from darkness to daylight , 
 in the sight of sleepless eye , to hear she only murmur now , after 
 hear her last terrible word . 

 the weary night - time pass on . long and long grow the interval 
 of silence between the scatter noise from the street ; less and less 
 frequent be the sound of distant carriage - wheel , and the echo 
 rapid footstep of late pleasure - seeker hurry home . at last , the 
 heavy tramp of the policeman go his round , alone disturb the 
 silence of the early morning hour . still , the voice from the bed 
 mutter incessantly ; but now , in drowsy , languid tone : still , Mr. 
 Bernard do not return : still the father of the die girl never come , 
 never obey the letter which summon he for the last time to she 
 side . 

  there be yet one more among the absent - one from whose approach 
 the death - bed must be keep sacred ; one , whose evil presence be to be 
 dread as a pestilence and a scourge . mannion ! - where be Mannion ? 

 I sit by the window , resign to wait in loneliness till the end come , 
 watch mechanically the vacant eye that ever watch I - when , 
 suddenly , the face of Margaret seem to fade out of my sight . I start 
 and look round . the candle , which I have place at the opposite end of 
 the room , have burn down without my notice it , and be now expire 
 in the socket . I run to light the fresh candle which lie on the table 
 by its side , but be too late . the wick flicker its last ; the room be 
 leave in darkness . 

 while I feel among the different object under my hand for a box of 
 match : Margaret 's voice strengthen again . 

 " innocent ! innocent ! " I hear her cry mournfully through the darkness . 
 " I will swear I be innocent , and father be sure to swear it too . innocent 
 Margaret ! oh , I ! what innocence ! " 

 she repeat these word over and over again , till the hearing they 
 seem to bewilder all my sens . I hardly know what I touch . 
 suddenly , my search hand stop of themselves , I could not tell 
 why . be there some change in the room ? be there more air in it , as if 
 a door have be open ? be there something move over the floor ? 
 have Margaret leave her bed ? - no ! the mournful voice be speak 
 unintermittingly , and speak from the same distance . 

 I move to search for the match on a chest of drawer , which stand 
 near the window . though the morning be at its darkest , and the house 
 stand midway between two gas - lamp , there be a glimmering of light in 
 this place . I look back into the room from the window , and think 
 I see something shadowy move near the bed . " take he away ! " I hear 
 Margaret scream in her wild tone . " his hand be on I : he be feel 
 my face , to feel if I be dead ! " 

 I run to she , strike against some piece of furniture in the darkness . 
 something pass swiftly between I and the bed , as I get near it . I 
 think I hear a door close . then there be silence for a moment ; and 
 then , as I stretch out my hand , my right hand encounter the 
 little table place by Margaret 's side , and the next moment I feel the 
 match - box that have be leave on it . 

 as I strike a light , her voice repeat close at my ear : 

 " his hand be on I : he be feel my face to feel if I be dead ! " 

 the match flare up . as I carry it to the candle , I look round , and 
 notice for the first time that there be a second door , at the further 
 corner of the room , which light some inner apartment through glass 
 pane at the top . when I try this door , it be lock on the inside , 
 and the room beyond be dark . 

 Dark and silent . but be no one there , hide in that darkness and 
 silence ? be there any doubt now , that stealthy foot have approach 
 Margaret , that stealthy hand have touch she , while the room be in 
 obscurity ? - doubt ? there be none on that point , none on any other . 
 Suspicion shape itself into conviction in an instant , and identify 
 the stranger who have pass in the darkness between I and the bedside , 
 with the man whose presence I have dread , as the presence of an evil 
 spirit in the chamber of death . 

 he be wait secretly in the house - wait for her last moment ; 
 listen for her last word ; watch his opportunity , perhaps , to 
 enter the room again , and openly profane it by his presence ! I place 
 myself by the door , resolve , if he approach , to thrust he back , at 
 any hazard , from the bedside . how long I remain absorb in watch 
 before the darkness of the inner room , I know not - but some time must 
 have elapse before the silence around I force itself suddenly on my 
 attention . I turn towards Margaret ; and , in an instant , all previous 
 thought be suspend in my mind , by the sight that now meet my eye . 

 she have alter completely . her hand , so restless hitherto , lie quite 
 still over the coverlid ; her lip never move ; the whole expression of 
 her face have change - the fever - trace remain on every feature , and 
 yet the fever - look be go . her eye be almost closed ; her quick 
 breathing have grow calm and slow . I touch her pulse ; it be beat 
 with a wayward , flutter gentleness . what do this striking alteration 
 indicate ? recovery ? be it possible ? as the idea cross my mind , every 
 one of my faculty become absorb in the sole occupation of watch 
 her face ; I could not have stir an instant from the bed , for world . 

 the early dawn of day be glimmer faintly at the window , before 
 another change appear - before she draw a long , sigh breath , and 
 slowly open her eye on mine . their first look be very strange and 
 startling to behold ; for it be the look that be natural to she ; the 
 calm look of consciousness , restore to what it have always be in 
 the past time . it last only for a moment . she recognise I ; and , 
 instantly , an expression of anguish and shame fly over the first terror 
 and surprise of her face . she struggle vainly to lift her hand - so 
 busy all through the night ; so idle now ! a faint moan of supplication 
 breathe from her lip ; and she slowly turn her head on the pillow , so 
 as to hide her face from my sight . 

 " oh , my God ! my God ! " she murmur , in low , wail tone , " I have   break 
 his heart , and he still come here to be kind to I ! this be bad than 
 death ! I be too bad to be forgive - leave I ! leave I ! - oh , Basil , leave 
 I to die ! " 

 I speak to she ; but desist almost immediately - desist even from 
 utter her name . at the mere sound of my voice , her suffering rise to 
 agony ; the wild despair of the soul wrestle awfully with the writhing 
 weakness of the body , utter itself in word and cry horrible , beyond 
 all imagination , to hear . I sink down on my knee by the bedside ; the 
 strength which have sustain I for hour , give way in an instant , and 
 I burst into a passion of tear , as my spirit pour from my lip in 
 supplication for her - tear that do not humiliate I ; for I know , 
 while I shed they , that I have forgive she ! 

 the dawn brighten . gradually , as the fair light of the new day flow 
 in lovely upon her bed ; as the fresh morning breeze lift tenderly and 
 playfully the scatter lock of her hair that lie over the pillow - so , 
 the calmness begin to come back to her voice and the stillness of repose 
 to her limb . but she never turn her face to I again ; never , when the 
 wild word of her despair grow few and fainter ; never , when the last 
 faint supplication to I , to leave she to die forsake as she deserve , 
 end mournfully in a long , moan gasp for breath . I wait after 
 this - wait a long time - then speak to she softly - then wait once 
 more ; hear she still breathe , but slowly and more slowly with every 
 minute - then speak to she for the second time , louder than before . she 
 never answer , and never move . be she sleep ? I could not tell . 
 some influence seem to hold I back from go to the other side of 
 the bed , to look at her face , as it lie away from I , almost hide in 
 the pillow . 

 the light strengthen fast , and grow mellow with the clear beauty 
 of the morning sunshine . I hear the sound of rapid footstep advance 
 along the street ; they stop under the window : and a voice which I 
 recognize , call I by my name . I look out : Mr. Bernard have return 
 at last . 

 " I could not get back soon , " he say ; " the case be desperate , and I 
 be afraid to leave it . you will find a key on the chimney - piece - throw 
 it out to I , and I can let myself in ; I tell they not to bolt the door 
 before I go out . " 

 I obey his direction . when he enter the room , I think Margaret 
 move a little , and sign to he with my hand to make no noise . he 
 look towards the bed without any appearance of surprise , and ask I 
 in a whisper when the change have come over she , and how . I tell he 
 very briefly , and inquire whether he have know of such change in other 
 case , like her . 

 " many , " he answer , " many change just as extraordinary , which have 
 raise hope that I never know realise . expect the bad from the 
 change you have witness ; it be a fatal sign . " 

 still , in spite of what he say , it seem as if he fear to wake she ; 
 for he speak in his low tone , and walk very softly when he go 
 close to the bedside . 

 he stop suddenly , just as he be about to feel her pulse , and look 
 in the direction of the glass door - listen attentively - and say , as 
 if to himself - " I think I hear some one move in that room , but I 
 suppose I be mistaken ; nobody can be up in the house yet . " with those 
 word he look down at Margaret , and gently part back her hair from 
 her forehead . 

 " do not   disturb she , " I whisper , ' she be asleep ; surely she be asleep ! " 

 he pause before he answer I , and place his hand on her heart . then 
 softly draw up the bed - linen , till it hide her face . 

 " yes , she be asleep , " he say gravely ; " asleep , never to wake again . she 
 be dead . " 

 I turn aside my head in silence , for my thought , at that moment , be 
 not the thought which can be speak by man to man . 

 " this have be a sad scene for any one at your age , " he resume kindly , 
 as he leave the bedside , " but you have bear it well . I be glad to see 
 that you can behave so calmly under so hard a trial . " 



 Calmly ? 

 yes ! at that moment it be fit that I should be calm ; for I could 
 remember that I have forgive she . 

 VIII . 

 on the fourth day from the morning when she have die , I stand alone in 
 the churchyard by the grave of Margaret Sherwin . 

 it have be leave for I to watch she die moment ; it be leave for I 
 to bestow on her remain the last human charity which the living can 
 extend to the dead . if I could have look into the future on our fatal 
 marriage - day , and could have know that the only home of my giving which 
 she would ever inhabit , would be the home of the grave ! - 

 her father have write I a letter , which I destroy at the time ; and 
 which , if I have it now , I should forbear from copy into these page . 
 let it be enough for I to relate here , that he never forgave the action 
 by which she thwart he in his mercenary design upon I and upon my 
 family ; that he divert from himself the suspicion and disgust of 
 his wife 's survive relative   whose hostility he have some pecuniary 
 reason to fear , by accuse his daughter , as he have declare he would 
 accuse she , of have be the real cause of her mother 's death ; and 
 that he take care to give the appearance of sincerity to the indignation 
 which he profess to feel against she , by refuse to follow she 
 remain to the place of burial . 

 Ralph have return to London , as soon as he receive the letter from Mr. 
 Bernard which I have forward to he . he offer I his assistance 
 in perform the last duty leave to my care , with an affectionate 
 earnestness that I have never see he display towards I before . but Mr. 
 Bernard have generously undertake to relieve I of every responsibility 
 which could be assume by other ; and on this occasion , therefore , I have 
 no need to put my brother 's ready kindness in help I to the test . 

 I stand alone by the grave . Mr. Bernard have take leave of I ; the 
 worker and the idler in the churchyard have alike depart . there be 
 no reason why I should not follow they ; and yet I remain , with my eye 
 fix upon the freshly - turn earth at my foot , think of the dead . 

 some time have pass thus , when the sound of approach footstep 
 attract my attention . I look up , and see a man , clothe in a long 
 cloak draw loosely around his neck , and wear a shade over his eye , 
 which hide the whole upper part of his face , advance slowly towards I , 
 walk with the help of a stick . he come on straight to the grave , and 
 stop at the foot of it - stop opposite I , as I stand at the head . 

 " do you know I again ? " he say . " do you know I for Robert Mannion ? " as 
 he pronounce his name , he raise the shade and look at I . 

 the first sight of that appalling face , with its ghastly discolouration 
 of sickness , its hideous deformity of feature , its fierce and changeless 
 malignity of expression glare full on I in the pierce noonday 
 sunshine - glare with the same unearthly look of fury and triumph which 
 I have see flash through the flash lightning , when I part from 
 he on the night of the storm - strike I speechless where I stand , and 
 have never leave I since . I must not , I dare not , describe that frightful 
 sight ; though it now rise before my imagination , vivid in its horror 
 as on the first day when I see it - though it move hither and thither 
 before I fearfully , while I write ; though it lower at my window , 
 a noisome shadow on the radiant prospect of earth , and sea , and sky , 
 whenever I look up from the page I be now write towards the beauty 
 of my cottage view . 

 " do you know I for Robert Mannion ? " he repeat . " do you know the 
 work of your own hand , now you see it ? or , be I change to you past 
 recognition , as your father might have find my father change , 
 if he have see he on the morning of his execution , stand under the 
 gallow , with the cap over his face ? " 

 still I could neither speak nor move . I could only look away from he in 
 horror , and fix my eye on the ground . 

 he lower the shade to its former position on his face , then speak 
 again . 

 " under this earth that we stand on , " he say , set his foot on the 
 grave ; " down here , where you be now look , lie bury with the 
 bury dead , the last influence which might one day have gain you 
 respite and mercy at my hand . do you think of the one , last chance 
 that you be lose , when you come to see she die ? I watch you , and 
 I watch she . I hear as much as you hear ; I see as much as you see ; 
 I know when she die , and how , as you know it ; I share she last moment 
 with you , to the very end . it be my fancy not to give she up , as your 
 sole possession , even on her death - bed : it be my fancy , now , not to let 
 you stand alone - as if her corpse be your property - over her grave ! " 

 while he utter the last word , I feel my self - possession returning . 
 I could not force myself to speak , as I would fain have speak - I could 
 only move away , to leave he . 

 " stop , " he say , " what I have still to say concern you . I have to tell 
 you , face to face , stand with you here , over her dead body , that 
 what I write from the hospital , be what I will do ; that I will make your 
 whole life to come , one long expiation of this deformity ; "   he point 
 to his face , " and of that death "   he set his foot once more on the 
 grave . " go where you will , this face of mine shall never be turn away 
 from you ; this tongue , which you can never silence but by a crime , 
 shall awaken against you the sleep superstition and cruelty of all 
 mankind . the noisome secret of that night when you follow we , shall 
 reek up like a pestilence in the nostril of your fellow - being , be 
 they whom they may . you may shield yourself behind your family and your 
 friend - I will strike at you through the dearest and the brave 
 of they ! now you have hear I , go ! the next time we meet , you shall 
 acknowledge with your own lip that I can act as I speak . live the free 
 life which Margaret Sherwin have restore to you by her death - you will 
 know it soon for the life of Cain ! " 

 he turn from the grave , and leave I by the way that he have come ; 
 but the hideous image of he , and the remembrance of the word he have 
 speak , never leave I . never for a moment , while I linger alone in 
 the churchyard ; never , when I quit it , and walk through the crowd 
 street . the horror of the fiend - face be still before my eye , the 
 poison of the fiend - word be still in my ear , when I return to my 
 lodging , and find Ralph wait to see I as soon as I enter my room . 

 " at last you have come back ! " he say ; " I be determined to stop till 
 you do , if I stay all day . be anything the matter ? have you get into 
 some bad difficulty than ever ? " 

 " no , Ralph - no . what have you to tell I ? " 

 " something that will rather surprise you , Basil : I have to tell you to 
 leave London at once ! leave it for your own interest and for everybody 
 else 's . my father have find out that Clara have be to see you . " 

 " good heaven ! how ? " 

 " he will not   tell I . but he have find it out . you know how you stand in 
 his opinion - I leave you to imagine what he think of Clara 's conduct in 
 come here . " 

 " no ! no ! tell I yourself , Ralph - tell I how she bear his 
 displeasure ! " 

 " as badly as possible . after have forbid she ever to enter this 
 house again , he now only show how he be offend , by his silence ; and 
 it be exactly that , of course , which distress she . between her notion 
 of implicit obedience to he , and her opposite notion , just as 
 strong , of her sisterly duty to you , she be make miserable from 
 morning to night . what she will end in , if thing go on like this , I be 
 really afraid to think ; and I be not easily frightened , as you know . 
 now , Basil , listen to I : it be your business to stop this , and my 
 business to tell you how . " 

 " I will do anything you wish - anything for Clara 's sake ! " 

 " then leave London ; and so cut short the struggle between her duty and 
 her inclination . if you do not , my father be quite capable of take she 
 at once into the country , though I know he have important business to 
 keep he in London . write a letter to she , say that you have go 
 away for your health , for change of scene and peace of mind - go away , 
 in short , to come back well some day . do not   say where you be go , 
 and do not   tell I , for she be sure to ask , and sure to get it out of 
 I if I know . then she might be write to you , and that might be find 
 out , too . she can not   distress herself about your absence , if you 
 account for it properly , as she distress herself now - that be one 
 consideration . and you will serve your own interest , as well as 
 Clara 's , by go away - that be another . " 

 " never mind my interest . Clara ! I can only think of Clara ! " 

 " but you have interest , and you must think of they . I tell my father 
 of the death of that unhappy woman , and of your noble behaviour when she 
 be die . do not   interrupt I , Basil - it be noble ; I could not   have 
 do what you do , I can tell you ! I see he be more strike by it than 
 he be willing to confess . an impression have be make on he by the 
 turn circumstance have take . only leave that impression to strengthen , 
 and you be safe . but if you destroy it by stay here , after what have 
 happen , and keep Clara in this new dilemma - my dear fellow , 
 you destroy your good chance ! there be a sort of defiance of he in 
 stop ; there be a downright concession to he in go away . " 

 " I will go , Ralph ; you have more than convince I that I ought ! I 
 will go to - morrow , though where - " 

 " you have the rest of the day to think where . I should go abroad and 
 amuse myself ; but your idea of amusement be , most likely , not mine . at 
 any rate , wherever you go , I can always supply you with money , when you 
 want it ; you can write to I , after you have be away some little time , 
 and I can write back , as soon as I have good news to tell you . only 
 stick to your present determination , Basil , and , I will answer for it , 
 you will be back in your own study at home , before you be many month 
 old ! " 

 " I will put it out of my power to fail in my resolution , by write to 
 Clara at once , and give you the letter to place in her hand to - morrow 
 evening , when I shall have leave London some hour . " 

 " that be right , Basil ! that be act and speak like a man ! " 

 I write immediately , account for my sudden absence as Ralph have 
 advise I - write , with a heavy heart , all that I think would be most 
 reassuring and cheer to Clara ; and then , without allow myself time 
 to hesitate or to think , give the letter to my brother . 

 " she shall have it to - morrow night , " he say , " and my father shall know 
 why you have leave town , at the same time . depend on I in this , as in 
 everything else . and now , Basil , I must say good bye - unless you be in 
 the humour for come to look at my new house this evening . ah ! I see 
 that will not   suit you just now , so , good bye , old fellow ! write when you 
 be in any necessity - get back your spirit and your health - and never 
 doubt that the step you be now take will be the good for Clara , and 
 the good for yourself ! " 

 he hurry out of the room , evidently feel more at say farewell 
 than he be willing to let I discover . I be leave alone for the rest of 
 the day , to think whither I should turn my step on the morrow . 

 I know that it would be good that I should leave England ; but there 
 seem to have grow within I , suddenly , a yearning towards my own 
 country that I have never feel before - a home - sickness for the land in 
 which my sister live . not once do my thought wander away to foreign 
 place , while I now try to consider calmly in what direction I should 
 depart when I leave London . 

 while I be still in doubt , my early impression of childhood come 
 back to my memory ; and influence by they , I think of Cornwall . my 
 nurse have be a cornish woman ; my first fancy and first feeling of 
 curiosity have be excite by her cornish story , by the description 
 of the scenery , the custom , and the people of her native land , with 
 which she be ever ready to amuse I . as I grow old , it have always 
 be one of my favourite project to go to Cornwall , to explore the wild 
 western land , on foot , from hill to hill throughout . and now , when no 
 motive of pleasure could influence my choice - now , when I be go 
 forth homeless and alone , in uncertainty , in grief , in peril - the old 
 fancy of long - past day still keep its influence , and point out my new 
 path to I among the rocky boundary of the Cornish shore . 

 my last night in London be a night make terrible by Mannion 's fearful 
 image in all my dream - make mournful , in my wake moment , by thought 
 of the morrow which be to separate I from Clara . but I never falter 
 in my resolution to leave London for her sake . when the morning come , 
 I collect my few necessary , add to they one or two book , and be 
 ready to depart . 

 my way through the street take I near my father 's house . as I pass 
 by the well - remember neighbourhood , my self - control so far deserted 
 I , that I stop and turn aside into the Square , in the hope of 
 see Clara once more before I go away . cautiously and doubtfully , 
 as if I be a trespasser even on the public pavement , I look up at 
 the house which be no more my home - at the window , side by side , of my 
 sister 's sitting - room and bed - room . she be neither stand near they , 
 nor pass accidentally from one room to another at that moment . still 
 I could not persuade myself to go on . I think of many and many an 
 act of kindness that she have do for I , which I seem never to have 
 appreciate until now - I think of what she have suffer , and might yet 
 suffer , for my sake - and the longing to see she once more , though only 
 for an instant , still keep I linger near the house and look up 
 vainly at the lonely window . 

 it be a bright , cool , autumnal morning ; perhaps she might have go out 
 into the garden of the square : it use often to be her habit , when I be 
 at home , to go there and read at this hour . I walk round , outside the 
 railing , search for she between gap in the foliage ; and have nearly 
 make the circuit of the garden thus , before the figure of a lady sit 
 alone under one of the tree , attract my attention . I stop - look 
 intently towards she - and see that it be Clara . 

 her face be almost entirely turn from I ; but I know she by her 
 dress , by her figure - even by her position , simple as it be . she be 
 sit with her hand on a close book which rest on her knee . a 
 little spaniel that I have give she lie asleep at her foot : she seem 
 to be look down at the animal , as far as I could tell by the position 
 of her head . when I move aside , to try if I could see her face , the 
 tree hide she from sight . I be oblige to be satisfied with the little 
 I could discern of she , through the one gap in the foliage which give 
 I a clear view of the place where she be sit . to speak to she , to 
 risk the misery to both of we of say farewell , be more than I dare 
 trust myself to do . I could only stand silent , and look at she - it might 
 be for the last time ! - until the tear gather in my eye , so that I 
 could see nothing more . I resist the temptation to dash they away . 
 while they still hide she from I - while I could not see she again , if I 
 would - I turn from the garden view , and leave the Square . 

 amid all the thought which throng on I , as I walk far and 
 far away from the neighbourhood of what be once my home ; amid all 
 the remembrance of past event - from the first day when I meet Margaret 
 Sherwin to the day when I stand by her grave - which be recall by the 
 mere act of leave London , there now arise in my mind , for the first 
 time , a doubt , which from that day to this have never leave it ; a doubt 
 whether Mannion might not be track I in secret along every step of 
 my way . 

 I stop instinctively , and look behind I . many figure be move 
 in the distance ; but the figure that I have see in the churchyard be 
 nowhere visible among they . a little far on , I look back again , 
 and still with the same result . after this , I let a long interval 
 elapse before I stop ; and then , for the third time , I turn round , 
 and scan the busy street - scene behind I , with eager , suspicious 
 eye . some little distance back , on the opposite side of the way , I 
 catch sight of a man who be stand still   as I be stand , amid 
 the move throng . his height be like Mannion 's height ; and he wear 
 a cloak like the cloak I have see on Mannion , when he approach I at 
 Margaret 's grave . More than this I could not detect , without crossing 
 over . the pass vehicle and foot - passenger constantly intercept my 
 view , from the position in which I stand . 

 be this figure , thus visible only by interval , the figure of Mannion ? 
 and be he really track my step ? as the suspicion strengthen in 
 my mind that it be so , the remembrance of his threat in the churchyard : 
 " you may shield yourself behind your family and your friend : I will 
 strike at you through the dearest and the brave of they - " suddenly 
 recur to I ; and bring with it a thought which urge I instantly 
 to proceed on my way . I never look behind I again , as I now walk 
 on ; for I say within myself : - " if he be follow I , I must not , and 
 will not avoid he : it will be the good result of my departure , that I 
 shall draw after I that destroy presence ; and thus at least remove 
 it far and safely away from my family and my home ! " 

 so , I neither turn aside from the straight direction , nor hurry my 
 step , nor look back any more . at the time I have resolve on , I leave 
 London for Cornwall , without make any attempt to conceal my departure . 
 and though I know that he must surely be follow I , still I never see 
 he again : never discover how close or how far off he be on my track . 

      

 two month have pass since that period ; and I know no more about he 
  now than I know then . 



  JOURNAL . 

 October 19th - my retrospect be finish . I have trace the history of 
 my error and misfortune , of the wrong I have do and the punishment I 
 have suffer for it , from the past to the present time . 

 the page of my manuscript   many more than I think to write at first 
 lie pile together on the table before I . I dare not look they over : I 
 dare not read the line which my own hand have trace . there may be much 
 in my manner of writing that want alteration ; but I have no heart to 
 return to my task , and revise and reconsider as I might if I be intent 
 on produce a book which be to be publish during my lifetime . other 
 will be find , when I be no more , to carve , and smooth , and polish to 
 the popular taste of the day this rugged material of truth which I shall 
 leave behind I . 

 but now , while I collect these leaf , and seal they up , never to be 
 open again by my hand , can I feel that I have relate all which it be 
 necessary to tell ? no ! while mannion live - while I be ignorant of 
 the change that may yet be work in the home from which I be 
 exiled - there remain for I a future which must be record , as the 
 necessary sequel to the narrative of the past . what may yet happen 
 worthy of record , I know not : what suffering I may yet undergo , which 
 may unfit I for continue the labour now terminate for a time , I 
 can not foresee . I have not hope enough in the future , or in myself ; to 
 believe that I shall have the time or the energy to write hereafter , 
 as I have write already , from recollection . it be good , then , that I 
 should note down event daily as they occur ; and so ensure , as far as 
 may be , a continuation of my narrative , fragment by fragment , to the 
 very last . 

 but , first , as a fit beginning to the Journal I now propose to keep , 
 let I briefly reveal something , in this place , of the life that I be 
 lead in my retirement on the cornish coast . 

 the fishing hamlet in which I have write the precede page , be on 
 the southern shore of Cornwall , not more than a few mile distant from 
 the Land 's end . the cottage I inhabit be build of rough granite , rudely 
 thatch , and have but two room . I possess no furniture but my bed , my 
 table , and my chair ; and some half - dozen fisherman and their family 
 be my only neighbour . but I feel neither the want of luxury , nor 
 the want of society : all that I wish for in come here , I have - the 
 complete seclusion . 

 my arrival produce , at first , both astonishment and suspicion . the 
 fisherman of Cornwall still preserve almost all the superstition , 
 even to the gross , which be hold dear by their humble ancestor , 
 century back . my simple neighbour could not understand why I have no 
 business to occupy I ; could not reconcile my worn , melancholy face with 
 my youthful year . such loneliness as mine look unnatural - especially 
 to the woman . they question I curiously ; and the very simplicity of 
 my answer , that I have only come to Cornwall to live in quiet , and regain 
 my health , perplex they afresh . they wait , day after day , when I 
 be first instal in the cottage , to see letter send to I - and no 
 letter arrive : to see my friend join I - and no friend come . this 
 deepen the mystery to their eye . they begin to recall to memory old 
 cornish legend of solitary , secret people who have live , year and 
 year ago , in certain part of the county - come , none know whence ; 
 exist , none know by what mean ; die and disappear , none know 
 when . they feel half inclined to identify I with these mysterious 
 visitor - to consider I as some being , a stranger to the whole human 
 family , who have come to waste away under a curse , and die ominously and 
 secretly among they . even the person to whom I first pay money for 
 my necessary , question , for a moment , the lawfulness and safety of 
 receive it ! 

 but these doubt gradually die away ; this superstitious curiosity 
 insensibly wear off , among my poor neighbour . they become used to my 
 solitary , thoughtful , and   to they   inexplicable mode of existence . 
 one or two little service of kindness which I render , soon after my 
 arrival , to their child , work wonder in my favour ; and I be 
 pity now , rather than distrust . when the result of the fishing be 
 abundant , a little present have be often make to I , out of the net . 
 some week ago , after I have go out in the morning , I find on my 
 return , two or three gull ' egg place in a basket before my door . 
 they have be leave there by the child , as ornament for my cottage 
 window - the only ornament they have to give ; the only ornament they have 
 ever hear of . 

 I can now go out unnoticed , direct my step up the ravine in which 
 our hamlet be situate , towards the old grey stone church which stand 
 solitary on the hill - top , surround by the lonesome moor . if any 
 child happen to be play among the scattered tomb , they do not 
 start and run away , when they see I sit on the coffin stone at the 
 entrance of the churchyard , or wander round the sturdy granite 
 tower , rear by hand which have moulder into dust century ago . my 
 approach have cease to be of evil oman for my little neighbour . they 
 just look up at I , for a moment , with bright smile , and then go on 
 with their game . 

 from the churchyard , I look down the ravine , on fine day , towards the 
 sea . mighty pile of granite soar above the fisherman 's cottage on each 
 side ; the little strip of white beach which the cliff shut in , glow 
 pure in the sunlight ; the inland stream that trickle down the bed of 
 the rock , sparkle , at place , like a rivulet of silver - fire ; the round 
 white cloud , with their violet shadow and bright wavy edge , roll on 
 majestically above I ; the cry of the sea - bird , the endless , dirge 
 murmur of the surf , and the far music of the wind among the ocean 
 cavern , fall , now together , now separately on my ear . nature 's 
 voice and Nature 's beauty - God 's soothe and purify angel of the 
 soul - speak to I most tenderly and most happily , at such time as 
 these . 

 it be when the rain fall , and wind and sea arise together - when , 
 shelter among the cavern in the side of the precipice , I look out 
 upon the dreary wave and the leap spray - that I feel the unknown 
 danger which hang over my head in all the horror of their uncertainty . 
 then , the threat of my deadly enemy strengthen their hold fearfully on 
 all my sens . I see the dim and ghastly personification of a fatality 
 that be lie in wait for I , in the strange shape of the mist which 
 shroud the sky , and move , and whirl , and brighten , and darken in a 
 weird glory of its own over the heaving water . then , the crash of the 
 breaker on the reef howl upon I with a sound of judgment ; and the 
 voice of the wind , growl and battle behind I in the hollow of the 
 cave , be , ever and ever , the same thunder - voice of doom and warn in 
 my ear . 

 do this foreboding that Mannion 's eye be always on I , that his 
 footstep be always secretly follow mine , proceed only from the 
 weakness of my wear - out energy ? could other in my situation restrain 
 themselves from fear , as I do , that he be still incessantly watch 
 I in secret ? it be possible . it may be , that his terrible connection 
 with all my suffering of the past , make I attach credit too easily to 
 the destroy power which he arrogate to himself in the future . or 
 it may be , that all resolution to resist he be paralyse in I , not so 
 much by my fear of his appearance , as by my uncertainty of the time when 
 it will take place - not so much by his menace themselves , as by the 
 delay in their execution . still , though I can estimate fairly the value 
 of these consideration , they exercise over I no lasting influence of 
 tranquillity . I remember what this man have do ; and in spite of 
 all reasoning , I believe in what he have tell I he will yet do . Madman 
 though he may be , I have no hope of defence or escape from he in any 
 direction , look where I will . 

 but for the occupation which the forego narrative have give to my 
 mind ; but for the relief which my heart can derive from its thought of 
 Clara , I must have sink under the torment of suspense and suspicion 
 in which my life be now pass . my sister ! even in this self - impose 
 absence from she , I have still find a mean of connect myself 
 remotely with something that she love . I have take , as the assume 
 name under which I live , and shall continue to live until my father have 
 give I back his confidence and his affection , the name of a little 
 estate that once belong to my mother , and that now belong to 
 her daughter . even the most wretched have their caprice , their last 
 favourite fancy . I possess no memorial of Clara , not even a letter . the 
 name that I have take from the place which she be always fondest and 
 proud of , be , to I , what a lock of hair , a ring , any little loveable 
 keepsake , be to other happy than I be . 

 I have wander away from the simple detail of my life in this place . 
 shall I now return to they ? not to - day ; my head burn , my hand be weary . 
 if the morrow should bring with it no event to write of , on the morrow I 
 can resume the subject from which I now break off . 

 October 20th . - after lay aside my pen , I go out yesterday for 
 the purpose of renew that former friendly intercourse with my poor 
 neighbour , which have be interrupt for the last three week by 
 unintermitting labour at the latter portion of my narrative . 

 in the course of my walk among the cottage and up to the old church 
 on the moor , I see few of the people of the district than usual . 
 the behaviour of those whom I do chance to meet , seem unaccountably 
 alter ; perhaps it be mere fancy , but I think they avoid I . one 
 woman abruptly shut her cottage door as I approach . a fisherman , when 
 I wish he good day , hardly answer ; and walk on without stop 
 to gossip with I as usual . some child , too , whom I overtake on the 
 road to the church , run away from I , make gesture to each other 
 which I could not understand . be the first superstitious distrust of 
 I return after I think it have be entirely overcome ? or be my 
 neighbour only show their resentment at my involuntary neglect of 
 they for the last three week ? I must try to find out to - morrow . 

 21st - I have discover all ! the truth , which I be strangely slow to 
 suspect yesterday , have force itself on I to - day . 

 I go out this morning , as I have purpose , to discover whether my 
 neighbour have really change towards I , or not , since the interval 
 of my three week ' seclusion . at the cottage - door near to mine , two 
 young child be play , whom I know I have succeed in attach 
 to I soon after my arrival . I walk up to speak to they ; but , as I 
 approach , their mother come out , and snatch they from I with a 
 look of anger and alarm . before I could question she , she have take they 
 inside the cottage , and have close the door . 

 almost at the same moment , as if by a preconcerte signal , three or four 
 other woman come out from their abode at a little distance , warn 
 I in loud , angry voice not to come near they , or their child ; and 
 disappear , shut their door . still not suspect the truth , I 
 turn back , and walk towards the beach . the lad whom I employ to 
 serve I with provision , be lounge there against the side of an old 
 boat . at see I , he start up , and walk away a few step - then 
 stop , and call out - 

 " I be not to bring you anything more ; father say he will not   sell to you 
 again , whatever you pay he . " 

 I ask the boy why his father have say that ; but he run back towards 
 the village without answer I . 

 " you have well leave we , " mutter a voice behind I . " if you do not   go of 
 your own accord , our people will starve you out of the place . " 

 the man who say these word , have be one of the first to set the 
 example of friendliness towards I , after my arrival ; and to he I now 
 turn for the explanation which no one else would give I . 

 " you know what we mean , and why we want you to go , well enough , " be his 
 reply . 

 I assure he that I do not ; and beg he so earnestly to enlighten 
 I , that he stop as he be walk away . 

 " I will tell you about it , " he say ; " but not now ; I do not   want to be see 
 with you . "   as he speak he look back at the woman , who be appear 
 once more in front of their cottage .   " go home again , and shut yourself 
 up ; I will come at dusk . " 

 and he come as he have promise . but when I ask he to enter my 
 cottage , he decline , and say he would talk to I outside , at my 
 window . this disinclination to be under my roof , remind I that my 
 supply of food have , for the last week , be leave on the window - ledge , 
 instead of be bring into my room as usual . I have be too 
 constantly occupy to pay much attention to the circumstance at the 
 time ; but I think it very strange now . 

 " do you mean to tell I you do not   suspect why we want to get you out of 
 our place here ? " say the man , look in distrustfully at I through 
 the window . 

 I repeat that I could not imagine why they have all change towards I , 
 or what wrong they think I have do they . 

 " then I will soon let you know it , " he continue . " we want you go from 
 here , because - " 

 " because , " interrupt another voice behind he , which I recognise 
 as his wife 's , " because you be bring a blight on we , and our 
 house - because we want our child 's face leave as God make they - " 

 " because , " interpose a second woman , who have join she , " you be 
 bring devil 's vengeance among christian people ! come back , John ! 
 he be not safe for a true man to speak to . " 

 they drag the fisherman away with they before he could say another 
 word . I have hear enough . the fatal truth burst at once on my mind . 
 Mannion have follow I to Cornwall : his threat be execute to the 
 very letter ! 



  10 o'clock .   - I have light my candle for the last time in this cottage , 
 to add a few line to my journal . the hamlet be quiet ; I hear no 
 footstep outside - and yet , can I be certain that mannion be not lurk 
 near my door at this moment ? 

 I must go when the morning come ; I must leave this quiet retreat , in 
 which I have live so calmly until now . there be no hope that I can 
 reinstate myself in the opinion of my poor neighbour . he have array 
 against I the pitiless hostility of their superstition . he have find 
 out the dormant cruelty , even in the heart of these simple people ; 
 and have awaken they against I , as he say he would . the evil work 
 must have be begin within the last three week , while I be much 
 within door , and there be little chance of meet I in my usual 
 walk . how that work be accomplish it be useless to inquire ; my only 
 object now , must be to prepare myself at once for departure . 

  11 o'clock .   - while I be put up my few book , a minute ago , a 
 little embroider marker fall out of one of they , which I have not 
 observe in the page before ; and which I recognise as have be 
 work for I by Clara . I have a memorial of my sister in my possession , 
 after all ! trifle as it be , I shall preserve it about I , as a 
 messenger of consolation in the time of adversity and peril . 

  1 o'clock .   - the wind sweep down on we , from off the moorland , in 
 fiercer and fiercer gust ; the wave dash heavily against our rock 
 promontory ; the rain drift wildly past my window ; and the dense 
 darkness overspread the whole sky . the storm which have be threaten 
 for some day , be gather fast . 



  Village of Treen , October 22nd .   - the event of this one day have 
 change the whole future of my life . I must force myself to write of 
 they at once . something warn I that if I delay , though only till 
 to - morrow , I shall be incapable of relate they at all . 

 it be still early in the morning - I think about seven o'clock - when I 
 close my cottage door behind I , never to open it again . I meet only one 
 or two of my neighbour as I leave the hamlet . they draw aside to let I 
 advance , without say a word . with a heavy heart , grieve more than 
 I could have imagine possible at depart as an enemy from among the 
 people with whom I have live as a friend , I pass slowly by the last 
 cottage , and ascend the cliff path which lead to the moor . 

 the storm have rag at its fierce some hour back . soon after daylight 
 the wind sink ; but the majesty of the mighty sea have lose none of 
 its terror and grandeur as yet . the huge atlantic wave still hurl 
 themselves , foaming and furious , against the massive granite of the 
 Cornish cliff . Overhead , the sky be hide in a thick white mist , now 
 hang , still and dripping , down to the ground ; now roll in shape 
 like vast smoke - wreath before the light wind which still blow at 
 interval . at a distance of more than a few yard , the large object 
 be totally invisible . I have nothing to guide I , as I advance , but 
 the ceaseless roaring of the sea on my right hand . 

 it be my purpose to get to Penzance by night . beyond that , I have no 
 project , no thought of what refuge I should seek next . any hope I might 
 have formerly feel of escape from Mannion , have now desert I for 
 ever . I could not discover by any outward indication , that he be still 
 follow my footstep . the mist obscure all object behind I from 
 view ; the ceaseless crash of the shore - wave overwhelm all landward 
 sound , but I never doubt for a moment that he be watch I , as I 
 proceed along my onward way . 

 I walk slowly , keep from the edge of the precipice only by keep 
 the sound of the sea always at the same distance from my ear ; know 
 that I be advance in the proper direction , though very circuitously , 
 as long as I hear the wave on my right hand . to have venture on the 
 short way , by the moor and the cross - road beyond it , would have be 
 only to have lose myself past all chance of extrication , in the mist . 

 in this tedious manner I have go on for some time , before it strike 
 I that the noise of the sea be alter completely to my sense 
 of hearing . it seem to be sound very strangely on each side of 
 I - both on my right hand and on my left . I stop and strain my eye 
 to look through the mist , but it be useless . crag only a few yard 
 off , seem like shadow in the thick white vapour . again , I go on a 
 little ; and , ere long , I hear roll towards I , as it be , under 
 my own foot , and under the roaring of the sea , a howling , hollow , 
 intermittent sound - like thunder at a distance . I stop again , and 
 rest against a rock . after some time , the mist begin to part to 
 seaward , but remain still as thick as ever on each side of I . I go 
 on towards the light sky in front - the thunder - sound boom louder 
 and louder , in the very heart , as it seem , of the great cliff . 

 the mist brighten yet a little more , and show I a landmark to 
 ship , stand on the high point of the surround rock . I climb 
 to it , recognise the glare red and white pattern in which it be 
 paint , and know that I have wander , in the mist , away from the 
 regular line of coast , out on one of the great granite promontory 
 which project into the sea , as natural breakwater , on the southern 
 shore of Cornwall . 

 I have twice penetrate as far as this place , at the early period of 
 my sojourn in the fishing - hamlet , and while I now listen to the 
 thunder - sound , I know from what cause it proceed . 

 beyond the spot where I stand , the rock descend suddenly , and almost 
 perpendicularly , to the range below they . in one of the high part of 
 the wall - side of granite thus form , there open a black , yawn hole 
 that slant nearly straight downwards , like a tunnel , to unknown and 
 unfathomable depth below , into which the wave find entrance through 
 some subterranean channel . even at calm time the sea be never silent 
 in this frightful abyss , but on stormy day its fury be terrific . the 
 wild wave boil and thunder in their imprisonment , till they seem 
 to convulse the solid cliff about they , like an earthquake . but , high 
 as they leapt up in the rocky wall of the chasm , they never leapt into 
 sight from above . nothing but cloud of spray indicate to the eye , what 
 must be the horrible tumult of the rag water below . 

 with my recognition of the place to which I have now wander , come 
 remembrance of the danger I have leave behind I on the rock - track that 
 lead from the mainland to the promontory - danger of narrow ledge and 
 treacherous precipice , which I have pass safely , while unconscious 
 of they in the mist , but which I shrink from tempt again , now that I 
 recollect they , until the sky have clear , and I could see my way well 
 before I . the atmosphere be still brighten slowly over the tossing , 
 distant wave : I determine to wait until it have lose all its obscurity , 
 before I venture to retrace my step . 

 I move down towards the low range of rock , to seek a less exposed 
 position than that which I now occupy . as I near the chasm , the 
 terrific howling of the wave inside it be violent enough to drown , 
 not only the crash sound of the surf on the outward crag of the 
 promontory , but even the shrill cry of the hundred on hundred 
 of sea - bird that whirl around I , except when their flight be 
 immediately over my head . at each side of the abyss , the rock , though 
 very precipitous , afford firm hold for hand and foot . as I descend 
 they , the morbid longing to look on danger , which have lead many a man 
 to the very brink of a precipice , even while he dread it , lead I to 
 advance as near as I durst to the side of the great hole , and to gaze 
 down into it . I could see but little of its black , shin , interior 
 wall , or of the fragment of rock which here and there jut out from 
 they , crown with patch of long , lank , sea - weed wave slowly to 
 and fro in empty space - I could see but little of these thing , for the 
 spray from the bellowing water in the invisible depth below , steam up 
 almost incessantly , like smoke , and shoot , hiss in cloud out of the 
 mouth of the chasm , on to a huge flat rock , cover with sea - weed , that 
 lie beneath and in front of it . the very sight of this smooth , slippery 
 plane of granite , shelve steeply downward , right into the gap 
 depth of the hole , make my head swim ; the thundering of the water 
 bewilder and deafen I - I move away while I have the power : away , 
 some thirty or forty yard in a lateral direction , towards the edge of 
 the promontory which look down on the sea . here , the rock rise again 
 in wild shape , form natural cavern and penthouse . towards one of 
 these I now advance , to shelter myself till the sky have clear . 

 I have just enter the place , close to the edge of the cliff , when a 
 hand be lay suddenly and firmly on my arm ; and , through the crashing 
 of the wave below , the thundering of the water in the abyss behind , 
 and the shrieking of the seabird overhead , I hear these word , speak 
 close to my ear : - 

 " take care of your life . it be not your 's to throw away - it be mine ! " 

 I turn , and see mannion stand by I . no shade conceal the hideous 
 distortion of his face . his eye be on I , as he point significantly 
 down to the surf foam two hundred foot beneath we . 

 " Suicide ! " he say slowly - " I suspect it , and , this time , I follow 
 close : follow , to fight with death , which should have you . " 

 as I move back from the edge of the precipice , and shake he from I , 
 I mark the vacancy that glare even through the glaring triumph of his 
 eye , and remember how I have be warn against he at the hospital . 

 the mist be thicken again , but thickening now in cloud that part 
 and change minute by minute , under the influence of the light behind 
 they . I have notice these sudden transition before , and know they to be 
 the sign which precede the speedy clearing of the atmosphere . 

 when I look up at the sky , Mannion step back a few pace , and 
 point in the direction of the fishing - hamlet from which I have 
 depart . 

 " even in that remote place , " he say , " and among those ignorant people , 
 my deformed face have bear witness against you , and Margaret 's death have 
 be avenge , as I say it should . you have be expel as a pest and 
 a curse , by a community of poor fisherman ; you have begin to live your 
 life of excommunication , as I live mine . superstition ! - barbarous , 
 monstrous superstition , which I find ready make to my use , be the 
 scourge with which I have drive you from that hiding - place . look at I 
 now ! I have get back my strength ; I be no long the sick refuse of the 
 hospital . where you go , I have the limb and the endurance to go too ! I 
 tell you again , we be link together for life ; I can not leave you if 
 I would . the horrible joy of hunt you through the world , leap in my 
 blood like fire ! look ! look out on those tossing wave . there be no rest 
 for they ; there shall be no rest for you ! " 

 the sight of he , stand close by I in that wild solitude ; the hoarse 
 sound of his voice , as he raise it almost to rave in his exultation 
 over my helplessness ; the incessant crashing of the sea on the outer 
 rock ; the roaring of the torture water imprison in the depth of 
 the abyss behind we ; the obscurity of the mist , and the strange , wild 
 shape it begin to take , as it now roll almost over our head - -all 
 that I see , all that I hear , seem suddenly to madden I , as Mannion 
 utter his last word . my brain feel turn to fire ; my heart to ice . 
 a horrible temptation to rid myself for ever of the wretch before I , by 
 hurl he over the precipice at my foot , seize on I . I feel my hand 
 stretch themselves out towards he without my willing it - if I 
 have wait another instant , I should have dash he or myself to 
 destruction . but I turn back in time ; and , reckless of all danger , 
 flee from the sight of he , over the rugged and perilous surface of the 
 cliff . 

 the shock of a fall among the rock , before I have advance more than a 
 few yard , partly restore my self - possession . still , I dare not look 
 back to see if Mannion be follow I , so long as the precipice behind 
 he be within view . 

 I begin to climb to the high range of rock almost at the same spot 
 by which I have descend from they - judge by the close thunder of the 
 water in the chasm . halfway up , I stop at a broad resting - place ; and 
 find that I must proceed a little , either to the right or to the left , 
 in a horizontal direction , before I could easily get high . at that 
 moment , the mist be slowly brighten again . I look first to the 
 left , to see where I could get good foothold - then to the right , towards 
 the outer side of the riven rock close at hand . 

 at the same instant , I catch sight dimly of the figure of Mannion , 
 move shadow - like below and beyond I , skirt the farth edge of 
 the slippery plane of granite that shelve into the gap mouth of the 
 hole . the brightening atmosphere show he that he have risk himself , 
 in the mist , too near to a dangerous place . he stop - look up and 
 see I watch he - raise his hand - and shake it threateningly in the 
 air . the ill - calculate violence of his action , in make that menacing 
 gesture , destroy his equilibrium - he stagger - try to recover 
 himself - sway half round where he stand - then fall heavily backward , 
 right on to the steep shelve rock . 

 the wet sea - weed slip through his finger , as they madly clutch at 
 it . he struggle frantically to throw himself towards the side of the 
 declivity ; slip far and far down it at every effort . close 
 to the mouth of the abyss , he spring up as if he have be shoot . a 
 tremendous jet of spray hiss out upon he at the same moment . I hear 
 a scream , so shrill , so horribly unlike any human cry , that it seem 
 to silence the very thundering of the water . the spray fall . for one 
 instant , I see two livid and bloody hand toss up against the black 
 wall of the hole , as he drop into it . then , the wave roar again 
 fiercely in their hidden depth ; the spray fly out once more ; and 
 when it clear off ; nothing be to be see at the yawning mouth of the 
 chasm - nothing move over the shelve granite , but some tear particle 
 of sea - weed slide slowly downwards in the run ooze . 

 the shock of that sight must have paralyse within I the power of 
 remember what follow it ; for I can recall nothing , after look 
 on the emptiness of the rock below , except that I crouch on the ledge 
 under my foot , to save myself from fall off it - that there be an 
 interval of oblivion - and that I seem to awaken again , as it be , to 
 the thundering of the water in the abyss . when I rise and look around 
 I , the seaward sky be lovely in its clearness ; the foam of the leaping 
 wave flash gloriously in the sunlight : and all that remain of the 
 mist be one great cloud of purple shadow , hang afar off over the 
 whole inland view . 

 I trace my way back along the promontory feebly and slowly . my weakness 
 be so great , that I tremble in every limb . a strange uncertainty about 
 direct myself in the simple action , overcome my mind . sometimes , I 
 stop short , hesitate in spite of myself at the slight obstacle 
 in my path . sometimes , I grow confused without any cause , about the 
 direction in which I be proceed , and fancy I be go back to the 
 fishing village .. the sight that I have witness , seem to be affect 
 I physically , far more than mentally . as I drag myself on my weary 
 way along the coast , there be always the same painful vacancy in 
 my thought : there seem to be no power in they yet , of realise 
 Mannion 's appalling death . 

 by the time I arrive at this village , my strength be so utterly 
 exhaust , that the people at the inn be oblige to help I upstairs . 
 even now , after some hour ' rest , the mere exertion of dip my pen 
 in the ink begin to be a labour and a pain to I . there be a strange 
 fluttering at my heart ; my recollection be grow confused again - I 
 can write no more . 

 23rd . - the frightful scene that I witness yesterday still hold the 
 same disastrous influence over I . I have vainly endeavour to think , 
 not of Mannion 's death , but of the free prospect which that death have 
 open to my view . wake or sleep , it be as if some fatality keep 
 all my faculty imprison within the black wall of the chasm . I see 
 the livid , bleed hand fly past they again , in my dream , last 
 night . and now , while the morning be clear and the breeze be fresh , no 
 repose , no change come to my thought . time bright beauty of unclouded 
 daylight seem to have lose the happy influence over I which it use 
 formerly to possess . 

 25th . - all yesterday I have not energy enough even to add a line to this 
 journal . the strength to control myself seem to have go from I . 
 the slight accidental noise in the house , throw I into a fit of 
 tremble which I can not subdue . surely , if ever the death of one human 
 be bring release and salvation to another , the death of Mannion have 
 bring they to I ; and yet , the effect leave on my mind by the horror of 
 have see it , be still not lessen - not even by the knowledge of all 
 that I have gain by be free from the deadly and most determined 
 enemy that man ever have . 

 26th . - visions - half wake , half dream - all through the night . 
 vision of my last lonely evening in the fishing - hamlet - of Mannion 
 again - the livid hand whirl to and fro over my head in the 
 darkness - then , glimpse of home ; of Clara read to I in my 
 study - then , a change to the room where Margaret die - the sight of she 
 again , with her long black hair stream over her face - then , oblivion 
 for a little while - then , Mannion once more ; walk backwards and 
 forward by my bedside - his death , seem like a dream ; his watch 
 I through the night like a reality to which I have just awaken - Clara 
 walk opposite to he on the other side - Ralph between they , point 
 at I . 

 27th . - I be afraid my mind be seriously affect ; it must have be 
 fatally weaken before I pass through the terrible scene among the 
 rock of the promontory . my nerve must have suffer far more than I 
 suspect at the time , under the constant suspense in which I have be 
 live since I leave London , and under the incessant strain and agitation 
 of write the narrative of all that have happen to I . shall I send 
 a letter to Ralph ? no - not yet . it might look like impatience , like not 
 be able to bear my necessary absence as calmly and resolutely as I 
 ought . 

 28th . - a wakeful night - torment by morbid apprehension that the 
 report about I in the fishing - village may spread to this place ; that 
 inquiry may be make after Mannion ; and that I may be suspect of 
 have cause his death . 

 29th . - the people at the inn have send to get I medical advice . the 
 doctor come to - day . he be kindness itself ; but I fall into a fit of 
 trembling , the moment he enter the room - grow confused in attempt 
 to tell he what be the matter with I - and , at last , could not 
 articulate a single word distinctly . he look very grave as he examine 
 I and question the landlady . I think I hear he say something 
 about send for my friend , but could not be certain . 

 31st . - weak and weak . I try in despair , to - day , to write to Ralph ; 
 but know not how to word the letter . the simple form of expression 
 confuse themselves inextricably in my mind . I be oblige to give it 
 up . it be a surprise to I to find that I can still add with my pencil 
 to the entry in this Journal ! when I be no long able to continue , 
 in some sort , the employment to which I have be use for so many week 
 past , what will become of I ? shall I have lose the only safeguard that 
 keep I in my sens ? 

          

 bad ! worse ! I have forget what day of the month it be ; and can not 
 remember it for a moment together , when they tell I - can not even 
 recollect how long I have be confine to my bed . I feel as if my heart 
 be waste away . oh ! if I could only see Clara again . 

          

 the doctor and a strange man have be look among my paper . 

 my God ! be I die ? die at the very time when there be a chance of 
 happiness for my future life ? 

          

 Clara ! - far from she - nothing but the little book - marker she work for 
 I - leave it round my neck when I - 

 I can not   move , or breathe , or think - if I could only be take back - if 
 my father could see I as I be now ! night again - the dream that will 
 come - always of home ; sometimes , the untried home in heaven , as well as 
 the familiar home on earth - 

          

 Clara ! I shall die out of my sens , unless Clara - break the news 
 gently - it may kill she - 

 her face so bright and calm ! her watchful , weep eye always look 
 at I , with a light in they that shin steady through the quivering 
 tear . while the light last , I shall live ; when it begin to die out -  


  note by the EDITOR . 

    there be some line of write beyond this point ; but they be 
  illegible . 





 letter in CONCLUSION . 



 LETTER I. 

 from WILLIAM PENHALE , MINER , AT BARTALLOCK , in CORNWALL , to his wife in 
 LONDON . 

 MY DEAR MARY , 

 I receive your letter yesterday , and be more glad than I can say , at 
 hear that our darling girl Susan have get such a good place in London , 
 and like her new mistress so well . my kind respect to your sister and 
 her husband , and say I do not   grumble about the money that be be spend 
 in send you with Susan to take care of she . she be too young , poor 
 child , to be trust to make the journey alone ; and , as I be oblige to 
 stop at home and work to keep the other child , and pay back what we 
 borrow for the trip , of course you be the proper person , after I , 
 to go with Susan - whose welfare be a more precious possession to we than 
 any money , I be sure . besides , when I marry you , and take you away 
 to Cornwall , I always promise you a trip to London to see your friend 
 again ; and now that promise be perform . so , once again , do not   fret 
 about the money that be be spend : I shall soon pay it back . 

 I have   get some very strange news for you , Mary . you know how bad work 
 be get at the mine , before you go away - so bad , that I think 
 to myself after you have go , " had not   I well try what I can do in the 
 fishing at Treen ? " and I go there ; and , thank God , have get on well 
 by it . I can turn my hand to most thing ; and the fishing have be very 
 good this year . so I have stick to my work . and now I come to my news . 

 the landlady at the inn here , be , as you know , a sort of relation of 
 mine . well , the third afternoon after you have go , I be stop to 
 say a word to she at her own door , on my way to the beach , when we see a 
 young gentleman , quite a stranger , come up to we . he look very pale 
 and wild - like , I think , when he ask for a bed ; and then get faint 
 all of a sudden - so faint and ill , that I be oblige to lend a hand in 
 get he upstairs . the next morning I hear he be bad : and it be 
 just the same story the morning after . he quite frighten the landlady , 
 he be so restless , and talk to himself in such a strange way ; 
 specially at night . he would not   say what be the matter with he , or 
 who he be : we could only find out that he have be stop among the 
 fishing people far west : and that they have not behave very well to 
 he at last - more shame for they ! I be sure they could take no hurt from 
 the poor young fellow , let he be whom he may . well , the end of it be 
 that I go and fetch the doctor for he myself , and when we get into 
 his room , we find he all pale and trembling , and look at we , poor 
 soul , as if he think we mean to murder he . the doctor give his 
 complaint some hard name which I do not   know how to write down ; but it 
 seem there be more the matter with his mind than his body , and that 
 he must have have some great fright which have shake his nerve all to 
 piece . the only way to do he good , as the doctor say , be to have he 
 carefully nurse by his relation , and keep quiet among people he know ; 
 strange face about he be likely to make he bad . the doctor ask 
 where his friend live ; but he would not   say , and , lately , he be get so 
 much bad that he can not   speak clearly to we at all . 

 yesterday evening , he give we all a fright . the doctor hear I below , 
 ask after he , say I be to come up stair and help to move he to 
 have his bed make . as soon as I raise he up   though I be sure I touch 
 he as gently as I could , he faint dead away . while he be be 
 bring to , a little piece of something that look like card - board , 
 prettily embroider with bead and silk , come away from a string that 
 hold it round his neck , and drop off the bedside . I pick it up ; 
 for I remember the time , Mary , when you and I be court , and how 
 precious the least thing be to I that belong to you . so I take care 
 of it for he , think it might be a keepsake from his sweetheart . 
 and sure enough , when he come to , he put up his thin white hand to his 
 neck , and look so thankful at I when I tie the little thing again to 
 the string ! just as I have do that , the doctor beckon I to the other 
 end of the room . 

 " this will not   do , " say he to I in a whisper . " if he go on like this , 
 he will lose his reason , if not his life . I must search his paper , to 
 find out what friend he have ; and you must be my witness . " 

 so the doctor open his little bag , and take out a square seal packet 
 first ; then two or three letter tie together ; the poor soul look 
 all the while as if he long to prevent we from touch they . well , 
 the doctor say there be no occasion to open the packet , for the 
 direction be the same on all the letter , and the name correspond 
 with his initial mark on his linen . 

 " I be next to certain this be where he live , or do live ; so this be 
 where I will write , " say the doctor . 

 " shall my wife take the letter , Sir ? " say I. " she be in London with our 
 girl , Susan ; and , if his friend should be go away from where you be 
 write to , she may be able to trace they . " 

 " quite right , Penhale ! " say he ; " we will do that . write to your wife , and 
 put my letter inside your . " 

 I do as he tell I , at once ; and his letter be inside this , with the 
 direction of the house and the street . 

 now , Mary , dear , go at once , and see what you can find out . the 
 direction on the doctor 's letter may be his home ; and if it be not , there 
 may be people there who can tell you where it be . so go at once , and 
 let we know directly what luck you have have , for there be no time to be 
 lose ; and if you see the young gentleman , you would pity he as much as 
 we do . 

 this have get to be such a long letter , that I have no room leave to write 
 any more . God bless you , Mary , and God bless my darling Susan ! give she 
 a kiss for father 's sake , and believe I , your love husband , 

  WILLIAM PENHALE . 

      

 LETTER II . 

 from MARY PENHALE to her husband 

 DEAREST WILLIAM , 

 Susan send a hundred kiss , and good love to you and her brother and 
 sister . she be get on nicely ; and her mistress be as kind and fond 
 of she as can be . good respect , too , from my sister Martha , and her 
 husband . and now I have   do give you all my message , I will tell you 
 some good news for the poor young gentleman who be so bad at Treen . 

 as soon as I have see Susan , and read your letter to she , I go to 
 the place where the doctor 's letter direct I . such a grand house , 
 William ! I be really afraid to knock at the door . so I pluck up 
 courage , and give a pull at the bell ; and a very fat , big man , with his 
 head all plaster over with powder , open the door , almost before I 
 have do ringing . " if you please , Sir , " say I , show he the name on 
 the doctor 's letter , " do any friend of this gentleman live here ? " " to 
 be sure they do , " say he ; " his father and sister live here : but what do 
 you want to know for ? " " I want they to read this letter , " say I. " it be 
 to tell they that the young gentleman be very bad in health down in our 
 country . " " you can not   see my master , " say he , " for he be confine to his 
 bed by illness : and Miss Clara be very poorly too - you have well leave 
 the letter with I . " just as he say this , an elderly lady cross the 
 hall   I find out she be the housekeeper , afterwards , and ask what 
 I want . when I tell she , she look quite startled . " step this way , 
 ma'am , " say she ; " you will do Miss Clara more good than all the doctor 
 put together . but you must break the news to she carefully , before she 
 see the letter . please to make it out well news than it be , for 
 the young lady be in very delicate health . " we go upstairs - such 
 stair - carpet ! I be almost frightened to step on they , after walk 
 through the dirty street . the housekeeper open a door , and say a few 
 word inside , which I could not hear , and then let I in where the young 
 lady be . 

 oh , William ! she have the sweetest , kind face I ever see in my life . 
 but it be so pale , and there be such a sad look in her eye when she 
 ask I to sit down , that it go to my heart , when I think of the 
 news I have to tell she . I could not   speak just at first ; and I suppose 
 she think I be in some trouble - for she beg I not to tell she 
 what I want , till I be well . she say it with such a voice and 
 such a look , that , like a great fool , I burst out cry , instead of 
 answer as I ought . but it do I good , though , and make I able to 
 tell she about her brother   break it as gently as I could   before I 
 give she the doctor 's letter . she never open it ; but stand up before 
 I as if she be turn to stone - not able to cry , or speak , or move . it 
 frighten I so , to see she in such a dreadful state , that I forget all 
 about the grand house , and the difference there be between we ; and take 
 she in my arm , make she sit down on the sofa by I - just as I should 
 do , if I be console our own Susan under some great trouble . well ! 
 I soon make she look more like herself , comfort she in every way I 
 could think of : and she lay her poor head on my shoulder , and I take 
 and kiss she ,   not remember a bit about its be a bear lady and 
 a stranger that I be kiss ; and the tear come at last , and do she 
 good . as soon as she could speak , she thank God her brother be find , 
 and have fall into kind hand . she have not   courage to read the doctor 's 
 letter herself , and ask I to do it . though he give a very bad account 
 of the young gentleman , he say that care and nursing , and get he 
 away from a strange place to his own home and among his friend , might 
 do wonder for he yet . when I come to this part of the letter , she 
 start up , and ask I to give it to she . then she inquire when I be 
 go back to Cornwall ; and I say , " as soon as possible , "   for indeed , 
 it be time I be home , William . " wait ; pray wait till I have show this 
 letter to my father ! " say she . and she run out of the room with it in 
 her hand . 

 after some time , she come back with her face all of a flush , like ; 
 look quite different to what she do before , and say that I have 
 do more to make the family happy by come with that letter , than she 
 could ever thank I for as she ought . a gentleman follow she in , who 
 be her eld brother   she say ; the pleasant , lively gentleman 
 I ever see . he shake hand as if he have know I all his life ; and tell 
 I I be the first person he have ever meet with who have do good in a 
 family by bring they bad news . then he ask I whether I be ready 
 to go to Cornwall the next morning with he , and the young lady , and 
 a friend of his who be a doctor . I have think already of get the 
 parting over with poor Susan , that very day : so I say , " yes . " after 
 that , they would not   let I go away till I have have something to eat and 
 drink ; and the dear , kind young lady ask I all about Susan , and where 
 she be live , and about you and the child , just as if she have know 
 we like neighbour . poor thing ! she be so flurried , and so anxious for 
 the next morning , that it be all the gentleman could do to keep she 
 quiet , and prevent she fall into a sort of laugh and cry fit , 
 which it seem she have be liable to lately . at last they let I go 
 away : and I go and stay with Susan as long as I could before I bid 
 her good - bye . she bear the parting bravely - poor , dear child ! God in 
 heaven bless she ; and I be sure he will ; for a well daughter no mother 
 ever have . 

 my dear husband , I be afraid this letter be very badly write ; but 
 the tear be in my eye , think of Susan ; and I feel so wearied and 
 flurry after what have happen . we be to go off very early to - morrow 
 morning in a carriage , which be to be put on the railway . only think 
 of my rid home in a fine carriage , with gentlefolk ! - how surprised 
 Willie , and Nancy , and the other child will be ! I shall get to Treen 
 almost as soon as my letter ; but I think I would write , so that you 
 might have the good news , the first moment it could get to you , to tell 
 the poor young gentleman . I be sure it must make he well , only to hear 
 that his brother and sister be come to fetch he home . 

 I can not   write any more , dear William , I be so very tired ; except that I 
 long to see you and the little one again ; and that I be , 

  your love and dutiful wife , 

 MARY PENHALE . 



 LETTER III . 

 to MR . JOHN BERNARD , from the writer of the FORE - go AUTOBIOGRAPHY . 

  this letter be nearly nine year later in date than the letter which 
 precede it . 

  Lanreath Cottage , Breconshire . 

 MY DEAR FRIEND , 

 I find , by your last letter , that you doubt whether I still remember 
 the circumstance under which I make a certain promise to you , more than 
 eight year ago . you be mistake : not one of those circumstance have 
 escape my memory . to satisfy you of this , I will now recapitulate they . 
 you will own , I think , that I have forget nothing . 

 after my removal from Cornwall   shall I ever forget the first sight of 
 Clara and Ralph at my bedside ! , when the nervous malady from which 
 I suffer so long , have yield to the affectionate devotion of my 
 family - aid by the untiring exercise of your skill - one of my first 
 anxiety be to show that I could gratefully appreciate your exertion 
 for my good , by repose the same confidence in you , which I should 
 place in my near and dear relative . from the time when we first 
 meet at the hospital , your service be devoted to I , through much 
 misery of mind and body , with the delicacy and the self - denial of a true 
 friend . I feel that it be only your due that you should know by what 
 trial I have be reduce to the situation in which you find I , when 
 you accompany my brother and sister to Cornwall - I feel this ; and 
 place in your hand , for your own private perusal , the narrative which 
 I have write of my error and of its terrible consequence . to tell you 
 all that have happen to I , with my own lip , be more than I could do 
 then - and even after this lapse of year , would be more than I could do 
 now . 

 after you have read the narrative , you urge I , on return it into my 
 possession , to permit its publication during my lifetime . I grant the 
 justness of the reason which lead you to counsel I thus ; but I tell 
 you , at the same time , that an obstacle , which I be bind to respect , 
 would prevent I from follow your advice . while my father live , I 
 could not suffer a manuscript in which he be represent   no matter 
 under what excess of provocation   as separate himself in the bitter 
 hostility from his own son , to be make public property . I could not 
 suffer event of which we never afterwards speak ourselves , to be give 
 to other in the form of a print narrative which might perhaps fall 
 under his own eye . you acknowledge , I remember , the justice of these 
 consideration and promise , in case I die before he , to keep back 
 my manuscript from publication as long as my father live . in bind 
 yourself to that engagement , however , you stipulate , and I agree , that 
 I should reconsider your argument in case I outlive he . this be my 
 promise , and these be the circumstance under which it be make . 
 you will allow , I think , that my memory be more accurate than you have 
 imagine it to be . 

 and now , you write to remind I of my part of our 
 agreement - forbear , with your accustomed delicacy , to introduce 
 the subject , until more than six month have elapse since my father 's 
 death . you have do well . I have have time to feel all the consolation 
 afford to I by the remembrance that , for year past , my life be of 
 some use in sweeten my father 's ; that his death have occur in the 
 ordinary course of Nature ; and that I never , to my own knowledge , give 
 he any cause to repent the full and love reconciliation which take 
 place between we , as soon as we could speak together freely after my 
 return to home . 

 still I be not answer your question : - be I now willing to permit the 
 publication of my narrative , provide all name and place mention in 
 it remain conceal , and I be know to no one but yourself , Ralph , and 
 Clara , as the writer of my own story ? I reply that I be willing . in a 
 few day , you will receive the manuscript by a safe hand . neither my 
 brother nor my sister object to its be make public on the term I 
 have mention ; and I feel no hesitation in accept the permission 
 thus accord to I . I have not glossed over the flightiness of Ralph 's 
 character ; but the brotherly kindness and manly generosity which lie 
 beneath it , be as apparent , I hope , in my narrative as they be in 
 fact . and Clara , dear Clara ! - all that I have say of she be only to be 
 regret as unworthy of the noble subject that my pen , or any other 
 pen , can have to write on . 

 one difficulty , however , still remain : - how be the page which I be 
 about to send you to be conclude ? in the novel - read sense of the 
 word , my story have no real conclusion . the repose that come to all 
 of we after trouble - to I , a repose in life : to other , how often 
 a repose only in the grave ! - be the end which must close this 
 autobiography : an end , calm , natural , and uneventful ; yet not , perhaps , 
 devoid of all lesson and value . be it fit that I should set myself , for 
 the sake of effect , to make a conclusion , and terminate by fiction 
 what have begin , and thus far , have proceed in truth ? in the interest 
 of Art , as well as in the interest of reality , surely not ! 

 whatever remain to be relate after the last entry in my journal , will 
 be find express in the simple , and therefore , the good form , by the 
 letter from William and Mary Penhale , which I send you with this . when 
 I revisit Cornwall , to see the good miner and his wife , I find , in 
 the course of the inquiry which I make as to the past , that they still 
 preserve the letter they have write about I , while I lay ill at 
 Treen . I ask permission to take copy of these two document , 
 as contain material , which I could but ill supply from my own 
 resource , for fill up a gap in my story . they at once consent ; 
 tell I that they have always keep each other 's letter after 
 marriage , as carefully as they keep they before , in token that their 
 first affection remain to the last unchanged . at the same time they 
 entreat I , with the most earnest simplicity , to polish their own 
 homely expression ; and turn they , as they phrase , it , into proper 
 reading . you may easily imagine that I know well than to do this ; and 
 you will , I be sure , agree with I that both the letter I send should 
 be print as literally as they be copy by my hand . 

 have now provide for the continuation of my story to the period of my 
 return home , I have a word or two to say on the subject of prepare the 
 autobiography for press . fail in the resolution , even now , to 
 look over my manuscript again , I leave the correction it require to 
 other - but on one condition . let none of the passage in which I 
 have relate event , or describe character , be either soften 
 or suppress . I be well aware of the tendency , in some reader , 
 to denounce truth itself as improbable , unless their own personal 
 experience have bear witness to it ; and it be on this very account that 
 I be firm in my determination to allow of no cringing beforehand to 
 anticipate incredulity . what I have write be Truth ; and it shall go 
 into the world as Truth should - entirely uncompromised . let my style 
 be correct as completely as you will ; but leave character and event 
 which be take from reality , real as they be . 

 in regard to the survive person with whom this narrative associate 
 I , I have little to say which it can concern the reader to know . the 
 man whom I have present in the precede page under the name 
 of Sherwin be , I believe , still alive , and still reside in 
 France - whither he retreat soon after the date of the last event 
 mention in my autobiography . a new system have be introduce into 
 his business by his assistant , which , when leave to his own unaided 
 resource , he fail to carry out . his affair become involve ; a 
 commercial crisis occur , which he be wholly unable to meet ; and 
 he be make a bankrupt , have first dishonestly secure to himself a 
 subsistence for life , out of the wreck of his property . I accidentally 
 hear of he , a few year since , as maintain among the English 
 resident of the town he then inhabit , the character of a man who have 
 undeservedly suffer from severe family misfortune , and who bear his 
 affliction with the most exemplary piety and resignation . 

 to those once connect with he , who be now no more , I need not and 
 can not refer again . that part of the dreary Past with which they be 
 associate , be the part which I still shrink in terror from think on . 
 there be two name which my lip have not utter for year ; which , 
 in this life , I shall never pronounce again . the night of Death be over 
 they : a night to look away from for evermore . 

 to look away from - but , towards what object ? the future ? that way , I see 
 but dimly even yet . it be on the Present that my thought be fix , in 
 the contentment which desire no change . 

 for the last five month I have live here with Clara - here , on the 
 little estate which be once her mother 's , which be now her . long 
 before my father 's death we often talk , in the great country house , of 
 future day which we might pass together , as we pass they now , in this 
 place . though we may often leave it for a time , we shall always look 
 back to Lanreath Cottage as to our home . the year of retirement which 
 I spend at the Hall , after my recovery , have not awaken in I a single 
 longing to return to the busy world . Ralph - now the head of our family ; 
 now arouse by his new duty to a sense of his new position - Ralph , 
 already emancipate from many of the habit which once enthral and 
 degrade he , have write , bid I employ to the utmost the resource 
 which his position enable he to offer I , if I decide on enter into 
 public life . but I have no such purpose ; I be still resolve to live on 
 in obscurity , in retirement , in peace . I have suffer too much ; I have 
 be wound too sadly , to range myself with the hero of Ambition , and 
 fight my way upward from the rank . the glory and the glitter which I 
 once long to look on as my own , would dazzle and destroy I , now . 
 such shock as I have endure , leave that behind they which change the 
 character and the purpose of a life . the mountain - path of Action be no 
 long a path for I ; my future hope pause with my present happiness 
 in the shadowed valley of Repose . 

 not a repose which own no duty , and be good for no use ; not a repose 
 which Thought can not ennoble , and Affection can not sanctify . to serve 
 the cause of the poor and the ignorant , in the little sphere which now 
 surround I ; to smooth the way for pleasure and plenty , where pain and 
 want have make it rugge too long ; to live more and more worthy , with 
 every day , of the sisterly love which , never tiring , never change , 
 watch over I in this last retreat , this dear home - these be the 
 purpose , the only purpose leave , which I may still cherish . let I but 
 live to fulfil they , and life will have give to I all that I can ask ! 

 I may now close my letter . I have communicate to you all the material 
 I can supply for the conclusion of my autobiography , and have furnish 
 you with the only direction I wish to give in reference to its 
 publication . present it to the reader in any form , and at any time , 
 that you think fit . on its reception by the public I have no wish to 
 speculate . it be enough for I to know that , with all its fault , it have 
 be write in sincerity and in truth . I shall not feel false shame at 
 its failure , or false pride at its success . 

 if there be any further information which you think it necessary to 
 possess , and which I have forget to communicate , write to I on the 
 subject - or , far well , come here yourself , and ask of I with your own 
 lip all that you desire to know . come , and judge of the life I be now 
 lead , by see it as it really be . though it be only for a few day , 
 pause long enough in your career of activity and usefulness , of fame and 
 honour , to find leisure time for a visit to the cottage where we live . 
 this be as much Clara 's invitation as mine . she will never forget   even 
 if I could !   all that I have owe to your friendship - will never weary 
  even if I should tire !   of show you that we be capable of deserve 
 it . come , then , and see she as well as I - see she , once more , my 
 sister of old time ! I remember what you say of Clara , when we last 
 meet , and last talk of she ; and I believe you will be almost as happy 
 to see she again in her old character as I be . 

 till then , farewell ! do not judge hastily of my motif for persist 
 in the life of retirement which I have lead for so many year past . do 
 not think that calamity have chill my heart , or enervate my mind . 
 past suffering may have change , but it have not deteriorate I . it have 
 fortify my spirit with an abide strength ; it have tell I plainly , 
 much that be but dimly reveal to I before ; it have show I use to 
 which I may put my existence , that have their sanction from other voice 
 than the voice of fame ; it have teach I to feel that brave ambition 
 which be vigorous enough to overleap the little life here ! be there 
 no aspiration in the purpose for which I would now live ? - Bernard ! 
 whatever we can do of good , in this world , with our affection or our 
 faculty , rise to the Eternal World above we , as a song of praise from 
 Humanity to God . amid the thousand , thousand tone ever join to 
 swell the music of that song , be those which sound loudest and grand 
  here , the tone which travel sweetest and purest to the Imperishable 
 Throne ; which mingle in the perfect harmony with the anthem of the 
 angel - choir ! ask your own heart that question - and then say , may not 
 the obscure life - even a life like mine - be dignify by a last 
 aspiration , and dedicate to a noble aim ? 

 I have do . the calm summer evening have steal on I while I have be 
 write to you ; and Clara 's voice - now the happy voice of the happy 
 old time - call to I from our garden seat to come out and look at the 
 sunset over the distant sea . once more - farewell ! 
