The Woman in White 


 by 

 Wilkie Collins 
 the STORY BEGUN BY WALTER HARTRIGHT 

  of Clement 's Inn , teacher of draw 

 this be the story of what a woman 's patience can endure , and what a Man 's resolution can achieve . 

 if the machinery of the Law could be depend on to fathom every case of suspicion , and to conduct every process of inquiry , with moderate assistance only from the lubricate influence of oil of gold , the event which fill these page might have claim their share of the public attention in a Court of Justice . 

 but the Law be still , in certain inevitable case , the pre - engaged servant of the long purse ; and the story be leave to be tell , for the first time , in this place . as the Judge might once have hear it , so the Reader shall hear it now . no circumstance of importance , from the beginning to the end of the disclosure , shall be relate on hearsay evidence . when the writer of these introductory line   Walter Hartright by name   happen to be more closely connect than other with the incident to be record , he will describe they in his own person . when his experience fail , he will retire from the position of narrator ; and his task will be continue , from the point at which he have leave it off , by other person who can speak to the circumstance under notice from their own knowledge , just as clearly and positively as he have speak before they . 

 thus , the story here present will be tell by more than one pen , as the story of an offence against the law be tell in Court by more than one witness with the same object , in both case , to present the truth always in its most direct and most intelligible aspect ; and to trace the course of one complete series of event , by make the person who have be most closely connect with they , at each successive stage , relate their own experience , word for word . 

 let Walter Hartright , teacher of drawing , age twenty - eight year , be hear first . 



 II 

 it be the last day of July . the long hot summer be draw to a close ; and we , the weary pilgrim of the London pavement , be begin to think of the cloud - shadow on the corn - field , and the autumn breeze on the sea - shore . 

 for my own poor part , the fading summer leave I out of health , out of spirit , and , if the truth must be tell , out of money as well . during the past year I have not manage my professional resource as carefully as usual ; and my extravagance now limit I to the prospect of spend the autumn economically between my mother 's cottage at Hampstead and my own chamber in town . 

 the evening , I remember , be still and cloudy ; the London air be at its heavy ; the distant hum of the street - traffic be at its faint ; the small pulse of the life within I , and the great heart of the city around I , seem to be sink in unison , languidly and more languidly , with the sink sun . I rouse myself from the book which I be dream over rather than read , and leave my chamber to meet the cool night air in the suburb . it be one of the two evening in every week which I be accustomed to spend with my mother and my sister . so I turn my step northward in the direction of Hampstead . 

 event which I have yet to relate make it necessary to mention in this place that my father have be dead some year at the period of which I be now write ; and that my sister Sarah and I be the sole survivor of a family of five child . my father be a drawing - master before I . his exertion have make he highly successful in his profession ; and his affectionate anxiety to provide for the future of those who be dependent on his labour have impel he , from the time of his marriage , to devote to the insuring of his life a much large portion of his income than most man consider it necessary to set aside for that purpose . thank to his admirable prudence and self - denial my mother and sister be leave , after his death , as independent of the world as they have be during his lifetime . I succeed to his connection , and have every reason to feel grateful for the prospect that await I at my starting in life . 

 the quiet twilight be still tremble on the topmost ridge of the heath ; and the view of London below I have sink into a black gulf in the shadow of the cloudy night , when I stand before the gate of my mother 's cottage . I have hardly ring the bell before the house door be open violently ; my worthy italian friend , Professor Pesca , appear in the servant 's place ; and dart out joyously to receive I , with a shrill foreign parody on an english cheer . 

 on his own account , and , I must be allow to add , on mine also , the Professor merit the honour of a formal introduction . accident have make he the starting - point of the strange family story which it be the purpose of these page to unfold . 

 I have first become acquainted with my italian friend by meet he at certain great house where he teach his own language and I teach drawing . all I then know of the history of his life be , that he have once hold a situation in the University of Padua ; that he have leave Italy for political reason   the nature of which he uniformly decline to mention to any one ; and that he have be for many year respectably establish in London as a teacher of language . 

 without be actually a dwarf for he be perfectly well proportion from head to foot Pesca be , I think , the small human being I ever see out of a show - room . remarkable anywhere , by his personal appearance , he be still far distinguish among the rank and file of mankind by the harmless eccentricity of his character . the rule idea of his life appear to be , that he be bind to show his gratitude to the country which have afford he an asylum and a means of subsistence by do his utmost to turn himself into an Englishman . not content with pay the nation in general the compliment of invariably carry an umbrella , and invariably wear gaiter and a white hat , the Professor far aspire to become an Englishman in his habit and amusement , as well as in his personal appearance . find we distinguish , as a nation , by our love of athletic exercise , the little man , in the innocence of his heart , devote himself impromptu to all our english sport and pastime whenever he have the opportunity of join they ; firmly persuade that he could adopt our national amusement of the field by an effort of will precisely as he have adopt our national gaiter and our national white hat . 

 I have see he risk his limb blindly at a fox - hunt and in a cricket - field ; and soon afterwards I see he risk his life , just as blindly , in the sea at Brighton . 

 we have meet there accidentally , and be bath together . if we have be engage in any exercise peculiar to my own nation I should , of course , have look after Pesca carefully ; but as foreigner be generally quite as well able to take care of themselves in the water as Englishmen , it never occur to I that the art of swimming might merely add one more to the list of manly exercise which the Professor believe that he could learn impromptu . soon after we have both strike out from shore , I stop , find my friend do not gain on I , and turn round to look for he . to my horror and amazement , I see nothing between I and the beach but two little white arm which struggle for an instant above the surface of the water , and then disappear from view . when I dive for he , the poor little man be lie quietly coil up at the bottom , in a hollow of shingle , look by many degree small than I have ever see he look before . during the few minute that elapse while I be take he in , the air revive he , and he ascend the step of the machine with my assistance . with the partial recovery of his animation come the return of his wonderful delusion on the subject of swimming . as soon as his chatter tooth would let he speak , he smile vacantly , and say he think it must have be the Cramp . 

 when he have thoroughly recover himself , and have join I on the beach , his warm southern nature break through all artificial english restraint in a moment . he overwhelm I with the wild expression of affection exclaim passionately , in his exaggerated italian way , that he would hold his life henceforth at my disposal and declare that he should never be happy again until he have find an opportunity of prove his gratitude by render I some service which I might remember , on my side , to the end of my day . 

 I do my good to stop the torrent of his tear and protestation by persist in treat the whole adventure as a good subject for a joke ; and succeed at last , as I imagine , in lessen Pesca 's overwhelming sense of obligation to I . little do I think then little do I think afterwards when our pleasant holiday have draw to an end that the opportunity of serve I for which my grateful companion so ardently long be soon to come ; that he be eagerly to seize it on the instant ; and that by so do he be to turn the whole current of my existence into a new channel , and to alter I to myself almost past recognition . 

 yet so it be . if I have not dive for Professor Pesca when he lie under water on his shingle bed , I should in all human probability never have be connect with the story which these page will relate I should never , perhaps , have hear even the name of the woman who have live in all my thought , who have possess herself of all my energy , who have become the one guide influence that now direct the purpose of my life . 



 III 

 Pesca 's face and manner , on the evening when we confront each other at my mother 's gate , be more than sufficient to inform I that something extraordinary have happen . it be quite useless , however , to ask he for an immediate explanation . I could only conjecture , while he be drag I in by both hand , that   know my habit   he have come to the cottage to make sure of meet I that night , and that he have some news to tell of an unusually agreeable kind . 

 we both bounce into the parlour in a highly abrupt and undignified manner . my mother sit by the open window laughing and fan herself . Pesca be one of her especial favourite and his wild eccentricity be always pardonable in her eye . poor dear soul ! from the first moment when she find out that the little Professor be deeply and gratefully attach to her son , she open her heart to he unreservedly , and take all his puzzle foreign peculiarity for grant , without so much as attempt to understand any one of they . 

 my sister Sarah , with all the advantage of youth , be , strangely enough , less pliable . she do full justice to Pesca 's excellent quality of heart ; but she could not accept he implicitly , as my mother accept he , for my sake . her insular notion of propriety rise in perpetual revolt against Pesca 's constitutional contempt for appearance ; and she be always more or less undisguisedly astonish at her mother 's familiarity with the eccentric little foreigner . I have observe , not only in my sister 's case , but in the instance of other , that we of the young generation be nothing like so hearty and so impulsive as some of our elder . I constantly see old people flush and excite by the prospect of some anticipate pleasure which altogether fail to ruffle the tranquillity of their serene grandchild . be we , I wonder , quite such genuine boy and girl now as our senior be in their time ? have the great advance in education take rather too long a stride ; and be we in these modern day , just the least trifle in the world too well bring up ? 

 without attempt to answer those question decisively , I may at least record that I never see my mother and my sister together in Pesca 's society , without find my mother much the young woman of the two . on this occasion , for example , while the old lady be laugh heartily over the boyish manner in which we tumble into the parlour , Sarah be perturbedly pick up the broken piece of a teacup , which the Professor have knock off the table in his precipitate advance to meet I at the door . 

 " I do not   know what would have happen , Walter , " say my mother , " if you have delay much long . Pesca have be half mad with impatience , and I have be half mad with curiosity . the Professor have bring some wonderful news with he , in which he say you be concern ; and he have cruelly refuse to give we the small hint of it till his friend Walter appear . " 

 " very provoking : it spoil the Set , " murmur Sarah to herself , mournfully absorb over the ruin of the broken cup . 

 while these word be be speak , Pesca , happily and fussily unconscious of the irreparable wrong which the crockery have suffer at his hand , be drag a large arm - chair to the opposite end of the room , so as to command we all three , in the character of a public speaker address an audience . have turn the chair with its back towards we , he jump into it on his knee , and excitedly address his small congregation of three from an impromptu pulpit . 

 " now , my good dear , " begin Pesca   who always say " good dear " when he mean " worthy friend " , " listen to I . the time have come I recite my good news I speak at last . " 

 " hear , hear ! " say my mother , humour the joke . 

 " the next thing he will break , mamma , " whisper Sarah , " will be the back of the good arm - chair . " 

 " I go back into my life , and I address myself to the noblest of create being , " continue Pesca , vehemently apostrophise my unworthy self over the top rail of the chair . " who find I dead at the bottom of the sea   through Cramp ; and who pull I up to the top ; and what do I say when I get into my own life and my own clothe again ? " 

 " much more than be at all necessary , " I answer as doggedly as possible ; for the least encouragement in connection with this subject invariably let loose the Professor 's emotion in a flood of tear . 

 " I say , " persist Pesca , " that my life belong to my dear friend , Walter , for the rest of my day and so it do . I say that I should never be happy again till I have find the opportunity of do a good something for Walter and I have never be content with myself till this most blessed day . now , " cry the enthusiastic little man at the top of his voice , " the overflow happiness burst out of I at every pore of my skin , like a perspiration ; for on my faith , and soul , and honour , the something be do at last , and the only word to say now be right - all - right ! " 

 it may be necessary to explain here that Pesca pride himself on be a perfect Englishman in his language , as well as in his dress , manner , and amusement . have pick up a few of our most familiar colloquial expression , he scatter they about over his conversation whenever they happen to occur to he , turn they , in his high relish for their sound and his general ignorance of their sense , into compound word and repetition of his own , and always run they into each other , as if they consist of one long syllable . 

 " among the fine London Houses where I teach the language of my native country , " say the Professor , rush into his long - defer explanation without another word of preface , " there be one , mighty fine , in the big place call Portland . you all know where that be ? yes , yes course - of - course . the fine house , my good dear , have get inside it a fine family . a Mamma , fair and fat ; three young Misses , fair and fat ; two young Misters , fair and fat ; and a Papa , the fairest and the fat of all , who be a mighty merchant , up to his eye in gold a fine man once , but see that he have get a naked head and two chin , fine no long at the present time . now mind ! I teach the sublime Dante to the young Misses , and ah ! my - soul - bless - my - soul ! it be not in human language to say how the sublime Dante puzzle the pretty head of all three ! no matter all in good time and the more lesson the well for I . now mind ! imagine to yourselves that I be teach the young Misses to - day , as usual . we be all four of we down together in the Hell of Dante . at the Seventh Circle but no matter for that : all the Circles be alike to the three young Misses , fair and fat , at the Seventh Circle , nevertheless , my pupil be stick fast ; and I , to set they go again , recite , explain , and blow myself up red - hot with useless enthusiasm , when a creak of boot in the passage outside , and in come the golden Papa , the mighty merchant with the naked head and the two chin . ha ! my good dear , I be close than you think for to the business , now . have you be patient so far ? or have you say to yourselves , ' deuce - what - the - deuce ! Pesca be long - wind to - night ? ' " 

 we declare that we be deeply interested . the Professor go on : 

 " in his hand , the golden Papa have a letter ; and after he have make his excuse for disturb we in our Infernal Region with the common mortal business of the house , he address himself to the three young miss , and begin , as you English begin everything in this blessed world that you have to say , with a great O. ' O , my dear , ' say the mighty merchant , ' I have get here a letter from my friend , Mr. ' the name have slip out of my mind ; but no matter ; we shall come back to that ; yes , yes right - all - right . so the Papa say , ' I have get a letter from my friend , the Mister ; and he want a recommend from I , of a drawing - master , to go down to his house in the country . ' my - soul - bless - my - soul ! when I hear the golden Papa say those word , if I have be big enough to reach up to he , I should have put my arm round his neck , and press he to my bosom in a long and grateful hug ! as it be , I only bounce upon my chair . my seat be on thorn , and my soul be on fire to speak but I hold my tongue , and let Papa go on . ' perhaps you know , ' say this good man of money , twiddle his friend 's letter this way and that , in his golden finger and thumb , ' perhaps you know , my dear , of a drawing - master that I can recommend ? ' the three young Misses all look at each other , and then say   with the indispensable great o to begin   " o , dear no , Papa ! but here be Mr. Pesca ' at the mention of myself I can hold no long the thought of you , my good dear , mount like blood to my head I start from my seat , as if a spike have grow up from the ground through the bottom of my chair I address myself to the mighty merchant , and I say   english phrase   ' dear sir , I have the man ! the first and foremost drawing - master of the world ! recommend he by the post to - night , and send he off , bag and baggage   english phrase again ha ! , send he off , bag and baggage , by the train to - morrow ! ' ' stop , stop , ' say papa ; ' be he a foreigner , or an Englishman ? ' ' english to the bone of his back , ' I answer . ' respectable ? ' say Papa . ' Sir , ' I say   for this last question of his outrage I , and I have do be familiar with he    ' Sir ! the immortal fire of genius burn in this Englishman 's bosom , and , what be more , his father have it before he ! ' ' never mind , ' say the golden barbarian of a papa , ' never mind about his genius , Mr. Pesca . we do not   want genius in this country , unless it be accompany by respectability and then we be very glad to have it , very glad indeed . can your friend produce testimonial letter that speak to his character ? ' I wave my hand negligently . ' letter ? ' I say . ' ha ! my - soul - bless - my - soul ! I should think so , indeed ! volume of letter and portfolio of testimonial , if you like ! ' ' one or two will do , ' say this man of phlegm and money . ' let he send they to I , with his name and address . and stop , stop , Mr. Pesca before you go to your friend , you have well take a note . ' ' bank - note ! ' I say , indignantly . ' no bank - note , if you please , till my brave Englishman have earn it first . ' ' bank - note ! ' say Papa , in a great surprise , ' who talk of bank - note ? I mean a note of the term a memorandum of what he be expect to do . go on with your lesson , Mr. Pesca , and I will give you the necessary extract from my friend 's letter . ' down sit the man of merchandise and money to his pen , ink , and paper ; and down I go once again into the Hell of Dante , with my three young Misses after I . in ten minute ' time the note be write , and the boot of Papa be creak themselves away in the passage outside . from that moment , on my faith , and soul , and honour , I know nothing more ! the glorious thought that I have catch my opportunity at last , and that my grateful service for my dear friend in the world be as good as do already , fly up into my head and make I drunk . how I pull my young Misses and myself out of our Infernal Region again , how my other business be do afterwards , how my little bit of dinner slide itself down my throat , I know no more than a man in the moon . enough for I , that here I be , with the mighty merchant 's note in my hand , as large as life , as hot as fire , and as happy as a king ! ha ! ha ! ha ! right - right - right - all - right ! " here the Professor wave the memorandum of term over his head , and end his long and voluble narrative with his shrill italian parody on an english cheer . " 

 my mother rise the moment he have do , with flushed cheek and brightened eye . she catch the little man warmly by both hand . 

 " my dear , good Pesca , " she say , " I never doubt your true affection for Walter but I be more than ever persuade of it now ! " 

 " I be sure we be very much oblige to Professor Pesca , for Walter 's sake , " add Sarah . she half rise , while she speak , as if to approach the arm - chair , in her turn ; but , observe that Pesca be rapturously kiss my mother 's hand , look serious , and resume her seat . " if the familiar little man treat my mother in that way , how will he treat I ? " face sometimes tell truth ; and that be unquestionably the thought in Sarah 's mind , as she sit down again . 

 although I myself be gratefully sensible of the kindness of Pesca 's motif , my spirit be hardly so much elevated as they ought to have be by the prospect of future employment now place before I . when the Professor have quite do with my mother 's hand , and when I have warmly thank he for his interference on my behalf , I ask to be allow to look at the note of term which his respectable patron have draw up for my inspection . 

 Pesca hand I the paper , with a triumphant flourish of the hand . 

 " Read ! " say the little man majestically . " I promise you my friend , the writing of the golden Papa speak with a tongue of trumpet for itself . " 

 the note of term be plain , straightforward , and comprehensive , at any rate . it inform I , 

 first , that Frederick Fairlie , Esquire , of Limmeridge House . Cumberland , want to engage the service of a thoroughly competent drawing - master , for a period of four month certain . 

 secondly , that the duty which the master be expect to perform would be of a twofold kind . he be to superintend the instruction of two young lady in the art of painting in water - colour ; and he be to devote his leisure time , afterwards , to the business of repair and mount a valuable collection of drawing , which have be suffer to fall into a condition of total neglect . 

 thirdly , that the term offer to the person who should undertake and properly perform these duty be four guineas a week ; that he be to reside at Limmeridge House ; and that he be to be treat there on the footing of a gentleman . 

 fourthly , and lastly , that no person need think of apply for this situation unless he could furnish the most unexceptionable reference to character and ability . the reference be to be send to Mr. Fairlie 's friend in London , who be empower to conclude all necessary arrangement . these instruction be follow by the name and address of Pesca 's employer in Portland Place and there the note , or memorandum , end . 

 the prospect which this offer of an engagement hold out be certainly an attractive one . the employment be likely to be both easy and agreeable ; it be propose to I at the autumn time of the year when I be least occupy ; and the term , judge by my personal experience in my profession , be surprisingly liberal . I know this ; I know that I ought to consider myself very fortunate if I succeed in secure the offer employment and yet , no soon have I read the memorandum than I feel an inexplicable unwillingness within I to stir in the matter . I have never in the whole of my previous experience find my duty and my inclination so painfully and so unaccountably at variance as I find they now . 

 " oh , Walter , your father never have such a chance as this ! " say my mother , when she have read the note of term and have hand it back to I . 

 " such distinguished people to know , " remark Sarah , straighten herself in the chair ; " and on such gratifying term of equality too ! " 

 " yes , yes ; the term , in every sense , be tempt enough , " I reply impatiently . " but before I send in my testimonial , I should like a little time to consider " 

 " consider ! " exclaim my mother . " why , Walter , what be the matter with you ? " 

 " consider ! " echo my sister . " what a very extraordinary thing to say , under the circumstance ! " 

 " consider ! " chime in the Professor . " what be there to consider about ? answer I this ! have you not be complain of your health , and have you not be long for what you call a smack of the country breeze ? well ! there in your hand be the paper that offer you perpetual choke mouthful of country breeze for four month ' time . be it not so ? ha ! again you want money . well ! be four golden guineas a week nothing ? my - soul - bless - my - soul ! only give it to I and my boot shall creak like the golden Papa 's , with a sense of the overpower richness of the man who walk in they ! four guineas a week , and , more than that , the charming society of two young miss ! and , more than that , your bed , your breakfast , your dinner , your gorge english tea and lunch and drink of foam beer , all for nothing why , Walter , my dear good friend deuce - what - the - deuce ! for the first time in my life I have not eye enough in my head to look , and wonder at you ! " 

 neither my mother 's evident astonishment at my behaviour , nor Pesca 's fervid enumeration of the advantage offer to I by the new employment , have any effect in shake my unreasonable disinclination to go to Limmeridge House . after start all the petty objection that I could think of to go to Cumberland , and after hear they answer , one after another , to my own complete discomfiture , I try to set up a last obstacle by ask what be to become of my pupil in London while I be teach Mr. Fairlie 's young lady to sketch from nature . the obvious answer to this be , that the great part of they would be away on their autumn travel , and that the few who remain at home might be confide to the care of one of my brother drawing - master , whose pupil I have once take off his hand under similar circumstance . my sister remind I that this gentleman have expressly place his service at my disposal , during the present season , in case I wish to leave town ; my mother seriously appeal to I not to let an idle caprice stand in the way of my own interest and my own health ; and Pesca piteously entreat that I would not wound he to the heart by reject the first grateful offer of service that he have be able to make to the friend who have save his life . 

 the evident sincerity and affection which inspire these remonstrance would have influence any man with an atom of good feeling in his composition . though I could not conquer my own unaccountable perversity , I have at least virtue enough to be heartily ashamed of it , and to end the discussion pleasantly by give way , and promise to do all that be want of I . 

 the rest of the evening pass merrily enough in humorous anticipation of my come life with the two young lady in Cumberland . Pesca , inspire by our national grog , which appear to get into his head , in the most marvellous manner , five minute after it have go down his throat , assert his claim to be consider a complete Englishman by make a series of speech in rapid succession , propose my mother 's health , my sister 's health , my health , and the health , in mass , of Mr. Fairlie and the two young miss , pathetically return thank himself , immediately afterwards , for the whole party . " a secret , Walter , " say my little friend confidentially , as we walk home together . " I be flush by the recollection of my own eloquence . my soul burst itself with ambition . one of these day I go into your noble Parliament . it be the dream of my whole life to be Honourable Pesca , M.P. ! " 

 the next morning I send my testimonial to the Professor 's employer in Portland Place . three day pass , and I conclude , with secret satisfaction , that my paper have not be find sufficiently explicit . on the fourth day , however , an answer come . it announce that Mr. Fairlie accept my service , and request I to start for Cumberland immediately . all the necessary instruction for my journey be carefully and clearly add in a postscript . 

 I make my arrangement , unwillingly enough , for leave London early the next day . towards evening Pesca look in , on his way to a dinner - party , to bid I good - bye . 

 " I shall dry my tear in your absence , " say the Professor gaily , " with this glorious thought . it be my auspicious hand that have give the first push to your fortune in the world . go , my friend ! when your sun shin in Cumberland   English proverb , in the name of heaven make your hay . marry one of the two young Misses ; become Honourable Hartright , M.P. ; and when you be on the top of the ladder remember that Pesca , at the bottom , have do it all ! " 

 I try to laugh with my little friend over his parting jest , but my spirit be not to be command . something jarred in I almost painfully while he be speak his light farewell word . 

 when I be leave alone again nothing remain to be do but to walk to the Hampstead cottage and bid my mother and Sarah good - bye . 



 IV 

 the heat have be painfully oppressive all day , and it be now a close and sultry night . 

 my mother and sister have speak so many last word , and have beg I to wait another five minute so many time , that it be nearly midnight when the servant lock the garden - gate behind I . I walk forward a few pace on the short way back to London , then stop and hesitate . 

 the moon be full and broad in the dark blue starless sky , and the broken ground of the heath look wild enough in the mysterious light to be hundred of mile away from the great city that lie beneath it . the idea of descend any soon than I could help into the heat and gloom of London repel I . the prospect of go to bed in my airless chamber , and the prospect of gradual suffocation , seem , in my present restless frame of mind and body , to be one and the same thing . I determine to stroll home in the purer air by the most roundabout way I could take ; to follow the white winding path across the lonely heath ; and to approach London through its most open suburb by strike into the Finchley Road , and so get back , in the cool of the new morning , by the western side of the Regent 's Park . 

 I wound my way down slowly over the heath , enjoy the divine stillness of the scene , and admire the soft alternation of light and shade as they follow each other over the broken ground on every side of I . so long as I be proceed through this first and prettiest part of my night walk my mind remain passively open to the impression produce by the view ; and I think but little on any subject indeed , so far as my own sensation be concern , I can hardly say that I think at all . 

 but when I have leave the heath and have turn into the by - road , where there be less to see , the idea naturally engender by the approach change in my habit and occupation gradually draw more and more of my attention exclusively to themselves . by the time I have arrive at the end of the road I have become completely absorb in my own fanciful vision of Limmeridge House , of Mr. Fairlie , and of the two lady whose practice in the art of water - colour painting I be so soon to superintend . 

 I have now arrive at that particular point of my walk where four road meet the road to Hampstead , along which I have return , the road to Finchley , the road to West End , and the road back to London . I have mechanically turn in this latter direction , and be stroll along the lonely high - road idly wonder , I remember , what the Cumberland young lady would look like when , in one moment , every drop of blood in my body be bring to a stop by the touch of a hand lay lightly and suddenly on my shoulder from behind I . 

 I turn on the instant , with my finger tighten round the handle of my stick . 

 there , in the middle of the broad bright high - road there , as if it have that moment spring out of the earth or drop from the heaven stand the figure of a solitary woman , dress from head to foot in white garment , her face bent in grave inquiry on mine , her hand pointing to the dark cloud over London , as I face she . 

 I be far too seriously startle by the suddenness with which this extraordinary apparition stand before I , in the dead of night and in that lonely place , to ask what she want . the strange woman speak first . 

 " be that the road to London ? " she say . 

 I look attentively at she , as she put that singular question to I . it be then nearly one o'clock . all I could discern distinctly by the moonlight be a colourless , youthful face , meagre and sharp to look at about the cheek and chin ; large , grave , wistfully attentive eye ; nervous , uncertain lip ; and light hair of a pale , brownish - yellow hue . there be nothing wild , nothing immodest in her manner : it be quiet and self - control , a little melancholy and a little touch by suspicion ; not exactly the manner of a lady , and , at the same time , not the manner of a woman in the humblest rank of life . the voice , little as I have yet hear of it , have something curiously still and mechanical in its tone , and the utterance be remarkably rapid . she hold a small bag in her hand : and her dress bonnet , shawl , and gown all of white be , so far as I could guess , certainly not compose of very delicate or very expensive material . her figure be slight , and rather above the average height her gait and action free from the slight approach to extravagance . this be all that I could observe of she in the dim light and under the perplexingly strange circumstance of our meeting . what sort of a woman she be , and how she come to be out alone in the high - road , an hour after midnight , I altogether fail to guess . the one thing of which I feel certain be , that the gross of mankind could not have misconstrue her motive in speak , even at that suspiciously late hour and in that suspiciously lonely place . 

 " do you hear I ? " she say , still quietly and rapidly , and without the least fretfulness or impatience . " I ask if that be the way to London . " 

 " yes , " I reply , " that be the way : it lead to St. John 's Wood and the Regent 's Park . you must excuse my not answer you before . I be rather startled by your sudden appearance in the road ; and I be , even now , quite unable to account for it . " 

 " you do not   suspect I of do anything wrong , do you ? I have do nothing wrong . I have meet with an accident I be very unfortunate in be here alone so late . why do you suspect I of do wrong ? " 

 she speak with unnecessary earnestness and agitation , and shrink back from I several pace . I do my good to reassure she . 

 " pray do not   suppose that I have any idea of suspect you , " I say , " or any other wish than to be of assistance to you , if I can . I only wonder at your appearance in the road , because it seem to I to be empty the instant before I see you . " 

 she turn , and point back to a place at the junction of the road to London and the road to Hampstead , where there be a gap in the hedge . 

 " I hear you come , " she say , " and hide there to see what sort of man you be , before I risk speak . I doubt and fear about it till you pass ; and then I be oblige to steal after you , and touch you . " 

 steal after I and touch I ? why not call to I ? strange , to say the least of it . 

 " may I trust you ? " she ask . " you do not   think the bad of I because I have meet with an accident ? " she stop in confusion ; shift her bag from one hand to the other ; and sigh bitterly . 

 the loneliness and helplessness of the woman touch I . the natural impulse to assist she and to spare she get the well of the judgment , the caution , the worldly tact , which an old , wise , and cold man might have summon to help he in this strange emergency . 

 " you may trust I for any harmless purpose , " I say . " if it trouble you to explain your strange situation to I , do not   think of return to the subject again . I have no right to ask you for any explanation . tell I how I can help you ; and if I can , I will . " 

 " you be very kind , and I be very , very thankful to have meet you . " the first touch of womanly tenderness that I have hear from she trembled in her voice as she say the word ; but no tear glistened in those large , wistfully attentive eye of her , which be still fix on I . " I have only be in London once before , " she go on , more and more rapidly , " and I know nothing about that side of it , yonder . can I get a fly , or a carriage of any kind ? be it too late ? I do not   know . if you could show I where to get a fly and if you will only promise not to interfere with I , and to let I leave you , when and how I please I have a friend in London who will be glad to receive I I want nothing else will you promise ? " 

 she look anxiously up and down the road ; shift her bag again from one hand to the other ; repeat the word , " will you promise ? " and look hard in my face , with a plead fear and confusion that it trouble I to see . 

 what could I do ? here be a stranger utterly and helplessly at my mercy and that stranger a forlorn woman . no house be near ; no one be pass whom I could consult ; and no earthly right exist on my part to give I a power of control over she , even if I have know how to exercise it . I trace these line , self - distrustfully , with the shadow of after - event darken the very paper I write on ; and still I say , what could I do ? 

 what I do do , be to try and gain time by question she . " be you sure that your friend in London will receive you at such a late hour as this ? " I say . 

 " quite sure . only say you will let I leave you when and how I please only say you will not   interfere with I . will you promise ? " 

 as she repeat the word for the third time , she come close to I and lay her hand , with a sudden gentle stealthiness , on my bosom a thin hand ; a cold hand   when I remove it with mine   even on that sultry night . remember that I be young ; remember that the hand which touch I be a woman 's . 

 " will you promise ? " 

 " yes . " 

 one word ! the little familiar word that be on everybody 's lip , every hour in the day . oh I ! and I tremble , now , when I write it . 

 we set our face towards London , and walk on together in the first still hour of the new day I , and this woman , whose name , whose character , whose story , whose object in life , whose very presence by my side , at that moment , be fathomless mystery to I . it be like a dream . be I Walter Hartright ? be this the well - know , uneventful road , where holiday people stroll on Sundays ? have I really leave , little more than an hour since , the quiet , decent , conventionally domestic atmosphere of my mother 's cottage ? I be too bewildered too conscious also of a vague sense of something like self - reproach to speak to my strange companion for some minute . it be her voice again that first break the silence between we . 

 " I want to ask you something , " she say suddenly . " do you know many people in London ? " 

 " yes , a great many . " 

 " many man of rank and title ? " there be an unmistakable tone of suspicion in the strange question . I hesitate about answer it . 

 " some , " I say , after a moment 's silence . 

 " many " she come to a full stop , and look I searchingly in the face " many man of the rank of Baronet ? " 

 too much astonish to reply , I question she in my turn . 

 " why do you ask ? " 

 " because I hope , for my own sake , there be one Baronet that you do not   know . " 

 " will you tell I his name ? " 

 " I can not   I dare not   I forget myself when I mention it . " she speak loudly and almost fiercely , raise she clench hand in the air , and shake it passionately ; then , on a sudden , control herself again , and add , in tone lower to a whisper " tell I which of they you know . " 

 I could hardly refuse to humour she in such a trifle , and I mention three name . two , the name of father of family whose daughter I teach ; one , the name of a bachelor who have once take I a cruise in his yacht , to make sketch for he . 

 " ah ! you don't know he , " she say , with a sigh of relief . " be you a man of rank and title yourself ? " 

 " far from it . I be only a drawing - master . " 

 as the reply pass my lip a little bitterly , perhaps she take my arm with the abruptness which characterise all her action . 

 " not a man of rank and title , " she repeat to herself . " thank God ! I may trust HIM . " 

 I have hitherto contrive to master my curiosity out of consideration for my companion ; but it get the well of I now . 

 " I be afraid you have serious reason to complain of some man of rank and title ? " I say . " I be afraid the baronet , whose name you be unwilling to mention to I , have do you some grievous wrong ? be he the cause of your be out here at this strange time of night ? " 

 " do not   ask I : do not   make I talk of it , " she answer . " I be not fit now . I have be cruelly use and cruelly wrong . you will be kind than ever , if you will walk on fast , and not speak to I . I sadly want to quiet myself , if I can . " 

 we move forward again at a quick pace ; and for half an hour , at least , not a word pass on either side . from time to time , be forbid to make any more inquiry , I steal a look at her face . it be always the same ; the lip close shut , the brow frown , the eye look straight forward , eagerly and yet absently . we have reach the first house , and be close on the new Wesleyan college , before her set feature relax and she speak once more . 

 " do you live in London ? " she say . 

 " yes . " as I answer , it strike I that she might have form some intention of appeal to I for assistance or advice , and that I ought to spare she a possible disappointment by warn she of my approach absence from home . so I add , " but to - morrow I shall be away from London for some time . I be go into the country . " 

 " where ? " she ask . " north or south ? " 

 " north to Cumberland . " 

 " Cumberland ! " she repeat the word tenderly . " ah ! wish I be go there too . I be once happy in Cumberland . " 

 I try again to lift the veil that hang between this woman and I . 

 " perhaps you be bear , " I say , " in the beautiful Lake country . " 

 " no , " she answer . " I be bear in Hampshire ; but I once go to school for a little while in Cumberland . lake ? I do not   remember any lake . it be limmeridge village , and Limmeridge House , I should like to see again . " 

 it be my turn now to stop suddenly . in the excited state of my curiosity , at that moment , the chance reference to Mr. Fairlie 's place of residence , on the lip of my strange companion , stagger I with astonishment . 

 " do you hear anybody call after we ? " she ask , look up and down the road affrightedly , the instant I stop . 

 " no , no . I be only strike by the name of Limmeridge House . I hear it mention by some Cumberland people a few day since . " 

 " ah ! not my people . Mrs. Fairlie be dead ; and her husband be dead ; and their little girl may be marry and go away by this time . I can not   say who live at Limmeridge now . if any more be leave there of that name , I only know I love they for Mrs. Fairlie 's sake . " 

 she seem about to say more ; but while she be speak , we come within view of the turnpike , at the top of the Avenue Road . her hand tighten round my arm , and she look anxiously at the gate before we . 

 " be the turnpike man look out ? " she ask . 

 he be not look out ; no one else be near the place when we pass through the gate . the sight of the gas - lamp and house seem to agitate she , and to make her impatient . 

 " this be London , " she say . " do you see any carriage I can get ? I be tired and frightened . I want to shut myself in and be drive away . " 

 I explain to she that we must walk a little far to get to a cab - stand , unless we be fortunate enough to meet with an empty vehicle ; and then try to resume the subject of Cumberland . it be useless . that idea of shut herself in , and be drive away , have now get full possession of her mind . she could think and talk of nothing else . 

 we have hardly proceed a third of the way down the Avenue Road when I see a cab draw up at a house a few door below we , on the opposite side of the way . a gentleman get out and let himself in at the garden door . I hail the cab , as the driver mount the box again . when we cross the road , my companion 's impatience increase to such an extent that she almost force I to run . 

 " it be so late , " she say . " I be only in a hurry because it be so late . " 

 " I can not   take you , sir , if you be not go towards Tottenham Court Road , " say the driver civilly , when I open the cab door . " my horse be dead beat , and I can not   get he no far than the stable . " 

 " yes , yes . that will do for I . I be go that way I be go that way . " she speak with breathless eagerness , and press by I into the cab . 

 I have assure myself that the man be sober as well as civil before I let she enter the vehicle . and now , when she be seat inside , I entreat she to let I see she set down safely at her destination . 

 " no , no , no , " she say vehemently . " I be quite safe , and quite happy now . if you be a gentleman , remember your promise . let he drive on till I stop he . thank you oh ! thank you , thank you ! " 

 my hand be on the cab door . she catch it in her , kiss it , and push it away . the cab drive off at the same moment I start into the road , with some vague idea of stop it again , I hardly know why hesitate from dread of frightening and distress she call , at last , but not loudly enough to attract the driver 's attention . the sound of the wheel grow fainter in the distance the cab melt into the black shadow on the road the woman in white be go . 


 ten minute or more have pass . I be still on the same side of the way ; now mechanically walk forward a few pace ; now stop again absently . at one moment I find myself doubt the reality of my own adventure ; at another I be perplexed and distress by an uneasy sense of have do wrong , which yet leave I confusedly ignorant of how I could have do right . I hardly know where I be go , or what I mean to do next ; I be conscious of nothing but the confusion of my own thought , when I be abruptly recall to myself awaken , I might almost say by the sound of rapidly approach wheel close behind I . 

 I be on the dark side of the road , in the thick shadow of some garden tree , when I stop to look round . on the opposite and light side of the way , a short distance below I , a policeman be stroll along in the direction of the Regent 's Park . 

 the carriage pass I an open chaise drive by two man . 

 " stop ! " cry one . " there be a policeman . let us ask he . " 

 the horse be instantly pull up , a few yard beyond the dark place where I stand . 

 " Policeman ! " cry the first speaker . " have you see a woman pass this way ? " 

 " what sort of woman , sir ? " 

 " a woman in a lavender - colour gown " 

 " no , no , " interpose the second man . " the clothe we give she be find on her bed . she must have go away in the clothe she wear when she come to we . in white , policeman . a woman in white . " 

 " I have not   see she , sir . " 

 " if you or any of your man meet with the woman , stop she , and send she in careful keeping to that address . I will pay all expense , and a fair reward into the bargain . " 

 the policeman look at the card that be hand down to he . 

 " why be we to stop she , sir ? what have she do ? " 

 " do ! she have escape from my Asylum . do not   forget ; a woman in white . drive on . " 



 v 

 " she have escape from my Asylum ! " 

 I can not say with truth that the terrible inference which those word suggest flash upon I like a new revelation . some of the strange question put to I by the woman in white , after my ill - consider promise to leave she free to act as she please , have suggest the conclusion either that she be naturally flighty and unsettled , or that some recent shock of terror have disturb the balance of her faculty . but the idea of absolute insanity which we all associate with the very name of an Asylum , have , I can honestly declare , never occur to I , in connection with she . I have see nothing , in her language or her action , to justify it at the time ; and even with the new light throw on she by the word which the stranger have address to the policeman , I could see nothing to justify it now . 

 what have I do ? assist the victim of the most horrible of all false imprisonment to escape ; or cast loose on the wide world of London an unfortunate creature , whose action it be my duty , and every man 's duty , mercifully to control ? I turn sick at heart when the question occur to I , and when I feel self - reproachfully that it be ask too late . 

 in the disturbed state of my mind , it be useless to think of go to bed , when I at last get back to my chamber in Clement 's Inn . before many hour elapse it would be necessary to start on my journey to Cumberland . I sit down and try , first to sketch , then to read but the woman in white get between I and my pencil , between I and my book . have the forlorn creature come to any harm ? that be my first thought , though I shrink selfishly from confront it . other thought follow , on which it be less harrowing to dwell . where have she stop the cab ? what have become of she now ? have she be trace and capture by the man in the chaise ? or be she still capable of control her own action ; and be we two follow our widely part road towards one point in the mysterious future , at which we be to meet once more ? 

 it be a relief when the hour come to lock my door , to bid farewell to London pursuit , London pupil , and London friend , and to be in movement again towards new interest and a new life . even the bustle and confusion at the railway terminus , so wearisome and bewildering at other time , rouse I and do I good . 



 my travel instruction direct I to go to Carlisle , and then to diverge by a branch railway which run in the direction of the coast . as a misfortune to begin with , our engine break down between Lancaster and Carlisle . the delay occasion by this accident cause I to be too late for the branch train , by which I be to have go on immediately . I have to wait some hour ; and when a late train finally deposit I at the near station to Limmeridge House , it be past ten , and the night be so dark that I could hardly see my way to the pony - chaise which Mr. Fairlie have order to be in wait for I . 

 the driver be evidently discompose by the lateness of my arrival . he be in that state of highly respectful sulkiness which be peculiar to english servant . we drive away slowly through the darkness in perfect silence . the road be bad , and the dense obscurity of the night increase the difficulty of get over the ground quickly . it be , by my watch , nearly an hour and a half from the time of our leave the station before I hear the sound of the sea in the distance , and the crunch of our wheel on a smooth gravel drive . we have pass one gate before enter the drive , and we pass another before we draw up at the house . I be receive by a solemn man - servant out of livery , be inform that the family have retire for the night , and be then lead into a large and lofty room where my supper be await I , in a forlorn manner , at one extremity of a lonesome mahogany wilderness of dining - table . 

 I be too tired and out of spirit to eat or drink much , especially with the solemn servant wait on I as elaborately as if a small dinner party have arrive at the house instead of a solitary man . in a quarter of an hour I be ready to be take up to my bedchamber . the solemn servant conduct I into a prettily furnished room say , " breakfast at nine o'clock , sir " look all round he to see that everything be in its proper place , and noiselessly withdraw . 

 " what shall I see in my dream to - night ? " I think to myself , as I put out the candle ; " the woman in white ? or the unknown inhabitant of this Cumberland mansion ? " it be a strange sensation to be sleep in the house , like a friend of the family , and yet not to know one of the inmate , even by sight ! 



 VI 

 when I rise the next morning and draw up my blind , the sea open before I joyously under the broad August sunlight , and the distant coast of Scotland fringe the horizon with its line of melt blue . 

 the view be such a surprise , and such a change to I , after my weary London experience of brick and mortar landscape , that I seem to burst into a new life and a new set of thought the moment I look at it . a confused sensation of have suddenly lose my familiarity with the past , without acquire any additional clearness of idea in reference to the present or the future , take possession of my mind . circumstance that be but a few day old fade back in my memory , as if they have happen month and month since . Pesca 's quaint announcement of the mean by which he have procure I my present employment ; the farewell evening I have pass with my mother and sister ; even my mysterious adventure on the way home from Hampstead have all become like event which might have occur at some former epoch of my existence . although the woman in white be still in my mind , the image of she seem to have grow dull and faint already . 

 a little before nine o'clock , I descend to the ground - floor of the house . the solemn man - servant of the night before meet I wander among the passage , and compassionately show I the way to the breakfast - room . 

 my first glance round I , as the man open the door , disclose a well - furnish breakfast - table , stand in the middle of a long room , with many window in it . I look from the table to the window farthest from I , and see a lady stand at it , with her back turn towards I . the instant my eye rest on she , I be strike by the rare beauty of her form , and by the unaffected grace of her attitude . her figure be tall , yet not too tall ; comely and well - develop , yet not fat ; her head set on her shoulder with an easy , pliant firmness ; her waist , perfection in the eye of a man , for it occupy its natural place , it fill out its natural circle , it be visibly and delightfully undeformed by stay . she have not hear my entrance into the room ; and I allow myself the luxury of admire she for a few moment , before I move one of the chair near I , as the least embarrassing mean of attract her attention . she turn towards I immediately . the easy elegance of every movement of her limb and body as soon as she begin to advance from the far end of the room , set I in a flutter of expectation to see her face clearly . she leave the window and I say to myself , the lady be dark . she move forward a few step and I say to myself , the lady be young . she approach near and I say to myself   with a sense of surprise which word fail I to express , the lady be ugly ! 

 never be the old conventional maxim , that Nature can not err , more flatly contradict never be the fair promise of a lovely figure more strangely and startlingly belie by the face and head that crown it . the lady 's complexion be almost swarthy , and the dark down on her upper lip be almost a moustache . she have a large , firm , masculine mouth and jaw ; prominent , pierce , resolute brown eye ; and thick , coal - black hair , grow unusually low down on her forehead . her expression bright , frank , and intelligent appear , while she be silent , to be altogether want in those feminine attraction of gentleness and pliability , without which the beauty of the handsome woman alive be beauty incomplete . to see such a face as this set on shoulder that a sculptor would have long to model to be charm by the modest grace of action through which the symmetrical limb betray their beauty when they move , and then to be almost repel by the masculine form and masculine look of the feature in which the perfectly shape figure end be to feel a sensation oddly akin to the helpless discomfort familiar to we all in sleep , when we recognise yet can not reconcile the anomaly and contradiction of a dream . 

 " Mr. Hartright ? " say the lady interrogatively , her dark face light up with a smile , and soften and grow womanly the moment she begin to speak . " we resign all hope of you last night , and go to bed as usual . accept my apology for our apparent want of attention ; and allow I to introduce myself as one of your pupil . shall we shake hand ? I suppose we must come to it soon or later and why not soon ? " 

 these odd word of welcome be speak in a clear , ringing , pleasant voice . the offer hand rather large , but beautifully form be give to I with the easy , unaffected self - reliance of a highly - breed woman . we sit down together at the breakfast - table in as cordial and customary a manner as if we have know each other for year , and have meet at Limmeridge House to talk over old time by previous appointment . 

 " I hope you come here good - humouredly determined to make the good of your position , " continue the lady . " you will have to begin this morning by put up with no other company at breakfast than mine . my sister be in her own room , nurse that essentially feminine malady , a slight headache ; and her old governess , Mrs. Vesey , be charitably attend on she with restorative tea . my uncle , Mr. Fairlie , never join we at any of our meal : he be an invalid , and keep bachelor state in his own apartment . there be nobody else in the house but I . two young lady have be stay here , but they go away yesterday , in despair ; and no wonder . all through their visit   in consequence of Mr. Fairlie 's invalid condition   we produce no such convenience in the house as a flirtable , danceable , small - talkable creature of the male sex ; and the consequence be , we do nothing but quarrel , especially at dinner - time . how can you expect four woman to dine together alone every day , and not quarrel ? we be such fool , we can not   entertain each other at table . you see I do not   think much of my own sex , Mr. Hartright which will you have , tea or coffee ? no woman do think much of her own sex , although few of they confess it as freely as I do . dear I , you look puzzle . why ? be you wonder what you will have for breakfast ? or be you surprised at my careless way of talk ? in the first case , I advise you , as a friend , to have nothing to do with that cold ham at your elbow , and to wait till the omelette come in . in the second case , I will give you some tea to compose your spirit , and do all a woman can   which be very little , by - the - bye   to hold my tongue . " 

 she hand I my cup of tea , laugh gaily . her light flow of talk , and her lively familiarity of manner with a total stranger , be accompany by an unaffected naturalness and an easy inborn confidence in herself and her position , which would have secure she the respect of the most audacious man breathing . while it be impossible to be formal and reserved in her company , it be more than impossible to take the faint vestige of a liberty with she , even in thought . I feel this instinctively , even while I catch the infection of her own bright gaiety of spirit even while I do my good to answer she in her own frank , lively way . 

 " yes , yes , " she say , when I have suggest the only explanation I could offer , to account for my perplexed look , " I understand . you be such a perfect stranger in the house , that you be puzzle by my familiar reference to the worthy inhabitant . natural enough : I ought to have think of it before . at any rate , I can set it right now . suppose I begin with myself , so as to get do with that part of the subject as soon as possible ? my name be Marian Halcombe ; and I be as inaccurate as woman usually be , in call Mr. Fairlie my uncle , and Miss Fairlie my sister . my mother be twice marry : the first time to Mr. Halcombe , my father ; the second time to Mr. Fairlie , my half - sister 's father . except that we be both orphan , we be in every respect as unlike each other as possible . my father be a poor man , and Miss Fairlie 's father be a rich man . I have get nothing , and she have a fortune . I be dark and ugly , and she be fair and pretty . everybody think I crab and odd   with perfect justice ; and everybody think her sweet - temper and charming   with more justice still . in short , she be an angel ; and I be try some of that marmalade , Mr. Hartright , and finish the sentence , in the name of female propriety , for yourself . what be I to tell you about Mr. Fairlie ? upon my honour , I hardly know . he be sure to send for you after breakfast , and you can study he for yourself . in the meantime , I may inform you , first , that he be the late Mr. Fairlie 's young brother ; secondly , that he be a single man ; and thirdly , that he be Miss Fairlie 's guardian . I will not   live without she , and she can not   live without I ; and that be how I come to be at Limmeridge House . my sister and I be honestly fond of each other ; which , you will say , be perfectly unaccountable , under the circumstance , and I quite agree with you but so it be . you must please both of we , Mr. Hartright , or please neither of we : and , what be still more try , you will be throw entirely upon our society . Mrs. Vesey be an excellent person , who possess all the cardinal virtue , and count for nothing ; and Mr. Fairlie be too great an invalid to be a companion for anybody . I do not   know what be the matter with he , and the doctor do not   know what be the matter with he , and he do not   know himself what be the matter with he . we all say it be on the nerve , and we none of we know what we mean when we say it . however , I advise you to humour his little peculiarity , when you see he to - day . admire his collection of coin , print , and water - colour drawing , and you will win his heart . upon my word , if you can be content with a quiet country life , I do not   see why you should not get on very well here . from breakfast to lunch , Mr. Fairlie 's drawing will occupy you . after lunch , Miss Fairlie and I shoulder our sketch - book , and go out to misrepresent Nature , under your direction . drawing be her favourite whim , mind , not mine . woman can not   draw their mind be too flighty , and their eye be too inattentive . no matter my sister like it ; so I waste paint and spoil paper , for her sake , as composedly as any woman in England . as for the evening , I think we can help you through they . Miss Fairlie play delightfully . for my own poor part , I do not   know one note of music from the other ; but I can match you at chess , backgammon , ecarte , and   with the inevitable female drawback   even at billiard as well . what do you think of the programme ? can you reconcile yourself to our quiet , regular life ? or do you mean to be restless , and secretly thirst for change and adventure , in the humdrum atmosphere of Limmeridge House ? " 

 she have run on thus far , in her gracefully banter way , with no other interruption on my part than the unimportant reply which politeness require of I . the turn of the expression , however , in her last question , or rather the one chance word , " adventure , " lightly as it fall from her lip , recall my thought to my meeting with the woman in white , and urge I to discover the connection which the stranger 's own reference to Mrs. Fairlie inform I must once have exist between the nameless fugitive from the Asylum , and the former mistress of Limmeridge House . 

 " even if I be the most restless of mankind , " I say , " I should be in no danger of thirsting after adventure for some time to come . the very night before I arrive at this house , I meet with an adventure ; and the wonder and excitement of it , I can assure you , Miss Halcombe , will last I for the whole term of my stay in Cumberland , if not for a much long period . " 

 " you do not   say so , Mr. Hartright ! may I hear it ? " 

 " you have a claim to hear it . the chief person in the adventure be a total stranger to I , and may perhaps be a total stranger to you ; but she certainly mention the name of the late Mrs. Fairlie in term of the sincere gratitude and regard . " 

 " mention my mother 's name ! you interest I indescribably . pray go on . " 

 I at once relate the circumstance under which I have meet the woman in white , exactly as they have occur ; and I repeat what she have say to I about Mrs. Fairlie and Limmeridge House , word for word . 

 Miss Halcombe 's bright resolute eye look eagerly into mine , from the beginning of the narrative to the end . her face express vivid interest and astonishment , but nothing more . she be evidently as far from know of any clue to the mystery as I be myself . 

 " be you quite sure of those word refer to my mother ? " she ask . 

 " quite sure , " I reply . " whoever she may be , the woman be once at school in the village of Limmeridge , be treat with especial kindness by Mrs. Fairlie , and , in grateful remembrance of that kindness , feel an affectionate interest in all survive member of the family . she know that Mrs. Fairlie and her husband be both dead ; and she speak of Miss Fairlie as if they have know each other when they be child . " 

 " you say , I think , that she deny belong to this place ? " 

 " yes , she tell I she come from Hampshire . " 

 " and you entirely fail to find out her name ? " 

 " entirely . " 

 " very strange . I think you be quite justified , Mr. Hartright , in give the poor creature her liberty , for she seem to have do nothing in your presence to show herself unfit to enjoy it . but I wish you have be a little more resolute about find out her name . we must really clear up this mystery , in some way . you have well not speak of it yet to Mr. Fairlie , or to my sister . they be both of they , I be certain , quite as ignorant of who the woman be , and of what her past history in connection with we can be , as I be myself . but they be also , in widely different way , rather nervous and sensitive ; and you would only fidget one and alarm the other to no purpose . as for myself , I be all aflame with curiosity , and I devote my whole energy to the business of discovery from this moment . when my mother come here , after her second marriage , she certainly establish the village school just as it exist at the present time . but the old teacher be all dead , or go elsewhere ; and no enlightenment be to be hop for from that quarter . the only other alternative I can think of " 

 at this point we be interrupt by the entrance of the servant , with a message from Mr. Fairlie , intimate that he would be glad to see I , as soon as I have do breakfast . 

 " wait in the hall , " say Miss Halcombe , answer the servant for I , in her quick , ready way . " Mr. Hartright will come out directly . I be about to say , " she go on , address I again , " that my sister and I have a large collection of my mother 's letter , address to my father and to hers . in the absence of any other mean of get information , I will pass the morning in look over my mother 's correspondence with Mr. Fairlie . he be fond of London , and be constantly away from his country home ; and she be accustom , at such time , to write and report to he how thing go on at Limmeridge . her letter be full of reference to the school in which she take so strong an interest ; and I think it more than likely that I may have discover something when we meet again . the luncheon hour be two , Mr. Hartright . I shall have the pleasure of introduce you to my sister by that time , and we will occupy the afternoon in drive round the neighbourhood and show you all our pet point of view . till two o'clock , then , farewell . " 

 she nod to I with the lively grace , the delightful refinement of familiarity , which characterise all that she do and all that she say ; and disappear by a door at the low end of the room . as soon as she have leave I , I turn my step towards the hall , and follow the servant , on my way , for the first time , to the presence of Mr. Fairlie . 



 VII 

 my conductor lead I upstairs into a passage which take we back to the bedchamber in which I have sleep during the past night ; and open the door next to it , beg I to look in . 

 " I have my master 's order to show you your own sitting - room , sir , " say the man , " and to inquire if you approve of the situation and the light . " 

 I must have be hard to please , indeed , if I have not approve of the room , and of everything about it . the bow - window look out on the same lovely view which I have admire , in the morning , from my bedroom . the furniture be the perfection of luxury and beauty ; the table in the centre be bright with gaily bind book , elegant convenience for writing , and beautiful flower ; the second table , near the window , be cover with all the necessary material for mount water - colour drawing , and have a little easel attach to it , which I could expand or fold up at will ; the wall be hang with gaily tint chintz ; and the floor be spread with Indian mat in maize - colour and red . it be the prettiest and most luxurious little sit - room I have ever see ; and I admire it with the warm enthusiasm . 

 the solemn servant be far too highly train to betray the slight satisfaction . he bow with icy deference when my term of eulogy be all exhaust , and silently open the door for I to go out into the passage again . 

 we turn a corner , and enter a long second passage , ascend a short flight of stair at the end , cross a small circular upper hall , and stop in front of a door cover with dark baize . the servant open this door , and lead I on a few yard to a second ; open that also , and disclose two curtain of pale sea - green silk hang before we ; raise one of they noiselessly ; softly utter the word , " Mr. Hartright , " and leave I . 

 I find myself in a large , lofty room , with a magnificent carved ceiling , and with a carpet over the floor , so thick and soft that it feel like pile of velvet under my foot . one side of the room be occupy by a long book - case of some rare inlay wood that be quite new to I . it be not more than six foot high , and the top be adorn with statuette in marble , range at regular distance one from the other . on the opposite side stand two antique cabinet ; and between they , and above they , hang a picture of the Virgin and Child , protect by glass , and bear Raphael 's name on the gilt tablet at the bottom of the frame . on my right hand and on my left , as I stand inside the door , be chiffonier and little stand in buhl and marquetterie , load with figure in Dresden china , with rare vas , ivory ornament , and toy and curiosity that sparkle at all point with gold , silver , and precious stone . at the low end of the room , opposite to I , the window be conceal and the sunlight be temper by large blind of the same pale sea - green colour as the curtain over the door . the light thus produce be deliciously soft , mysterious , and subdue ; it fall equally upon all the object in the room ; it help to intensify the deep silence , and the air of profound seclusion that possess the place ; and it surround , with an appropriate halo of repose , the solitary figure of the master of the house , lean back , listlessly compose , in a large easy - chair , with a reading - easel fasten on one of its arm , and a little table on the other . 

 if a man 's personal appearance , when he be out of his dressing - room , and when he have pass forty , can be accept as a safe guide to his time of life which be more than doubtful Mr. Fairlie 's age , when I see he , might have be reasonably compute at over fifty and under sixty year . his beardless face be thin , worn , and transparently pale , but not wrinkle ; his nose be high and hooked ; his eye be of a dim greyish blue , large , prominent , and rather red round the rim of the eyelid ; his hair be scanty , soft to look at , and of that light sandy colour which be the last to disclose its own change towards grey . he be dress in a dark frock - coat , of some substance much thin than cloth , and in waistcoat and trouser of spotless white . his foot be effeminately small , and be clothe in buff - colour silk stocking , and little womanish bronze - leather slipper . two ring adorn his white delicate hand , the value of which even my inexperienced observation detect to be all but priceless . upon the whole , he have a frail , languidly - fretful , over - refined look something singularly and unpleasantly delicate in its association with a man , and , at the same time , something which could by no possibility have look natural and appropriate if it have be transfer to the personal appearance of a woman . my morning 's experience of Miss Halcombe have predispose I to be pleased with everybody in the house ; but my sympathy shut themselves up resolutely at the first sight of Mr. Fairlie . 

 on approach nearer to he , I discover that he be not so entirely without occupation as I have at first suppose . place amid the other rare and beautiful object on a large round table near he , be a dwarf cabinet in ebony and silver , contain coin of all shape and size , set out in little drawer line with dark purple velvet . one of these drawer lay on the small table attach to his chair ; and near it be some tiny jeweller 's brush , a wash - leather ' stump , " and a little bottle of liquid , all wait to be use in various way for the removal of any accidental impurity which might be discover on the coin . his frail white finger be listlessly toy with something which look , to my uninstructed eye , like a dirty pewter medal with ragged edge , when I advance within a respectful distance of his chair , and stop to make my bow . 

 " so glad to possess you at Limmeridge , Mr. Hartright , " he say in a querulous , croak voice , which combine , in anything but an agreeable manner , a discordantly high tone with a drowsily languid utterance . " pray sit down . and do not   trouble yourself to move the chair , please . in the wretched state of my nerve , movement of any kind be exquisitely painful to I . have you see your studio ? will it do ? " 

 " I have just come from see the room , Mr. Fairlie ; and I assure you " 

 he stop I in the middle of the sentence , by close his eye , and hold up one of his white hand imploringly . I pause in astonishment ; and the croak voice honour I with this explanation 

 " pray excuse I . but could you contrive to speak in a low key ? in the wretched state of my nerve , loud sound of any kind be indescribable torture to I . you will pardon an invalid ? I only say to you what the lamentable state of my health oblige I to say to everybody . yes . and you really like the room ? " 

 " I could wish for nothing pretty and nothing more comfortable , " I answer , drop my voice , and begin to discover already that Mr. Fairlie 's selfish affectation and Mr. Fairlie 's wretched nerve mean one and the same thing . 

 " so glad . you will find your position here , Mr. Hartright , properly recognise . there be none of the horrid English barbarity of feeling about the social position of an artist in this house . so much of my early life have be pass abroad , that I have quite cast my insular skin in that respect . I wish I could say the same of the gentry detestable word , but I suppose I must use it of the gentry in the neighbourhood . they be sad goth in Art , Mr. Hartright . People , I do assure you , who would have open their eye in astonishment , if they have see Charles the Fifth pick up Titian 's brush for he . do you mind put this tray of coin back in the cabinet , and give I the next one to it ? in the wretched state of my nerve , exertion of any kind be unspeakably disagreeable to I . yes . thank you . " 

 as a practical commentary on the liberal social theory which he have just favour I by illustrate , Mr. Fairlie 's cool request rather amuse I . I put back one drawer and give he the other , with all possible politeness . he begin trifle with the new set of coin and the little brush immediately ; languidly look at they and admire they all the time he be speak to I . 

 " a thousand thank and a thousand excuse . do you like coin ? yes . so glad we have another taste in common besides our taste for Art . now , about the pecuniary arrangement between we do tell I be they satisfactory ? " 

 " most satisfactory , Mr. Fairlie . " 

 " so glad . and what next ? ah ! I remember . yes . in reference to the consideration which you be good enough to accept for give I the benefit of your accomplishment in art , my steward will wait on you at the end of the first week , to ascertain your wish . and what next ? curious , be it not ? I have a great deal more to say : and I appear to have quite forget it . do you mind touch the bell ? in that corner . yes . thank you . " 

 I ring ; and a new servant noiselessly make his appearance a foreigner , with a set smile and perfectly brush hair a valet every inch of he . 

 " Louis , " say Mr. Fairlie , dreamily dust the tip of his finger with one of the tiny brush for the coin , " I make some entry in my tablette this morning . find my tablette . a thousand pardon , Mr. Hartright , I be afraid I bear you . " 

 as he wearily close his eye again , before I could answer , and as he do most assuredly bear I , I sit silent , and look up at the Madonna and Child by Raphael . in the meantime , the valet leave the room , and return shortly with a little ivory book . Mr. Fairlie , after first relieve himself by a gentle sigh , let the book drop open with one hand , and hold up the tiny brush with the other , as a sign to the servant to wait for further order . 

 " yes . just so ! " say Mr. Fairlie , consult the tablette . " Louis , take down that portfolio . " he point , as he speak , to several portfolio place near the window , on mahogany stand . " no . not the one with the green back that contain my Rembrandt etching , Mr. Hartright . do you like etching ? yes ? so glad we have another taste in common . the portfolio with the red back , Louis . do not   drop it ! you have no idea of the torture I should suffer , Mr. Hartright , if Louis drop that portfolio . be it safe on the chair ? do you think it safe , Mr. Hartright ? yes ? so glad . will you oblige I by look at the drawing , if you really think they be quite safe . Louis , go away . what an ass you be . do not   you see I hold the tablette ? do you suppose I want to hold they ? then why not relieve I of the tablette without be tell ? a thousand pardon , Mr. Hartright ; servant be such ass , be they not ? do tell I what do you think of the drawing ? they have come from a sale in a shocking state I think they smell of horrid dealer ' and broker ' finger when I look at they last . can you undertake they ? " 

 although my nerve be not delicate enough to detect the odour of plebeian finger which have offend Mr. Fairlie 's nostril , my taste be sufficiently educate to enable I to appreciate the value of the drawing , while I turn they over . they be , for the most part , really fine specimen of english water - colour art ; and they have deserve much well treatment at the hand of their former possessor than they appear to have receive . 

 " the drawing , " I answer , " require careful straining and mounting ; and , in my opinion , they be well worth " 

 " I beg your pardon , " interpose Mr. Fairlie . " do you mind my close my eye while you speak ? even this light be too much for they . yes ? " 

 " I be about to say that the drawing be well worth all the time and trouble " 

 Mr. Fairlie suddenly open his eye again , and roll they with an expression of helpless alarm in the direction of the window . 

 " I entreat you to excuse I , Mr. Hartright , " he say in a feeble flutter . " but surely I hear some horrid child in the garden my private garden below ? " 

 " I can not   say , Mr. Fairlie . I hear nothing myself . " 

 " Oblige I you have be so very good in humour my poor nerve oblige I by lift up a corner of the blind . do not   let the sun in on I , Mr. Hartright ! have you get the blind up ? yes ? then will you be so very kind as to look into the garden and make quite sure ? " 

 I comply with this new request . the garden be carefully wall in , all round . not a human creature , large or small , appear in any part of the sacred seclusion . I report that gratifying fact to Mr. Fairlie . 

 " a thousand thank . my fancy , I suppose . there be no child , thank Heaven , in the house ; but the servant   person bear without nerve   will encourage the child from the village . such brat oh , dear I , such brat ! shall I confess it , Mr. Hartright ? I sadly want a reform in the construction of child . nature 's only idea seem to be to make they machine for the production of incessant noise . surely our delightful Raffaello 's conception be infinitely preferable ? " 

 he point to the picture of the Madonna , the upper part of which represent the conventional cherub of italian Art , celestially provide with sit accommodation for their chin , on balloon of buff - colour cloud . 

 " quite a model family ! " say Mr. Fairlie , leer at the cherub . " such nice round face , and such nice soft wing , and nothing else . no dirty little leg to run about on , and no noisy little lung to scream with . how immeasurably superior to the exist construction ! I will close my eye again , if you will allow I . and you really can manage the drawing ? so glad . be there anything else to settle ? if there be , I think I have forget it . shall we ring for Louis again ? " 

 be , by this time , quite as anxious , on my side , as Mr. Fairlie evidently be on his , to bring the interview to a speedy conclusion , I think I would try to render the summoning of the servant unnecessary , by offer the requisite suggestion on my own responsibility . 

 " the only point , Mr. Fairlie , that remain to be discuss , " I say , " refer , I think , to the instruction in sketching which I be engaged to communicate to the two young lady . " 

 " ah ! just so , " say Mr. Fairlie . " I wish I feel strong enough to go into that part of the arrangement but I do not . the lady who profit by your kind service , Mr. Hartright , must settle , and decide , and so on , for themselves . my niece be fond of your charming art . she know just enough about it to be conscious of her own sad defect . please take pain with she . yes . be there anything else ? no . we quite understand each other do not   we ? I have no right to detain you any long from your delightful pursuit have I ? so pleasant to have settle everything such a sensible relief to have do business . do you mind ring for Louis to carry the portfolio to your own room ? " 

 " I will carry it there myself , Mr. Fairlie , if you will allow I . " 

 " will you really ? be you strong enough ? how nice to be so strong ! be you sure you will not   drop it ? so glad to possess you at Limmeridge , Mr. Hartright . I be such a sufferer that I hardly dare hope to enjoy much of your society . would you mind take great pain not to let the door bang , and not to drop the portfolio ? thank you . gently with the curtain , please the slight noise from they go through I like a knife . yes . good morning ! " 

 when the sea - green curtain be closed , and when the two baize door be shut behind I , I stop for a moment in the little circular hall beyond , and draw a long , luxurious breath of relief . it be like come to the surface of the water after deep diving , to find myself once more on the outside of Mr. Fairlie 's room . 

 as soon as I be comfortably establish for the morning in my pretty little studio , the first resolution at which I arrive be to turn my step no more in the direction of the apartment occupy by the master of the house , except in the very improbable event of his honour I with a special invitation to pay he another visit . have settle this satisfactory plan of future conduct in reference to Mr. Fairlie , I soon recover the serenity of temper of which my employer 's haughty familiarity and impudent politeness have , for the moment , deprive I . the remain hour of the morning pass away pleasantly enough , in look over the drawing , arrange they in set , trim their ragged edge , and accomplish the other necessary preparation in anticipation of the business of mount they . I ought , perhaps , to have make more progress than this ; but , as the luncheon - time draw near , I grow restless and unsettled , and feel unable to fix my attention on work , even though that work be only of the humble manual kind . 

 at two o'clock I descend again to the breakfast - room , a little anxiously . expectation of some interest be connect with my approach reappearance in that part of the house . my introduction to Miss Fairlie be now close at hand ; and , if Miss Halcombe 's search through her mother 's letter have produce the result which she anticipate , the time have come for clear up the mystery of the woman in white . 



 viii 

 when I enter the room , I find Miss Halcombe and an elderly lady seat at the luncheon - table . 

 the elderly lady , when I be present to she , prove to be Miss Fairlie 's former governess , Mrs. Vesey , who have be briefly describe to I by my lively companion at the breakfast - table , as possess of " all the cardinal virtue , and count for nothing . " I can do little more than offer my humble testimony to the truthfulness of Miss Halcombe 's sketch of the old lady 's character . Mrs. Vesey look the personification of human composure and female amiability . a calm enjoyment of a calm existence beam in drowsy smile on her plump , placid face . some of we rush through life , and some of we saunter through life . Mrs. Vesey SAT through life . Sat in the house , early and late ; sit in the garden ; sit in unexpected window - seat in passage ; sit   on a camp - stool   when her friend try to take she out walking ; sit before she look at anything , before she talk of anything , before she answer yes , or no , to the commonest question always with the same serene smile on her lip , the same vacantly - attentive turn of the head , the same snugly - comfortable position of her hand and arm , under every possible change of domestic circumstance . a mild , a compliant , an unutterably tranquil and harmless old lady , who never by any chance suggest the idea that she have be actually alive since the hour of her birth . nature have so much to do in this world , and be engage in generate such a vast variety of co - existent production , that she must surely be now and then too flurried and confuse to distinguish between the different process that she be carry on at the same time . start from this point of view , it will always remain my private persuasion that Nature be absorb in make cabbage when Mrs. Vesey be bear , and that the good lady suffer the consequence of a vegetable preoccupation in the mind of the Mother of we all . 

 " now , Mrs. Vesey , " say Miss Halcombe , look bright , sharp , and ready than ever , by contrast with the undemonstrative old lady at her side , " what will you have ? a cutlet ? " 

 Mrs. Vesey cross her dimpled hand on the edge of the table , smile placidly , and say , " yes , dear . " 

 " what be that opposite Mr. Hartright ? boil chicken , be it not ? I think you like boil chicken well than cutlet , Mrs. Vesey ? " 

 Mrs. Vesey take her dimpled hand off the edge of the table and cross they on her lap instead ; nod contemplatively at the boil chicken , and say , " yes , dear . " 

 " well , but which will you have , to - day ? shall Mr. Hartright give you some chicken ? or shall I give you some cutlet ? " 

 Mrs. Vesey put one of her dimpled hand back again on the edge of the table ; hesitate drowsily , and say , " which you please , dear . " 

 " mercy on I ! it be a question for your taste , my good lady , not for mine . suppose you have a little of both ? and suppose you begin with the chicken , because Mr. Hartright look devour by anxiety to carve for you . " 

 Mrs. Vesey put the other dimpled hand back on the edge of the table ; brighten dimly one moment ; go out again the next ; bow obediently , and say , " if you please , sir . " 

 surely a mild , a compliant , an unutterably tranquil and harmless old lady ! but enough , perhaps , for the present , of Mrs. Vesey . 


 all this time , there be no sign of Miss Fairlie . we finish our luncheon ; and still she never appear . Miss Halcombe , whose quick eye nothing escape , notice the look that I cast , from time to time , in the direction of the door . 

 " I understand you , Mr. Hartright , " she say ; " you be wonder what have become of your other pupil . she have be downstairs , and have get over her headache ; but have not sufficiently recover her appetite to join we at lunch . if you will put yourself under my charge , I think I can undertake to find she somewhere in the garden . " 

 she take up a parasol lie on a chair near she , and lead the way out , by a long window at the bottom of the room , which open on to the lawn . it be almost unnecessary to say that we leave Mrs. Vesey still seat at the table , with her dimpled hand still cross on the edge of it ; apparently settle in that position for the rest of the afternoon . 

 as we cross the lawn , Miss Halcombe look at I significantly , and shake her head . 

 " that mysterious adventure of your , " she say , ' still remain involved in its own appropriate midnight darkness . I have be all the morning look over my mother 's letter , and I have make no discovery yet . however , do not   despair , Mr. Hartright . this be a matter of curiosity ; and you have get a woman for your ally . under such condition success be certain , soon or later . the letter be not exhausted . I have three packet still leave , and you may confidently rely on my spending the whole evening over they . " 

 here , then , be one of my anticipation of the morning still unfulfilled . I begin to wonder , next , whether my introduction to Miss Fairlie would disappoint the expectation that I have be form of she since breakfast - time . 

 " and how do you get on with Mr. Fairlie ? " inquire Miss Halcombe , as we leave the lawn and turn into a shrubbery . " be he particularly nervous this morning ? never mind consider about your answer , Mr. Hartright . the mere fact of your be oblige to consider be enough for I . I see in your face that he be particularly nervous ; and , as I be amiably unwilling to throw you into the same condition , I ask no more . " 

 we turn off into a wind path while she be speak , and approach a pretty summer - house , build of wood , in the form of a miniature swiss chalet . the one room of the summer - house , as we ascend the step of the door , be occupy by a young lady . she be stand near a rustic table , look out at the inland view of moor and hill present by a gap in the tree , and absently turn over the leaf of a little sketch - book that lie at her side . this be Miss Fairlie . 

 how can I describe she ? how can I separate she from my own sensation , and from all that have happen in the later time ? how can I see she again as she look when my eye first rest on she as she should look , now , to the eye that be about to see she in these page ? 

 the water - colour drawing that I make of Laura Fairlie , at an after period , in the place and attitude in which I first see she , lie on my desk while I write . I look at it , and there dawn upon I brightly , from the dark greenish - brown background of the summer - house , a light , youthful figure , clothe in a simple muslin dress , the pattern of it form by broad alternate stripe of delicate blue and white . a scarf of the same material sit crisply and closely round her shoulder , and a little straw hat of the natural colour , plainly and sparingly trim with ribbon to match the gown , cover her head , and throw its soft pearly shadow over the upper part of her face . her hair be of so faint and pale a brown not flaxen , and yet almost as light ; not golden , and yet almost as glossy that it nearly melt , here and there , into the shadow of the hat . it be plainly part and draw back over her ear , and the line of it ripple naturally as it cross her forehead . the eyebrow be rather dark than the hair ; and the eye be of that soft , limpid , turquoise blue , so often sing by the poet , so seldom see in real life . lovely eye in colour , lovely eye in form large and tender and quietly thoughtful but beautiful above all thing in the clear truthfulness of look that dwell in their inmost depth , and shin through all their change of expression with the light of a purer and a well world . the charm most gently and yet most distinctly express which they shed over the whole face , so cover and transform its little natural human blemish elsewhere , that it be difficult to estimate the relative merit and defect of the other feature . it be hard to see that the low part of the face be too delicately refine away towards the chin to be in full and fair proportion with the upper part ; that the nose , in escape the aquiline bend   always hard and cruel in a woman , no matter how abstractedly perfect it may be , have err a little in the other extreme , and have miss the ideal straightness of line ; and that the sweet , sensitive lip be subject to a slight nervous contraction , when she smile , which draw they upward a little at one corner , towards the cheek . it might be possible to note these blemish in another woman 's face but it be not easy to dwell on they in her , so subtly be they connect with all that be individual and characteristic in her expression , and so closely do the expression depend for its full play and life , in every other feature , on the move impulse of the eye . 

 do my poor portrait of she , my fond , patient labour of long and happy day , show I these thing ? ah , how few of they be in the dim mechanical drawing , and how many in the mind with which I regard it ! a fair , delicate girl , in a pretty light dress , trifle with the leaf of a sketch - book , while she look up from it with truthful , innocent blue eye that be all the drawing can say ; all , perhaps , that even the deep reach of thought and pen can say in their language , either . the woman who first give life , light , and form to our shadowy conception of beauty , fill a void in our spiritual nature that have remain unknown to we till she appear . sympathy that lie too deep for word , too deep almost for thought , be touch , at such time , by other charm than those which the sens feel and which the resource of expression can realise . the mystery which underlie the beauty of woman be never raise above the reach of all expression until it have claim kindre with the deep mystery in our own soul . then , and then only , have it pass beyond the narrow region on which light fall , in this world , from the pencil and the pen . 

 think of she as you think of the first woman who quicken the pulse within you that the rest of her sex have no art to stir . let the kind , candid blue eye meet your , as they meet mine , with the one matchless look which we both remember so well . let her voice speak the music that you once love well , attune as sweetly to your ear as to mine . let she footstep , as she come and go , in these page , be like that other footstep to whose airy fall your own heart once beat time . take she as the visionary nursling of your own fancy ; and she will grow upon you , all the more clearly , as the live woman who dwell in mine . 

 among the sensation that crowd on I , when my eye first look upon her familiar sensation which we all know , which spring to life in most of our heart , die again in so many , and renew their bright existence in so few there be one that troubled and perplex I : one that seem strangely inconsistent and unaccountably out of place in Miss Fairlie 's presence . 

 mingle with the vivid impression produce by the charm of her fair face and head , her sweet expression , and her win simplicity of manner , be another impression , which , in a shadowy way , suggest to I the idea of something want . at one time it seem like something want in she : at another , like something want in myself , which hinder I from understand she as I ought . the impression be always strong in the most contradictory manner , when she look at I ; or , in other word , when I be most conscious of the harmony and charm of her face , and yet , at the same time , most trouble by the sense of an incompleteness which it be impossible to discover . something want , something want and where it be , and what it be , I could not say . 

 the effect of this curious caprice of fancy   as I think it then   be not of a nature to set I at my ease , during a first interview with Miss Fairlie . the few kind word of welcome which she speak find I hardly self - possess enough to thank she in the customary phrase of reply . observe my hesitation , and no doubt attribute it , naturally enough , to some momentary shyness on my part , Miss Halcombe take the business of talk , as easily and readily as usual , into her own hand . 

 " look there , Mr. Hartright , " she say , point to the sketch - book on the table , and to the little delicate wandering hand that be still trifle with it . " surely you will acknowledge that your model pupil be find at last ? the moment she hear that you be in the house , she seize her inestimable sketch - book , look universal nature straight in the face , and long to begin ! " 

 Miss Fairlie laugh with a ready good - humour , which break out as brightly as if it have be part of the sunshine above we , over her lovely face . 

 " I must not take credit to myself where no credit be due , " she say , her clear , truthful blue eye look alternately at Miss Halcombe and at I . " Fond as I be of draw , I be so conscious of my own ignorance that I be more afraid than anxious to begin . now I know you be here , Mr. Hartright , I find myself look over my sketch , as I use to look over my lesson when I be a little girl , and when I be sadly afraid that I should turn out not fit to be hear . " 

 she make the confession very prettily and simply , and , with quaint , childish earnestness , draw the sketch - book away close to her own side of the table . Miss Halcombe cut the knot of the little embarrassment forthwith , in her resolute , downright way . 

 " good , bad , or indifferent , " she say , " the pupil 's sketch must pass through the fiery ordeal of the master 's judgment and there be an end of it . suppose we take they with we in the carriage , Laura , and let Mr. Hartright see they , for the first time , under circumstance of perpetual jolting and interruption ? if we can only confuse he all through the drive , between Nature as it be , when he look up at the view , and nature as it be not when he look down again at our sketch - book , we shall drive he into the last desperate refuge of pay we compliment , and shall slip through his professional finger with our pet feather of vanity all unruffled . " 

 " I hope Mr. Hartright will pay I no compliment , " say Miss Fairlie , as we all leave the summer - house . 

 " may I venture to inquire why you express that hope ? " I ask . 

 " because I shall believe all that you say to I , " she answer simply . 

 in those few word she unconsciously give I the key to her whole character : to that generous trust in other which , in her nature , grow innocently out of the sense of her own truth . I only know it intuitively then . I know it by experience now . 

 we merely wait to rouse good Mrs. Vesey from the place which she still occupy at the deserted luncheon - table , before we enter the open carriage for our promise drive . the old lady and Miss Halcombe occupy the back seat , and Miss Fairlie and I sit together in front , with the sketch - book open between we , fairly exhibit at last to my professional eye . all serious criticism on the drawing , even if I have be dispose to volunteer it , be render impossible by Miss Halcombe 's lively resolution to see nothing but the ridiculous side of the Fine Arts , as practise by herself , her sister , and lady in general . I can remember the conversation that pass far more easily than the sketch that I mechanically look over . that part of the talk , especially , in which Miss Fairlie take any share , be still as vividly impressed on my memory as if I have hear it only a few hour ago . 

 yes ! let I acknowledge that on this first day I let the charm of her presence lure I from the recollection of myself and my position . the most trifling of the question that she put to I , on the subject of use her pencil and mix her colour ; the slight alteration of expression in the lovely eye that look into mine with such an earnest desire to learn all that I could teach , and to discover all that I could show , attract more of my attention than the fine view we pass through , or the grand change of light and shade , as they flow into each other over the wave moorland and the level beach . at any time , and under any circumstance of human interest , be it not strange to see how little real hold the object of the natural world amid which we live can gain on our heart and mind ? we go to Nature for comfort in trouble , and sympathy in joy , only in book . admiration of those beauty of the inanimate world , which modern poetry so largely and so eloquently describe , be not , even in the good of we , one of the original instinct of our nature . as child , we none of we possess it . no uninstructed man or woman possess it . those whose life be most exclusively pass amid the ever - change wonder of sea and land be also those who be most universally insensible to every aspect of Nature not directly associate with the human interest of their calling . our capacity of appreciate the beauty of the earth we live on be , in truth , one of the civilised accomplishment which we all learn as an art ; and , more , that very capacity be rarely practise by any of we except when our mind be most indolent and most unoccupied . how much share have the attraction of Nature ever have in the pleasurable or painful interest and emotion of ourselves or our friend ? what space do they ever occupy in the thousand little narrative of personal experience which pass every day by word of mouth from one of we to the other ? all that our mind can compass , all that our heart can learn , can be accomplish with equal certainty , equal profit , and equal satisfaction to ourselves , in the poor as in the rich prospect that the face of the earth can show . there be surely a reason for this want of inborn sympathy between the creature and the creation around it , a reason which may perhaps be find in the widely - differ destiny of man and his earthly sphere . the grand mountain prospect that the eye can range over be appoint to annihilation . the small human interest that the pure heart can feel be appoint to immortality . 

 we have be out nearly three hour , when the carriage again pass through the gate of Limmeridge House . 

 on our way back I have let the lady settle for themselves the first point of view which they be to sketch , under my instruction , on the afternoon of the next day . when they withdraw to dress for dinner , and when I be alone again in my little sitting - room , my spirit seem to leave I on a sudden . I feel ill at ease and dissatisfied with myself , I hardly know why . perhaps I be now conscious for the first time of have enjoy our drive too much in the character of a guest , and too little in the character of a drawing - master . perhaps that strange sense of something want , either in Miss Fairlie or in myself , which have perplex I when I be first introduce to she , haunt I still . anyhow , it be a relief to my spirit when the dinner - hour call I out of my solitude , and take I back to the society of the lady of the house . 

 I be strike , on enter the drawing - room , by the curious contrast , rather in material than in colour , of the dress which they now wear . while Mrs. Vesey and Miss Halcombe be richly clothe   each in the manner most become to her age , the first in silver - grey , and the second in that delicate primrose - yellow colour which match so well with a dark complexion and black hair , Miss Fairlie be unpretendingly and almost poorly dress in plain white muslin . it be spotlessly pure : it be beautifully put on ; but still it be the sort of dress which the wife or daughter of a poor man might have wear , and it make she , so far as external go , look less affluent in circumstance than her own governess . at a later period , when I learn to know more of Miss Fairlie 's character , I discover that this curious contrast , on the wrong side , be due to her natural delicacy of feeling and natural intensity of aversion to the slight personal display of her own wealth . neither Mrs. Vesey nor Miss Halcombe could ever induce she to let the advantage in dress desert the two lady who be poor , to lean to the side of the one lady who be rich . 

 when the dinner be over we return together to the drawing - room . although Mr. Fairlie   emulate the magnificent condescension of the monarch who have pick up Titian 's brush for he   have instruct his butler to consult my wish in relation to the wine that I might prefer after dinner , I be resolute enough to resist the temptation of sit in solitary grandeur among bottle of my own choosing , and sensible enough to ask the lady ' permission to leave the table with they habitually , on the civilised foreign plan , during the period of my residence at Limmeridge House . 

 the drawing - room , to which we have now withdraw for the rest of the evening , be on the ground - floor , and be of the same shape and size as the breakfast - room . large glass door at the low end open on to a terrace , beautifully ornament along its whole length with a profusion of flower . the soft , hazy twilight be just shade leaf and blossom alike into harmony with its own sober hue as we enter the room , and the sweet evening scent of the flower meet we with its fragrant welcome through the open glass door . Good Mrs. Vesey   always the first of the party to sit down   take possession of an arm - chair in a corner , and doze off comfortably to sleep . at my request Miss Fairlie place herself at the piano . as I follow she to a seat near the instrument , I see Miss Halcombe retire into a recess of one of the side window , to proceed with the search through her mother 's letter by the last quiet ray of the evening light . 

 how vividly that peaceful home - picture of the drawing - room come back to I while I write ! from the place where I sit I could see Miss Halcombe 's graceful figure , half of it in soft light , half in mysterious shadow , bend intently over the letter in her lap ; while , near to I , the fair profile of the player at the piano be just delicately define against the faintly - deepen background of the inner wall of the room . outside , on the terrace , the cluster flower and long grass and creeper wave so gently in the light evening air , that the sound of their rustling never reach we . the sky be without a cloud , and the dawn mystery of moonlight begin to tremble already in the region of the eastern heaven . the sense of peace and seclusion soothe all thought and feel into a rapt , unearthly repose ; and the balmy quiet , that deepen ever with the deepening light , seem to hover over we with a gentler influence still , when there steal upon it from the piano the heavenly tenderness of the music of Mozart . it be an evening of sight and sound never to forget . 

 we all sit silent in the place we have choose Mrs. Vesey still sleep , Miss Fairlie still play , Miss Halcombe still read till the light fail we . by this time the moon have steal round to the terrace , and soft , mysterious ray of light be slant already across the low end of the room . the change from the twilight obscurity be so beautiful that we banish the lamp , by common consent , when the servant bring they in , and keep the large room unlighte , except by the glimmer of the two candle at the piano . 

 for half an hour more the music still go on . after that the beauty of the moonlight view on the terrace tempt Miss Fairlie out to look at it , and I follow she . when the candle at the piano have be light Miss Halcombe have change her place , so as to continue her examination of the letter by their assistance . we leave she , on a low chair , at one side of the instrument , so absorb over her reading that she do not seem to notice when we move . 

 we have be out on the terrace together , just in front of the glass door , hardly so long as five minute , I should think ; and Miss Fairlie be , by my advice , just tie her white handkerchief over her head as a precaution against the night air when I hear Miss Halcombe 's voice low , eager , and alter from its natural lively tone pronounce my name . 

 " Mr. Hartright , " she say , " will you come here for a minute ? I want to speak to you . " 

 I enter the room again immediately . the piano stand about half - way down along the inner wall . on the side of the instrument farth from the terrace Miss Halcombe be sit with the letter scatter on her lap , and with one in her hand select from they , and hold close to the candle . on the side near to the terrace there stand a low ottoman , on which I take my place . in this position I be not far from the glass door , and I could see Miss Fairlie plainly , as she pass and repasse the opening on to the terrace , walk slowly from end to end of it in the full radiance of the moon . 

 " I want you to listen while I read the concluding passage in this letter , " say Miss Halcombe . " tell I if you think they throw any light upon your strange adventure on the road to London . the letter be address by my mother to her second husband , Mr. Fairlie , and the date refer to a period of between eleven and twelve year since . at that time Mr. and Mrs. Fairlie , and my half - sister Laura , have be live for year in this house ; and I be away from they complete my education at a school in Paris . " 

 she look and speak earnestly , and , as I think , a little uneasily as well . at the moment when she raise the letter to the candle before begin to read it , Miss Fairlie pass we on the terrace , look in for a moment , and see that we be engage , slowly walk on . 

 Miss Halcombe begin to read as follow : 


 " ' you will be tired , my dear Philip , of hear perpetually about my school and my scholar . Lay the blame , pray , on the dull uniformity of life at Limmeridge , and not on I . besides , this time I have something really interesting to tell you about a new scholar . 

 " ' you know old Mrs. Kempe at the village shop . well , after year of ailing , the doctor have at last give she up , and she be die slowly day by day . her only live relation , a sister , arrive last week to take care of she . this sister come all the way from Hampshire her name be Mrs. Catherick . four day ago Mrs. Catherick come here to see I , and bring she only child with she , a sweet little girl about a year old than our darling Laura ' " 


 as the last sentence fall from the reader 's lip , Miss Fairlie pass we on the terrace once more . she be softly sing to herself one of the melody which she have be play early in the evening . Miss Halcombe wait till she have pass out of sight again , and then go on with the letter 


 " ' Mrs. Catherick be a decent , well - behave , respectable woman ; middle - aged , and with the remain of have be moderately , only moderately , nice - looking . there be something in her manner and in her appearance , however , which I can not   make out . she be reserve about herself to the point of downright secrecy , and there be a look in her face I can not   describe it which suggest to I that she have something on her mind . she be altogether what you would call a walk mystery . her errand at Limmeridge House , however , be simple enough . when she leave Hampshire to nurse her sister , Mrs. Kempe , through her last illness , she have be oblige to bring her daughter with she , through have no one at home to take care of the little girl . Mrs. Kempe may die in a week 's time , or may linger on for month ; and Mrs. Catherick 's object be to ask I to let her daughter , Anne , have the benefit of attend my school , subject to the condition of her be remove from it to go home again with her mother , after Mrs. Kempe 's death . I consent at once , and when Laura and I go out for our walk , we take the little girl   who be just eleven year old   to the school that very day . ' " 


 once more Miss Fairlie 's figure , bright and soft in its snowy muslin dress her face prettily frame by the white fold of the handkerchief which she have tie under her chin pass by we in the moonlight . once more Miss Halcombe wait till she be out of sight , and then go on 


 " ' I have take a violent fancy , Philip , to my new scholar , for a reason which I mean to keep till the last for the sake of surprise you . her mother have tell I as little about the child as she tell I of herself , I be leave to discover   which I do on the first day when we try she at lesson   that the poor little thing 's intellect be not develop as it ought to be at her age . see this I have she up to the house the next day , and privately arrange with the doctor to come and watch she and question she , and tell I what he think . his opinion be that she will grow out of it . but he say her careful bringing - up at school be a matter of great importance just now , because her unusual slowness in acquire idea imply an unusual tenacity in keep they , when they be once receive into her mind . now , my love , you must not imagine , in your off - hand way , that I have be attach myself to an idiot . this poor little Anne Catherick be a sweet , affectionate , grateful girl , and say the quaint , prettiest thing   as you shall judge by an instance , in the most oddly sudden , surprised , half - frightened way . although she be dress very neatly , her clothe show a sad want of taste in colour and pattern . so I arrange , yesterday , that some of our darling Laura 's old white frock and white hat should be alter for Anne Catherick , explain to she that little girl of her complexion look neater and well all in white than in anything else . she hesitate and seem puzzled for a minute , then flush up , and appear to understand . her little hand clasp mine suddenly . she kiss it , Philip , and say   oh , so earnestly ! , " I will always wear white as long as I live . it will help I to remember you , ma'am , and to think that I be please you still , when I go away and see you no more . " this be only one speciman of the quaint thing she say so prettily . poor little soul ! she shall have a stock of white frock , make with good deep tuck , to let out for she as she grow ' " 


 Miss Halcombe pause , and look at I across the piano . 

 " do the forlorn woman whom you meet in the high - road seem young ? " she ask . " young enough to be two- or three - and - twenty ? " 

 " yes , Miss Halcombe , as young as that . " 

 " and she be strangely dress , from head to foot , all in white ? " 

 " all in white . " 

 while the answer be pass my lip Miss Fairlie glide into view on the terrace for the third time . instead of proceed on her walk , she stop , with her back turn towards we , and , lean on the balustrade of the terrace , look down into the garden beyond . my eye fix upon the white gleam of her muslin gown and head - dress in the moonlight , and a sensation , for which I can find no name a sensation that quicken my pulse , and raise a fluttering at my heart begin to steal over I . 

 " all in white ? " Miss Halcombe repeat . " the most important sentence in the letter , Mr. Hartright , be those at the end , which I will read to you immediately . but I can not   help dwell a little upon the coincidence of the white costume of the woman you meet , and the white frock which produce that strange answer from my mother 's little scholar . the doctor may have be wrong when he discover the child 's defect of intellect , and predict that she would ' grow out of they . ' she may never have grow out of they , and the old grateful fancy about dress in white , which be a serious feeling to the girl , may be a serious feeling to the woman still . " 

 I say a few word in answer I hardly know what . all my attention be concentrate on the white gleam of Miss Fairlie 's muslin dress . 

 " listen to the last sentence of the letter , " say Miss Halcombe . " I think they will surprise you . " 

 as she raise the letter to the light of the candle , Miss Fairlie turn from the balustrade , look doubtfully up and down the terrace , advance a step towards the glass door , and then stop , face we . 

 meanwhile Miss Halcombe read I the last sentence to which she have refer 


 " ' and now , my love , see that I be at the end of my paper , now for the real reason , the surprising reason , for my fondness for little Anne Catherick . my dear Philip , although she be not half so pretty , she be , nevertheless , by one of those extraordinary caprice of accidental resemblance which one sometimes see , the live likeness , in her hair , her complexion , the colour of her eye , and the shape of her face ' " 


 I start up from the ottoman before Miss Halcombe could pronounce the next word . a thrill of the same feeling which run through I when the touch be lay upon my shoulder on the lonely high - road chill I again . 

 there stand Miss Fairlie , a white figure , alone in the moonlight ; in her attitude , in the turn of her head , in her complexion , in the shape of her face , the live image , at that distance and under those circumstance , of the woman in white ! the doubt which have trouble my mind for hour and hour past flash into conviction in an instant . that ' something want " be my own recognition of the ominous likeness between the fugitive from the asylum and my pupil at Limmeridge House . 

 " you see it ! " say Miss Halcombe . she drop the useless letter , and her eye flash as they meet mine . " you see it now , as my mother see it eleven year since ! " 

 " I see it more unwillingly than I can say . to associate that forlorn , friendless , lost woman , even by an accidental likeness only , with Miss Fairlie , seem like cast a shadow on the future of the bright creature who stand look at we now . let I lose the impression again as soon as possible . call she in , out of the dreary moonlight pray call she in ! " 

 " Mr. Hartright , you surprise I . whatever woman may be , I think that man , in the nineteenth century , be above superstition . " 

 " pray call she in ! " 

 " hush , hush ! she be come of her own accord . say nothing in her presence . let this discovery of the likeness be keep a secret between you and I . come in , Laura , come in , and wake Mrs. Vesey with the piano . Mr. Hartright be petition for some more music , and he want it , this time , of the light and lively kind . " 



 IX 

 so end my eventful first day at Limmeridge House . 

 Miss Halcombe and I keep our secret . after the discovery of the likeness no fresh light seem destine to break over the mystery of the woman in white . at the first safe opportunity Miss Halcombe cautiously lead her half - sister to speak of their mother , of old time , and of Anne Catherick . Miss Fairlie 's recollection of the little scholar at Limmeridge be , however , only of the most vague and general kind . she remember the likeness between herself and her mother 's favourite pupil , as something which have be suppose to exist in past time ; but she do not refer to the gift of the white dress , or to the singular form of word in which the child have artlessly express her gratitude for they . she remember that Anne have remain at Limmeridge for a few month only , and have then leave it to go back to her home in Hampshire ; but she could not say whether the mother and daughter have ever return , or have ever be hear of afterwards . no further search , on Miss Halcombe 's part , through the few letter of Mrs. Fairlie 's writing which she have leave unread , assist in clear up the uncertainty still leave to perplex we . we have identify the unhappy woman whom I have meet in the night - time with Anne Catherick we have make some advance , at least , towards connect the probably defective condition of the poor creature 's intellect with the peculiarity of she be dress all in white , and with the continuance , in her mature year , of her childish gratitude towards Mrs. Fairlie and there , so far as we know at that time , our discovery have end . 


 the day pass on , the week pass on , and the track of the golden autumn wind its bright way visibly through the green summer of the tree . peaceful , fast - flow , happy time ! my story glide by you now as swiftly as you once glide by I . of all the treasure of enjoyment that you pour so freely into my heart , how much be leave I that have purpose and value enough to be write on this page ? nothing but the sad of all confession that a man can make the confession of his own folly . 

 the secret which that confession disclose should be tell with little effort , for it have indirectly escape I already . the poor weak word , which have fail to describe Miss Fairlie , have succeed in betray the sensation she awaken in I . it be so with we all . our word be giant when they do we an injury , and dwarf when they do we a service . 

 I love she . 

 ah ! how well I know all the sadness and all the mockery that be contain in those three word . I can sigh over my mournful confession with the tender woman who read it and pity I . I can laugh at it as bitterly as the hard man who toss it from he in contempt . I love she ! feel for I , or despise I , I confess it with the same immovable resolution to own the truth . 

 be there no excuse for I ? there be some excuse to be find , surely , in the condition under which my term of hire service be pass at Limmeridge House . 

 my morning hour succeed each other calmly in the quiet and seclusion of my own room . I have just work enough to do , in mount my employer 's drawing , to keep my hand and eye pleasurably employ , while my mind be leave free to enjoy the dangerous luxury of its own unbridled thought . a perilous solitude , for it last long enough to enervate , not long enough to fortify I . a perilous solitude , for it be follow by afternoon and evening spend , day after day and week after week alone in the society of two woman , one of whom possess all the accomplishment of grace , wit , and high - breeding , the other all the charm of beauty , gentleness , and simple truth , that can purify and subdue the heart of man . not a day pass , in that dangerous intimacy of teacher and pupil , in which my hand be not close to Miss Fairlie 's ; my cheek , as we bent together over her sketch - book , almost touch her . the more attentively she watch every movement of my brush , the more closely I be breathe the perfume of her hair , and the warm fragrance of her breath . it be part of my service to live in the very light of her eye at one time to be bend over she , so close to her bosom as to tremble at the thought of touch it ; at another , to feel she bend over I , bend so close to see what I be about , that her voice sink low when she speak to I , and her ribbon brush my cheek in the wind before she could draw they back . 

 the evening which follow the sketching excursion of the afternoon varied , rather than check , these innocent , these inevitable familiarity . my natural fondness for the music which she play with such tender feeling , such delicate womanly taste , and her natural enjoyment of give I back , by the practice of her art , the pleasure which I have offer to she by the practice of mine , only weave another tie which draw we close and close to one another . the accident of conversation ; the simple habit which regulate even such a little thing as the position of our place at table ; the play of Miss Halcombe 's ever - ready raillery , always direct against my anxiety as teacher , while it sparkle over her enthusiasm as pupil ; the harmless expression of poor Mrs. Vesey 's drowsy approval , which connect Miss Fairlie and I as two model young people who never disturb she every one of these trifle , and many more , combine to fold we together in the same domestic atmosphere , and to lead we both insensibly to the same hopeless end . 

 I should have remember my position , and have put myself secretly on my guard . I do so , but not till it be too late . all the discretion , all the experience , which have avail I with other woman , and secure I against other temptation , fail I with she . it have be my profession , for year past , to be in this close contact with young girl of all age , and of all order of beauty . I have accept the position as part of my calling in life ; I have train myself to leave all the sympathy natural to my age in my employer 's outer hall , as coolly as I leave my umbrella there before I go upstairs . I have long since learn to understand , composedly and as a matter of course , that my situation in life be consider a guarantee against any of my female pupil feel more than the most ordinary interest in I , and that I be admit among beautiful and captivate woman much as a harmless domestic animal be admit among they . this guardian experience I have gain early ; this guardian experience have sternly and strictly guide I straight along my own poor narrow path , without once let I stray aside , to the right hand or to the left . and now I and my trusty talisman be part for the first time . yes , my hardly - earn self - control be as completely lose to I as if I have never possess it ; lose to I , as it be lose every day to other man , in other critical situation , where woman be concern . I know , now , that I should have question myself from the first . I should have ask why any room in the house be well than home to I when she enter it , and barren as a desert when she go out again why I always notice and remember the little change in her dress that I have notice and remember in no other woman 's before why I see she , hear she , and touch she   when we shake hand at night and morning   as I have never see , hear , and touch any other woman in my life ? I should have look into my own heart , and find this new growth spring up there , and pluck it out while it be young . why be this easy , simplest work of self - culture always too much for I ? the explanation have be write already in the three word that be many enough , and plain enough , for my confession . I love she . 

 the day pass , the week pass ; it be approach the third month of my stay in Cumberland . the delicious monotony of life in our calm seclusion flow on with I , like a smooth stream with a swimmer who glide down the current . all memory of the past , all thought of the future , all sense of the falseness and hopelessness of my own position , lie hush within I into deceitful rest . lull by the Syren - song that my own heart sing to I , with eye shut to all sight , and ear close to all sound of danger , I drift near and near to the fatal rock . the warning that arouse I at last , and startle I into sudden , self - accuse consciousness of my own weakness , be the plain , the true , the kind of all warning , for it come silently from she . 

 we have part one night as usual . no word have fall from my lip , at that time or at any time before it , that could betray I , or startle she into sudden knowledge of the truth . but when we meet again in the morning , a change have come over she a change that tell I all . 

 I shrink then I shrink still from invade the innermost sanctuary of her heart , and lay it open to other , as I have lay open my own . let it be enough to say that the time when she first surprise my secret be , I firmly believe , the time when she first surprise her own , and the time , also , when she change towards I in the interval of one night . her nature , too truthful to deceive other , be too noble to deceive itself . when the doubt that I have hush asleep first lay its weary weight on her heart , the true face own all , and say , in its own frank , simple language I be sorry for he ; I be sorry for myself . 

 it say this , and more , which I could not then interpret . I understand but too well the change in her manner , to great kindness and quick readiness in interpret all my wish , before other to constraint and sadness , and nervous anxiety to absorb herself in the first occupation she could seize on , whenever we happen to be leave together alone . I understand why the sweet sensitive lip smile so rarely and so restrainedly now , and why the clear blue eye look at I , sometimes with the pity of an angel , sometimes with the innocent perplexity of a child . but the change mean more than this . there be a coldness in her hand , there be an unnatural immobility in her face , there be in all her movement the mute expression of constant fear and cling self - reproach . the sensation that I could trace to herself and to I , the unacknowledged sensation that we be feel in common , be not these . there be certain element of the change in she that be still secretly draw we together , and other that be , as secretly , begin to drive we apart . 

 in my doubt and perplexity , in my vague suspicion of something hide which I be leave to find by my own unaided effort , I examine Miss Halcombe 's look and manner for enlightenment . live in such intimacy as ours , no serious alteration could take place in any one of we which do not sympathetically affect the other . the change in Miss Fairlie be reflect in her half - sister . although not a word escape Miss Halcombe which hint at an altered state of feeling towards myself , her penetrate eye have contract a new habit of always watch I . sometimes the look be like suppressed anger , sometimes like suppress dread , sometimes like neither like nothing , in short , which I could understand . a week elapse , leave we all three still in this position of secret constraint towards one another . my situation , aggravate by the sense of my own miserable weakness and forgetfulness of myself , now too late awaken in I , be become intolerable . I feel that I must cast off the oppression under which I be live , at once and for ever yet how to act for the good , or what to say first , be more than I could tell . 

 from this position of helplessness and humiliation I be rescue by Miss Halcombe . her lip tell I the bitter , the necessary , the unexpected truth ; her hearty kindness sustain I under the shock of hear it ; her sense and courage turn to its right use an event which threaten the bad that could happen , to I and to other , in Limmeridge House . 



 X 

 it be on a Thursday in the week , and nearly at the end of the third month of my sojourn in Cumberland . 

 in the morning , when I go down into the breakfast - room at the usual hour , Miss Halcombe , for the first time since I have know she , be absent from her customary place at the table . 

 Miss Fairlie be out on the lawn . she bow to I , but do not come in . not a word have drop from my lip , or from her , that could unsettle either of we and yet the same unacknowledged sense of embarrassment make we shrink alike from meet one another alone . she wait on the lawn , and I wait in the breakfast - room , till Mrs. Vesey or Miss Halcombe come in . how quickly I should have join she : how readily we should have shake hand , and glide into our customary talk , only a fortnight ago . 

 in a few minute Miss Halcombe enter . she have a preoccupied look , and she make her apology for be late rather absently . 

 " I have be detain , " she say , " by a consultation with Mr. Fairlie on a domestic matter which he wish to speak to I about . " 

 Miss Fairlie come in from the garden , and the usual morning greeting pass between we . her hand strike cold to mine than ever . she do not look at I , and she be very pale . even Mrs. Vesey notice it when she enter the room a moment after . 

 " I suppose it be the change in the wind , " say the old lady . " the winter be come ah , my love , the winter be come soon ! " 

 in her heart and in mine it have come already ! 

 our morning meal once so full of pleasant good - humour discussion of the plan for the day be short and silent . Miss Fairlie seem to feel the oppression of the long pause in the conversation , and look appealingly to her sister to fill they up . Miss Halcombe , after once or twice hesitate and check herself , in a most uncharacteristic manner , speak at last . 

 " I have see your uncle this morning , Laura , " she say . " he think the purple room be the one that ought to be get ready , and he confirm what I tell you . Monday be the day not Tuesday . " 

 while these word be be speak Miss Fairlie look down at the table beneath she . her finger move nervously among the crumb that be scatter on the cloth . the paleness on her cheek spread to her lip , and the lip themselves tremble visibly . I be not the only person present who notice this . Miss Halcombe see it , too , and at once set we the example of rise from table . 

 Mrs. Vesey and Miss Fairlie leave the room together . the kind sorrowful blue eye look at I , for a moment , with the prescient sadness of a coming and a long farewell . I feel the answer pang in my own heart the pang that tell I I must lose she soon , and love she the more unchangeably for the loss . 

 I turn towards the garden when the door have close on she . Miss Halcombe be stand with her hat in her hand , and her shawl over her arm , by the large window that lead out to the lawn , and be look at I attentively . 

 " have you any leisure time to spare , " she ask , " before you begin to work in your own room ? " 

 " certainly , Miss Halcombe . I have always time at your service . " 

 " I want to say a word to you in private , Mr. Hartright . get your hat and come out into the garden . we be not likely to be disturb there at this hour in the morning . " 

 as we step out on to the lawn , one of the under - gardener a mere lad pass we on his way to the house , with a letter in his hand . Miss Halcombe stop he . 

 " be that letter for I ? " she ask . 

 " Nay , miss ; it be just say to be for Miss Fairlie , " answer the lad , hold out the letter as he speak . 

 Miss Halcombe take it from he and look at the address . 

 " a strange handwriting , " she say to herself . " who can Laura 's correspondent be ? where do you get this ? " she continue , address the gardener . 

 " well , miss , " say the lad , " I just get it from a woman . " 

 " what woman ? " 

 " a woman well stricken in age . " 

 " oh , an old woman . any one you know ? " 

 " I canna ' tak ' it on mysel ' to say that she be other than a stranger to I . " 

 " which way do she go ? " 

 " that gate , " say the under - gardener , turn with great deliberation towards the south , and embrace the whole of that part of England with one comprehensive sweep of his arm . 

 " curious , " say Miss Halcombe ; " I suppose it must be a begging - letter . there , " she add , hand the letter back to the lad , " take it to the house , and give it to one of the servant . and now , Mr. Hartright , if you have no objection , let we walk this way . " 

 she lead I across the lawn , along the same path by which I have follow she on the day after my arrival at Limmeridge . 

 at the little summer - house , in which Laura Fairlie and I have first see each other , she stop , and break the silence which she have steadily maintain while we be walk together . 

 " what I have to say to you I can say here . " 

 with those word she enter the summer - house , take one of the chair at the little round table inside , and sign to I to take the other . I suspect what be come when she speak to I in the breakfast - room ; I feel certain of it now . 

 " Mr. Hartright , " she say , " I be go to begin by make a frank avowal to you . I be go to say without phrase - making , which I detest , or pay compliment , which I heartily despise that I have come , in the course of your residence with we , to feel a strong friendly regard for you . I be predispose in your favour when you first tell I of your conduct towards that unhappy woman whom you meet under such remarkable circumstance . your management of the affair might not have be prudent , but it show the self - control , the delicacy , and the compassion of a man who be naturally a gentleman . it make I expect good thing from you , and you have not disappoint my expectation . " 

 she pause but hold up her hand at the same time , as a sign that she await no answer from I before she proceed . when I enter the summer - house , no thought be in I of the woman in white . but now , Miss Halcombe 's own word have put the memory of my adventure back in my mind . it remain there throughout the interview remain , and not without a result . 

 " as your friend , " she proceed , " I be go to tell you , at once , in my own plain , blunt , downright language , that I have discover your secret without help or hint , mind , from any one else . Mr. Hartright , you have thoughtlessly allow yourself to form an attachment a serious and devoted attachment I be afraid to my sister Laura . I do not   put you to the pain of confess it in so many word , because I see and know that you be too honest to deny it . I do not   even blame you I pity you for open your heart to a hopeless affection . you have not attempt to take any underhand advantage you have not speak to my sister in secret . you be guilty of weakness and want of attention to your own good interest , but of nothing bad . if you have act , in any single respect , less delicately and less modestly , I should have tell you to leave the house without an instant 's notice , or an instant 's consultation of anybody . as it be , I blame the misfortune of your year and your position I do not   blame you . shake hand I have give you pain ; I be go to give you more , but there be no help for it shake hand with your friend , Marian Halcombe , first . " 

 the sudden kindness the warm , high - minded , fearless sympathy which meet I on such mercifully equal term , which appeal with such delicate and generous abruptness straight to my heart , my honour , and my courage , overcome I in an instant . I try to look at she when she take my hand , but my eve be dim . I try to thank she , but my voice fail I . 

 " listen to I , " she say , considerately avoid all notice of my loss of self - control . " listen to I , and let we get it over at once . it be a real true relief to I that I be not oblige , in what I have now to say , to enter into the question the hard and cruel question as I think it of social inequality . circumstance which will try you to the quick , spare I the ungracious necessity of pain a man who have live in friendly intimacy under the same roof with myself by any humiliating reference to matter of rank and station . you must leave Limmeridge House , Mr. Hartright , before more harm be do . it be my duty to say that to you ; and it would be equally my duty to say it , under precisely the same serious necessity , if you be the representative of the old and wealthy family in England . you must leave we , not because you be a teacher of draw " 

 she wait a moment , turn her face full on I , and reach across the table , lay her hand firmly on my arm . 

 " not because you be a teacher of drawing , " she repeat , " but because Laura Fairlie be engage to be marry . " 

 the last word go like a bullet to my heart . my arm lose all sensation of the hand that grasp it . I never move and never speak . the sharp autumn breeze that scatter the dead leaf at our foot come as cold to I , on a sudden , as if my own mad hope be dead leaf too , whirl away by the wind like the rest . hope ! betroth , or not betroth , she be equally far from I . would other man have remember that in my place ? not if they have love she as I do . 

 the pang pass , and nothing but the dull numb pain of it remain . I feel Miss Halcombe 's hand again , tighten its hold on my arm I raise my head and look at she . her large black eye be root on I , watch the white change on my face , which I feel , and which she see . 

 " crush it ! " she say . " here , where you first see she , crush it ! do not   shrink under it like a woman . tear it out ; trample it under foot like a man ! " 

 the suppress vehemence with which she speak , the strength which she will concentrate in the look she fix on I , and in the hold on my arm that she have not yet relinquish communicate to mine , steady I . we both wait for a minute in silence . at the end of that time I have justify her generous faith in my manhood I have , outwardly at least , recover my self - control . 

 " be you yourself again ? " 

 " enough myself , Miss Halcombe , to ask your pardon and her . enough myself to be guide by your advice , and to prove my gratitude in that way , if I can prove it in no other . " 

 " you have prove it already , " she answer , " by those word . Mr. Hartright , concealment be at an end between we . I can not affect to hide from you what my sister have unconsciously show to I . you must leave we for her sake , as well as for your own . your presence here , your necessary intimacy with we , harmless as it have be , God know , in all other respect , have unsteady she and make she wretched . I , who love she well than my own life I , who have learn to believe in that pure , noble , innocent nature as I believe in my religion know but too well the secret misery of self - reproach that she have be suffer since the first shadow of a feeling disloyal to her marriage engagement enter her heart in spite of she . I do not   say it would be useless to attempt to say it after what have happen that her engagement have ever have a strong hold on her affection . it be an engagement of honour , not of love ; her father sanction it on his deathbed , two year since ; she herself neither welcome it nor shrank from it she be content to make it . till you come here she be in the position of hundred of other woman , who marry man without be greatly attract to they or greatly repel by they , and who learn to love they   when they do not   learn to hate !   after marriage , instead of before . I hope more earnestly than word can say and you should have the self - sacrifice courage to hope too that the new thought and feeling which have disturb the old calmness and the old content have not take root too deeply to be ever remove . your absence   if I have less belief in your honour , and your courage , and your sense , I should not trust to they as I be trust now   your absence will help my effort , and time will help we all three . it be something to know that my first confidence in you be not all misplace . it be something to know that you will not be less honest , less manly , less considerate towards the pupil whose relation to yourself you have have the misfortune to forget , than towards the stranger and the outcast whose appeal to you be not make in vain . " 

 again the chance reference to the woman in white ! be there no possibility of speak of Miss Fairlie and of I without raise the memory of Anne Catherick , and set she between we like a fatality that it be hopeless to avoid ? 

 " tell I what apology I can make to Mr. Fairlie for break my engagement , " I say . " tell I when to go after that apology be accept . I promise implicit obedience to you and to your advice . " 

 " time be every way of importance , " she answer . " you hear I refer this morning to Monday next , and to the necessity of set the purple room in order . the visitor whom we expect on Monday " 

 I could not wait for she to be more explicit . know what I know now , the memory of Miss Fairlie 's look and manner at the breakfast - table tell I that the expect visitor at Limmeridge House be her future husband . I try to force it back ; but something rise within I at that moment strong than my own will , and I interrupt Miss Halcombe . 

 " let I go to - day , " I say bitterly . " the soon the well . " 

 " no , not to - day , " she reply . " the only reason you can assign to Mr. Fairlie for your departure , before the end of your engagement , must be that an unforeseen necessity compel you to ask his permission to return at once to London . you must wait till to - morrow to tell he that , at the time when the post come in , because he will then understand the sudden change in your plan , by associate it with the arrival of a letter from London . it be miserable and sicken to descend to deceit , even of the most harmless kind but I know Mr. Fairlie , and if you once excite his suspicion that you be trifle with he , he will refuse to release you . speak to he on Friday morning : occupy yourself afterwards   for the sake of your own interest with your employer   in leave your unfinished work in as little confusion as possible , and quit this place on Saturday . it will be time enough then , Mr. Hartright , for you , and for all of we . " 

 before I could assure she that she might depend on my acting in the strict accordance with her wish , we be both startle by advance footstep in the shrubbery . some one be come from the house to seek for we ! I feel the blood rush into my cheek and then leave they again . could the third person who be fast approach we , at such a time and under such circumstance , be Miss Fairlie ? 

 it be a relief so sadly , so hopelessly be my position towards she change already it be absolutely a relief to I , when the person who have disturb we appear at the entrance of the summer - house , and prove to be only Miss Fairlie 's maid . 

 " could I speak to you for a moment , miss ? " say the girl , in rather a flurry , unsettled manner . 

 Miss Halcombe descend the step into the shrubbery , and walk aside a few pace with the maid . 

 leave by myself , my mind revert , with a sense of forlorn wretchedness which it be not in any word that I can find to describe , to my approach return to the solitude and the despair of my lonely London home . thought of my kind old mother , and of my sister , who have rejoice with she so innocently over my prospect in Cumberland thought whose long banishment from my heart it be now my shame and my reproach to realise for the first time come back to I with the love mournfulness of old , neglect friend . my mother and my sister , what would they feel when I return to they from my broken engagement , with the confession of my miserable secret they who have part from I so hopefully on that last happy night in the Hampstead cottage ! 

 Anne Catherick again ! even the memory of the farewell evening with my mother and my sister could not return to I now unconnected with that other memory of the moonlight walk back to London . what do it mean ? be that woman and I to meet once more ? it be possible , at the least . do she know that I live in London ? yes ; I have tell she so , either before or after that strange question of her , when she have ask I so distrustfully if I know many man of the rank of Baronet . either before or after my mind be not calm enough , then , to remember which . 

 a few minute elapse before Miss Halcombe dismiss the maid and come back to I . she , too , look flurried and unsettle now . 

 " we have arrange all that be necessary , Mr. Hartright , " she say . " we have understand each other , as friend should , and we may go back at once to the house . to tell you the truth , I be uneasy about Laura . she have send to say she want to see I directly , and the maid report that her mistress be apparently very much agitated by a letter that she have receive this morning the same letter , no doubt , which I send on to the house before we come here . " 

 we retrace our step together hastily along the shrubbery path . although Miss Halcombe have end all that she think it necessary to say on her side , I have not end all that I want to say on mine . from the moment when I have discover that the expect visitor at Limmeridge be Miss Fairlie 's future husband , I have feel a bitter curiosity , a burn envious eagerness , to know who he be . it be possible that a future opportunity of put the question might not easily offer , so I risk ask it on our way back to the house . 

 " now that you be kind enough to tell I we have understand each other , Miss Halcombe , " I say , " now that you be sure of my gratitude for your forbearance and my obedience to your wish , may I venture to ask who "   I hesitate I have force myself to think of he , but it be hard still to speak of he , as her promise husband   " who the gentleman engage to Miss Fairlie be ? " 

 her mind be evidently occupy with the message she have receive from her sister . she answer in a hasty , absent way 

 " a gentleman of large property in Hampshire . " 

 Hampshire ! Anne Catherick 's native place . again , and yet again , the woman in white . there be a fatality in it . 

 " and his name ? " I say , as quietly and indifferently as I could . 

 " Sir Percival Glyde . " 

 SIR Sir Percival ! Anne Catherick 's question that suspicious question about the man of the rank of Baronet whom I might happen to know have hardly be dismiss from my mind by Miss Halcombe 's return to I in the summer - house , before it be recall again by her own answer . I stop suddenly , and look at she . 

 " Sir Percival Glyde , " she repeat , imagine that I have not hear her former reply . 

 " Knight , or Baronet ? " I ask , with an agitation that I could hide no long . 

 she pause for a moment , and then answer , rather coldly 

 " Baronet , of course . " 



 XI 

 not a word more be say , on either side , as we walk back to the house . Miss Halcombe hasten immediately to her sister 's room , and I withdraw to my studio to set in order all of Mr. Fairlie 's drawing that I have not yet mount and restore before I resign they to the care of other hand . thought that I have hitherto restrain , thought that make my position hard than ever to endure , crowd on I now that I be alone . 

 she be engage to be marry , and her future husband be Sir Percival Glyde . a man of the rank of Baronet , and the owner of property in Hampshire . 

 there be hundred of baronet in England , and dozen of landowner in Hampshire . judge by the ordinary rule of evidence , I have not the shadow of a reason , thus far , for connect Sir Percival Glyde with the suspicious word of inquiry that have be speak to I by the woman in white . and yet , I do connect he with they . be it because he have now become associate in my mind with Miss Fairlie , Miss Fairlie be , in her turn , associate with Anne Catherick , since the night when I have discover the ominous likeness between they ? have the event of the morning so unnerved I already that I be at the mercy of any delusion which common chance and common coincidence might suggest to my imagination ? impossible to say . I could only feel that what have pass between Miss Halcombe and myself , on our way from the summer - house , have affect I very strangely . the foreboding of some undiscoverable danger lie hide from we all in the darkness of the future be strong on I . the doubt whether I be not link already to a chain of event which even my approach departure from Cumberland would be powerless to snap asunder the doubt whether we any of we see the end as the end would really be gather more and more darkly over my mind . poignant as it be , the sense of suffering cause by the miserable end of my brief , presumptuous love seem to be blunt and deaden by the still strong sense of something obscurely impending , something invisibly threaten , that Time be hold over our head . 

 I have be engage with the drawing little more than half an hour , when there be a knock at the door . it open , on my answering ; and , to my surprise , Miss Halcombe enter the room . 

 her manner be angry and agitated . she catch up a chair for herself before I could give her one , and sit down in it , close at my side . 

 " Mr. Hartright , " she say , " I have hop that all painful subject of conversation be exhaust between we , for to - day at least . but it be not to be so . there be some underhand villainy at work to frighten my sister about her approach marriage . you see I send the gardener on to the house , with a letter address , in a strange handwriting , to Miss Fairlie ? " 

 " certainly . " 

 " the letter be an anonymous letter a vile attempt to injure Sir Percival Glyde in my sister 's estimation . it have so agitated and alarm she that I have have the great possible difficulty in compose her spirit sufficiently to allow I to leave her room and come here . I know this be a family matter on which I ought not to consult you , and in which you can feel no concern or interest " 

 " I beg your pardon , Miss Halcombe . I feel the strong possible concern and interest in anything that affect Miss Fairlie 's happiness or your . " 

 " I be glad to hear you say so . you be the only person in the house , or out of it , who can advise I . Mr. Fairlie , in his state of health and with his horror of difficulty and mystery of all kind , be not to be think of . the clergyman be a good , weak man , who know nothing out of the routine of his duty ; and our neighbour be just the sort of comfortable , jog - trot acquaintance whom one can not disturb in time of trouble and danger . what I want to know be this : ought I at once to take such step as I can to discover the writer of the letter ? or ought I to wait , and apply to Mr. Fairlie 's legal adviser to - morrow ? it be a question perhaps a very important one of gain or lose a day . tell I what you think , Mr. Hartright . if necessity have not already oblige I to take you into my confidence under very delicate circumstance , even my helpless situation would , perhaps , be no excuse for I . but as thing be I can not surely be wrong , after all that have pass between we , in forget that you be a friend of only three month ' standing . " 

 she give I the letter . it begin abruptly , without any preliminary form of address , as follow 


 " do you believe in dream ? I hope , for your own sake , that you do . see what scripture say about dream and their fulfilment   Genesis xl . 8 , xli . 25 ; Daniel iv . 18 - 25 , and take the warning I send you before it be too late . 

 " last night I dream about you , Miss Fairlie . I dream that I be stand inside the communion rail of a church I on one side of the altar - table , and the clergyman , with his surplice and his prayer - book , on the other . 

 " after a time there walk towards we , down the aisle of the church , a man and a woman , come to be marry . you be the woman . you look so pretty and innocent in your beautiful white silk dress , and your long white lace veil , that my heart feel for you , and the tear come into my eye . 

 " they be tear of pity , young lady , that heaven bless and instead of fall from my eye like the everyday tear that we all of we shed , they turn into two ray of light which slant nearer and nearer to the man stand at the altar with you , till they touch his breast . the two ray spring ill arch like two rainbow between I and he . I look along they , and I see down into his inmost heart . 

 " the outside of the man you be marry be fair enough to see . he be neither tall nor short he be a little below the middle size . a light , active , high - spirited man about five - and - forty year old , to look at . he have a pale face , and be bald over the forehead , but have dark hair on the rest of his head . his beard be shaven on his chin , but be let to grow , of a fine rich brown , on his cheek and his upper lip . his eye be brown too , and very bright ; his nose straight and handsome and delicate enough to have do for a woman 's . his hand the same . he be trouble from time to time with a dry hack cough , and when he put up his white right hand to his mouth , he show the red scar of an old wound across the back of it . have I dream of the right man ? you know well , Miss Fairlie and you can say if I be deceive or not . read next , what I see beneath the outside I entreat you , read , and profit . 

 " I look along the two ray of light , and I see down into his inmost heart . it be black as night , and on it be write , in the red flaming letter which be the handwriting of the fall angel , ' without pity and without remorse . he have strew with misery the path of other , and he will live to strew with misery the path of this woman by his side . ' I read that , and then the ray of light shift and point over his shoulder ; and there , behind he , stand a fiend laughing . and the ray of light shift once more , and point over your shoulder ; and there behind you , stand an angel weep . and the ray of light shift for the third time , and point straight between you and that man . they widen and widen , thrust you both asunder , one from the other . and the clergyman look for the marriage - service in vain : it be go out of the book , and he shut up the leaf , and put it from he in despair . and I wake with my eye full of tear and my heart beat for I believe in dream . 

 " believe too , Miss Fairlie I beg of you , for your own sake , believe as I do . Joseph and Daniel , and other in Scripture , believe in dream . inquire into the past life of that man with the scar on his hand , before you say the word that make you his miserable wife . I do not   give you this warning on my account , but on your . I have an interest in your well - being that will live as long as I draw breath . your mother 's daughter have a tender place in my heart for your mother be my first , my good , my only friend . " 


 there the extraordinary letter end , without signature of any sort . 

 the handwriting afford no prospect of a clue . it be trace on rule line , in the cramp , conventional , copy - book character technically term ' small hand . " it be feeble and faint , and deface by blot , but have otherwise nothing to distinguish it . 

 " that be not an illiterate letter , " say Miss Halcombe , " and at the same time , it be surely too incoherent to be the letter of an educate person in the high rank of life . the reference to the bridal dress and veil , and other little expression , seem to point to it as the production of some woman . what do you think , Mr. Hartright ? " 

 " I think so too . it seem to I to be not only the letter of a woman , but of a woman whose mind must be " 

 " derange ? " suggest Miss Halcombe . " it strike I in that light too . " 

 I do not answer . while I be speak , my eye rest on the last sentence of the letter : " your mother 's daughter have a tender place in my heart for your mother be my first , my good , my only friend . " those word and the doubt which have just escape I as to the sanity of the writer of the letter , act together on my mind , suggest an idea , which I be literally afraid to express openly , or even to encourage secretly . I begin to doubt whether my own faculty be not in danger of lose their balance . it seem almost like a monomania to be trace back everything strange that happen , everything unexpected that be say , always to the same hidden source and the same sinister influence . I resolve , this time , in defence of my own courage and my own sense , to come to no decision that plain fact do not warrant , and to turn my back resolutely on everything that tempt I in the shape of surmise . 

 " if we have any chance of trace the person who have write this , " I say , return the letter to Miss Halcombe , " there can be no harm in seize our opportunity the moment it offer . I think we ought to speak to the gardener again about the elderly woman who give he the letter , and then to continue our inquiry in the village . but first let I ask a question . you mention just now the alternative of consult Mr. Fairlie 's legal adviser to - morrow . be there no possibility of communicate with he early ? why not to - day ? " 

 " I can only explain , " reply Miss Halcombe , " by enter into certain particular , connect with my sister 's marriage - engagement , which I do not think it necessary or desirable to mention to you this morning . one of Sir Percival Glyde 's object in come here on Monday , be to fix the period of his marriage , which have hitherto be leave quite unsettled . he be anxious that the event should take place before the end of the year . " 

 " do Miss Fairlie know of that wish ? " I ask eagerly . 

 " she have no suspicion of it , and after what have happen , I shall not take the responsibility upon myself of enlighten she . Sir Percival have only mention his view to Mr. Fairlie , who have tell I himself that he be ready and anxious , as Laura 's guardian , to forward they . he have write to London , to the family solicitor , Mr. Gilmore . Mr. Gilmore happen to be away in Glasgow on business , and he have reply by propose to stop at Limmeridge House on his way back to town . he will arrive to - morrow , and will stay with we a few day , so as to allow Sir Percival time to plead his own cause . if he succeed , Mr. Gilmore will then return to London , take with he his instruction for my sister 's marriage - settlement . you understand now , Mr. Hartright , why I speak of wait to take legal advice until to - morrow ? Mr. Gilmore be the old and try friend of two generation of Fairlies , and we can trust he , as we could trust no one else . " 

 the marriage - settlement ! the mere hearing of those two word sting I with a jealous despair that be poison to my high and well instinct . I begin to think it be hard to confess this , but I must suppress nothing from begin to end of the terrible story that I now stand committed to reveal I begin to think , with a hateful eagerness of hope , of the vague charge against Sir Percival Glyde which the anonymous letter contain . what if those wild accusation rest on a foundation of truth ? what if their truth could be prove before the fatal word of consent be speak , and the marriage - settlement be draw ? I have try to think since , that the feeling which then animate I begin and end in pure devotion to Miss Fairlie 's interest , but I have never succeed in deceive myself into believe it , and I must not now attempt to deceive other . the feeling begin and end in reckless , vindictive , hopeless hatred of the man who be to marry she . 

 " if we be to find out anything , " I say , speak under the new influence which be now direct I , " we have well not let another minute slip by we unemployed . I can only suggest , once more , the propriety of question the gardener a second time , and of inquire in the village immediately afterwards . " 

 " I think I may be of help to you in both case , " say Miss Halcombe , rise . " let we go , Mr. Hartright , at once , and do the good we can together . " 

 I have the door in my hand to open it for she but I stop , on a sudden , to ask an important question before we set forth . 

 " one of the paragraph of the anonymous letter , " I say , " contain some sentence of minute personal description . Sir Percival Glyde 's name be not mention , I know but do that description at all resemble he ? " 

 " accurately even in state his age to be forty - five " 

 forty - five ; and she be not yet twenty - one ! man of his age married wife of her age every day and experience have show those marriage to be often the happy one . I know that and yet even the mention of his age , when I contrast it with her , add to my blind hatred and distrust of he . 

 " accurately , " Miss Halcombe continue , " even to the scar on his right hand , which be the scar of a wound that he receive year since when he be travel in Italy . there can be no doubt that every peculiarity of his personal appearance be thoroughly well known to the writer of the letter . " 

 " even a cough that he be trouble with be mention , if I remember right ? " 

 " yes , and mention correctly . he treat it lightly himself , though it sometimes make his friend anxious about he . " 

 " I suppose no whisper have ever be hear against his character ? " 

 " Mr. Hartright ! I hope you be not unjust enough to let that infamous letter influence you ? " 

 I feel the blood rush into my cheek , for I know that it had influence I . 

 " I hope not , " I answer confusedly . " perhaps I have no right to ask the question . " 

 " I be not sorry you ask it , " she say , " for it enable I to do justice to Sir Percival 's reputation . not a whisper , Mr. Hartright , have ever reach I , or my family , against he . he have fight successfully two contest election , and have come out of the ordeal unscathed . a man who can do that , in England , be a man whose character be establish . " 

 I open the door for she in silence , and follow she out . she have not convince I . if the record angel have come down from heaven to confirm she , and have open his book to my mortal eye , the record angel would not have convince I . 

 we find the gardener at work as usual . no amount of questioning could extract a single answer of any importance from the lad 's impenetrable stupidity . the woman who have give he the letter be an elderly woman ; she have not speak a word to he , and she have go away towards the south in a great hurry . that be all the gardener could tell we . 

 the village lie southward of the house . so to the village we go next . 



 XII 

 our inquiry at Limmeridge be patiently pursue in all direction , and among all sort and condition of people . but nothing come of they . three of the villager do certainly assure we that they have see the woman , but as they be quite unable to describe she , and quite incapable of agree about the exact direction in which she be proceed when they last see she , these three bright exception to the general rule of total ignorance afford no more real assistance to we than the mass of their unhelpful and unobservant neighbour . 

 the course of our useless investigation bring we , in time , to the end of the village at which the school establish by Mrs. Fairlie be situate . as we pass the side of the building appropriate to the use of the boy , I suggest the propriety of make a last inquiry of the schoolmaster , whom we might presume to be , in virtue of his office , the most intelligent man in the place . 

 " I be afraid the schoolmaster must have be occupy with his scholar , " say Miss Halcombe , " just at the time when the woman pass through the village and return again . however , we can but try . " 

 we enter the playground enclosure , and walk by the schoolroom window to get round to the door , which be situate at the back of the building . I stop for a moment at the window and look in . 

 the schoolmaster be sit at his high desk , with his back to I , apparently harangue the pupil , who be all gather together in front of he , with one exception . the one exception be a sturdy white - head boy , stand apart from all the rest on a stool in a corner a forlorn little Crusoe , isolate in his own desert island of solitary penal disgrace . 

 the door , when we get round to it , be ajar , and the school - master 's voice reach we plainly , as we both stop for a minute under the porch . 

 " now , boy , " say the voice , " mind what I tell you . if I hear another word speak about ghost in this school , it will be the bad for all of you . there be no such thing as ghost , and therefore any boy who believe in ghost believe in what can not   possibly be ; and a boy who belong to Limmeridge School , and believe in what can not   possibly be , set up his back against reason and discipline , and must be punish accordingly . you all see Jacob Postlethwaite stand up on the stool there in disgrace . he have be punish , not because he say he see a ghost last night , but because he be too impudent and too obstinate to listen to reason , and because he persist in say he see the ghost after I have tell he that no such thing can possibly be . if nothing else will do , I mean to cane the ghost out of Jacob Postlethwaite , and if the thing spread among any of the rest of you , I mean to go a step far , and cane the ghost out of the whole school . " 

 " we seem to have choose an awkward moment for our visit , " say Miss Halcombe , push open the door at the end of the schoolmaster 's address , and lead the way in . 

 our appearance produce a strong sensation among the boy . they appear to think that we have arrive for the express purpose of see Jacob Postlethwaite can . 

 " go home all of you to dinner , " say the schoolmaster , " except Jacob . Jacob must stop where he be ; and the ghost may bring he his dinner , if the ghost please . " 

 Jacob 's fortitude desert he at the double disappearance of his schoolfellow and his prospect of dinner . he take his hand out of his pocket , look hard at his knuckle , raise they with great deliberation to his eye , and when they get there , ground they round and round slowly , accompany the action by short spasm of sniffing , which follow each other at regular interval the nasal minute gun of juvenile distress . 

 " we come here to ask you a question , Mr. Dempster , " say Miss Halcombe , address the schoolmaster ; " and we little expect to find you occupy in exorcise a ghost . what do it all mean ? what have really happen ? " 

 " that wicked boy have be frightening the whole school , Miss Halcombe , by declare that he see a ghost yesterday evening , " answer the master ; " and he still persist in his absurd story , in spite of all that I can say to he . " 

 " most extraordinary , " say Miss Halcombe " I should not have think it possible that any of the boy have imagination enough to see a ghost . this be a new accession indeed to the hard labour of form the youthful mind at Limmeridge , and I heartily wish you well through it , Mr. Dempster . in the meantime , let I explain why you see I here , and what it be I want . " 

 she then put the same question to the schoolmaster which we have ask already of almost every one else in the village . it be meet by the same discouraging answer Mr. Dempster have not set eye on the stranger of whom we be in search . 

 " we may as well return to the house , Mr. Hartright , " say Miss Halcombe ; " the information we want be evidently not to be find . " 

 she have bow to Mr. Dempster , and be about to leave the schoolroom , when the forlorn position of Jacob Postlethwaite , piteously sniff on the stool of penitence , attract her attention as she pass he , and make she stop good - humouredly to speak a word to the little prisoner before she open the door . 

 " you foolish boy , " she say , " why do not   you beg Mr. Dempster 's pardon , and hold your tongue about the ghost ? " 

 " eh ! but I see t ' ghaist , " persist Jacob Postlethwaite , with a stare of terror and a burst of tear . 

 " stuff and nonsense ! you see nothing of the kind . ghost indeed ! what ghost " 

 " I beg your pardon , Miss Halcombe , " interpose the schoolmaster a little uneasily " but I think you have well not question the boy . the obstinate folly of his story be beyond all belief ; and you might lead he into ignorantly " 

 " ignorantly what ? " inquire Miss Halcombe sharply . 

 " ignorantly shock your feeling , " say Mr. Dempster , look very much discompose . 

 " upon my word , Mr. Dempster , you pay my feeling a great compliment in think they weak enough to be shock by such an urchin as that ! " she turn with an air of satirical defiance to little Jacob , and begin to question he directly . " come ! " she say , " I mean to know all about this . you naughty boy , when do you see the ghost ? " 

 " Yestere'en , at the gloaming , " reply Jacob . 

 " oh ! you see it yesterday evening , in the twilight ? and what be it like ? " 

 " arl in white as a ghaist should be , " answer the ghost - seer , with a confidence beyond his year . 

 " and where be it ? " 

 " away yander , in t ' kirkyard where a ghaist ought to be . " 

 " as a ' ghaist ' should be where a ' ghaist ' ought to be why , you little fool , you talk as if the manner and custom of ghost have be familiar to you from your infancy ! you have get your story at your finger ' end , at any rate . I suppose I shall hear next that you can actually tell I whose ghost it be ? " 

 " eh ! but I just can , " reply Jacob , nod his head with an air of gloomy triumph . 

 Mr. Dempster have already try several time to speak while Miss Halcombe be examine his pupil , and he now interpose resolutely enough to make himself hear . 

 " excuse I , Miss Halcombe , " he say , " if I venture to say that you be only encourage the boy by ask he these question . " 

 " I will merely ask one more , Mr. Dempster , and then I shall be quite satisfied . well , " she continue , turn to the boy , " and whose ghost be it ? " 

 " T ' ghaist of Mistress Fairlie , " answer Jacob in a whisper . 

 the effect which this extraordinary reply produce on Miss Halcombe fully justify the anxiety which the schoolmaster have show to prevent she from hear it . her face crimson with indignation she turn upon little Jacob with an angry suddenness which terrify he into a fresh burst of tear open her lip to speak to he then control herself , and address the master instead of the boy . 

 " it be useless , " she say , " to hold such a child as that responsible for what he say . I have little doubt that the idea have be put into his head by other . if there be people in this village , Mr. Dempster , who have forget the respect and gratitude due from every soul in it to my mother 's memory , I will find they out , and if I have any influence with Mr. Fairlie , they shall suffer for it . " 

 " I hope indeed , I be sure , Miss Halcombe that you be mistaken , " say the schoolmaster . " the matter begin and end with the boy 's own perversity and folly . he see , or think he see , a woman in white , yesterday evening , as he be pass the churchyard ; and the figure , real or fancied , be stand by the marble cross , which he and every one else in Limmeridge know to be the monument over Mrs. Fairlie 's grave . these two circumstance be surely sufficient to have suggest to the boy himself the answer which have so naturally shock you ? " 

 although Miss Halcombe do not seem to be convince , she evidently feel that the schoolmaster 's statement of the case be too sensible to be openly combat . she merely reply by thank he for his attention , and by promise to see he again when her doubt be satisfied . this say , she bow , and lead the way out of the schoolroom . 

 throughout the whole of this strange scene I have stand apart , listen attentively , and draw my own conclusion . as soon as we be alone again , Miss Halcombe ask I if I have form any opinion on what I have hear . 

 " a very strong opinion , " I answer ; " the boy 's story , as I believe , have a foundation in fact . I confess I be anxious to see the monument over Mrs. Fairlie 's grave , and to examine the ground about it . " 

 " you shall see the grave . " 

 she pause after make that reply , and reflect a little as we walk on . " what have happen in the schoolroom , " she resume , " have so completely distract my attention from the subject of the letter , that I feel a little bewildered when I try to return to it . must we give up all idea of make any further inquiry , and wait to place the thing in Mr. Gilmore 's hand to - morrow ? " 

 " by no mean , Miss Halcombe . what have happen in the schoolroom encourage I to persevere in the investigation . " 

 " why do it encourage you ? " 

 " because it strengthen a suspicion I feel when you give I the letter to read . " 

 " I suppose you have your reason , Mr. Hartright , for conceal that suspicion from I till this moment ? " 

 " I be afraid to encourage it in myself . I think it be utterly preposterous I distrust it as the result of some perversity in my own imagination . but I can do so no long . not only the boy 's own answer to your question , but even a chance expression that drop from the schoolmaster 's lip in explain his story , have force the idea back into my mind . event may yet prove that idea to be a delusion , Miss Halcombe ; but the belief be strong in I , at this moment , that the fancy ghost in the churchyard , and the writer of the anonymous letter , be one and the same person . " 

 she stop , turn pale , and look I eagerly in the face . 

 " what person ? " 

 " the schoolmaster unconsciously tell you . when he speak of the figure that the boy see in the churchyard he call it ' a woman in white . ' " 

 " not Anne Catherick ? " 

 " yes , Anne Catherick . " 

 she put her hand through my arm and lean on it heavily . 

 " I do not   know why , " she say in low tone , " but there be something in this suspicion of yours that seem to startle and unnerve I . I feel " she stop , and try to laugh it off . " Mr. Hartright , " she go on , " I will show you the grave , and then go back at once to the house . I have well not leave Laura too long alone . I have well go back and sit with she . " 

 we be close to the churchyard when she speak . the church , a dreary building of grey stone , be situate in a little valley , so as to be shelter from the bleak wind blow over the moorland all round it . the burial - ground advance , from the side of the church , a little way up the slope of the hill . it be surround by a rough , low stone wall , and be bare and open to the sky , except at one extremity , where a brook trickle down the stony hill - side , and a clump of dwarf tree throw their narrow shadow over the short , meagre grass . just beyond the brook and the tree , and not far from one of the three stone stile which afford entrance , at various point , to the churchyard , rise the white marble cross that distinguish Mrs. Fairlie 's grave from the humbler monument scatter about it . 

 " I need go no far with you , " say Miss Halcombe , point to the grave . " you will let I know if you find anything to confirm the idea you have just mention to I . let we meet again at the house . " 

 she leave I . I descend at once to the churchyard , and cross the stile which lead directly to Mrs. Fairlie 's grave . 

 the grass about it be too short , and the ground too hard , to show any mark of footstep . disappointed thus far , I next look attentively at the cross , and at the square block of marble below it , on which the inscription be cut . 

 the natural whiteness of the cross be a little clouded , here and there , by weather stain , and rather more than one half of the square block beneath it , on the side which bear the inscription , be in the same condition . the other half , however , attract my attention at once by its singular freedom from stain or impurity of any kind . I look close , and see that it have be clean recently clean , in a downward direction from top to bottom . the boundary line between the part that have be clean and the part that have not be traceable wherever the inscription leave a blank space of marble sharply traceable as a line that have be produce by artificial mean . who have begin the cleansing of the marble , and who have leave it unfinishe ? 

 I look about I , wonder how the question be to be solve . no sign of a habitation could be discern from the point at which I be stand the burial - ground be leave in the lonely possession of the dead . I return to the church , and walk round it till I come to the back of the building ; then cross the boundary wall beyond , by another of the stone stile , and find myself at the head of a path lead down into a deserted stone quarry . against one side of the quarry a little two - room cottage be build , and just outside the door an old woman be engage in washing . 

 I walk up to she , and enter into conversation about the church and burial - ground . she be ready enough to talk , and almost the first word she say inform I that her husband fill the two office of clerk and sexton . I say a few word next in praise of Mrs. Fairlie 's monument . the old woman shake her head , and tell I I have not see it at its good . it be her husband 's business to look after it , but he have be so ailing and weak for month and month past , that he have hardly be able to crawl into church on Sundays to do his duty , and the monument have be neglect in consequence . he be get a little well now , and in a week or ten day ' time he hop to be strong enough to set to work and clean it . 

 this information extract from a long ramble answer in the broad Cumberland dialect tell I all that I most want to know . I give the poor woman a trifle , and return at once to Limmeridge House . 

 the partial cleansing of the monument have evidently be accomplish by a strange hand . connect what I have discover , thus far , with what I have suspect after hear the story of the ghost see at twilight , I want nothing more to confirm my resolution to watch Mrs. Fairlie 's grave , in secret , that evening , return to it at sunset , and wait within sight of it till the night fall . the work of cleanse the monument have be leave unfinished , and the person by whom it have be begin might return to complete it . 

 on get back to the house I inform Miss Halcombe of what I intend to do . she look surprised and uneasy while I be explain my purpose , but she make no positive objection to the execution of it . she only say , " I hope it may end well . " 

 just as she be leave I again , I stop she to inquire , as calmly as I could , after Miss Fairlie 's health . she be in well spirit , and Miss Halcombe hop she might be induce to take a little walk exercise while the afternoon sun last . 

 I return to my own room to resume set the drawing in order . it be necessary to do this , and doubly necessary to keep my mind employ on anything that would help to distract my attention from myself , and from the hopeless future that lie before I . from time to time I pause in my work to look out of window and watch the sky as the sun sink near and near to the horizon . on one of those occasion I see a figure on the broad gravel walk under my window . it be Miss Fairlie . 

 I have not see she since the morning , and I have hardly speak to she then . another day at Limmeridge be all that remain to I , and after that day my eye might never look on she again . this thought be enough to hold I at the window . I have sufficient consideration for she to arrange the blind so that she might not see I if she look up , but I have no strength to resist the temptation of let my eye , at least , follow she as far as they could on her walk . 

 she be dress in a brown cloak , with a plain black silk gown under it . on her head be the same simple straw hat which she have wear on the morning when we first meet . a veil be attach to it now which hide her face from I . by her side trot a little italian greyhound , the pet companion of all her walk , smartly dress in a scarlet cloth wrapper , to keep the sharp air from his delicate skin . she do not seem to notice the dog . she walk straight forward , with her head droop a little , and her arm fold in her cloak . the dead leaf , which have whirl in the wind before I when I have hear of her marriage engagement in the morning , whirl in the wind before she , and rise and fall and scatter themselves at her foot as she walk on in the pale wan sunlight . the dog shiver and tremble , and press against her dress impatiently for notice and encouragement . but she never heed he . she walk on , far and far away from I , with the dead leaf whirl about she on the path walk on , till my ache eye could see she no more , and I be leave alone again with my own heavy heart . 

 in another hour 's time I have do my work , and the sunset be at hand . I get my hat and coat in the hall , and slip out of the house without meet any one . 

 the cloud be wild in the western heaven , and the wind blow chill from the sea . far as the shore be , the sound of the surf sweep over the intervene moorland , and beat drearily in my ear when I enter the churchyard . not a living creature be in sight . the place look lonely than ever as I choose my position , and wait and watch , with my eye on the white cross that rise over Mrs. Fairlie 's grave . 



 xiii 

 the exposed situation of the churchyard have oblige I to be cautious in choose the position that I be to occupy . 

 the main entrance to the church be on the side next to the burial - ground , and the door be screen by a porch wall in on either side . after some little hesitation , cause by natural reluctance to conceal myself , indispensable as that concealment be to the object in view , I have resolve on enter the porch . a loophole window be pierce in each of its side wall . through one of these window I could see Mrs. Fairlie 's grave . the other look towards the stone quarry in which the sexton 's cottage be build . before I , front the porch entrance , be a patch of bare burial - ground , a line of low stone wall , and a strip of lonely brown hill , with the sunset cloud sail heavily over it before the strong , steady wind . no living creature be visible or audible no bird fly by I , no dog bark from the sexton 's cottage . the pause in the dull beating of the surf be fill up by the dreary rustling of the dwarf tree near the grave , and the cold faint bubble of the brook over its stony bed . a dreary scene and a dreary hour . my spirit sink fast as I count out the minute of the evening in my hiding - place under the church porch . 

 it be not twilight yet the light of the set sun still linger in the heaven , and little more than the first half - hour of my solitary watch have elapse when I hear footstep and a voice . the footstep be approach from the other side of the church , and the voice be a woman 's . 

 " do not   you fret , my dear , about the letter , " say the voice . " I give it to the lad quite safe , and the lad he take it from I without a word . he go his way and I go mine , and not a living soul follow I afterwards that I will warrant . " 

 these word string up my attention to a pitch of expectation that be almost painful . there be a pause of silence , but the footstep still advance . in another moment two person , both woman , pass within my range of view from the porch window . they be walk straight towards the grave ; and therefore they have their back turn towards I . 

 one of the woman be dress in a bonnet and shawl . the other wear a long travelling - cloak of a dark - blue colour , with the hood draw over her head . a few inch of her gown be visible below the cloak . my heart beat fast as I note the colour it be white . 

 after advance about half - way between the church and the grave they stop , and the woman in the cloak turn her head towards her companion . but her side face , which a bonnet might now have allow I to see , be hide by the heavy , project edge of the hood . 

 " mind you keep that comfortable warm cloak on , " say the same voice which I have already hear the voice of the woman in the shawl . " Mrs. Todd be right about your look too particular , yesterday , all in white . I will walk about a little while you be here , churchyard be not at all in my way , whatever they may be in your . finish what you want to do before I come back , and let we be sure and get home again before night . " 

 with those word she turn about , and retrace her step , advance with her face towards I . it be the face of an elderly woman , brown , rugged , and healthy , with nothing dishonest or suspicious in the look of it . close to the church she stop to pull her shawl close round she . 

 " Queer , " she say to herself , " always queer , with her whim and her way , ever since I can remember she . harmless , though as harmless , poor soul , as a little child . " 

 she sigh look about the burial - ground nervously shake her head , as if the dreary prospect by no mean please she , and disappear round the corner of the church . 

 I doubt for a moment whether I ought to follow and speak to she or not . my intense anxiety to find myself face to face with her companion help I to decide in the negative . I could ensure see the woman in the shawl by wait near the churchyard until she come back although it seem more than doubtful whether she could give I the information of which I be in search . the person who have deliver the letter be of little consequence . the person who have write it be the one centre of interest , and the one source of information , and that person I now feel convinced be before I in the churchyard . 

 while these idea be pass through my mind I see the woman in the cloak approach close to the grave , and stand look at it for a little while . she then glance all round she , and take a white linen cloth or handkerchief from under her cloak , turn aside towards the brook . the little stream run into the churchyard under a tiny archway in the bottom of the wall , and run out again , after a winding course of a few dozen yard , under a similar opening . she dip the cloth in the water , and return to the grave . I see she kiss the white cross , then kneel down before the inscription , and apply her wet cloth to the cleansing of it . 

 after consider how I could show myself with the least possible chance of frighten she , I resolve to cross the wall before I , to skirt round it outside , and to enter the churchyard again by the stile near the grave , in order that she might see I as I approach . she be so absorbed over her employment that she do not hear I come until I have step over the stile . then she look up , start to her foot with a faint cry , and stand face I in speechless and motionless terror . 

 " do not   be frightened , " I say . " surely you remember I ? " 

 I stop while I speak then advance a few step gently then stop again and so approach by little and little till I be close to she . if there have be any doubt still leave in my mind , it must have be now set at rest . there , speak affrightedly for itself there be the same face confront I over Mrs. Fairlie 's grave which have first look into mine on the high - road by night . 

 " you remember I ? " I say . " we meet very late , and I help you to find the way to London . surely you have not forget that ? " 

 her feature relax , and she draw a heavy breath of relief . I see the new life of recognition stir slowly under the death - like stillness which fear have set on her face . 

 " do not   attempt to speak to I just yet , " I go on . " take time to recover yourself take time to feel quite certain that I be a friend . " 

 " you be very kind to I , " she murmur . " as kind now as you be then . " 

 she stop , and I keep silence on my side . I be not grant time for composure to she only , I be gain time also for myself . under the wan wild evening light , that woman and I be meet together again , a grave between we , the dead about we , the lonesome hill close we round on every side . the time , the place , the circumstance under which we now stand face to face in the evening stillness of that dreary valley the lifelong interest which might hang suspend on the next chance word that pass between we the sense that , for aught I know to the contrary , the whole future of Laura Fairlie 's life might be determine , for good or for evil , by my winning or lose the confidence of the forlorn creature who stand tremble by her mother 's grave all threaten to shake the steadiness and the self - control on which every inch of the progress I might yet make now depend . I try hard , as I feel this , to possess myself of all my resource ; I do my utmost to turn the few moment for reflection to the good account . 

 " be you calm now ? " I say , as soon as I think it time to speak again . " can you talk to I without feel frightened , and without forget that I be a friend ? " 

 " how do you come here ? " she ask , without notice what I have just say to she . 

 " do not   you remember my tell you , when we last meet , that I be go to Cumberland ? I have be in Cumberland ever since I have be stay all the time at Limmeridge House . " 

 " at Limmeridge House ! " her pale face brighten as she repeat the word , her wander eye fix on I with a sudden interest . " ah , how happy you must have be ! " she say , look at I eagerly , without a shadow of its former distrust leave in her expression . 

 I take advantage of her newly - arouse confidence in I to observe her face , with an attention and a curiosity which I have hitherto restrain myself from show , for caution 's sake . I look at she , with my mind full of that other lovely face which have so ominously recall she to my memory on the terrace by moonlight . I have see Anne Catherick 's likeness in Miss Fairlie . I now see Miss Fairlie 's likeness in Anne Catherick see it all the more clearly because the point of dissimilarity between the two be present to I as well as the point of resemblance . in the general outline of the countenance and general proportion of the feature in the colour of the hair and in the little nervous uncertainty about the lip in the height and size of the figure , and the carriage of the head and body , the likeness appear even more startling than I have ever feel it to be yet . but there the resemblance end , and the dissimilarity , in detail , begin . the delicate beauty of Miss Fairlie 's complexion , the transparent clearness of her eye , the smooth purity of her skin , the tender bloom of colour on her lip , be all miss from the worn weary face that be now turn towards mine . although I hat myself even for think such a thing , still , while I look at the woman before I , the idea would force itself into my mind that one sad change , in the future , be all that be want to make the likeness complete , which I now see to be so imperfect in detail . if ever sorrow and suffering set their profane mark on the youth and beauty of Miss Fairlie 's face , then , and then only , Anne Catherick and she would be the twin - sister of chance resemblance , the living reflection of one another . 

 I shudder at the thought . there be something horrible in the blind unreasone distrust of the future which the mere passage of it through my mind seem to imply . it be a welcome interruption to be rouse by feel Anne Catherick 's hand lay on my shoulder . the touch be as stealthy and as sudden as that other touch which have petrify I from head to foot on the night when we first meet . 

 " you be look at I , and you be think of something , " she say , with her strange breathless rapidity of utterance . " what be it ? " 

 " nothing extraordinary , " I answer . " I be only wonder how you come here . " 

 " I come with a friend who be very good to I . I have only be here two day . " 

 " and you find your way to this place yesterday ? " 

 " how do you know that ? " 

 " I only guess it . " 

 she turn from I , and kneel down before the inscription once more . 

 " where should I go if not here ? " she say . " the friend who be well than a mother to I be the only friend I have to visit at Limmeridge . oh , it make my heart ache to see a stain on her tomb ! it ought to be keep white as snow , for her sake . I be tempt to begin clean it yesterday , and I can not   help come back to go on with it to - day . be there anything wrong in that ? I hope not . surely nothing can be wrong that I do for Mrs. Fairlie 's sake ? " 

 the old grateful sense of her benefactress 's kindness be evidently the rule idea still in the poor creature 's mind the narrow mind which have but too plainly open to no other lasting impression since that first impression of her young and happy day . I see that my good chance of win her confidence lie in encourage she to proceed with the artless employment which she have come into the burial - ground to pursue . she resume it at once , on my tell she she might do so , touch the hard marble as tenderly as if it have be a sentient thing , and whisper the word of the inscription to herself , over and over again , as if the lose day of her girlhood have return and she be patiently learn her lesson once more at Mrs. Fairlie 's knee . 

 " should you wonder very much , " I say , prepare the way as cautiously as I could for the question that be to come , " if I own that it be a satisfaction to I , as well as a surprise , to see you here ? I feel very uneasy about you after you leave I in the cab . " 

 she look up quickly and suspiciously . 

 " uneasy , " she repeat . " why ? " 

 " a strange thing happen after we part that night . two man overtake I in a chaise . they do not see where I be stand , but they stop near I , and speak to a policeman on the other side of the way . " 

 she instantly suspend her employment . the hand hold the damp cloth with which she have be clean the inscription drop to her side . the other hand grasp the marble cross at the head of the grave . her face turn towards I slowly , with the blank look of terror set rigidly on it once more . I go on at all hazard it be too late now to draw back . 

 " the two man speak to the policeman , " I say , " and ask he if he have see you . he have not see you ; and then one of the man speak again , and say you have escape from his asylum . " 

 she spring to her foot as if my last word have set the pursuer on her track . 

 " stop ! and hear the end , " I cry . " stop ! and you shall know how I befriend you . a word from I would have tell the man which way you have go and I never speak that word . I help your escape I make it safe and certain . think , try to think . try to understand what I tell you . " 

 my manner seem to influence she more than my word . she make an effort to grasp the new idea . her hand shift the damp cloth hesitatingly from one to the other , exactly as they have shift the little travel - bag on the night when I first see she . slowly the purpose of my word seem to force its way through the confusion and agitation of her mind . slowly her feature relax , and her eye look at I with their expression gain in curiosity what it be fast lose in fear . 

 " you do not   think I ought to be back in the asylum , do you ? " she say . 

 " certainly not . I be glad you escape from it I be glad I help you . " 

 " yes , yes , you do help I indeed ; you help I at the hard part , " she go on a little vacantly . " it be easy to escape , or I should not have get away . they never suspect I as they suspect the other . I be so quiet , and so obedient , and so easily frightened . the finding London be the hard part , and there you help I . do I thank you at the time ? I thank you now very kindly . " 

 " be the Asylum far from where you meet I ? come ! show that you believe I to be your friend , and tell I where it be . " 

 she mention the place a private Asylum , as its situation inform I ; a private Asylum not very far from the spot where I have see she and then , with evident suspicion of the use to which I might put her answer , anxiously repeat her former inquiry , " you do not   think I ought to be take back , do you ? " 

 " once again , I be glad you escape I be glad you prosper well after you leave I , " I answer . " you say you have a friend in London to go to . do you find the friend ? " 

 " yes . it be very late , but there be a girl up at needle - work in the house , and she help I to rouse Mrs. Clements . Mrs. Clements be my friend . a good , kind woman , but not like Mrs. Fairlie . ah no , nobody be like Mrs. Fairlie ! " 

 " be Mrs. Clements an old friend of your ? have you know she a long time ? " 

 " yes , she be a neighbour of ours once , at home , in Hampshire , and like I , and take care of I when I be a little girl . year ago , when she go away from we , she write down in my Prayer - book for I where she be go to live in London , and she say , ' if you be ever in trouble , Anne , come to I . I have no husband alive to say I nay , and no child to look after , and I will take care of you . ' kind word , be they not ? I suppose I remember they because they be kind . it be little enough I remember besides little enough , little enough ! " 

 " have you no father or mother to take care of you ? " 

 " Father ? I never see he I never hear mother speak of he . Father ? ah , dear ! he be dead , I suppose . " 

 " and your mother ? " 

 " I do not   get on well with she . we be a trouble and a fear to each other . " 

 a trouble and a fear to each other ! at those word the suspicion cross my mind , for the first time , that her mother might be the person who have place she under restraint . 

 " do not   ask I about mother , " she go on . " I would rather talk of Mrs. Clements . Mrs. Clements be like you , she do not   think that I ought to be back in the Asylum , and she be as glad as you be that I escape from it . she cry over my misfortune , and say it must be keep secret from everybody . " 

 her " misfortune . " in what sense be she use that word ? in a sense which might explain her motive in write the anonymous letter ? in a sense which might show it to be the too common and too customary motive that have lead many a woman to interpose anonymous hindrance to the marriage of the man who have ruin she ? I resolve to attempt the clearing up of this doubt before more word pass between we on either side . 

 " what misfortune ? " I ask . 

 " the misfortune of my be shut up , " she answer , with every appearance of feel surprised at my question . " what other misfortune could there be ? " 

 I determine to persist , as delicately and forbearingly as possible . it be of very great importance that I should be absolutely sure of every step in the investigation which I now gain in advance . 

 " there be another misfortune , " I say , " to which a woman may be liable , and by which she may suffer lifelong sorrow and shame . " 

 " what be it ? " she ask eagerly . 

 " the misfortune of believe too innocently in her own virtue , and in the faith and honour of the man she love , " I answer . 

 she look up at I with the artless bewilderment of a child . not the slight confusion or change of colour not the faint trace of any secret consciousness of shame struggle to the surface appear in her face that face which betray every other emotion with such transparent clearness . no word that ever be speak could have assure I , as her look and manner now assure I , that the motive which I have assign for her write the letter and send it to Miss Fairlie be plainly and distinctly the wrong one . that doubt , at any rate , be now set at rest ; but the very removal of it open a new prospect of uncertainty . the letter , as I know from positive testimony , point at Sir Percival Glyde , though it do not name he . she must have have some strong motive , originate in some deep sense of injury , for secretly denounce he to Miss Fairlie in such term as she have employ , and that motive be unquestionably not to be trace to the loss of her innocence and her character . whatever wrong he might have inflict on she be not of that nature . of what nature could it be ? 

 " I do not   understand you , " she say , after evidently try hard , and try in vain , to discover the meaning of the word I have last say to she . 

 " never mind , " I answer . " let we go on with what we be talk about . tell I how long you stay with Mrs. Clements in London , and how you come here . " 

 " how long ? " she repeat . " I stay with Mrs. Clements till we both come to this place , two day ago . " 

 " you be live in the village , then ? " I say . " it be strange I should not have hear of you , though you have only be here two day . " 

 " no , no , not in the village . three mile away at a farm . do you know the farm ? they call it Todd 's Corner . " 

 I remember the place perfectly we have often pass by it in our drive . it be one of the old farm in the neighbourhood , situate in a solitary , shelter spot , inland at the junction of two hill . 

 " they be relation of Mrs. Clements at Todd 's Corner , " she go on , " and they have often ask she to go and see they . she say she would go , and take I with she , for the quiet and the fresh air . it be very kind , be it not ? I would have go anywhere to be quiet , and safe , and out of the way . but when I hear that Todd 's Corner be near Limmeridge oh ! I be so happy I would have walk all the way barefoot to get there , and see the school and the village and Limmeridge House again . they be very good people at Todd 's Corner . I hope I shall stay there a long time . there be only one thing I do not   like about they , and do not   like about Mrs. Clements " 

 " what be it ? " 

 " they will tease I about dress all in white they say it look so particular . how do they know ? Mrs. Fairlie know well . Mrs. Fairlie would never have make I wear this ugly blue cloak ! ah ! she be fond of white in her lifetime , and here be white stone about her grave and I be make it whiter for her sake . she often wear white herself , and she always dress her little daughter in white . be Miss Fairlie well and happy ? do she wear white now , as she use when she be a girl ? " 

 her voice sink when she put the question about Miss Fairlie , and she turn her head far and far away from I . I think I detect , in the alteration of her manner , an uneasy consciousness of the risk she have run in send the anonymous letter , and I instantly determine so to frame my answer as to surprise she into own it . 

 " Miss Fairlie be not very well or very happy this morning , " I say . 

 she murmur a few word , but they be speak so confusedly , and in such a low tone , that I could not even guess at what they mean . 

 " do you ask I why Miss Fairlie be neither well nor happy this morning ? " I continue . 

 " no , " she say quickly and eagerly " oh no , I never ask that . " 

 " I will tell you without your asking , " I go on . " Miss Fairlie have receive your letter . " 

 she have be down on her knee for some little time past , carefully remove the last weather - stain leave about the inscription while we be speak together . the first sentence of the word I have just address to she make her pause in her occupation , and turn slowly without rise from her knee , so as to face I . the second sentence literally petrify she . the cloth she have be hold drop from her hand her lip fall apart all the little colour that there be naturally in her face leave it in an instant . 

 " how do you know ? " she say faintly . " who show it to you ? " the blood rush back into her face rush overwhelmingly , as the sense rush upon her mind that her own word have betray she . she strike her hand together in despair . " I never write it , " she gasp affrightedly ; " I know nothing about it ! " 

 " yes , " I say , " you write it , and you know about it . it be wrong to send such a letter , it be wrong to frighten Miss Fairlie . if you have anything to say that it be right and necessary for she to hear , you should have go yourself to Limmeridge House you should have speak to the young lady with your own lip . " 

 she crouch down over the flat stone of the grave , till her face be hide on it , and make no reply . 

 " Miss Fairlie will be as good and kind to you as her mother be , if you mean well , " I go on . " Miss Fairlie will keep your secret , and not let you come to any harm . will you see she to - morrow at the farm ? will you meet she in the garden at Limmeridge House ? " 

 " oh , if I could die , and be hide and at rest with you ! " her lip murmur the word close on the grave - stone , murmur they in tone of passionate endearment , to the dead remain beneath . " you know how I love your child , for your sake ! oh , Mrs. Fairlie ! Mrs. Fairlie ! tell I how to save she . be my darling and my mother once more , and tell I what to do for the good . " 

 I hear her lip kiss the stone I see her hand beat on it passionately . the sound and the sight deeply affect I . I stoop down , and take the poor helpless hand tenderly in mine , and try to soothe she . 

 it be useless . she snatch her hand from I , and never move her face from the stone . see the urgent necessity of quiet she at any hazard and by any mean , I appeal to the only anxiety that she appear to feel , in connection with I and with my opinion of she the anxiety to convince I of her fitness to be mistress of her own action . 

 " come , come , " I say gently . " try to compose yourself , or you will make I alter my opinion of you . do not   let I think that the person who put you in the Asylum might have have some excuse " 

 the next word die away on my lip . the instant I risk that chance reference to the person who have put she in the Asylum she spring up on her knee . a most extraordinary and startling change pass over she . her face , at all ordinary time so touch to look at , in its nervous sensitiveness , weakness , and uncertainty , become suddenly darken by an expression of maniacally intense hatred and fear , which communicate a wild , unnatural force to every feature . her eye dilate in the dim evening light , like the eye of a wild animal . she catch up the cloth that have fall at her side , as if it have be a living creature that she could kill , and crush it in both her hand with such convulsive strength , that the few drop of moisture leave in it trickle down on the stone beneath she . 

 " talk of something else , " she say , whisper through her tooth . " I shall lose myself if you talk of that . " 

 every vestige of the gentler thought which have fill her mind hardly a minute since seem to be sweep from it now . it be evident that the impression leave by Mrs. Fairlie 's kindness be not , as I have suppose , the only strong impression on her memory . with the grateful remembrance of her school - day at Limmeridge , there exist the vindictive remembrance of the wrong inflict on she by her confinement in the Asylum . who have do that wrong ? could it really be her mother ? 

 it be hard to give up pursue the inquiry to that final point , but I force myself to abandon all idea of continue it . see she as I see she now , it would have be cruel to think of anything but the necessity and the humanity of restore her composure . 

 " I will talk of nothing to distress you , " I say soothingly . 

 " you want something , " she answer sharply and suspiciously . " do not   look at I like that . speak to I tell I what you want . " 

 " I only want you to quiet yourself , and when you be calm , to think over what I have say . " 

 " say ? " she pause twist the cloth in her hand , backwards and forwards , and whisper to herself , " what be it he say ? " she turn again towards I , and shake her head impatiently . " why do not   you help I ? " she ask , with angry suddenness . 

 " yes , yes , " I say , " I will help you , and you will soon remember . I ask you to see Miss Fairlie to - morrow and to tell she the truth about the letter . " 

 " ah ! Miss Fairlie Fairlie Fairlie " 

 the mere utterance of the love familiar name seem to quiet she . her face soften and grow like itself again . 

 " you need have no fear of Miss Fairlie , " I continue , " and no fear of get into trouble through the letter . she know so much about it already , that you will have no difficulty in tell she all . there can be little necessity for concealment where there be hardly anything leave to conceal . you mention no name in the letter ; but Miss Fairlie know that the person you write of be Sir Percival Glyde " 

 the instant I pronounce that name she start to her foot , and a scream burst from she that ring through the churchyard , and make my heart leap in I with the terror of it . the dark deformity of the expression which have just leave her face lower on it once more , with double and treble intensity . the shriek at the name , the reiterated look of hatred and fear that instantly follow , tell all . not even a last doubt now remain . her mother be guiltless of imprison she in the Asylum . a man have shut she up and that man be Sir Percival Glyde . 

 the scream have reach other ear than mine . on one side I hear the door of the sexton 's cottage open ; on the other I hear the voice of her companion , the woman in the shawl , the woman whom she have speak of as Mrs. Clements . 

 " I be come ! I be come ! " cry the voice from behind the clump of dwarf tree . 

 in a moment more Mrs. Clements hurry into view . 

 " who be you ? " she cry , face I resolutely as she set her foot on the stile . " how dare you frighten a poor helpless woman like that ? " 

 she be at Anne Catherick 's side , and have put one arm around she , before I could answer . " what be it , my dear ? " she say . " what have he do to you ? " 

 " nothing , " the poor creature answer . " nothing . I be only frightened . " 

 Mrs. Clements turn on I with a fearless indignation , for which I respect she . 

 " I should be heartily ashamed of myself if I deserve that angry look , " I say . " but I do not deserve it . I have unfortunately startle she without intend it . this be not the first time she have see I . ask she yourself , and she will tell you that I be incapable of willingly harm she or any woman . " 

 I speak distinctly , so that Anne Catherick might hear and understand I , and I see that the word and their meaning have reach she . 

 " yes , yes , " she say " he be good to I once he help I " she whisper the rest into her friend 's ear . 

 " strange , indeed ! " say Mrs. Clements , with a look of perplexity . " it make all the difference , though . I be sorry I speak so rough to you , sir ; but you must own that appearance look suspicious to a stranger . it be more my fault than your , for humour her whim , and let she be alone in such a place as this . come , my dear come home now . " 

 I think the good woman look a little uneasy at the prospect of the walk back , and I offer to go with they until they be both within sight of home . Mrs. Clements thank I civilly , and decline . she say they be sure to meet some of the farm - labourer as soon as they get to the moor . 

 " try to forgive I , " I say , when Anne Catherick take her friend 's arm to go away . innocent as I have be of any intention to terrify and agitate she , my heart smite I as I look at the poor , pale , frighten face . 

 " I will try , " she answer . " but you know too much I be afraid you will always frighten I now . " 

 Mrs. Clements glance at I , and shake her head pityingly . 

 " good - night , sir , " she say . " you could not   help it , I know but I wish it be I you have frighten , and not she . " 

 they move away a few step . I think they have leave I , but Anne suddenly stop , and separate herself from her friend . 

 " wait a little , " she say . " I must say good - bye . " 

 she return to the grave , rest both hand tenderly on the marble cross , and kiss it . 

 " I be well now , " she sigh , look up at I quietly . " I forgive you . " 

 she join her companion again , and they leave the burial - ground . I see they stop near the church and speak to the sexton 's wife , who have come from the cottage , and have wait , watch we from a distance . then they go on again up the path that lead to the moor . I look after Anne Catherick as she disappear , till all trace of she have fade in the twilight look as anxiously and sorrowfully as if that be the last I be to see in this weary world of the woman in white . 



 XIV 

 half an hour later I be back at the house , and be inform Miss Halcombe of all that have happen . 

 she listen to I from begin to end with a steady , silent attention , which , in a woman of her temperament and disposition , be the strong proof that could be offer of the serious manner in which my narrative affect she . 

 " my mind misgive I , " be all she say when I have do . " my mind misgive I sadly about the future . " 

 " the future may depend , " I suggest , " on the use we make of the present . it be not improbable that Anne Catherick may speak more readily and unreservedly to a woman than she have speak to I . if Miss Fairlie " 

 " not to be think of for a moment , " interpose Miss Halcombe , in her most decide manner . 

 " let I suggest , then , " I continue , " that you should see Anne Catherick yourself , and do all you can to win her confidence . for my own part , I shrink from the idea of alarm the poor creature a second time , as I have most unhappily alarm she already . do you see any objection to accompany I to the farmhouse to - morrow ? " 

 " none whatever . I will go anywhere and do anything to serve Laura 's interest . what do you say the place be call ? " 

 " you must know it well . it be call Todd 's Corner . " 

 " certainly . Todd 's Corner be one of Mr. Fairlie 's farm . our dairymaid here be the farmer 's second daughter . she go backwards and forwards constantly between this house and her father 's farm , and she may have hear or see something which it may be useful to we to know . shall I ascertain , at once , if the girl be downstairs ? " 

 she ring the bell , and send the servant with his message . he return , and announce that the dairymaid be then at the farm . she have not be there for the last three day , and the housekeeper have give her leave to go home for an hour or two that evening . 

 " I can speak to she to - morrow , " say Miss Halcombe , when the servant have leave the room again . " in the meantime , let I thoroughly understand the object to be gain by my interview with Anne Catherick . be there no doubt in your mind that the person who confine she in the Asylum be Sir Percival Glyde ? " 

 " there be not the shadow of a doubt . the only mystery that remain be the mystery of his motive . look to the great difference between his station in life and her , which seem to preclude all idea of the most distant relationship between they , it be of the last importance even assume that she really require to be place under restraint to know why he should have be the person to assume the serious responsibility of shut she up " 

 " in a private asylum , I think you say ? " 

 " yes , in a private Asylum , where a sum of money , which no poor person could afford to give , must have be pay for her maintenance as a patient . " 

 " I see where the doubt lie , Mr. Hartright , and I promise you that it shall be set at rest , whether Anne Catherick assist we to - morrow or not . Sir Percival Glyde shall not be long in this house without satisfy Mr. Gilmore , and satisfy I . my sister 's future be my dear care in life , and I have influence enough over she to give I some power , where her marriage be concern , in the disposal of it . " 

 we part for the night . 


 after breakfast the next morning , an obstacle , which the event of the evening before have put out of my memory , interpose to prevent our proceeding immediately to the farm . this be my last day at Limmeridge House , and it be necessary , as soon as the post come in , to follow Miss Halcombe 's advice , and to ask Mr. Fairlie 's permission to shorten my engagement by a month , in consideration of an unforeseen necessity for my return to London . 

 fortunately for the probability of this excuse , so far as appearance be concern , the post bring I two letter from London friend that morning . I take they away at once to my own room , and send the servant with a message to Mr. Fairlie , request to know when I could see he on a matter of business . 

 I await the man 's return , free from the slight feeling of anxiety about the manner in which his master might receive my application . with Mr. Fairlie 's leave or without it , I must go . the consciousness of have now take the first step on the dreary journey which be henceforth to separate my life from Miss Fairlie 's seem to have blunt my sensibility to every consideration connect with myself . I have do with my poor man 's touchy pride I have do with all my little artist vanity . no insolence of Mr. Fairlie 's , if he choose to be insolent , could wound I now . 

 the servant return with a message for which I be not unprepared . Mr. Fairlie regret that the state of his health , on that particular morning , be such as to preclude all hope of his have the pleasure of receive I . he beg , therefore , that I would accept his apology , and kindly communicate what I have to say in the form of a letter . similar message to this have reach I , at various interval , during my three month ' residence in the house . throughout the whole of that period Mr. Fairlie have be rejoice to " possess " I , but have never be well enough to see I for a second time . the servant take every fresh batch of drawing that I mount and restore back to his master with my " respect , " and return empty - handed with Mr. Fairlie 's " kind compliment , " " good thank , " and ' sincere regret " that the state of his health still oblige he to remain a solitary prisoner in his own room . a more satisfactory arrangement to both side could not possibly have be adopt . it would be hard to say which of we , under the circumstance , feel the most grateful sense of obligation to Mr. Fairlie 's accommodate nerve . 

 I sit down at once to write the letter , express myself in it as civilly , as clearly , and as briefly as possible . Mr. Fairlie do not hurry his reply . nearly an hour elapse before the answer be place in my hand . it be write with beautiful regularity and neatness of character , in violet - colour ink , on note - paper as smooth as ivory and almost as thick as cardboard , and it address I in these term 

 " Mr. Fairlie 's compliment to Mr. Hartright . Mr. Fairlie be more surprised and disappointed than he can say   in the present state of his health   by Mr. Hartright 's application . Mr. Fairlie be not a man of business , but he have consult his steward , who be , and that person confirm Mr. Fairlie 's opinion that Mr. Hartright 's request to be allow to break his engagement can not be justify by any necessity whatever , except perhaps a case of life and death . if the highly - appreciative feeling towards art and its professor , which it be the consolation and happiness of Mr. Fairlie 's suffer existence to cultivate , could be easily shake , Mr. Hartright 's present proceeding would have shake it . it have not do so except in the instance of Mr. Hartright himself . 

 " have state his opinion so far , that be to say , as acute nervous suffering will allow he to state anything Mr. Fairlie have nothing to add but the expression of his decision , in reference to the highly irregular application that have be make to he . perfect repose of body and mind be to the last degree important in his case , Mr. Fairlie will not suffer Mr. Hartright to disturb that repose by remain in the house under circumstance of an essentially irritate nature to both side . accordingly , Mr. Fairlie waive his right of refusal , purely with a view to the preservation of his own tranquillity and inform Mr. Hartright that he may go . " 

 I fold the letter up , and put it away with my other paper . the time have be when I should have resent it as an insult I accept it now as a write release from my engagement . it be off my mind , it be almost out of my memory , when I go downstairs to the breakfast - room , and inform Miss Halcombe that I be ready to walk with she to the farm . 

 " have Mr. Fairlie give you a satisfactory answer ? " she ask as we leave the house . 

 " he have allow I to go , Miss Halcombe . " 

 she look up at I quickly , and then , for the first time since I have know she , take my arm of her own accord . no word could have express so delicately that she understand how the permission to leave my employment have be grant , and that she give I her sympathy , not as my superior , but as my friend . I have not feel the man 's insolent letter , but I feel deeply the woman 's atone kindness . 

 on our way to the farm we arrange that Miss Halcombe be to enter the house alone , and that I be to wait outside , within call . we adopt this mode of proceed from an apprehension that my presence , after what have happen in the churchyard the evening before , might have the effect of renew Anne Catherick 's nervous dread , and of render she additionally distrustful of the advance of a lady who be a stranger to she . Miss Halcombe leave I , with the intention of speak , in the first instance , to the farmer 's wife   of whose friendly readiness to help she in any way she be well assure , while I wait for she in the near neighbourhood of the house . 

 I have fully expect to be leave alone for some time . to my surprise , however , little more than five minute have elapse before Miss Halcombe return . 

 " do Anne Catherick refuse to see you ? " I ask in astonishment . 

 " Anne Catherick be go , " reply Miss Halcombe . 

 " Gone ? " 

 " go with Mrs. Clements . they both leave the farm at eight o'clock this morning . " 

 I could say nothing I could only feel that our last chance of discovery have go with they . 

 " all that Mrs. Todd know about her guest , I know , " Miss Halcombe go on , " and it leave I , as it leave she , in the dark . they both come back safe last night , after they leave you , and they pass the first part of the evening with Mr. Todd 's family as usual . just before supper - time , however , Anne Catherick startle they all by be suddenly seize with faintness . she have have a similar attack , of a less alarming kind , on the day she arrive at the farm ; and Mrs. Todd have connect it , on that occasion , with something she be read at the time in our local newspaper , which lie on the farm table , and which she have take up only a minute or two before . " 

 " do Mrs. Todd know what particular passage in the newspaper affect she in that way ? " I inquire . 

 " no , " reply Miss Halcombe . " she have look it over , and have see nothing in it to agitate any one . I ask leave , however , to look it over in my turn , and at the very first page I open I find that the editor have enrich his small stock of news by draw upon our family affair , and have publish my sister 's marriage engagement , among his other announcement , copy from the London paper , of marriage in High Life . I conclude at once that this be the paragraph which have so strangely affect Anne Catherick , and I think I see in it , also , the origin of the letter which she send to our house the next day . " 

 " there can be no doubt in either case . but what do you hear about her second attack of faintness yesterday evening ? " 

 " nothing . the cause of it be a complete mystery . there be no stranger in the room . the only visitor be our dairymaid , who , as I tell you , be one of Mr. Todd 's daughter , and the only conversation be the usual gossip about local affair . they hear she cry out , and see she turn deadly pale , without the slight apparent reason . Mrs. Todd and Mrs. Clements take she upstairs , and Mrs. Clements remain with she . they be hear talk together until long after the usual bedtime , and early this morning Mrs. Clements take Mrs. Todd aside , and amaze she beyond all power of expression by say that they must go . the only explanation Mrs. Todd could extract from her guest be , that something have happen , which be not the fault of any one at the farmhouse , but which be serious enough to make Anne Catherick resolve to leave Limmeridge immediately . it be quite useless to press Mrs. Clements to be more explicit . she only shake her head , and say that , for Anne 's sake , she must beg and pray that no one would question she . all she could repeat , with every appearance of be seriously agitate herself , be that Anne must go , that she must go with she , and that the destination to which they might both betake themselves must be keep a secret from everybody . I spare you the recital of Mrs. Todd 's hospitable remonstrance and refusal . it end in she drive they both to the near station , more than three hour since . she try hard on the way to get they to speak more plainly , but without success ; and she set they down outside the station - door , so hurt and offend by the unceremonious abruptness of their departure and their unfriendly reluctance to place the least confidence in she , that she drive away in anger , without so much as stop to bid they good - bye . that be exactly what have take place . search your own memory , Mr. Hartright , and tell I if anything happen in the burial - ground yesterday evening which can at all account for the extraordinary departure of those two woman this morning . " 

 " I should like to account first , Miss Halcombe , for the sudden change in Anne Catherick which alarm they at the farmhouse , hour after she and I have part , and when time enough have elapse to quiet any violent agitation that I might have be unfortunate enough to cause . do you inquire particularly about the gossip which be go on in the room when she turn faint ? " 

 " yes . but Mrs. Todd 's household affair seem to have divide her attention that evening with the talk in the farmhouse parlour . she could only tell I that it be ' just the news , ' meaning , I suppose , that they all talk as usual about each other . " 

 " the dairymaid 's memory may be well than her mother 's , " I say . " it may be as well for you to speak to the girl , Miss Halcombe , as soon as we get back . " 

 my suggestion be act on the moment we return to the house . Miss Halcombe lead I round to the servant ' office , and we find the girl in the dairy , with her sleeve tuck up to her shoulder , clean a large milk - pan and sing blithely over her work . 

 " I have bring this gentleman to see your dairy , Hannah , " say Miss Halcombe . " it be one of the sight of the house , and it always do you credit . " 

 the girl blush and curtsey , and say shyly that she hop she always do she good to keep thing neat and clean . 

 " we have just come from your father 's , " Miss Halcombe continue . " you be there yesterday evening , I hear , and you find visitor at the house ? " 

 " yes , miss . " 

 " one of they be take faint and ill , I be tell . I suppose nothing be say or do to frighten she ? you be not talk of anything very terrible , be you ? " 

 " oh no , miss ! " say the girl , laugh . " we be only talk of the news . " 

 " your sister tell you the news at Todd 's Corner , I suppose ? " 

 " yes , miss . " 

 " and you tell they the news at Limmeridge House ? " 

 " yes , miss . and I be quite sure nothing be say to frighten the poor thing , for I be talk when she be take ill . it give I quite a turn , miss , to see it , never have be take faint myself . " 

 before any more question could be put to she , she be call away to receive a basket of egg at the dairy door . as she leave we I whisper to Miss Halcombe 

 " ask she if she happen to mention , last night , that visitor be expect at Limmeridge House . " 

 Miss Halcombe show I , by a look , that she understand , and put the question as soon as the dairymaid return to we . 

 " oh yes , miss , I mention that , " say the girl simply . " the company come , and the accident to the brindle cow , be all the news I have to take to the farm . " 

 " do you mention name ? do you tell they that Sir Percival Glyde be expect on Monday ? " 

 " yes , miss I tell they Sir Percival Glyde be come . I hope there be no harm in it I hope I do not   do wrong . " 

 " oh no , no harm . come , Mr. Hartright , Hannah will begin to think we in the way , if we interrupt she any long over her work . " 

 we stop and look at one another the moment we be alone again . 

 " be there any doubt in your mind , now , Miss Halcombe ? " 

 " Sir Percival Glyde shall remove that doubt , Mr. Hartright or Laura Fairlie shall never be his wife . " 



 XV 

 as we walk round to the front of the house a fly from the railway approach we along the drive . Miss Halcombe wait on the door - step until the fly draw up , and then advance to shake hand with an old gentleman , who get out briskly the moment the step be let down . Mr. Gilmore have arrive . 

 I look at he , when we be introduce to each other , with an interest and a curiosity which I could hardly conceal . this old man be to remain at Limmeridge House after I have leave it , he be to hear Sir Percival Glyde 's explanation , and be to give Miss Halcombe the assistance of his experience in form her judgment ; he be to wait until the question of the marriage be set at rest ; and his hand , if that question be decide in the affirmative , be to draw the settlement which bind Miss Fairlie irrevocably to her engagement . even then , when I know nothing by comparison with what I know now , I look at the family lawyer with an interest which I have never feel before in the presence of any man breathe who be a total stranger to I . 

 in external appearance Mr. Gilmore be the exact opposite of the conventional idea of an old lawyer . his complexion be florid his white hair be wear rather long and keep carefully brush his black coat , waistcoat , and trouser fit he with perfect neatness his white cravat be carefully tie , and his lavender - colour kid glove might have adorn the hand of a fashionable clergyman , without fear and without reproach . his manner be pleasantly mark by the formal grace and refinement of the old school of politeness , quicken by the invigorate sharpness and readiness of a man whose business in life oblige he always to keep his faculty in good working order . a sanguine constitution and fair prospect to begin with a long subsequent career of creditable and comfortable prosperity a cheerful , diligent , widely - respect old age such be the general impression I derive from my introduction to Mr. Gilmore , and it be but fair to he to add , that the knowledge I gain by later and well experience only tend to confirm they . 

 I leave the old gentleman and Miss Halcombe to enter the house together , and to talk of family matter undisturbed by the restraint of a stranger 's presence . they cross the hall on their way to the drawing - room , and I descend the step again to wander about the garden alone . 

 my hour be number at Limmeridge House my departure the next morning be irrevocably settle my share in the investigation which the anonymous letter have render necessary be at an end . no harm could be do to any one but myself if I let my heart loose again , for the little time that be leave I , from the cold cruelty of restraint which necessity have force I to inflict upon it , and take my farewell of the scene which be associate with the brief dream - time of my happiness and my love . 

 I turn instinctively to the walk beneath my study - window , where I have see she the evening before with her little dog , and follow the path which her dear foot have tread so often , till I come to the wicket gate that lead into her rose garden . the winter bareness spread drearily over it now . the flower that she have teach I to distinguish by their name , the flower that I have teach she to paint from , be go , and the tiny white path that lead between the bed be damp and green already . I go on to the avenue of tree , where we have breathe together the warm fragrance of August evening , where we have admire together the myriad combination of shade and sunlight that dapple the ground at our foot . the leaf fall about I from the groan branch , and the earthy decay in the atmosphere chill I to the bone . a little far on , and I be out of the ground , and follow the lane that wound gently upward to the near hill . the old felled tree by the wayside , on which we have sit to rest , be sodden with rain , and the tuft of fern and grass which I have draw for she , nestle under the rough stone wall in front of we , have turn to a pool of water , stagnate round an island of draggle weed . I gain the summit of the hill , and look at the view which we have so often admire in the happy time . it be cold and barren it be no long the view that I remember . the sunshine of her presence be far from I the charm of her voice no long murmur in my ear . she have talk to I , on the spot from which I now look down , of her father , who be her last survive parent have tell I how fond of each other they have be , and how sadly she miss he still when she enter certain room in the house , and when she take up forget occupation and amusement with which he have be associate . be the view that I have see , while listen to those word , the view that I see now , stand on the hill - top by myself ? I turn and leave it I wound my way back again , over the moor , and round the sandhill , down to the beach . there be the white rage of the surf , and the multitudinous glory of the leap wave but where be the place on which she have once draw idle figure with her parasol in the sand the place where we have sit together , while she talk to I about myself and my home , while she ask I a woman 's minutely observant question about my mother and my sister , and innocently wonder whether I should ever leave my lonely chamber and have a wife and a house of my own ? wind and wave have long since smooth out the trace of she which she have leave in those mark on the sand , I look over the wide monotony of the sea - side prospect , and the place in which we two have idle away the sunny hour be as lose to I as if I have never know it , as strange to I as if I stand already on a foreign shore . 

 the empty silence of the beach strike cold to my heart . I return to the house and the garden , where trace be leave to speak of she at every turn . 

 on the west terrace walk I meet Mr. Gilmore . he be evidently in search of I , for he quicken his pace when we catch sight of each other . the state of my spirit little fit I for the society of a stranger ; but the meeting be inevitable , and I resign myself to make the good of it . 

 " you be the very person I want to see , " say the old gentleman . " I have two word to say to you , my dear sir ; and if you have no objection I will avail myself of the present opportunity . to put it plainly , Miss Halcombe and I have be talk over family affair affair which be the cause of my be here and in the course of our conversation she be naturally lead to tell I of this unpleasant matter connect with the anonymous letter , and of the share which you have most creditably and properly take in the proceeding so far . that share , I quite understand , give you an interest which you might not otherwise have feel , in know that the future management of the investigation which you have begin will be place in safe hand . my dear sir , make yourself quite easy on that point it will be place in MY hand . " 

 " you be , in every way , Mr. Gilmore , much fitter to advise and to act in the matter than I be . be it an indiscretion on my part to ask if you have decide yet on a course of proceeding ? " 

 " so far as it be possible to decide , Mr. Hartright , I have decide . I mean to send a copy of the letter , accompany by a statement of the circumstance , to Sir Percival Glyde 's solicitor in London , with whom I have some acquaintance . the letter itself I shall keep here to show to Sir Percival as soon as he arrive . the tracing of the two woman I have already provide for , by send one of Mr. Fairlie 's servant a confidential person to the station to make inquiry . the man have his money and his direction , and he will follow the woman in the event of his find any clue . this be all that can be do until Sir Percival come on Monday . I have no doubt myself that every explanation which can be expect from a gentleman and a man of honour , he will readily give . Sir Percival stand very high , sir an eminent position , a reputation above suspicion I feel quite easy about result quite easy , I be rejoice to assure you . thing of this sort happen constantly in my experience . anonymous letter unfortunate woman sad state of society . I do not   deny that there be peculiar complication in this case ; but the case itself be , most unhappily , common common . " 

 " I be afraid , Mr. Gilmore , I have the misfortune to differ from you in the view I take of the case . " 

 " just so , my dear sir just so . I be an old man , and I take the practical view . you be a young man , and you take the romantic view . let we not dispute about our view . I live professionally in an atmosphere of disputation , Mr. Hartright , and I be only too glad to escape from it , as I be escape here . we will wait for event yes , yes , yes we will wait for event . charming place this . good shooting ? probably not , none of Mr. Fairlie 's land be preserve , I think . charming place , though , and delightful people . you draw and paint , I hear , Mr. Hartright ? enviable accomplishment . what style ? " 

 we drop into general conversation , or rather , Mr. Gilmore talk and I listen . my attention be far from he , and from the topic on which he discourse so fluently . the solitary walk of the last two hour have work its effect on I it have set the idea in my mind of hasten my departure from Limmeridge House . why should I prolong the hard trial of say farewell by one unnecessary minute ? what further service be require of I by any one ? there be no useful purpose to be serve by my stay in Cumberland there be no restriction of time in the permission to leave which my employer have grant to I . why not end it there and then ? 

 I determine to end it . there be some hour of daylight still leave there be no reason why my journey back to London should not begin on that afternoon . I make the first civil excuse that occur to I for leave Mr. Gilmore , and return at once to the house . 

 on my way up to my own room I meet Miss Halcombe on the stair . she see , by the hurry of my movement and the change in my manner , that I have some new purpose in view , and ask what have happen . 

 I tell she the reason which induce I to think of hasten my departure , exactly as I have tell they here . 

 " no , no , " she say , earnestly and kindly , " leave we like a friend break bread with we once more . stay here and dine , stay here and help we to spend our last evening with you as happily , as like our first evening , as we can . it be my invitation Mrs. Vesey 's invitation " she hesitate a little , and then add , " Laura 's invitation as well . " 

 I promise to remain . God know I have no wish to leave even the shadow of a sorrowful impression with any one of they . 

 my own room be the good place for I till the dinner bell ring . I wait there till it be time to go downstairs . 

 I have not speak to Miss Fairlie I have not even see she all that day . the first meeting with she , when I enter the drawing - room , be a hard trial to her self - control and to mine . she , too , have do she good to make our last evening renew the golden bygone time the time that could never come again . she have put on the dress which I use to admire more than any other that she possess a dark blue silk , trim quaintly and prettily with old - fashioned lace ; she come forward to meet I with her former readiness she give I her hand with the frank , innocent good - will of happy day . the cold finger that tremble round mine the pale cheek with a bright red spot burn in the midst of they the faint smile that struggle to live on her lip and die away from they while I look at it , tell I at what sacrifice of herself her outward composure be maintain . my heart could take she no close to I , or I should have love she then as I have never love she yet . 

 Mr. Gilmore be a great assistance to we . he be in high good - humour , and he lead the conversation with unflagge spirit . Miss Halcombe second he resolutely , and I do all I could to follow her example . the kind blue eye , whose slight change of expression I have learn to interpret so well , look at I appealingly when we first sit down to table . help my sister the sweet anxious face seem to say help my sister , and you will help I . 

 we get through the dinner , to all outward appearance at least , happily enough . when the lady have rise from table , and Mr. Gilmore and I be leave alone in the dining - room , a new interest present itself to occupy our attention , and to give I an opportunity of quiet myself by a few minute of needful and welcome silence . the servant who have be despatch to trace Anne Catherick and Mrs. Clements return with his report , and be show into the dining - room immediately . 

 " well , " say Mr. Gilmore , " what have you find out ? " 

 " I have find out , sir , " answer the man , " that both the woman take ticket at our station here for Carlisle . " 

 " you go to Carlisle , of course , when you hear that ? " 

 " I do , sir , but I be sorry to say I could find no further trace of they . " 

 " you inquire at the railway ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " and at the different inn ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " and you leave the statement I write for you at the police station ? " 

 " I do , sir . " 

 " well , my friend , you have do all you could , and I have do all I could , and there the matter must rest till further notice . we have play our trump card , Mr. Hartright , " continue the old gentleman when the servant have withdraw . " for the present , at least , the woman have outmanoeuvre we , and our only resource now be to wait till Sir Percival Glyde come here on Monday next . will not   you fill your glass again ? good bottle of port , that sound , substantial , old wine . I have get well in my own cellar , though . " 

 we return to the drawing - room the room in which the happy evening of my life have be pass the room which , after this last night , I be never to see again . its aspect be alter since the day have shorten and the weather have grow cold . the glass door on the terrace side be closed , and hide by thick curtain . instead of the soft twilight obscurity , in which we use to sit , the bright radiant glow of lamplight now dazzle my eye . all be change indoor and out all be change . 

 Miss Halcombe and Mr. Gilmore sit down together at the card - table Mrs. Vesey take her customary chair . there be no restraint on the disposal of their evening , and I feel the restraint on the disposal of mine all the more painfully from observe it . I see Miss Fairlie linger near the music - stand . the time have be when I might have join she there . I wait irresolutely I know neither where to go nor what to do next . she cast one quick glance at I , take a piece of music suddenly from the stand , and come towards I of her own accord . 

 " shall I play some of those little melody of Mozart 's which you use to like so much ? " she ask , open the music nervously , and look down at it while she speak . 

 before I could thank she she hasten to the piano . the chair near it , which I have always be accustom to occupy , stand empty . she strike a few chord then glance round at I then look back again at her music . 

 " will not   you take your old place ? " she say , speak very abruptly and in very low tone . 

 " I may take it on the last night , " I answer . 

 she do not reply she keep her attention rivet on the music music which she know by memory , which she have play over and over again , in former time , without the book . I only know that she have hear I , I only know that she be aware of my be close to she , by see the red spot on the cheek that be near to I fade out , and the face grow pale all over . 

 " I be very sorry you be go , " she say , her voice almost sink to a whisper , her eye look more and more intently at the music , her finger fly over the key of the piano with a strange feverish energy which I have never notice in she before . 

 " I shall remember those kind word , Miss Fairlie , long after to - morrow have come and go . " 

 the paleness grow whiter on her face , and she turn it far away from I . 

 " do not   speak of to - morrow , " she say . " let the music speak to we of to - night , in a happy language than ours . " 

 her lip tremble a faint sigh flutter from they , which she try vainly to suppress . her finger waver on the piano she strike a false note , confuse herself in try to set it right , and drop her hand angrily on her lap . Miss Halcombe and Mr. Gilmore look up in astonishment from the card - table at which they be play . even Mrs. Vesey , doze in her chair , wake at the sudden cessation of the music , and inquire what have happen . 

 " you play at whist , Mr. Hartright ? " ask Miss Halcombe , with her eye direct significantly at the place I occupy . 

 I know what she mean I know she be right , and I rise at once to go to the card - table . as I leave the piano Miss Fairlie turn a page of the music , and touch the key again with a surer hand . 

 " I will play it , " she say , strike the note almost passionately . " I will play it on the last night . " 

 " Come , Mrs. Vesey , " say Miss Halcombe , " Mr. Gilmore and I be tired of ecarte come and be Mr. Hartright 's partner at whist . " 

 the old lawyer smile satirically . his have be the win hand , and he have just turn up a king . he evidently attribute Miss Halcombe 's abrupt change in the card - table arrangement to a lady 's inability to play the lose game . 

 the rest of the evening pass without a word or a look from she . she keep her place at the piano , and I keep mine at the card - table . she play unintermittingly play as if the music be her only refuge from herself . sometimes her finger touch the note with a lingering fondness a soft , plaintive , die tenderness , unutterably beautiful and mournful to hear ; sometimes they falter and fail she , or hurry over the instrument mechanically , as if their task be a burden to they . but still , change and waver as they might in the expression they impart to the music , their resolution to play never falter . she only rise from the piano when we all rise to say good - night . 

 Mrs. Vesey be the near to the door , and the first to shake hand with I . 

 " I shall not see you again , Mr. Hartright , " say the old lady . " I be truly sorry you be go away . you have be very kind and attentive , and an old woman like I feel kindness and attention . I wish you happy , sir I wish you a kind good - bye . " 

 Mr. Gilmore come next . 

 " I hope we shall have a future opportunity of better our acquaintance , Mr. Hartright . you quite understand about that little matter of business be safe in my hand ? yes , yes , of course . bless I , how cold it be ! do not   let I keep you at the door . Bon voyage , my dear sir bon voyage , as the French say . " 

 Miss Halcombe follow . 

 " half - past seven to - morrow morning , " she say then add in a whisper , " I have hear and see more than you think . your conduct to - night have make I your friend for life . " 

 Miss Fairlie come last . I could not trust myself to look at she when I take her hand , and when I think of the next morning . 

 " my departure must be a very early one , " I say . " I shall be go , Miss Fairlie , before you " 

 " no , no , " she interpose hastily , " not before I be out of my room . I shall be down to breakfast with Marian . I be not so ungrateful , not so forgetful of the past three month " 

 her voice fail she , her hand close gently round mine then drop it suddenly . before I could say " good - night " she be go . 


 the end come fast to meet I come inevitably , as the light of the last morning come at Limmeridge House . 

 it be barely half - past seven when I go downstairs , but I find they both at the breakfast - table wait for I . in the chill air , in the dim light , in the gloomy morning silence of the house , we three sit down together , and try to eat , try to talk . the struggle to preserve appearance be hopeless and useless , and I rise to end it . 

 as I hold out my hand , as Miss Halcombe , who be near to I , take it , Miss Fairlie turn away suddenly and hurry from the room . 

 " well so , " say Miss Halcombe , when the door have close " well so , for you and for she . " 

 I wait a moment before I could speak it be hard to lose she , without a parting word or a parting look . I control myself I try to take leave of Miss Halcombe in fitting term ; but all the farewell word I would fain have speak dwindle to one sentence . 

 " have I deserve that you should write to I ? " be all I could say . 

 " you have nobly deserve everything that I can do for you , as long as we both live . whatever the end be you shall know it . " 

 " and if I can ever be of help again , at any future time , long after the memory of my presumption and my folly be forget . . . " 

 I could add no more . my voice falter , my eye moisten in spite of I . 

 she catch I by both hand she press they with the strong , steady grasp of a man her dark eye glitter her brown complexion flush deep the force and energy of her face glow and grow beautiful with the pure inner light of her generosity and her pity . 

 " I will trust you if ever the time come I will trust you as my friend and her friend , as my brother and her brother . " she stop , draw I near to she the fearless , noble creature touch my forehead , sister - like , with her lip , and call I by my christian name . " God bless you , Walter ! " she say . " wait here alone and compose yourself I have well not stay for both our sake I have well see you go from the balcony upstairs . " 

 she leave the room . I turn away towards the window , where nothing face I but the lonely autumn landscape I turn away to master myself , before I too leave the room in my turn , and leave it for ever . 

 a minute pass it could hardly have be more when I hear the door open again softly , and the rustling of a woman 's dress on the carpet move towards I . my heart beat violently as I turn round . Miss Fairlie be approach I from the farth end of the room . 

 she stop and hesitate when our eye meet , and when she see that we be alone . then , with that courage which woman lose so often in the small emergency , and so seldom in the great , she come on near to I , strangely pale and strangely quiet , draw one hand after she along the table by which she walk , and hold something at her side in the other , which be hide by the fold of her dress . 

 " I only go into the drawing - room , " she say , " to look for this . it may remind you of your visit here , and of the friend you leave behind you . you tell I I have improve very much when I do it , and I think you might like " 

 she turn her head away , and offer I a little sketch , draw throughout by her own pencil , of the summer - house in which we have first meet . the paper tremble in her hand as she hold it out to I tremble in mine as I take it from she . 

 I be afraid to say what I feel I only answer , " it shall never leave I all my life long it shall be the treasure that I prize most . I be very grateful for it very grateful to you , for not let I go away without bid you good - bye . " 

 " oh ! " she say innocently , " how could I let you go , after we have pass so many happy day together ! " 

 " those day may never return , Miss Fairlie my way of life and yours be very far apart . but if a time should come , when the devotion of my whole heart and soul and strength will give you a moment 's happiness , or spare you a moment 's sorrow , will you try to remember the poor drawing - master who have teach you ? Miss Halcombe have promise to trust I will you promise too ? " 

 the farewell sadness in the kind blue eye shine dimly through her gathering tear . 

 " I promise it , " she say in broken tone . " oh , do not   look at I like that ! I promise it with all my heart . " 

 I venture a little near to she , and hold out my hand . 

 " you have many friend who love you , Miss Fairlie . your happy future be the dear object of many hope . may I say , at part , that it be the dear object of MY hope too ? " 

 the tear flow fast down her cheek . she rest one tremble hand on the table to steady herself while she give I the other . I take it in mine I hold it fast . my head droop over it , my tear fall on it , my lip press it not in love ; oh , not in love , at that last moment , but in the agony and the self - abandonment of despair . 

 " for God 's sake , leave I ! " she say faintly . 

 the confession of her heart 's secret burst from she in those plead word . I have no right to hear they , no right to answer they they be the word that banish I , in the name of her sacred weakness , from the room . it be all over . I drop her hand , I say no more . the blind tear shut she out from my eye , and I dash they away to look at she for the last time . one look as she sink into a chair , as her arm fall on the table , as her fair head drop on they wearily . one farewell look , and the door have close upon she the great gulf of separation have open between we the image of Laura Fairlie be a memory of the past already . 


 the end of Hartright 's Narrative . 




 the story continued BY VINCENT GILMORE 

  of Chancery Lane , Solicitor 



 I 

 I write these line at the request of my friend , Mr. Walter Hartright . they be intend to convey a description of certain event which seriously affect Miss Fairlie 's interest , and which take place after the period of Mr. Hartright 's departure from Limmeridge House . 

 there be no need for I to say whether my own opinion do or do not sanction the disclosure of the remarkable family story , of which my narrative form an important component part . Mr. Hartright have take that responsibility on himself , and circumstance yet to be relate will show that he have amply earn the right to do so , if he choose to exercise it . the plan he have adopt for present the story to other , in the most truthful and most vivid manner , require that it should be tell , at each successive stage in the march of event , by the person who be directly concerned in those event at the time of their occurrence . my appearance here , as narrator , be the necessary consequence of this arrangement . I be present during the sojourn of Sir Percival Glyde in Cumberland , and be personally concerned in one important result of his short residence under Mr. Fairlie 's roof . it be my duty , therefore , to add these new link to the chain of event , and to take up the chain itself at the point where , for the present only Mr. Hartright have drop it . 


 I arrive at Limmeridge House on Friday the second of November . 

 my object be to remain at Mr. Fairlie 's until the arrival of Sir Percival Glyde . if that event lead to the appointment of any give day for Sir Percival 's union with Miss Fairlie , I be to take the necessary instruction back with I to London , and to occupy myself in draw the lady 's marriage - settlement . 

 on the Friday I be not favour by Mr. Fairlie with an interview . he have be , or have fancy himself to be , an invalid for year past , and he be not well enough to receive I . Miss Halcombe be the first member of the family whom I see . she meet I at the house door , and introduce I to Mr. Hartright , who have be stay at Limmeridge for some time past . 

 I do not see Miss Fairlie until later in the day , at dinner - time . she be not look well , and I be sorry to observe it . she be a sweet lovable girl , as amiable and attentive to every one about she as her excellent mother use to be though , personally speak , she take after her father . Mrs. Fairlie have dark eye and hair , and her eld daughter , Miss Halcombe , strongly remind I of she . Miss Fairlie play to we in the evening not so well as usual , I think . we have a rubber at whist , a mere profanation , so far as play be concern , of that noble game . I have be favourably impress by Mr. Hartright on our first introduction to one another , but I soon discover that he be not free from the social failing incidental to his age . there be three thing that none of the young man of the present generation can do . they can not   sit over their wine , they can not   play at whist , and they can not   pay a lady a compliment . Mr. Hartright be no exception to the general rule . otherwise , even in those early day and on that short acquaintance , he strike I as be a modest and gentlemanlike young man . 

 so the Friday pass . I say nothing about the more serious matter which engage my attention on that day the anonymous letter to Miss Fairlie , the measure I think it right to adopt when the matter be mention to I , and the conviction I entertain that every possible explanation of the circumstance would be readily afford by Sir Percival Glyde , have all be fully notice , as I understand , in the narrative which precede this . 

 on the Saturday Mr. Hartright have leave before I get down to breakfast . Miss Fairlie keep her room all day , and Miss Halcombe appear to I to be out of spirit . the house be not what it use to be in the time of Mr. and Mrs. Philip Fairlie . I take a walk by myself in the forenoon , and look about at some of the place which I first see when I be stay at Limmeridge to transact family business , more than thirty year since . they be not what they use to be either . 

 at two o'clock Mr. Fairlie send to say he be well enough to see I . he have not alter , at any rate , since I first know he . his talk be to the same purpose as usual all about himself and his ailment , his wonderful coin , and his matchless rembrandt etching . the moment I try to speak of the business that have bring I to his house , he shut his eye and say I " upset " he . I persist in upset he by return again and again to the subject . all I could ascertain be that he look on his niece 's marriage as a settled thing , that her father have sanction it , that he sanction it himself , that it be a desirable marriage , and that he should be personally rejoice when the worry of it be over . as to the settlement , if I would consult his niece , and afterwards dive as deeply as I please into my own knowledge of the family affair , and get everything ready , and limit his share in the business , as guardian , to say yes , at the right moment why , of course he would meet my view , and everybody else 's view , with infinite pleasure . in the meantime , there I see he , a helpless sufferer , confine to his room . do I think he look as if he want tease ? no . then why tease he ? 

 I might , perhaps , have be a little astonished at this extraordinary absence of all self - assertion on Mr. Fairlie 's part , in the character of guardian , if my knowledge of the family affair have not be sufficient to remind I that he be a single man , and that he have nothing more than a life - interest in the Limmeridge property . as matter stand , therefore , I be neither surprised nor disappoint at the result of the interview . Mr. Fairlie have simply justify my expectation and there be an end of it . 

 Sunday be a dull day , out of door and in . a letter arrive for I from Sir Percival Glyde 's solicitor , acknowledge the receipt of my copy of the anonymous letter and my accompanying statement of the case . Miss Fairlie join we in the afternoon , look pale and depressed , and altogether unlike herself . I have some talk with she , and venture on a delicate allusion to Sir Percival . she listen and say nothing . all other subject she pursue willingly , but this subject she allow to drop . I begin to doubt whether she might not be repent of her engagement just as young lady often do , when repentance come too late . 

 on Monday Sir Percival Glyde arrive . 

 I find he to be a most prepossess man , so far as manner and appearance be concern . he look rather old than I have expect , his head be bald over the forehead , and his face somewhat marked and worn , but his movement be as active and his spirit as high as a young man 's . his meeting with Miss Halcombe be delightfully hearty and unaffected , and his reception of I , upon my being present to he , be so easy and pleasant that we get on together like old friend . Miss Fairlie be not with we when he arrive , but she enter the room about ten minute afterwards . Sir Percival rise and pay his compliment with perfect grace . his evident concern on see the change for the bad in the young lady 's look be express with a mixture of tenderness and respect , with an unassuming delicacy of tone , voice , and manner , which do equal credit to his good breeding and his good sense . I be rather surprised , under these circumstance , to see that Miss Fairlie continue to be constrain and uneasy in his presence , and that she take the first opportunity of leave the room again . Sir Percival neither notice the restraint in her reception of he , nor her sudden withdrawal from our society . he have not obtrude his attention on she while she be present , and he do not embarrass Miss Halcombe by any allusion to her departure when she be go . his tact and taste be never at fault on this or on any other occasion while I be in his company at Limmeridge House . 

 as soon as Miss Fairlie have leave the room he spar we all embarrassment on the subject of the anonymous letter , by advert to it of his own accord . he have stop in London on his way from Hampshire , have see his solicitor , have read the document forward by I , and have travel on to Cumberland , anxious to satisfy our mind by the speedy and the full explanation that word could convey . on hear he express himself to this effect , I offer he the original letter , which I have keep for his inspection . he thank I , and decline to look at it , say that he have see the copy , and that he be quite willing to leave the original in our hand . 

 the statement itself , on which he immediately enter , be as simple and satisfactory as I have all along anticipate it would be . 

 Mrs. Catherick , he inform we , have in past year lay he under some obligation for faithful service render to his family connection and to himself . she have be doubly unfortunate in be married to a husband who have desert she , and in have an only child whose mental faculty have be in a disturbed condition from a very early age . although her marriage have remove she to a part of Hampshire far distant from the neighbourhood in which Sir Percival 's property be situate , he have take care not to lose sight of her his friendly feeling towards the poor woman , in consideration of her past service , have be greatly strengthen by his admiration of the patience and courage with which she support her calamity . in course of time the symptom of mental affliction in her unhappy daughter increase to such a serious extent , as to make it a matter of necessity to place she under proper medical care . Mrs. Catherick herself recognise this necessity , but she also feel the prejudice common to person occupy her respectable station , against allow her child to be admit , as a pauper , into a public asylum . Sir Percival have respect this prejudice , as he respect honest independence of feeling in any rank of life , and have resolve to mark his grateful sense of Mrs. Catherick 's early attachment to the interest of himself and his family , by defray the expense of her daughter 's maintenance in a trustworthy private Asylum . to her mother 's regret , and to his own regret , the unfortunate creature have discover the share which circumstance have induce he to take in place she under restraint , and have conceive the most intense hatred and distrust of he in consequence . to that hatred and distrust which have express itself in various way in the Asylum the anonymous letter , write after her escape , be plainly attributable . if Miss Halcombe 's or Mr. Gilmore 's recollection of the document do not confirm that view , or if they wish for any additional particular about the Asylum   the address of which he mention , as well as the name and address of the two doctor on whose certificate the patient be admit , he be ready to answer any question and to clear up any uncertainty . he have do his duty to the unhappy young woman , by instruct his solicitor to spare no expense in trace she , and in restore she once more to medical care , and he be now only anxious to do his duty towards Miss Fairlie and towards her family , in the same plain , straightforward way . 

 I be the first to speak in answer to this appeal . my own course be plain to I . it be the great beauty of the Law that it can dispute any human statement , make under any circumstance , and reduce to any form . if I have feel professionally call upon to set up a case against Sir Percival Glyde , on the strength of his own explanation , I could have do so beyond all doubt . but my duty do not lie in this direction my function be of the purely judicial kind . I be to weigh the explanation we have just hear , to allow all due force to the high reputation of the gentleman who offer it , and to decide honestly whether the probability , on Sir Percival 's own showing , be plainly with he , or plainly against he . my own conviction be that they be plainly with he , and I accordingly declare that his explanation be , to my mind , unquestionably a satisfactory one . 

 Miss Halcombe , after look at I very earnestly , say a few word , on her side , to the same effect with a certain hesitation of manner , however , which the circumstance do not seem to I to warrant . I be unable to say , positively , whether Sir Percival notice this or not . my opinion be that he do , see that he pointedly resume the subject , although he might now , with all propriety , have allow it to drop . 

 " if my plain statement of fact have only be address to Mr. Gilmore , " he say , " I should consider any further reference to this unhappy matter as unnecessary . I may fairly expect Mr. Gilmore , as a gentleman , to believe I on my word , and when he have do I that justice , all discussion of the subject between we have come to an end . but my position with a lady be not the same . I owe to she what I would concede to no man alive a proof of the truth of my assertion . you can not ask for that proof , Miss Halcombe , and it be therefore my duty to you , and still more to Miss Fairlie , to offer it . may I beg that you will write at once to the mother of this unfortunate woman to Mrs. Catherick to ask for her testimony in support of the explanation which I have just offer to you . " 

 I see Miss Halcombe change colour , and look a little uneasy . Sir Percival 's suggestion , politely as it be express , appear to she , as it appear to I , to point very delicately at the hesitation which her manner have betray a moment or two since . 

 " I hope , Sir Percival , you do not   do I the injustice to suppose that I distrust you , " she say quickly . 

 " certainly not , Miss Halcombe . I make my proposal purely as an act of attention to you . will you excuse my obstinacy if I still venture to press it ? " 

 he walk to the writing - table as he speak , draw a chair to it , and open the paper case . 

 " let I beg you to write the note , " he say , " as a favour to I . it need not occupy you more than a few minute . you have only to ask Mrs. Catherick two question . first , if her daughter be place in the Asylum with her knowledge and approval . secondly , if the share I take in the matter be such as to merit the expression of her gratitude towards myself ? Mr. Gilmore 's mind be at ease on this unpleasant subject , and your mind be at ease pray set my mind at ease also by write the note . " 

 " you oblige I to grant your request , Sir Percival , when I would much rather refuse it . " 

 with those word Miss Halcombe rise from her place and go to the writing - table . Sir Percival thank she , hand she a pen , and then walk away towards the fireplace . Miss Fairlie 's little italian greyhound be lie on the rug . he hold out his hand , and call to the dog good - humouredly . 

 " come , Nina , " he say , " we remember each other , do not   we ? " 

 the little beast , cowardly and cross - grained , as pet - dog usually be , look up at he sharply , shrink away from his outstretched hand , whine , shiver , and hide itself under a sofa . it be scarcely possible that he could have be put out by such a trifle as a dog 's reception of he , but I observe , nevertheless , that he walk away towards the window very suddenly . perhaps his temper be irritable at time . if so , I can sympathise with he . my temper be irritable at time too . 

 Miss Halcombe be not long in write the note . when it be do she rise from the writing - table , and hand the open sheet of paper to Sir Percival . he bow , take it from she , fold it up immediately without look at the content , seal it , write the address , and hand it back to she in silence . I never see anything more gracefully and more becomingly do in my life . 

 " you insist on my post this letter , Sir Percival ? " say Miss Halcombe . 

 " I beg you will post it , " he answer . " and now that it be write and seal up , allow I to ask one or two last question about the unhappy woman to whom it refer . I have read the communication which Mr. Gilmore kindly address to my solicitor , describe the circumstance under which the writer of the anonymous letter be identify . but there be certain point to which that statement do not refer . do Anne Catherick see Miss Fairlie ? " 

 " certainly not , " reply Miss Halcombe . 

 " do she see you ? " 

 " no . " 

 " she see nobody from the house then , except a certain Mr. Hartright , who accidentally meet with she in the churchyard here ? " 

 " nobody else . " 

 " Mr. Hartright be employ at Limmeridge as a drawing - master , I believe ? be he a member of one of the Water - Colour Societies ? " 

 " I believe he be , " answer Miss Halcombe . 

 he pause for a moment , as if he be think over the last answer , and then add 

 " do you find out where Anne Catherick be live , when she be in this neighbourhood ? " 

 " yes . at a farm on the moor , call Todd 's Corner . " 

 " it be a duty we all owe to the poor creature herself to trace she , " continue Sir Percival . " she may have say something at Todd 's Corner which may help we to find she . I will go there and make inquiry on the chance . in the meantime , as I can not prevail on myself to discuss this painful subject with Miss Fairlie , may I beg , Miss Halcombe , that you will kindly undertake to give she the necessary explanation , defer it of course until you have receive the reply to that note . " 

 Miss Halcombe promise to comply with his request . he thank she , nod pleasantly , and leave we , to go and establish himself in his own room . as he open the door the cross - grained greyhound poke out her sharp muzzle from under the sofa , and bark and snap at he . 

 " a good morning 's work , Miss Halcombe , " I say , as soon as we be alone . " here be an anxious day well end already . " 

 " yes , " she answer ; " no doubt . I be very glad your mind be satisfied . " 

 " my mind ! surely , with that note in your hand , your mind be at ease too ? " 

 " oh yes how can it be otherwise ? I know the thing could not be , " she go on , speak more to herself than to I ; " but I almost wish Walter Hartright have stay here long enough to be present at the explanation , and to hear the proposal to I to write this note . " 

 I be a little surprised perhaps a little pique also by these last word . 

 " event , it be true , connect Mr. Hartright very remarkably with the affair of the letter , " I say ; " and I readily admit that he conduct himself , all thing consider , with great delicacy and discretion . but I be quite at a loss to understand what useful influence his presence could have exercise in relation to the effect of Sir Percival 's statement on your mind or mine . " 

 " it be only a fancy , " she say absently . " there be no need to discuss it , Mr. Gilmore . your experience ought to be , and be , the good guide I can desire . " 

 I do not altogether like she thrust the whole responsibility , in this marked manner , on my shoulder . if Mr. Fairlie have do it , I should not have be surprised . but resolute , clear - minded Miss Halcombe be the very last person in the world whom I should have expect to find shrink from the expression of an opinion of her own . 

 " if any doubt still trouble you , " I say , " why not mention they to I at once ? tell I plainly , have you any reason to distrust Sir Percival Glyde ? " 

 " none whatever . " 

 " do you see anything improbable , or contradictory , in his explanation ? " 

 " how can I say I do , after the proof he have offer I of the truth of it ? can there be well testimony in his favour , Mr. Gilmore , than the testimony of the woman 's mother ? " 

 " none well . if the answer to your note of inquiry prove to be satisfactory , I for one can not see what more any friend of Sir Percival 's can possibly expect from he . " 

 " then we will post the note , " she say , rise to leave the room , " and dismiss all further reference to the subject until the answer arrive . do not   attach any weight to my hesitation . I can give no well reason for it than that I have be over - anxious about Laura lately and anxiety , Mr. Gilmore , unsettle the strong of we . " 

 she leave I abruptly , her naturally firm voice faltering as she speak those last word . a sensitive , vehement , passionate nature a woman of ten thousand in these trivial , superficial time . I have know she from her early year I have see she test , as she grow up , in more than one try family crisis , and my long experience make I attach an importance to her hesitation under the circumstance here detail , which I should certainly not have feel in the case of another woman . I could see no cause for any uneasiness or any doubt , but she have make I a little uneasy , and a little doubtful , nevertheless . in my youth , I should have chafe and fret under the irritation of my own unreasonable state of mind . in my age , I know well , and go out philosophically to walk it off . 



 II 

 we all meet again at dinner - time . 

 Sir Percival be in such boisterous high spirit that I hardly recognise he as the same man whose quiet tact , refinement , and good sense have impress I so strongly at the interview of the morning . the only trace of his former self that I could detect reappear , every now and then , in his manner towards Miss Fairlie . a look or a word from she suspend his loud laugh , check his gay flow of talk , and render he all attention to she , and to no one else at table , in an instant . although he never openly try to draw she into the conversation , he never lose the slight chance she give he of let her drift into it by accident , and of say the word to she , under those favourable circumstance , which a man with less tact and delicacy would have pointedly address to she the moment they occur to he . rather to my surprise , Miss Fairlie appear to be sensible of his attention without be move by they . she be a little confused from time to time when he look at she , or speak to she ; but she never warm towards he . Rank , fortune , good breeding , good look , the respect of a gentleman , and the devotion of a lover be all humbly place at her foot , and , so far as appearance go , be all offer in vain . 

 on the next day , the Tuesday , Sir Percival go in the morning   take one of the servant with he as a guide   to Todd 's Corner . his inquiry , as I afterwards hear , lead to no result . on his return he have an interview with Mr. Fairlie , and in the afternoon he and Miss Halcombe ride out together . nothing else happen worthy of record . the evening pass as usual . there be no change in Sir Percival , and no change in Miss Fairlie . 

 the Wednesday 's post bring with it an event the reply from Mrs. Catherick . I take a copy of the document , which I have preserve , and which I may as well present in this place . it run as follow 


 " MADAM , I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter , inquire whether my daughter , Anne , be place under medical superintendence with my knowledge and approval , and whether the share take in the matter by Sir Percival Glyde be such as to merit the expression of my gratitude towards that gentleman . be pleased to accept my answer in the affirmative to both those question , and believe I to remain , your obedient servant , 

 " JANE ANNE CATHERICK . " 

 short , sharp , and to the point ; in form rather a business - like letter for a woman to write in substance as plain a confirmation as could be desire of Sir Percival Glyde 's statement . this be my opinion , and with certain minor reservation , Miss Halcombe 's opinion also . Sir Percival , when the letter be show to he , do not appear to be strike by the sharp , short tone of it . he tell we that Mrs. Catherick be a woman of few word , a clear - headed , straightforward , unimaginative person , who write briefly and plainly , just as she speak . 

 the next duty to be accomplish , now that the answer have be receive , be to acquaint Miss Fairlie with Sir Percival 's explanation . Miss Halcombe have undertake to do this , and have leave the room to go to her sister , when she suddenly return again , and sit down by the easy - chair in which I be read the newspaper . Sir Percival have go out a minute before to look at the stable , and no one be in the room but ourselves . 

 " I suppose we have really and truly do all we can ? " she say , turn and twist Mrs. Catherick 's letter in her hand . 

 " if we be friend of Sir Percival 's , who know he and trust he , we have do all , and more than all , that be necessary , " I answer , a little annoyed by this return of her hesitation . " but if we be enemy who suspect he " 

 " that alternative be not even to be think of , " she interpose . " we be Sir Percival 's friend , and if generosity and forbearance can add to our regard for he , we ought to be Sir Percival 's admirer as well . you know that he see Mr. Fairlie yesterday , and that he afterwards go out with I . " 

 " yes . I see you rid away together . " 

 " we begin the ride by talk about Anne Catherick , and about the singular manner in which Mr. Hartright meet with she . but we soon drop that subject , and Sir Percival speak next , in the most unselfish term , of his engagement with Laura . he say he have observe that she be out of spirit , and he be willing , if not inform to the contrary , to attribute to that cause the alteration in her manner towards he during his present visit . if , however , there be any more serious reason for the change , he would entreat that no constraint might be place on her inclination either by Mr. Fairlie or by I . all he ask , in that case , be that she would recall to mind , for the last time , what the circumstance be under which the engagement between they be make , and what his conduct have be from the beginning of the courtship to the present time . if , after due reflection on those two subject , she seriously desire that he should withdraw his pretension to the honour of become her husband and if she would tell he so plainly with her own lip he would sacrifice himself by leave she perfectly free to withdraw from the engagement . " 

 " no man could say more than that , Miss Halcombe . as to my experience , few man in his situation would have say as much . " 

 she pause after I have speak those word , and look at I with a singular expression of perplexity and distress . 

 " I accuse nobody , and I suspect nothing , " she break out abruptly . " but I can not and will not accept the responsibility of persuade Laura to this marriage . " 

 " that be exactly the course which Sir Percival Glyde have himself request you to take , " I reply in astonishment . " he have beg you not to force her inclination . " 

 " and he indirectly oblige I to force they , if I give she his message . " 

 " how can that possibly be ? " 

 " consult your own knowledge of Laura , Mr. Gilmore . if I tell she to reflect on the circumstance of her engagement , I at once appeal to two of the strong feeling in her nature to her love for her father 's memory , and to her strict regard for truth . you know that she never break a promise in her life you know that she enter on this engagement at the beginning of her father 's fatal illness , and that he speak hopefully and happily of her marriage to Sir Percival Glyde on his deathbed . " 

 I own that I be a little shocked at this view of the case . 

 " surely , " I say , " you do not   mean to infer that when Sir Percival speak to you yesterday he speculate on such a result as you have just mention ? " 

 her frank , fearless face answer for she before she speak . 

 " do you think I would remain an instant in the company of any man whom I suspect of such baseness as that ? " she ask angrily . 

 I like to feel her hearty indignation flash out on I in that way . we see so much malice and so little indignation in my profession . 

 " in that case , " I say , " excuse I if I tell you , in our legal phrase , that you be travel out of the record . whatever the consequence may be , Sir Percival have a right to expect that your sister should carefully consider she engagement from every reasonable point of view before she claim her release from it . if that unlucky letter have prejudice she against he , go at once , and tell she that he have clear himself in your eye and in mine . what objection can she urge against he after that ? what excuse can she possibly have for change her mind about a man whom she have virtually accept for her husband more than two year ago ? " 

 " in the eye of law and reason , Mr. Gilmore , no excuse , I daresay . if she still hesitate , and if I still hesitate , you must attribute our strange conduct , if you like , to caprice in both case , and we must bear the imputation as well as we can . " 

 with those word she suddenly rise and leave I . when a sensible woman have a serious question put to she , and evade it by a flippant answer , it be a sure sign , in ninety - nine case out of a hundred , that she have something to conceal . I return to the perusal of the newspaper , strongly suspect that Miss Halcombe and Miss Fairlie have a secret between they which they be keep from Sir Percival , and keep from I . I think this hard on both of we , especially on Sir Percival . 

 my doubt or to speak more correctly , my conviction be confirm by Miss Halcombe 's language and manner when I see she again later in the day . she be suspiciously brief and reserve in tell I the result of her interview with her sister . Miss Fairlie , it appear , have listen quietly while the affair of the letter be place before she in the right point of view , but when Miss Halcombe next proceed to say that the object of Sir Percival 's visit at Limmeridge be to prevail on she to let a day be fix for the marriage she check all further reference to the subject by beg for time . if Sir Percival would consent to spare she for the present , she would undertake to give he his final answer before the end of the year . she plead for this delay with such anxiety and agitation , that Miss Halcombe have promise to use her influence , if necessary , to obtain it , and there , at Miss Fairlie 's earnest entreaty , all further discussion of the marriage question have end . 

 the purely temporary arrangement thus propose might have be convenient enough to the young lady , but it prove somewhat embarrassing to the writer of these line . that morning 's post have bring a letter from my partner , which oblige I to return to town the next day by the afternoon train . it be extremely probable that I should find no second opportunity of present myself at Limmeridge House during the remainder of the year . in that case , suppose Miss Fairlie ultimately decide on hold to her engagement , my necessary personal communication with she , before I draw her settlement , would become something like a downright impossibility , and we should be oblige to commit to write question which ought always to be discuss on both side by word of mouth . I say nothing about this difficulty until Sir Percival have be consult on the subject of the desire delay . he be too gallant a gentleman not to grant the request immediately . when Miss Halcombe inform I of this I tell she that I must absolutely speak to her sister before I leave Limmeridge , and it be , therefore , arrange that I should see Miss Fairlie in her own sitting - room the next morning . she do not come down to dinner , or join we in the evening . indisposition be the excuse , and I think Sir Percival look , as well he might , a little annoyed when he hear of it . 

 the next morning , as soon as breakfast be over , I go up to Miss Fairlie 's sitting - room . the poor girl look so pale and sad , and come forward to welcome I so readily and prettily , that the resolution to lecture she on her caprice and indecision , which I have be form all the way upstairs , fail I on the spot . I lead she back to the chair from which she have rise , and place myself opposite to she . her cross - grained pet greyhound be in the room , and I fully expect a bark and snap reception . strange to say , the whimsical little brute falsify my expectation by jump into my lap and poke its sharp muzzle familiarly into my hand the moment I sit down . 

 " you use often to sit on my knee when you be a child , my dear , " I say , " and now your little dog seem determined to succeed you in the vacant throne . be that pretty draw your doing ? " 

 I point to a little album which lie on the table by her side and which she have evidently be look over when I come in . the page that lie open have a small water - colour landscape very neatly mount on it . this be the drawing which have suggest my question an idle question enough but how could I begin to talk of business to she the moment I open my lip ? 

 " no , " she say , look away from the drawing rather confusedly , " it be not my doing . " 

 her finger have a restless habit , which I remember in she as a child , of always play with the first thing that come to hand whenever any one be talk to she . on this occasion they wander to the album , and toy absently about the margin of the little water - colour drawing . the expression of melancholy deepen on her face . she do not look at the drawing , or look at I . her eye move uneasily from object to object in the room , betray plainly that she suspect what my purpose be in come to speak to she . see that , I think it well to get to the purpose with as little delay as possible . 

 " one of the errand , my dear , which bring I here be to bid you good - bye , " I begin . " I must get back to London to - day : and , before I leave , I want to have a word with you on the subject of your own affair . " 

 " I be very sorry you be go , Mr. Gilmore , " she say , look at I kindly . " it be like the happy old time to have you here . 

 " I hope I may be able to come back and recall those pleasant memory once more , " I continue ; " but as there be some uncertainty about the future , I must take my opportunity when I can get it , and speak to you now . I be your old lawyer and your old friend , and I may remind you , I be sure , without offence , of the possibility of your marrying Sir Percival Glyde . " 

 she take her hand off the little album as suddenly as if it have turn hot and burn she . her finger twin together nervously in her lap , her eye look down again at the floor , and an expression of constraint settle on her face which look almost like an expression of pain . 

 " be it absolutely necessary to speak of my marriage engagement ? " she ask in low tone . 

 " it be necessary to refer to it , " I answer , " but not to dwell on it . let we merely say that you may marry , or that you may not marry . in the first case , I must be prepare , beforehand , to draw your settlement , and I ought not to do that without , as a matter of politeness , first consult you . this may be my only chance of hear what your wish be . let we , therefore , suppose the case of your marrying , and let I inform you , in as few word as possible , what your position be now , and what you may make it , if you please , in the future . " 

 I explain to she the object of a marriage - settlement , and then tell she exactly what her prospect be in the first place , on her come of age , and in the second place , on the decease of her uncle mark the distinction between the property in which she have a life - interest only , and the property which be leave at her own control . she listen attentively , with the constrain expression still on her face , and her hand still nervously clasp together in her lap . 

 " and now , " I say in conclusion , " tell I if you can think of any condition which , in the case we have suppose , you would wish I to make for you subject , of course , to your guardian 's approval , as you be not yet of age . " 

 she move uneasily in her chair , then look in my face on a sudden very earnestly . 

 " if it do happen , " she begin faintly , " if I be " 

 " if you be marry , " I add , help she out . 

 " do not   let he part I from Marian , " she cry , with a sudden outbreak of energy . " oh , Mr. Gilmore , pray make it law that Marian be to live with I ! " 

 under other circumstance I might , perhaps , have be amuse at this essentially feminine interpretation of my question , and of the long explanation which have precede it . but her look and tone , when she speak , be of a kind to make I more than serious they distress I . her word , few as they be , betray a desperate clinging to the past which bode ill for the future . 

 " your have Marian Halcombe to live with you can easily be settle by private arrangement , " I say . " you hardly understand my question , I think . it refer to your own property to the disposal of your money . suppose you be to make a will when you come of age , who would you like the money to go to ? " 

 " Marian have be mother and sister both to I , " say the good , affectionate girl , her pretty blue eye glisten while she speak . " may I leave it to Marian , Mr. Gilmore ? " 

 " certainly , my love , " I answer . " but remember what a large sum it be . would you like it all to go to Miss Halcombe ? " 

 she hesitate ; her colour come and go , and her hand steal back again to the little album . 

 " not all of it , " she say . " there be some one else besides Marian " 

 she stop ; her colour heighten , and the finger of the hand that rest upon the album beat gently on the margin of the drawing , as if her memory have set they go mechanically with the remembrance of a favourite tune . 

 " you mean some other member of the family besides Miss Halcombe ? " I suggest , see she at a loss to proceed . 

 the heighten colour spread to her forehead and her neck , and the nervous finger suddenly clasp themselves fast round the edge of the book . 

 " there be some one else , " she say , not notice my last word , though she have evidently hear they ; " there be some one else who might like a little keepsake if if I might leave it . there would be no harm if I should die first " 

 she pause again . the colour that have spread over her cheek suddenly , as suddenly leave they . the hand on the album resign its hold , tremble a little , and move the book away from she . she look at I for an instant then turn her head aside in the chair . her handkerchief fall to the floor as she change her position , and she hurriedly hide her face from I in her hand . 

 sad ! to remember she , as I do , the lively , happy child that ever laugh the day through , and to see she now , in the flower of her age and her beauty , so broken and so bring down as this ! 

 in the distress that she cause I I forget the year that have pass , and the change they have make in our position towards one another . I move my chair close to she , and pick up her handkerchief from the carpet , and draw her hand from her face gently . " do not   cry , my love , " I say , and dry the tear that be gather in her eye with my own hand , as if she have be the little Laura Fairlie of ten long year ago . 

 it be the good way I could have take to compose she . she lay her head on my shoulder , and smile faintly through her tear . 

 " I be very sorry for forget myself , " she say artlessly . " I have not be well I have feel sadly weak and nervous lately , and I often cry without reason when I be alone . I be well now I can answer you as I ought , Mr. Gilmore , I can indeed . " 

 " no , no , my dear , " I reply , " we will consider the subject as do with for the present . you have say enough to sanction my take the good possible care of your interest , and we can settle detail at another opportunity . let we have do with business now , and talk of something else . " 

 I lead she at once into speak on other topic . in ten minute ' time she be in well spirit , and I rise to take my leave . 

 " come here again , " she say earnestly . " I will try to be worthy of your kind feeling for I and for my interest if you will only come again . " 

 still cling to the past that past which I represent to she , in my way , as Miss Halcombe do in her ! it trouble I sorely to see she look back , at the beginning of her career , just as I look back at the end of mine . 

 " if I do come again , I hope I shall find you well , " I say ; " well and happy . God bless you , my dear ! " 

 she only answer by put up her cheek to I to be kiss . even lawyer have heart , and mine ache a little as I take leave of she . 

 the whole interview between we have hardly last more than half an hour she have not breathe a word , in my presence , to explain the mystery of her evident distress and dismay at the prospect of her marriage , and yet she have contrive to win I over to her side of the question , I neither know how nor why . I have enter the room , feel that Sir Percival Glyde have fair reason to complain of the manner in which she be treat he . I leave it , secretly hop that matter might end in she take he at his word and claim her release . a man of my age and experience ought to have know well than to vacillate in this unreasonable manner . I can make no excuse for myself ; I can only tell the truth , and say so it be . 

 the hour for my departure be now draw near . I send to Mr. Fairlie to say that I would wait on he to take leave if he like , but that he must excuse my be rather in a hurry . he send a message back , write in pencil on a slip of paper : " kind love and good wish , dear Gilmore . hurry of any kind be inexpressibly injurious to I . pray take care of yourself . good - bye . " 

 just before I leave I see Miss Halcombe for a moment alone . 

 " have you say all you want to Laura ? " she ask . 

 " yes , " I reply . " she be very weak and nervous I be glad she have you to take care of she . " 

 Miss Halcombe 's sharp eye study my face attentively . 

 " you be alter your opinion about Laura , " she say . " you be readier to make allowance for she than you be yesterday . " 

 no sensible man ever engage , unprepared , in a fencing match of word with a woman . I only answer 

 " let I know what happen . I will do nothing till I hear from you . " 

 she still look hard in my face . " I wish it be all over , and well over , Mr. Gilmore and so do you . " with those word she leave I . 

 Sir Percival most politely insist on see I to the carriage door . 

 " if you be ever in my neighbourhood , " he say , " pray do not   forget that I be sincerely anxious to improve our acquaintance . the try and trust old friend of this family will be always a welcome visitor in any house of mine . " 

 a really irresistible man courteous , considerate , delightfully free from pride a gentleman , every inch of he . as I drive away to the station I feel as if I could cheerfully do anything to promote the interest of Sir Percival Glyde anything in the world , except draw the marriage settlement of his wife . 



 III 

 a week pass , after my return to London , without the receipt of any communication from Miss Halcombe . 

 on the eighth day a letter in her handwriting be place among the other letter on my table . 

 it announce that Sir Percival Glyde have be definitely accept , and that the marriage be to take place , as he have originally desire , before the end of the year . in all probability the ceremony would be perform during the last fortnight in December . Miss Fairlie 's twenty - first birthday be late in March . she would , therefore , by this arrangement , become Sir Percival 's wife about three month before she be of age . 

 I ought not to have be surprised , I ought not to have be sorry , but I be surprised and sorry , nevertheless . some little disappointment , cause by the unsatisfactory shortness of Miss Halcombe 's letter , mingle itself with these feeling , and contribute its share towards upset my serenity for the day . in six line my correspondent announce the propose marriage in three more , she tell I that Sir Percival have leave Cumberland to return to his house in Hampshire , and in two conclude sentence she inform I , first , that Laura be sadly in want of change and cheerful society ; secondly , that she have resolve to try the effect of some such change forthwith , by take her sister away with she on a visit to certain old friend in Yorkshire . there the letter end , without a word to explain what the circumstance be which have decide Miss Fairlie to accept Sir Percival Glyde in one short week from the time when I have last see she . 

 at a late period the cause of this sudden determination be fully explain to I . it be not my business to relate it imperfectly , on hearsay evidence . the circumstance come within the personal experience of Miss Halcombe , and when her narrative succeed mine , she will describe they in every particular exactly as they happen . in the meantime , the plain duty for I to perform before I , in my turn , lie down my pen and withdraw from the story be to relate the one remain event connect with Miss Fairlie 's propose marriage in which I be concern , namely , the drawing of the settlement . 

 it be impossible to refer intelligibly to this document without first enter into certain particular in relation to the bride 's pecuniary affair . I will try to make my explanation briefly and plainly , and to keep it free from professional obscurity and technicality . the matter be of the utmost importance . I warn all reader of these line that Miss Fairlie 's inheritance be a very serious part of Miss Fairlie 's story , and that Mr. Gilmore 's experience , in this particular , must be their experience also , if they wish to understand the narrative which be yet to come . 

 Miss Fairlie 's expectation , then , be of a twofold kind , comprise her possible inheritance of real property , or land , when her uncle die , and her absolute inheritance of personal property , or money , when she come of age . 

 let we take the land first . 

 in the time of Miss Fairlie 's paternal grandfather   whom we will call Mr. Fairlie , the eld   the entail succession to the Limmeridge estate stand thus 

 Mr. Fairlie , the elder , die and leave three son , Philip , Frederick , and Arthur . as eld son , Philip succeed to the estate , if he die without leave a son , the property go to the second brother , Frederick ; and if Frederick die also without leave a son , the property go to the third brother , Arthur . 

 as event turn out , Mr. Philip Fairlie die leave an only daughter , the Laura of this story , and the estate , in consequence , go , in course of law , to the second brother , Frederick , a single man . the third brother , Arthur , have die many year before the decease of Philip , leave a son and a daughter . the son , at the age of eighteen , be drown at Oxford . his death leave Laura , the daughter of Mr. Philip Fairlie , presumptive heiress to the estate , with every chance of succeed to it , in the ordinary course of nature , on her uncle Frederick 's death , if the say Frederick die without leave male issue . 

 except in the event , then , of Mr. Frederick Fairlie 's marrying and leave an heir   the two very last thing in the world that he be likely to do , his niece , Laura , would have the property on his death , possess , it must be remember , nothing more than a life - interest in it . if she die single , or die childless , the estate would revert to her cousin , Magdalen , the daughter of Mr. Arthur Fairlie . if she marry , with a proper settlement or , in other word , with the settlement I mean to make for she the income from the estate   a good three thousand a year   would , during her lifetime , be at her own disposal . if she die before her husband , he would naturally expect to be leave in the enjoyment of the income , for his lifetime . if she have a son , that son would be the heir , to the exclusion of her cousin Magdalen . thus , Sir Percival 's prospect in marry Miss Fairlie   so far as his wife 's expectation from real property be concern   promise he these two advantage , on Mr. Frederick Fairlie 's death : first , the use of three thousand a year   by his wife 's permission , while she live , and in his own right , on her death , if he survive she ; and , secondly , the inheritance of Limmeridge for his son , if he have one . 

 so much for the land property , and for the disposal of the income from it , on the occasion of Miss Fairlie 's marriage . thus far , no difficulty or difference of opinion on the lady 's settlement be at all likely to arise between Sir Percival 's lawyer and myself . 

 the personal estate , or , in other word , the money to which Miss Fairlie would become entitled on reach the age of twenty - one year , be the next point to consider . 

 this part of her inheritance be , in itself , a comfortable little fortune . it be derive under her father 's will , and it amount to the sum of twenty thousand pound . besides this , she have a life - interest in ten thousand pound more , which latter amount be to go , on her decease , to her aunt Eleanor , her father 's only sister . it will greatly assist in set the family affair before the reader in the clear possible light , if I stop here for a moment , to explain why the aunt have be keep wait for her legacy until the death of the niece . 

 Mr. Philip Fairlie have live on excellent term with his sister Eleanor , as long as she remain a single woman . but when her marriage take place , somewhat late in life , and when that marriage unite she to an italian gentleman name Fosco , or , rather , to an italian nobleman see that he rejoice in the title of Count Mr. Fairlie disapprove of her conduct so strongly that he cease to hold any communication with she , and even go the length of strike her name out of his will . the other member of the family all think this serious manifestation of resentment at his sister 's marriage more or less unreasonable . Count Fosco , though not a rich man , be not a penniless adventurer either . he have a small but sufficient income of his own . he have live many year in England , and he hold an excellent position in society . these recommendation , however , avail nothing with Mr. Fairlie . in many of his opinion he be an Englishman of the old school , and he hat a foreigner simply and solely because he be a foreigner . the utmost that he could be prevail on to do , in after year mainly at Miss Fairlie 's intercession be to restore his sister 's name to its former place in his will , but to keep she wait for her legacy by give the income of the money to his daughter for life , and the money itself , if her aunt die before she , to her cousin Magdalen . consider the relative age of the two lady , the aunt 's chance , in the ordinary course of nature , of receive the ten thousand pound , be thus render doubtful in the extreme ; and Madame Fosco resent her brother 's treatment of she as unjustly as usual in such case , by refuse to see her niece , and decline to believe that Miss Fairlie 's intercession have ever be exert to restore her name to Mr. Fairlie 's will . 

 such be the history of the ten thousand pound . here again no difficulty could arise with Sir Percival 's legal adviser . the income would be at the wife 's disposal , and the principal would go to her aunt or her cousin on her death . 

 all preliminary explanation be now clear out of the way , I come at last to the real knot of the case to the twenty thousand pound . 

 this sum be absolutely Miss Fairlie 's own on she complete her twenty - first year , and the whole future disposition of it depend , in the first instance , on the condition I could obtain for she in her marriage - settlement . the other clause contain in that document be of a formal kind , and need not be recite here . but the clause relate to the money be too important to be pass over . a few line will be sufficient to give the necessary abstract of it . 

 my stipulation in regard to the twenty thousand pound be simply this : the whole amount be to be settle so as to give the income to the lady for her life afterwards to Sir Percival for his life and the principal to the child of the marriage . in default of issue , the principal be to be dispose of as the lady might by she will direct , for which purpose I reserve to she the right of make a will . the effect of these condition may be thus sum up . if Lady Glyde die without leave child , her half - sister Miss Halcombe , and any other relative or friend whom she might be anxious to benefit , would , on her husband 's death , divide among they such share of her money as she desire they to have . if , on the other hand , she die leave child , then their interest , naturally and necessarily , supersede all other interest whatsoever . this be the clause and no one who read it can fail , I think , to agree with I that it mete out equal justice to all party . 

 we shall see how my proposal be meet on the husband 's side . 

 at the time when Miss Halcombe 's letter reach I I be even more busily occupy than usual . but I contrive to make leisure for the settlement . I have draw it , and have send it for approval to Sir Percival 's solicitor , in less than a week from the time when Miss Halcombe have inform I of the propose marriage . 

 after a lapse of two day the document be return to I , with note and remark of the baronet 's lawyer . his objection , in general , prove to be of the most trifling and technical kind , until he come to the clause relate to the twenty thousand pound . against this there be double line draw in red ink , and the follow note be append to they 

 " not admissible . the principal to go to Sir Percival Glyde , in the event of his survive Lady Glyde , and there be no issue . " 

 that be to say , not one farthing of the twenty thousand pound be to go to Miss Halcombe , or to any other relative or friend of Lady Glyde 's . the whole sum , if she leave no child , be to slip into the pocket of her husband . 

 the answer I write to this audacious proposal be as short and sharp as I could make it . " my dear sir . Miss Fairlie 's settlement . I maintain the clause to which you object , exactly as it stand . your truly . " the rejoinder come back in a quarter of an hour . " my dear sir . Miss Fairlie 's settlement . I maintain the red ink to which you object , exactly as it stand . your truly . " in the detestable slang of the day , we be now both " at a deadlock , " and nothing be leave for it but to refer to our client on either side . 

 as matter stand , my client Miss Fairlie not have yet complete her twenty - first year Mr. Frederick Fairlie , be her guardian . I write by that day 's post , and put the case before he exactly as it stand , not only urge every argument I could think of to induce he to maintain the clause as I have draw it , but state to he plainly the mercenary motive which be at the bottom of the opposition to my settlement of the twenty thousand pound . the knowledge of Sir Percival 's affair which I have necessarily gain when the provision of the deed on his side be submit in due course to my examination , have but too plainly inform I that the debt on his estate be enormous , and that his income , though nominally a large one , be virtually , for a man in his position , next to nothing . the want of ready money be the practical necessity of Sir Percival 's existence , and his lawyer 's note on the clause in the settlement be nothing but the frankly selfish expression of it . 

 Mr. Fairlie 's answer reach I by return of post , and prove to be wander and irrelevant in the extreme . turn into plain English , it practically express itself to this effect : " would dear Gilmore be so very obliging as not to worry his friend and client about such a trifle as a remote contingency ? be it likely that a young woman of twenty - one would die before a man of forty five , and die without child ? on the other hand , in such a miserable world as this , be it possible to over - estimate the value of peace and quietness ? if those two heavenly blessing be offer in exchange for such an earthly trifle as a remote chance of twenty thousand pound , be it not a fair bargain ? surely , yes . then why not make it ? " 

 I throw the letter away in disgust . just as it have flutter to the ground , there be a knock at my door , and Sir Percival 's solicitor , Mr. Merriman , be show in . there be many variety of sharp practitioner in this world , but I think the hard of all to deal with be the man who overreach you under the disguise of inveterate good - humour . a fat , well feed , smile , friendly man of business be of all party to a bargain the most hopeless to deal with . Mr. Merriman be one of this class . 

 " and how be good Mr. Gilmore ? " he begin , all in a glow with the warmth of his own amiability . " glad to see you , sir , in such excellent health . I be pass your door , and I think I would look in in case you might have something to say to I . do now pray do let we settle this little difference of our by word of mouth , if we can ! have you hear from your client yet ? " 

 " yes . have you hear from your ? " 

 " my dear , good sir ! I wish I have hear from he to any purpose I wish , with all my heart , the responsibility be off my shoulder ; but he be obstinate or let I rather say , resolute and he will not   take it off . ' Merriman , I leave detail to you . do what you think right for my interest , and consider I as have personally withdraw from the business until it be all over . ' those be Sir Percival 's word a fortnight ago , and all I can get he to do now be to repeat they . I be not a hard man , Mr. Gilmore , as you know . personally and privately , I do assure you , I should like to sponge out that note of mine at this very moment . but if Sir Percival will not   go into the matter , if Sir Percival will blindly leave all his interest in my sole care , what course can I possibly take except the course of assert they ? my hand be bind do not   you see , my dear sir ? my hand be bind . " 

 " you maintain your note on the clause , then , to the letter ? " I say . 

 " yes deuce take it ! I have no other alternative . " he walk to the fireplace and warm himself , hum the fag end of a tune in a rich convivial bass voice . " what do your side say ? " he go on ; " now pray tell I what do your side say ? " 

 I be ashamed to tell he . I attempt to gain time nay , I do bad . my legal instinct get the well of I , and I even try to bargain . 

 " twenty thousand pound be rather a large sum to be give up by the lady 's friend at two day ' notice , " I say . 

 " very true , " reply Mr. Merriman , look down thoughtfully at his boot . " properly put , sir most properly put ! " 

 " a compromise , recognise the interest of the lady 's family as well as the interest of the husband , might not perhaps have frighten my client quite so much , " I go on . " come , come ! this contingency resolve itself into a matter of bargaining after all . what be the least you will take ? " 

 " the least we will take , " say Mr. Merriman , " be nineteen- thousand - nine - hundred - and - ninety - nine - pound - nineteen - shillings- and - elevenpence - three - farthing . ha ! ha ! ha ! excuse I , Mr. Gilmore . I must have my little joke . " 

 " little enough , " I remark . " the joke be just worth the odd farthe it be make for . " 

 Mr. Merriman be delighted . he laugh over my retort till the room ring again . I be not half so good - humour on my side ; I come back to business , and close the interview . 

 " this be Friday , " I say . " give we till Tuesday next for our final answer . " 

 " by all mean , " reply Mr. Merriman . " long , my dear sir , if you like . " he take up his hat to go , and then address I again . " by the way , " he say , " your client in Cumberland have not hear anything more of the woman who write the anonymous letter , have they ? " 

 " nothing more , " I answer . " have you find no trace of she ? " 

 " not yet , " say my legal friend . " but we do not   despair . Sir Percival have his suspicion that somebody be keep she in hiding , and we be have that somebody watch . " 

 " you mean the old woman who be with she in Cumberland , " I say . 

 " quite another party , sir , " answer Mr. Merriman . " we do not   happen to have lay hand on the old woman yet . our somebody be a man . we have get he close under our eye here in London , and we strongly suspect he have something to do with help she in the first instance to escape from the Asylum . Sir Percival want to question he at once , but I say , ' no . question he will only put he on his guard watch he , and wait . ' we shall see what happen . a dangerous woman to be at large , Mr. Gilmore ; nobody know what she may do next . I wish you good - morning , sir . on Tuesday next I shall hope for the pleasure of hear from you . " he smile amiably and go out . 

 my mind have be rather absent during the latter part of the conversation with my legal friend . I be so anxious about the matter of the settlement that I have little attention to give to any other subject , and the moment I be leave alone again I begin to think over what my next proceeding ought to be . 

 in the case of any other client I should have act on my instruction , however personally distasteful to I , and have give up the point about the twenty thousand pound on the spot . but I could not act with this business - like indifference towards Miss Fairlie . I have an honest feeling of affection and admiration for she I remember gratefully that her father have be the kind patron and friend to I that ever man have I have feel towards she while I be draw the settlement as I might have feel , if I have not be an old bachelor , towards a daughter of my own , and I be determined to spare no personal sacrifice in her service and where her interest be concern . write a second time to Mr. Fairlie be not to be think of it would only be give he a second opportunity of slip through my finger . see he and personally remonstrate with he might possibly be of more use . the next day be Saturday . I determine to take a return ticket and jolt my old bone down to Cumberland , on the chance of persuade he to adopt the just , the independent , and the honourable course . it be a poor chance enough , no doubt , but when I have try it my conscience would be at ease . I should then have do all that a man in my position could do to serve the interest of my old friend 's only child . 

 the weather on Saturday be beautiful , a west wind and a bright sun . have feel latterly a return of that fulness and oppression of the head , against which my doctor warn I so seriously more than two year since , I resolve to take the opportunity of get a little extra exercise by send my bag on before I and walk to the terminus in Euston Square . as I come out into Holborn a gentleman walk by rapidly stop and speak to I . it be Mr. Walter Hartright . 

 if he have not be the first to greet I I should certainly have pass he . he be so changed that I hardly know he again . his face look pale and haggard his manner be hurried and uncertain and his dress , which I remember as neat and gentlemanlike when I see he at Limmeridge , be so slovenly now that I should really have be ashamed of the appearance of it on one of my own clerk . 

 " have you be long back from Cumberland ? " he ask . " I hear from Miss Halcombe lately . I be aware that Sir Percival Glyde 's explanation have be consider satisfactory . will the marriage take place soon ? do you happen to know Mr. Gilmore ? " 

 he speak so fast , and crowd his question together so strangely and confusedly , that I could hardly follow he . however accidentally intimate he might have be with the family at Limmeridge , I could not see that he have any right to expect information on their private affair , and I determine to drop he , as easily as might be , on the subject of Miss Fairlie 's marriage . 

 " Time will show , Mr. Hartright , " I say " time will show . I dare say if we look out for the marriage in the paper we shall not be far wrong . excuse my notice it , but I be sorry to see you not look so well as you be when we last meet . " 

 a momentary nervous contraction quiver about his lip and eye , and make I half reproach myself for have answer he in such a significantly guard manner . 

 " I have no right to ask about her marriage , " he say bitterly . " I must wait to see it in the newspaper like other people . yes , " he go on before I could make any apology " I have not be well lately . I be go to another country to try a change of scene and occupation . Miss Halcombe have kindly assist I with her influence , and my testimonial have be find satisfactory . it be a long distance off , but I do not   care where I go , what the climate be , or how long I be away . " he look about he while he say this at the throng of stranger pass we by on either side , in a strange , suspicious manner , as if he think that some of they might be watch we . 

 " I wish you well through it , and safe back again , " I say , and then add , so as not to keep he altogether at arm 's length on the subject of the Fairlies , " I be go down to Limmeridge to - day on business . Miss Halcombe and Miss Fairlie be away just now on a visit to some friend in Yorkshire . " 

 his eye brighten , and he seem about to say something in answer , but the same momentary nervous spasm cross his face again . he take my hand , press it hard , and disappear among the crowd without say another word . though he be little more than a stranger to I , I wait for a moment , look after he almost with a feeling of regret . I have gain in my profession sufficient experience of young man to know what the outward sign and token be of their beginning to go wrong , and when I resume my walk to the railway I be sorry to say I feel more than doubtful about Mr. Hartright 's future . 



 IV 

 leave by an early train , I get to Limmeridge in time for dinner . the house be oppressively empty and dull . I have expect that good Mrs. Vesey would have be company for I in the absence of the young lady , but she be confine to her room by a cold . the servant be so surprised at see I that they hurry and bustle absurdly , and make all sort of annoying mistake . even the butler , who be old enough to have know well , bring I a bottle of port that be chill . the report of Mr. Fairlie 's health be just as usual , and when I send up a message to announce my arrival , I be tell that he would be delighted to see I the next morning but that the sudden news of my appearance have prostrate he with palpitation for the rest of the evening . the wind howl dismally all night , and strange cracking and groan noise sound here , there , and everywhere in the empty house . I sleep as wretchedly as possible , and get up in a mighty bad humour to breakfast by myself the next morning . 

 at ten o'clock I be conduct to Mr. Fairlie 's apartment . he be in his usual room , his usual chair , and his usual aggravating state of mind and body . when I go in , his valet be stand before he , hold up for inspection a heavy volume of etching , as long and as broad as my office writing - desk . the miserable foreigner grin in the most abject manner , and look ready to drop with fatigue , while his master composedly turn over the etching , and bring their hide beauty to light with the help of a magnifying glass . 

 " you very well of good old friend , " say Mr. Fairlie , lean back lazily before he could look at I , " be you quite well ? how nice of you to come here and see I in my solitude . Dear Gilmore ! " 

 I have expect that the valet would be dismiss when I appear , but nothing of the sort happen . there he stand , in front of his master 's chair , tremble under the weight of the etching , and there Mr. Fairlie sit , serenely twirl the magnifying glass between his white finger and thumb . 

 " I have come to speak to you on a very important matter , " I say , " and you will therefore excuse I , if I suggest that we have well be alone . " 

 the unfortunate valet look at I gratefully . Mr. Fairlie faintly repeat my last three word , " well be alone , " with every appearance of the utmost possible astonishment . 

 I be in no humour for trifling , and I resolve to make he understand what I mean . 

 " Oblige I by give that man permission to withdraw , " I say , point to the valet . 

 Mr. Fairlie arch his eyebrow and purse up his lip in sarcastic surprise . 

 " Man ? " he repeat . " you provoke old Gilmore , what can you possibly mean by call he a man ? he be nothing of the sort . he might have be a man half an hour ago , before I want my etching , and he may be a man half an hour hence , when I do not   want they any long . at present he be simply a portfolio stand . why object , Gilmore , to a portfolio stand ? " 

 " I do object . for the third time , Mr. Fairlie , I beg that we may be alone . " 

 my tone and manner leave he no alternative but to comply with my request . he look at the servant , and point peevishly to a chair at his side . 

 " put down the etching and go away , " he say . " do not   upset I by lose my place . have you , or have you not , lose my place ? be you sure you have not ? and have you put my hand - bell quite within my reach ? yes ? then why the devil do not   you go ? " 

 the valet go out . Mr. Fairlie twist himself round in his chair , polish the magnifying glass with his delicate cambric handkerchief , and indulge himself with a sidelong inspection of the open volume of etching . it be not easy to keep my temper under these circumstance , but I do keep it . 

 " I have come here at great personal inconvenience , " I say , " to serve the interest of your niece and your family , and I think I have establish some slight claim to be favour with your attention in return . " 

 " do not   bully I ! " exclaim Mr. Fairlie , fall back helplessly in the chair , and close his eye . " please do not   bully I . I be not strong enough . " 

 I be determined not to let he provoke I , for Laura Fairlie 's sake . 

 " my object , " I go on , " be to entreat you to reconsider your letter , and not to force I to abandon the just right of your niece , and of all who belong to she . let I state the case to you once more , and for the last time . " 

 Mr. Fairlie shake his head and sigh piteously . 

 " this be heartless of you , Gilmore very heartless , " he say . " never mind , go on . " 

 I put all the point to he carefully I set the matter before he in every conceivable light . he lie back in the chair the whole time I be speak with his eye close . when I have do he open they indolently , take his silver smell - bottle from the table , and sniff at it with an air of gentle relish . 

 " Good Gilmore ! " he say between the sniff , " how very nice this be of you ! how you reconcile one to human nature ! " 

 " give I a plain answer to a plain question , Mr. Fairlie . I tell you again , Sir Percival Glyde have no shadow of a claim to expect more than the income of the money . the money itself if your niece have no child , ought to be under her control , and to return to her family . if you stand firm , Sir Percival must give way he must give way , I tell you , or he expose himself to the base imputation of marry Miss Fairlie entirely from mercenary motif . " 

 Mr. Fairlie shake the silver smell - bottle at I playfully . 

 " you dear old Gilmore , how you do hate rank and family , do not   you ? how you detest Glyde because he happen to be a baronet . what a Radical you be oh , dear I , what a Radical you be ! " 

 a Radical ! ! ! I could put up with a good deal of provocation , but , after hold the sound conservative principle all my life , I could not put up with be call a Radical . my blood boil at it I start out of my chair I be speechless with Indignation . 

 " do not   shake the room ! " cry Mr. Fairlie " for Heaven 's sake do not   shake the room ! Worthiest of all possible gilmore , I mean no offence . my own view be so extremely liberal that I think I be a Radical myself . yes . we be a pair of Radicals . please do not   be angry . I can not   quarrel I have not   stamina enough . shall we drop the subject ? yes . come and look at these sweet etching . do let I teach you to understand the heavenly pearliness of these line . do now , there be a good Gilmore ! " 

 while he be maunder on in this way I be , fortunately for my own self - respect , return to my sens . when I speak again I be compose enough to treat his impertinence with the silent contempt that it deserve . 

 " you be entirely wrong , sir , " I say , " in suppose that I speak from any prejudice against Sir Percival Glyde . I may regret that he have so unreservedly resign himself in this matter to his lawyer 's direction as to make any appeal to himself impossible , but I be not prejudiced against he . what I have say would equally apply to any other man in his situation , high or low . the principle I maintain be a recognise principle . if you be to apply at the near town here , to the first respectable solicitor you could find , he would tell you as a stranger what I tell you as a friend . he would inform you that it be against all rule to abandon the lady 's money entirely to the man she marry . he would decline , on ground of common legal caution , to give the husband , under any circumstance whatever , an interest of twenty thousand pound in his wife 's death . " 

 " would he really , Gilmore ? " say Mr. Fairlie . " if he say anything half so horrid , I do assure you I should tinkle my bell for Louis , and have he send out of the house immediately . " 

 " you shall not irritate I , Mr. Fairlie for your niece 's sake and for her father 's sake , you shall not irritate I . you shall take the whole responsibility of this discreditable settlement on your own shoulder before I leave the room . " 

 " do not ! now please do not ! " say Mr. Fairlie . " think how precious your time be , Gilmore , and do not   throw it away . I would dispute with you if I could , but I can not   I have not   stamina enough . you want to upset I , to upset yourself , to upset Glyde , and to upset Laura ; and oh , dear I ! all for the sake of the very last thing in the world that be likely to happen . no , dear friend , in the interest of peace and quietness , positively no ! " 

 " I be to understand , then , that you hold by the determination express in your letter ? " 

 " yes , please . so glad we understand each other at last . sit down again do ! " 

 I walk at once to the door , and Mr. Fairlie resignedly " tinkle " his hand - bell . before I leave the room I turn round and address he for the last time . 

 " whatever happen in the future , sir , " I say , " remember that my plain duty of warning you have be perform . as the faithful friend and servant of your family , I tell you , at parting , that no daughter of mine should be married to any man alive under such a settlement as you be force I to make for Miss Fairlie . " 

 the door open behind I , and the valet stand wait on the threshold . 

 " Louis , " say Mr. Fairlie , ' show Mr. Gilmore out , and then come back and hold up my etching for I again . make they give you a good lunch downstairs . do , Gilmore , make my idle beast of servant give you a good lunch ! " 

 I be too much disgusted to reply I turn on my heel , and leave he in silence . there be an up train at two o'clock in the afternoon , and by that train I return to London . 

 on the Tuesday I send in the altered settlement , which practically disinherit the very person whom Miss Fairlie 's own lip have inform I she be most anxious to benefit . I have no choice . another lawyer would have draw up the deed if I have refuse to undertake it . 


 my task be do . my personal share in the event of the family story extend no far than the point which I have just reach . other pen than mine will describe the strange circumstance which be now shortly to follow . seriously and sorrowfully I close this brief record . seriously and sorrowfully I repeat here the parting word that I speak at Limmeridge House : no daughter of mine should have be marry to any man alive under such a settlement as I be compel to make for Laura Fairlie . 


 the end of Mr. Gilmore 's Narrative . 




 the story continue BY MARIAN halcombe 

  in extract from her Diary 



 LIMMERIDGE HOUSE , Nov. 8 . 1 

  1   the passage omit , here and elsewhere , in Miss Halcombe 's Diary be only those which bear no reference to Miss Fairlie or to any of the person with whom she be associate in these page . 


 this morning Mr. Gilmore leave we . 

 his interview with Laura have evidently grieve and surprise he more than he like to confess . I feel afraid , from his look and manner when we part , that she might have inadvertently betray to he the real secret of her depression and my anxiety . this doubt grow on I so , after he have go , that I decline rid out with Sir Percival , and go up to Laura 's room instead . 

 I have be sadly distrustful of myself , in this difficult and lamentable matter , ever since I find out my own ignorance of the strength of Laura 's unhappy attachment . I ought to have know that the delicacy and forbearance and sense of honour which draw I to poor Hartright , and make I so sincerely admire and respect he , be just the quality to appeal most irresistibly to Laura 's natural sensitiveness and natural generosity of nature . and yet , until she open her heart to I of her own accord , I have no suspicion that this new feeling have take root so deeply . I once think time and care might remove it . I now fear that it will remain with she and alter she for life . the discovery that I have commit such an error in judgment as this make I hesitate about everything else . I hesitate about Sir Percival , in the face of the plainest proof . I hesitate even in speak to Laura . on this very morning I doubt , with my hand on the door , whether I should ask she the question I have come to put , or not . 

 when I go into her room I find she walk up and down in great impatience . she look flushed and excited , and she come forward at once , and speak to I before I could open my lip . 

 " I want you , " she say . " come and sit down on the sofa with I . Marian ! I can bear this no long I must and will end it . " 

 there be too much colour in her cheek , too much energy in her manner , too much firmness in her voice . the little book of Hartright 's drawing the fatal book that she will dream over whenever she be alone be in one of her hand . I begin by gently and firmly take it from she , and put it out of sight on a side - table . 

 " tell I quietly , my darling , what you wish to do , " I say . " have Mr. Gilmore be advise you ? " 

 she shake her head . " no , not in what I be think of now . he be very kind and good to I , Marian , and I be ashamed to say I distress he by cry . I be miserably helpless I can not   control myself . for my own sake , and for all our sake , I must have courage enough to end it . " 

 " do you mean courage enough to claim your release ? " I ask . 

 " no , " she say simply . " Courage , dear , to tell the truth . " 

 she put her arm round my neck , and rest her head quietly on my bosom . on the opposite wall hang the miniature portrait of her father . I bent over she , and see that she be look at it while her head lie on my breast . 

 " I can never claim my release from my engagement , " she go on . " whatever way it end it must end wretchedly for I . all I can do , Marian , be not to add the remembrance that I have break my promise and forget my father 's die word , to make that wretchedness bad . " 

 " what be it you propose , then ? " I ask . 

 " to tell Sir Percival Glyde the truth with my own lip , " she answer , " and to let he release I , if he will , not because I ask he , but because he know all . " 

 " what do you mean , Laura , by ' all ' ? Sir Percival will know enough   he have tell I so himself   if he know that the engagement be oppose to your own wish . " 

 " can I tell he that , when the engagement be make for I by my father , with my own consent ? I should have keep my promise , not happily , I be afraid , but still contentedly " she stop , turn her face to I , and lay her cheek close against mine " I should have keep my engagement , Marian , if another love have not grow up in my heart , which be not there when I first promise to be Sir Percival 's wife . " 

 " Laura ! you will never lower yourself by make a confession to he ? " 

 " I shall lower myself , indeed , if I gain my release by hide from he what he have a right to know . " 

 " he have not the shadow of a right to know it ! " 

 " wrong , Marian , wrong ! I ought to deceive no one least of all the man to whom my father give I , and to whom I give myself . " she put her lip to mine , and kiss I . " my own love , " she say softly , " you be so much too fond of I , and so much too proud of I , that you forget , in my case , what you would remember in your own . well that Sir Percival should doubt my motif , and misjudge my conduct if he will , than that I should be first false to he in thought , and then mean enough to serve my own interest by hide the falsehood . " 

 I hold she away from I in astonishment . for the first time in our life we have change place the resolution be all on her side , the hesitation all on mine . I look into the pale , quiet , resign young face I see the pure , innocent heart , in the love eye that look back at I and the poor worldly caution and objection that rise to my lip dwindle and die away in their own emptiness . I hang my head in silence . in her place the despicably small pride which make so many woman deceitful would have be my pride , and would have make I deceitful too . 

 " do not   be angry with I , Marian , " she say , mistake my silence . 

 I only answer by draw she close to I again . I be afraid of cry if I speak . my tear do not flow so easily as they ought they come almost like man 's tear , with sob that seem to tear I in piece , and that frighten every one about I . 

 " I have think of this , love , for many day , " she go on , twin and twist my hair with that childish restlessness in her finger , which poor Mrs. Vesey still try so patiently and so vainly to cure she of " I have think of it very seriously , and I can be sure of my courage when my own conscience tell I I be right . let I speak to he to - morrow in your presence , Marian . I will say nothing that be wrong , nothing that you or I need be ashamed of but , oh , it will ease my heart so to end this miserable concealment ! only let I know and feel that I have no deception to answer for on my side , and then , when he have hear what I have to say , let he act towards I as he will . " 

 she sigh , and put her head back in its old position on my bosom . sad misgiving about what the end would be weigh upon my mind , but still distrust myself , I tell she that I would do as she wish . she thank I , and we pass gradually into talking of other thing . 

 at dinner she join we again , and be more easy and more herself with Sir Percival than I have see she yet . in the evening she go to the piano , choose new music of the dexterous , tuneless , florid kind . the lovely old melody of Mozart , which poor Hartright be so fond of , she have never play since he leave . the book be no long in the music - stand . she take the volume away herself , so that nobody might find it out and ask she to play from it . 

 I have no opportunity of discover whether her purpose of the morning have change or not , until she wish Sir Percival good - night and then her own word inform I that it be unaltered . she say , very quietly , that she wish to speak to he after breakfast , and that he would find she in her sitting - room with I . he change colour at those word , and I feel his hand tremble a little when it come to my turn to take it . the event of the next morning would decide his future life , and he evidently know it . 

 I go in , as usual , through the door between our two bedroom , to bid Laura good - night before she go to sleep . in stoop over she to kiss she I see the little book of Hartright 's drawing half hide under her pillow , just in the place where she use to hide her favourite toy when she be a child . I could not find it in my heart to say anything , but I point to the book and shake my head . she reach both hand up to my cheek , and draw my face down to hers till our lip meet . 

 " leave it there to - night , " she whisper ; " to - morrow may be cruel , and may make I say good - bye to it for ever . " 


 9th . the first event of the morning be not of a kind to raise my spirit a letter arrive for I from poor Walter Hartright . it be the answer to mine describe the manner in which Sir Percival clear himself of the suspicion raise by Anne Catherick 's letter . he write shortly and bitterly about Sir Percival 's explanation , only say that he have no right to offer an opinion on the conduct of those who be above he . this be sad , but his occasional reference to himself grieve I still more . he say that the effort to return to his old habit and pursuit grow hard instead of easy to he every day and he implore I , if I have any interest , to exert it to get he employment that will necessitate his absence from England , and take he among new scene and new people . I have be make all the readier to comply with this request by a passage at the end of his letter , which have almost alarm I . 

 after mention that he have neither see nor hear anything of Anne Catherick , he suddenly break off , and hint in the most abrupt , mysterious manner , that he have be perpetually watch and follow by strange man ever since he return to London . he acknowledge that he can not prove this extraordinary suspicion by fix on any particular person , but he declare that the suspicion itself be present to he night and day . this have frighten I , because it look as if his one fix idea about Laura be become too much for his mind . I will write immediately to some of my mother 's influential old friend in London , and press his claim on their notice . change of scene and change of occupation may really be the salvation of he at this crisis in his life . 

 greatly to my relief , Sir Percival send an apology for not join we at breakfast . he have take an early cup of coffee in his own room , and he be still engage there in write letter . at eleven o'clock , if that hour be convenient , he would do himself the honour of wait on Miss Fairlie and Miss Halcombe . 

 my eye be on Laura 's face while the message be be deliver . I have find she unaccountably quiet and compose on go into her room in the morning , and so she remain all through breakfast . even when we be sit together on the sofa in her room , wait for Sir Percival , she still preserve her self - control . 

 " do not   be afraid of I , Marian , " be all she say ; " I may forget myself with an old friend like Mr. Gilmore , or with a dear sister like you , but I will not forget myself with Sir Percival Glyde . " 

 I look at she , and listen to she in silent surprise . through all the year of our close intimacy this passive force in her character have be hide from I hide even from herself , till love find it , and suffering call it forth . 

 as the clock on the mantelpiece strike eleven Sir Percival knock at the door and come in . there be suppress anxiety and agitation in every line of his face . the dry , sharp cough , which tease he at most time , seem to be trouble he more incessantly than ever . he sit down opposite to we at the table , and Laura remain by I . I look attentively at they both , and he be the pale of the two . 

 he say a few unimportant word , with a visible effort to preserve his customary ease of manner . but his voice be not to be steady , and the restless uneasiness in his eye be not to be conceal . he must have feel this himself , for he stop in the middle of a sentence , and give up even the attempt to hide his embarrassment any long . 

 there be just one moment of dead silence before Laura address he . 

 " I wish to speak to you , Sir Percival , " she say , " on a subject that be very important to we both . my sister be here , because her presence help I and give I confidence . she have not suggest one word of what I be go to say I speak from my own thought , not from her . I be sure you will be kind enough to understand that before I go any far ? " 

 Sir Percival bow . she have proceed thus far , with perfect outward tranquillity and perfect propriety of manner . she look at he , and he look at she . they seem , at the outset , at least , resolve to understand one another plainly . 

 " I have hear from Marian , " she go on , " that I have only to claim my release from our engagement to obtain that release from you . it be forbear and generous on your part , Sir Percival , to send I such a message . it be only do you justice to say that I be grateful for the offer , and I hope and believe that it be only do myself justice to tell you that I decline to accept it . " 

 his attentive face relax a little . but I see one of his foot , softly , quietly , incessantly beat on the carpet under the table , and I feel that he be secretly as anxious as ever . 

 " I have not forget , " she say , " that you ask my father 's permission before you honour I with a proposal of marriage . perhaps you have not forget either what I say when I consent to our engagement ? I venture to tell you that my father 's influence and advice have mainly decide I to give you my promise . I be guide by my father , because I have always find he the truest of all adviser , the good and fondest of all protector and friend . I have lose he now I have only his memory to love , but my faith in that dear dead friend have never be shake . I believe at this moment , as truly as I ever believe , that he know what be good , and that his hope and wish ought to be my hope and wish too . " 

 her voice tremble for the first time . her restless finger steal their way into my lap , and hold fast by one of my hand . there be another moment of silence , and then Sir Percival speak . 

 " may I ask , " he say , " if I have ever prove myself unworthy of the trust which it have be hitherto my great honour and great happiness to possess ? " 

 " I have find nothing in your conduct to blame , " she answer . " you have always treat I with the same delicacy and the same forbearance . you have deserve my trust , and , what be of far more importance in my estimation , you have deserve my father 's trust , out of which mine grow . you have give I no excuse , even if I have want to find one , for ask to be release from my pledge . what I have say so far have be speak with the wish to acknowledge my whole obligation to you . my regard for that obligation , my regard for my father 's memory , and my regard for my own promise , all forbid I to set the example , on my side , of withdraw from our present position . the breaking of our engagement must be entirely your wish and your act , Sir Percival not mine . " 

 the uneasy beating of his foot suddenly stop , and he lean forward eagerly across the table . 

 " my act ? " he say . " what reason can there be on my side for withdraw ? " 

 I hear her breath quicken I feel her hand grow cold . in spite of what she have say to I when we be alone , I begin to be afraid of she . I be wrong . 

 " a reason that it be very hard to tell you , " she answer . " there be a change in I , Sir Percival a change which be serious enough to justify you , to yourself and to I , in break off our engagement . " 

 his face turn so pale again that even his lip lose their colour . he raise the arm which lie on the table , turn a little away in his chair , and support his head on his hand , so that his profile only be present to we . 

 " what change ? " he ask . the tone in which he put the question jar on I there be something painfully suppress in it . 

 she sigh heavily , and lean towards I a little , so as to rest her shoulder against mine . I feel her trembling , and try to spare she by speak myself . she stop I by a warning pressure of her hand , and then address Sir Percival one more , but this time without look at he . 

 " I have hear , " she say , " and I believe it , that the fond and truest of all affection be the affection which a woman ought to bear to her husband . when our engagement begin that affection be mine to give , if I could , and your to win , if you could . will you pardon I , and spare I , Sir Percival , if I acknowledge that it be not so any long ? " 

 a few tear gather in her eye , and drop over her cheek slowly as she pause and wait for his answer . he do not utter a word . at the beginning of her reply he have move the hand on which his head rest , so that it hide his face . I see nothing but the upper part of his figure at the table . not a muscle of he move . the finger of the hand which support his head be dent deep in his hair . they might have express hide anger or hidden grief it be hard to say which there be no significant trembling in they . there be nothing , absolutely nothing , to tell the secret of his thought at that moment the moment which be the crisis of his life and the crisis of her . 

 I be determined to make he declare himself , for Laura 's sake . 

 " Sir Percival ! " I interpose sharply , " have you nothing to say when my sister have say so much ? More , in my opinion , " I add , my unlucky temper get the well of I , " than any man alive , in your position , have a right to hear from she . " 

 that last rash sentence open a way for he by which to escape I if he choose , and he instantly take advantage of it . 

 " pardon I , Miss Halcombe , " he say , still keep his hand over his face , " pardon I if I remind you that I have claim no such right . " 

 the few plain word which would have bring he back to the point from which he have wander be just on my lip , when Laura check I by speak again . 

 " I hope I have not make my painful acknowledgment in vain , " she continue . " I hope it have secure I your entire confidence in what I have still to say ? " 

 " pray be assure of it . " he make that brief reply warmly , drop his hand on the table while he speak , and turn towards we again . whatever outward change have pass over he be go now . his face be eager and expectant it express nothing but the most intense anxiety to hear she next word . 

 " I wish you to understand that I have not speak from any selfish motive , " she say . " if you leave I , Sir Percival , after what you have just hear , you do not leave I to marry another man , you only allow I to remain a single woman for the rest of my life . my fault towards you have begin and end in my own thought . it can never go any far . no word have pass " she hesitate , in doubt about the expression she should use next , hesitate in a momentary confusion which it be very sad and very painful to see . " no word have pass , " she patiently and resolutely resume , " between myself and the person to whom I be now refer for the first and last time in your presence of my feeling towards he , or of his feeling towards I no word ever can pass neither he nor I be likely , in this world , to meet again . I earnestly beg you to spare I from say any more , and to believe I , on my word , in what I have just tell you . it be the truth . Sir Percival , the truth which I think my promise husband have a claim to hear , at any sacrifice of my own feeling . I trust to his generosity to pardon I , and to his honour to keep my secret . " 

 " both those trust be sacred to I , " he say , " and both shall be sacredly keep . " 

 after answer in those term he pause , and look at she as if he be wait to hear more . 

 " I have say all I wish to say , " she add quietly " I have say more than enough to justify you in withdraw from your engagement . " 

 " you have say more than enough , " he answer , " to make it the dear object of my life to keep the engagement . " with those word he rise from his chair , and advance a few step towards the place where she be sit . 

 she start violently , and a faint cry of surprise escape she . every word she have speak have innocently betray her purity and truth to a man who thoroughly understand the priceless value of a pure and true woman . her own noble conduct have be the hidden enemy , throughout , of all the hope she have trust to it . I have dread this from the first . I would have prevent it , if she have allow I the small chance of do so . I even wait and watch now , when the harm be do , for a word from Sir Percival that would give I the opportunity of put he in the wrong . 

 " you have leave it to I , Miss Fairlie , to resign you , " he continue . " I be not heartless enough to resign a woman who have just show herself to be the noble of her sex . " 

 he speak with such warmth and feeling , with such passionate enthusiasm , and yet with such perfect delicacy , that she raise her head , flush up a little , and look at he with sudden animation and spirit . 

 " no ! " she say firmly . " the most wretched of her sex , if she must give herself in marriage when she can not give her love . " 

 " may she not give it in the future , " he ask , " if the one object of her husband 's life be to deserve it ? " 

 " never ! " she answer . " if you still persist in maintain our engagement , I may be your true and faithful wife , Sir Percival your love wife , if I know my own heart , never ! " 

 she look so irresistibly beautiful as she say those brave word that no man alive could have steel his heart against she . I try hard to feel that Sir Percival be to blame , and to say so , but my womanhood would pity he , in spite of myself . 

 " I gratefully accept your faith and truth , " he say . " the least that you can offer be more to I than the utmost that I could hope for from any other woman in the world . " 

 her left hand still hold mine , but her right hand hang listlessly at her side . he raise it gently to his lip touch it with they , rather than kiss it bow to I and then , with perfect delicacy and discretion , silently quit the room . 

 she neither move nor say a word when he be go she sit by I , cold and still , with her eye fix on the ground . I see it be hopeless and useless to speak , and I only put my arm round she , and hold she to I in silence . we remain together so for what seem a long and weary time so long and so weary , that I grow uneasy and speak to she softly , in the hope of produce a change . 

 the sound of my voice seem to startle she into consciousness . she suddenly draw herself away from I and rise to her foot . 

 " I must submit , Marian , as well as I can , " she say . " my new life have its hard duty , and one of they begin to - day . " 

 as she speak she go to a side - table near the window , on which her sketch material be place , gather they together carefully , and put they in a drawer of her cabinet . she lock the drawer and bring the key to I . 

 " I must part from everything that remind I of he , " she say . " keep the key wherever you please I shall never want it again . " 

 before I could say a word she have turn away to her book - case , and have take from it the album that contain Walter Hartright 's drawing . she hesitate for a moment , hold the little volume fondly in her hand then lift it to her lip and kiss it . 

 " oh , Laura ! Laura ! " I say , not angrily , not reprovingly with nothing but sorrow in my voice , and nothing but sorrow in my heart . 

 " it be the last time , Marian , " she plead . " I be bid it good - bye for ever . " 

 she lay the book on the table and draw out the comb that fasten her hair . it fall , in its matchless beauty , over her back and shoulder , and drop round she , far below her waist . she separate one long , thin lock from the rest , cut it off , and pin it carefully , in the form of a circle , on the first blank page of the album . the moment it be fasten she close the volume hurriedly , and place it in my hand . 

 " you write to he and he write to you , " she say . " while I be alive , if he ask after I always tell he I be well , and never say I be unhappy . do not   distress he , Marian , for my sake , do not   distress he . if I die first , promise you will give he this little book of his drawing , with my hair in it . there can be no harm , when I be go , in tell he that I put it there with my own hand . and say oh , Marian , say for I , then , what I can never say for myself say I love he ! " 

 she fling her arm round my neck , and whisper the last word in my ear with a passionate delight in utter they which it almost break my heart to hear . all the long restraint she have impose on herself give way in that first last outburst of tenderness . she break from I with hysterical vehemence , and throw herself on the sofa in a paroxysm of sob and tear that shake she from head to foot . 

 I try vainly to soothe she and reason with she she be past be soothe , and past be reason with . it be the sad , sudden end for we two of this memorable day . when the fit have wear itself out she be too exhausted to speak . she slumber towards the afternoon , and I put away the book of drawing so that she might not see it when she wake . my face be calm , whatever my heart might be , when she open her eye again and look at I . we say no more to each other about the distressing interview of the morning . Sir Percival 's name be not mention . Walter Hartright be not allude to again by either of we for the remainder of the day . 


 10th . find that she be compose and like herself this morning , I return to the painful subject of yesterday , for the sole purpose of implore she to let I speak to Sir Percival and Mr. Fairlie , more plainly and strongly than she could speak to either of they herself , about this lamentable marriage . she interpose , gently but firmly , in the middle of my remonstrance . 

 " I leave yesterday to decide , " she say ; " and yesterday have decide . it be too late to go back . " 

 Sir Percival speak to I this afternoon about what have pass in Laura 's room . he assure I that the unparalleled trust she have place in he have awaken such an answer conviction of her innocence and integrity in his mind , that he be guiltless of have feel even a moment 's unworthy jealousy , either at the time when he be in her presence , or afterwards when he have withdraw from it . deeply as he lament the unfortunate attachment which have hinder the progress he might otherwise have make in her esteem and regard , he firmly believe that it have remain unacknowledged in the past , and that it would remain , under all change of circumstance which it be possible to contemplate , unacknowledge in the future . this be his absolute conviction ; and the strong proof he could give of it be the assurance , which he now offer , that he feel no curiosity to know whether the attachment be of recent date or not , or who have be the object of it . his implicit confidence in Miss Fairlie make he satisfied with what she have think fit to say to he , and he be honestly innocent of the slight feeling of anxiety to hear more . 

 he wait after say those word and look at I . I be so conscious of my unreasonable prejudice against he so conscious of an unworthy suspicion that he might be speculate on my impulsively answer the very question which he have just describe himself as resolve not to ask that I evade all reference to this part of the subject with something like a feeling of confusion on my own part . at the same time I be resolve not to lose even the small opportunity of try to plead Laura 's cause , and I tell he boldly that I regret his generosity have not carry he one step far , and induce he to withdraw from the engagement altogether . 

 here , again , he disarm I by not attempt to defend himself . he would merely beg I to remember the difference there be between his allow Miss Fairlie to give he up , which be a matter of submission only , and his force himself to give up Miss Fairlie , which be , in other word , ask he to be the suicide of his own hope . her conduct of the day before have so strengthen the unchangeable love and admiration of two long year , that all active contention against those feeling , on his part , be henceforth entirely out of his power . I must think he weak , selfish , unfeele towards the very woman whom he idolise , and he must bow to my opinion as resignedly as he could only put it to I , at the same time , whether her future as a single woman , pin under an unhappily place attachment which she could never acknowledge , could be say to promise she a much bright prospect than her future as the wife of a man who worship the very ground she walk on ? in the last case there be hope from time , however slight it might be in the first case , on her own showing , there be no hope at all . 

 I answer he more because my tongue be a woman 's , and must answer , than because I have anything convincing to say . it be only too plain that the course Laura have adopt the day before have offer he the advantage if he choose to take it and that he have choose to take it . I feel this at the time , and I feel it just as strongly now , while I write these line , in my own room . the one hope leave be that his motif really spring , as he say they do , from the irresistible strength of his attachment to Laura . 

 before I close my diary for to - night I must record that I write to - day , in poor Hartright 's interest , to two of my mother 's old friend in London both man of influence and position . if they can do anything for he , I be quite sure they will . except Laura , I never be more anxious about any one than I be now about Walter . all that have happen since he leave we have only increase my strong regard and sympathy for he . I hope I be do right in try to help he to employment abroad I hope , most earnestly and anxiously , that it will end well . 


 11th . Sir Percival have an interview with Mr. Fairlie , and I be send for to join they . 

 I find Mr. Fairlie greatly relieve at the prospect of the " family worry "   as he be pleased to describe his niece 's marriage   be settle at last . so far , I do not feel call on to say anything to he about my own opinion , but when he proceed , in his most aggravatingly languid manner , to suggest that the time for the marriage have well be settle next , in accordance with Sir Percival 's wish , I enjoy the satisfaction of assail Mr. Fairlie 's nerve with as strong a protest against hurry Laura 's decision as I could put into word . Sir Percival immediately assure I that he feel the force of my objection , and beg I to believe that the proposal have not be make in consequence of any interference on his part . Mr. Fairlie lean back in his chair , close his eye , say we both of we do honour to human nature , and then repeat his suggestion as coolly as if neither Sir Percival nor I have say a word in opposition to it . it end in my flatly decline to mention the subject to Laura , unless she first approach it of her own accord . I leave the room at once after make that declaration . Sir Percival look seriously embarrassed and distressed , Mr. Fairlie stretch out his lazy leg on his velvet footstool , and say , " Dear Marian ! how I envy you your robust nervous system ! do not   bang the door ! " 

 on go to Laura 's room I find that she have ask for I , and that Mrs. Vesey have inform she that I be with Mr. Fairlie . she inquire at once what I have be want for , and I tell she all that have pass , without attempt to conceal the vexation and annoyance that I really feel . her answer surprise and distress I inexpressibly it be the very last reply that I should have expect she to make . 

 " my uncle be right , " she say . " I have cause trouble and anxiety enough to you , and to all about I . let I cause no more , Marian let Sir Percival decide . " 

 I remonstrate warmly , but nothing that I could say move she . 

 " I be hold to my engagement , " she reply ; " I have break with my old life . the evil day will not come the less surely because I put it off . no , Marian ! once again my uncle be right . I have cause trouble enough and anxiety enough , and I will cause no more . " 

 she use to be pliability itself , but she be now inflexibly passive in her resignation I might almost say in her despair . dearly as I love she , I should have be less pained if she have be violently agitate it be so shockingly unlike her natural character to see she as cold and insensible as I see she now . 


 12th . Sir Percival put some question to I at breakfast about Laura , which leave I no choice but to tell he what she have say . 

 while we be talk she herself come down and join we . she be just as unnaturally compose in Sir Percival 's presence as she have be in mine . when breakfast be over he have an opportunity of say a few word to she privately , in a recess of one of the window . they be not more than two or three minute together , and on their separating she leave the room with Mrs. Vesey , while Sir Percival come to I . he say he have entreat she to favour he by maintain her privilege of fix the time for the marriage at her own will and pleasure . in reply she have merely express her acknowledgment , and have desire he to mention what his wish be to Miss Halcombe . 

 I have no patience to write more . in this instance , as in every other , Sir Percival have carry his point with the utmost possible credit to himself , in spite of everything that I can say or do . his wish be now , what they be , of course , when he first come here ; and Laura have resign herself to the one inevitable sacrifice of the marriage , remain as coldly hopeless and enduring as ever . in part with the little occupation and relic that remind she of Hartright , she seem to have part with all her tenderness and all her impressibility . it be only three o'clock in the afternoon while I write these line , and Sir Percival have leave we already , in the happy hurry of a bridegroom , to prepare for the bride 's reception at his house in Hampshire . unless some extraordinary event happen to prevent it they will be marry exactly at the time when he wish to be marry before the end of the year . my very finger burn as I write it ! 


 13th . a sleepless night , through uneasiness about Laura . towards the morning I come to a resolution to try what change of scene would do to rouse she . she can not surely remain in her present torpor of insensibility , if I take she away from Limmeridge and surround she with the pleasant face of old friend ? after some consideration I decide on write to the Arnolds , in Yorkshire . they be simple , kind - hearted , hospitable people , and she have know they from her childhood . when I have put the letter in the post - bag I tell she what I have do . it would have be a relief to I if she have show the spirit to resist and object . but no she only say , " I will go anywhere with you , Marian . I dare say you be right I dare say the change will do I good . " 


 14th . I write to Mr. Gilmore , inform he that there be really a prospect of this miserable marriage taking place , and also mention my idea of try what change of scene would do for Laura . I have no heart to go into particular . time enough for they when we get near to the end of the year . 


 15th . three letter for I . the first , from the Arnolds , full of delight at the prospect of see Laura and I . the second , from one of the gentleman to whom I write on Walter Hartright 's behalf , inform I that he have be fortunate enough to find an opportunity of comply with my request . the third , from Walter himself , thank I , poor fellow , in the warm term , for give he an opportunity of leave his home , his country , and his friend . a private expedition to make excavation among the ruin city of Central America be , it seem , about to sail from Liverpool . the draughtsman who have be already appoint to accompany it have lose heart , and withdraw at the eleventh hour , and Walter be to fill his place . he be to be engage for six month certain , from the time of the landing in Honduras , and for a year afterwards , if the excavation be successful , and if the fund hold out . his letter end with a promise to write I a farewell line when they be all on board ship , and when the pilot leave they . I can only hope and pray earnestly that he and I be both act in this matter for the good . it seem such a serious step for he to take , that the mere contemplation of it startle I . and yet , in his unhappy position , how can I expect he or wish he to remain at home ? 


 16th . the carriage be at the door . Laura and I set out on our visit to the Arnolds to - day . 



 POLESDEAN LODGE , YORKSHIRE . 

 23rd . a week in these new scene and among these kind - hearted people have do she some good , though not so much as I have hop . I have resolve to prolong our stay for another week at least . it be useless to go back to Limmeridge till there be an absolute necessity for our return . 


 24th . sad news by this morning 's post . the expedition to Central America sail on the twenty - first . we have part with a true man we have lose a faithful friend . Water Hartright have leave England . 


 25th . sad news yesterday ominous news to - day . Sir Percival Glyde have write to Mr. Fairlie , and Mr. Fairlie have write to Laura and I , to recall we to Limmeridge immediately . 

 what can this mean ? have the day for the marriage be fix in our absence ? 



 II 


 LIMMERIDGE HOUSE . 

 November 27th . my foreboding be realise . the marriage be fix for the twenty - second of December . 

 the day after we leave for Polesdean Lodge Sir Percival write , it seem , to Mr. Fairlie , to say that the necessary repair and alteration in his house in Hampshire would occupy a much long time in completion than he have originally anticipate . the proper estimate be to be submit to he as soon as possible , and it would greatly facilitate his enter into definite arrangement with the workpeople , if he could be inform of the exact period at which the wedding ceremony might be expect to take place . he could then make all his calculation in reference to time , besides write the necessary apology to friend who have be engage to visit he that winter , and who could not , of course , be receive when the house be in the hand of the workman . 

 to this letter Mr. Fairlie have reply by request Sir Percival himself to suggest a day for the marriage , subject to Miss Fairlie 's approval , which her guardian willingly undertake to do his good to obtain . Sir Percival write back by the next post , and propose   in accordance with his own view and wish from the first ?   the latter part of December perhaps the twenty - second , or twenty - fourth , or any other day that the lady and her guardian might prefer . the lady not be at hand to speak for herself , her guardian have decide , in her absence , on the early day mention the twenty - second of December , and have write to recall we to Limmeridge in consequence . 

 after explain these particular to I at a private interview yesterday , Mr. Fairlie suggest , in his most amiable manner , that I should open the necessary negotiation to - day . feel that resistance be useless , unless I could first obtain Laura 's authority to make it , I consent to speak to she , but declare , at the same time , that I would on no consideration undertake to gain her consent to Sir Percival 's wish . Mr. Fairlie compliment I on my " excellent conscience , " much as he would have compliment I , if he have be out walk , on my " excellent constitution , " and seem perfectly satisfied , so far , with have simply shift one more family responsibility from his own shoulder to mine . 

 this morning I speak to Laura as I have promise . the composure I may almost say , the insensibility which she have so strangely and so resolutely maintain ever since Sir Percival leave we , be not proof against the shock of the news I have to tell she . she turn pale and tremble violently . 

 " not so soon ! " she plead . " oh , Marian , not so soon ! " 

 the slight hint she could give be enough for I . I rise to leave the room , and fight her battle for she at once with Mr. Fairlie . 

 just as my hand be on the door , she catch fast hold of my dress and stop I . 

 " let I go ! " I say . " my tongue burn to tell your uncle that he and Sir Percival be not to have it all their own way . " 

 she sigh bitterly , and still hold my dress . 

 " no ! " she say faintly . " too late , Marian , too late ! " 

 " not a minute too late , " I retort . " the question of time be our question and trust I , Laura , to take a woman 's full advantage of it . " 

 I unclasp her hand from my gown while I speak ; but she slip both her arm round my waist at the same moment , and hold I more effectually than ever . 

 " it will only involve we in more trouble and more confusion , " she say . " it will set you and my uncle at variance , and bring Sir Percival here again with fresh cause of complaint " 

 " so much the well ! " I cry out passionately . " who care for his cause of complaint ? be you to break your heart to set his mind at ease ? no man under heaven deserve these sacrifice from we woman . man ! they be the enemy of our innocence and our peace they drag we away from our parent ' love and our sister ' friendship they take we body and soul to themselves , and fasten our helpless life to theirs as they chain up a dog to his kennel . and what do the good of they give we in return ? let I go , Laura I be mad when I think of it ! " 

 the tear miserable , weak , woman 's tear of vexation and rage start to my eye . she smile sadly , and put she handkerchief over my face to hide for I the betrayal of my own weakness the weakness of all other which she know that I most despise . 

 " oh , Marian ! " she say . " you cry ! think what you would say to I , if the place be change , and if those tear be mine . all your love and courage and devotion will not alter what must happen , soon or later . let my uncle have his way . let we have no more trouble and heart - burning that any sacrifice of mine can prevent . say you will live with I , Marian , when I be married and say no more . " 

 but I do say more . I force back the contemptible tear that be no relief to I , and that only distress she , and reason and plead as calmly as I could . it be of no avail . she make I twice repeat the promise to live with she when she be marry , and then suddenly ask a question which turn my sorrow and my sympathy for she into a new direction . 

 " while we be at Polesdean , " she say , " you have a letter , marian " 

 her altered tone the abrupt manner in which she look away from I and hide her face on my shoulder the hesitation which silence she before she have complete her question , all tell I , but too plainly , to whom the half - express inquiry point . 

 " I think , Laura , that you and I be never to refer to he again , " I say gently . 

 " you have a letter from he ? " she persist . 

 " yes , " I reply , " if you must know it . " 

 " do you mean to write to he again ? " 

 I hesitate . I have be afraid to tell she of his absence from England , or of the manner in which my exertion to serve his new hope and project have connect I with his departure . what answer could I make ? he be go where no letter could reach he for month , perhaps for year , to come . 

 " suppose I do mean to write to he again , " I say at last . " what then , Laura ? " 

 her cheek grow burn hot against my neck , and her arm tremble and tighten round I . 

 " do not   tell he about the TWENTY - second , " she whisper . " promise , marian pray promise you will not even mention my name to he when you write next . " 

 I give the promise . no word can say how sorrowfully I give it . she instantly take her arm from my waist , walk away to the window , and stand look out with she back to I . after a moment she speak once more , but without turn round , without allow I to catch the small glimpse of her face . 

 " be you go to my uncle 's room ? " she ask . " will you say that I consent to whatever arrangement he may think well ? never mind leave I , Marian . I shall be well alone for a little while . " 

 I go out . if , as soon as I get into the passage , I could have transport Mr. Fairlie and Sir Percival Glyde to the uttermost end of the earth by lift one of my finger , that finger would have be raise without an instant 's hesitation . for once my unhappy temper now stand my friend . I should have break down altogether and burst into a violent fit of cry , if my tear have not be all burn up in the heat of my anger . as it be , I dash into Mr. Fairlie 's room call to he as harshly as possible , " Laura consent to the twenty - second " and dash out again without wait for a word of answer . I bang the door after I , and I hope I shatter Mr. Fairlie 's nervous system for the rest of the day . 


 28th . this morning I read poor Hartright 's farewell letter over again , a doubt have cross my mind since yesterday , whether I be act wisely in conceal the fact of his departure from Laura . 

 on reflection , I still think I be right . the allusion in his letter to the preparation make for the expedition to Central America , all show that the leader of it know it to be dangerous . if the discovery of this make I uneasy , what would it make she ? it be bad enough to feel that his departure have deprive we of the friend of all other to whose devotion we could trust in the hour of need , if ever that hour come and find we helpless ; but it be far bad to know that he have go from we to face the peril of a bad climate , a wild country , and a disturbed population . surely it would be a cruel candour to tell Laura this , without a pressing and a positive necessity for it ? 

 I almost doubt whether I ought not to go a step far , and burn the letter at once , for fear of its one day fall into wrong hand . it not only refer to Laura in term which ought to remain a secret for ever between the writer and I , but it reiterate his suspicion so obstinate , so unaccountable , and so alarming that he have be secretly watch since he leave Limmeridge . he declare that he see the face of the two strange man who follow he about the street of London , watch he among the crowd which gather at Liverpool to see the expedition embark , and he positively assert that he hear the name of Anne Catherick pronounce behind he as he get into the boat . his own word be , " these event have a meaning , these event must lead to a result . the mystery of Anne Catherick be not clear up yet . she may never cross my path again , but if ever she cross your , make well use of the opportunity , Miss Halcombe , than I make of it . I speak on strong conviction I entreat you to remember what I say . " these be his own expression . there be no danger of my forget they my memory be only too ready to dwell on any word of Hartright 's that refer to Anne Catherick . but there be danger in my keep the letter . the mere accident might place it at the mercy of stranger . I may fall ill I may die . well to burn it at once , and have one anxiety the less . 

 it be burn . the ash of his farewell letter the last he may ever write to I lie in a few black fragment on the hearth . be this the sad end to all that sad story ? oh , not the end surely , surely not the end already ! 


 29th . the preparation for the marriage have begin . the dressmaker have come to receive her order . Laura be perfectly impassive , perfectly careless about the question of all other in which a woman 's personal interest be most closely bind up . she have leave it all to the dressmaker and to I . if poor Hartright have be the baronet , and the husband of her father 's choice , how differently she would have behave ! how anxious and capricious she would have be , and what a hard task the good of dressmaker would have find it to please she ! 


 30th . we hear every day from Sir Percival . the last news be that the alteration in his house will occupy from four to six month before they can be properly complete . if painter , paperhanger , and upholsterer could make happiness as well as splendour , I should be interested about their proceeding in Laura 's future home . as it be , the only part of Sir Percival 's last letter which do not leave I as it find I , perfectly indifferent to all his plan and project , be the part which refer to the wedding tour . he propose , as Laura be delicate , and as the winter threaten to be unusually severe , to take she to Rome , and to remain in Italy until the early part of next summer . if this plan should not be approve , he be equally ready , although he have no establishment of his own in town , to spend the season in London , in the most suitable furnished house that can be obtain for the purpose . 

 put myself and my own feeling entirely out of the question   which it be my duty to do , and which I have do , I , for one , have no doubt of the propriety of adopt the first of these proposal . in either case a separation between Laura and I be inevitable . it will be a long separation , in the event of their go abroad , than it would be in the event of their remain in London but we must set against this disadvantage the benefit to Laura , on the other side , of pass the winter in a mild climate , and more than that , the immense assistance in raise her spirit , and reconcile she to her new existence , which the mere wonder and excitement of travel for the first time in her life in the most interesting country in the world , must surely afford . she be not of a disposition to find resource in the conventional gaiety and excitement of London . they would only make the first oppression of this lamentable marriage fall the heavy on she . I dread the beginning of her new life more than word can tell , but I see some hope for she if she travel none if she remain at home . 

 it be strange to look back at this late entry in my journal , and to find that I be write of the marriage and the parting with Laura , as people write of a settle thing . it seem so cold and so unfeele to be look at the future already in this cruelly compose way . but what other way be possible , now that the time be draw so near ? before another month be over our head she will be his Laura instead of mine ! his Laura ! I be as little able to realise the idea which those two word convey my mind feel almost as dull and stun by it as if writing of her marriage be like writing of her death . 


 December 1st . a sad , sad day a day that I have no heart to describe at any length . after weakly put it off last night , I be oblige to speak to she this morning of Sir Percival 's proposal about the wedding tour . 

 in the full conviction that I should be with she wherever she go , the poor child for a child she be still in many thing be almost happy at the prospect of see the wonder of Florence and Rome and Naples . it nearly break my heart to dispel her delusion , and to bring her face to face with the hard truth . I be oblige to tell she that no man tolerate a rival not even a woman rival in his wife 's affection , when he first marry , whatever he may do afterwards . I be oblige to warn she that my chance of live with she permanently under her own roof , depend entirely on my not arouse Sir Percival 's jealousy and distrust by stand between they at the beginning of their marriage , in the position of the choose depositary of his wife 's close secret . drop by drop I pour the profane bitterness of this world 's wisdom into that pure heart and that innocent mind , while every high and well feeling within I recoil from my miserable task . it be over now . she have learn she hard , her inevitable lesson . the simple illusion of her girlhood be go , and my hand have strip they off . well mine than his that be all my consolation well mine than his . 

 so the first proposal be the proposal accept . they be to go to Italy , and I be to arrange , with Sir Percival 's permission , for meet they and stay with they when they return to England . in other word , I be to ask a personal favour , for the first time in my life , and to ask it of the man of all other to whom I least desire to owe a serious obligation of any kind . well ! I think I could do even more than that , for Laura 's sake . 


 2nd . on look back , I find myself always refer to Sir Percival in disparage term . in the turn affair have now take . I must and will root out my prejudice against he , I can not think how it first get into my mind . it certainly never exist in former time . 

 be it Laura 's reluctance to become his wife that have set I against he ? have Hartright 's perfectly intelligible prejudice infect I without my suspecting their influence ? do that letter of Anne Catherick 's still leave a lurking distrust in my mind , in spite of Sir Percival 's explanation , and of the proof in my possession of the truth of it ? I can not account for the state of my own feeling ; the one thing I be certain of be , that it be my duty doubly my duty now not to wrong Sir Percival by unjustly distrust he . if it have get to be a habit with I always to write of he in the same unfavourable manner , I must and will break myself of this unworthy tendency , even though the effort should force I to close the page of my journal till the marriage be over ! I be seriously dissatisfied with myself I will write no more to - day . 



 December 16th . a whole fortnight have pass , and I have not once open these page . I have be long enough away from my journal to come back to it with a healthy and well mind , I hope , so far as Sir Percival be concern . 

 there be not much to record of the past two week . the dress be almost all finish , and the new travel trunk have be send here from London . poor dear Laura hardly leave I for a moment all day , and last night , when neither of we could sleep , she come and creep into my bed to talk to I there . " I shall lose you so soon , Marian , " she say ; " I must make the most of you while I can . " 

 they be to be marry at Limmeridge Church , and thank Heaven , not one of the neighbour be to be invite to the ceremony . the only visitor will be our old friend , Mr. Arnold , who be to come from Polesdean to give Laura away , her uncle be far too delicate to trust himself outside the door in such inclement weather as we now have . if I be not determine , from this day forth , to see nothing but the bright side of our prospect , the melancholy absence of any male relative of Laura 's , at the most important moment of her life , would make I very gloomy and very distrustful of the future . but I have do with gloom and distrust that be to say , I have do with write about either the one or the other in this journal . 

 Sir Percival be to arrive to - morrow . he offer , in case we wish to treat he on term of rigid etiquette , to write and ask our clergyman to grant he the hospitality of the rectory , during the short period of his sojourn at Limmeridge , before the marriage . under the circumstance , neither Mr. Fairlie nor I think it at all necessary for we to trouble ourselves about attend to trifle form and ceremony . in our wild moorland country , and in this great lonely house , we may well claim to be beyond the reach of the trivial conventionality which hamper people in other place . I write to Sir Percival to thank he for his polite offer , and to beg that he would occupy his old room , just as usual , at Limmeridge House . 


 17th . he arrive to - day , look , as I think , a little worn and anxious , but still talk and laugh like a man in the good possible spirit . he bring with he some really beautiful present in jewellery , which Laura receive with her good grace , and , outwardly at least , with perfect self - possession . the only sign I can detect of the struggle it must cost she to preserve appearance at this try time , express itself in a sudden unwillingness , on her part , ever to be leave alone . instead of retreat to her own room , as usual , she seem to dread go there . when I go upstairs to - day , after lunch , to put on my bonnet for a walk , she volunteer to join I , and again , before dinner , she throw the door open between our two room , so that we might talk to each other while we be dress . " keep I always do something , " she say ; " keep I always in company with somebody . do not   let I think that be all I ask now , Marian do not   let I think . " 

 this sad change in she only increase her attraction for Sir Percival . he interpret it , I can see , to his own advantage . there be a feverish flush in her cheek , a feverish brightness in her eye , which he welcome as the return of her beauty and the recovery of her spirit . she talk to - day at dinner with a gaiety and carelessness so false , so shockingly out of her character , that I secretly long to silence she and take she away . Sir Percival 's delight and surprise appear to be beyond all expression . the anxiety which I have notice on his face when he arrive totally disappear from it , and he look , even to my eye , a good ten year young than he really be . 

 there can be no doubt though some strange perversity prevent I from see it myself there can be no doubt that Laura 's future husband be a very handsome man . regular feature form a personal advantage to begin with and he have they . bright brown eye , either in man or woman , be a great attraction and he have they . even baldness , when it be only baldness over the forehead   as in his case , be rather become than not in a man , for it heighten the head and add to the intelligence of the face . grace and ease of movement , untire animation of manner , ready , pliant , conversational power all these be unquestionable merit , and all these he certainly possess . surely Mr. Gilmore , ignorant as he be of Laura 's secret , be not to blame for feel surprised that she should repent of her marriage engagement ? any one else in his place would have share our good old friend 's opinion . if I be ask , at this moment , to say plainly what defect I have discover in Sir Percival , I could only point out two . one , his incessant restlessness and excitability which may be cause , naturally enough , by unusual energy of character . the other , his short , sharp , ill - temper manner of speak to the servant which may be only a bad habit after all . no , I can not dispute it , and I will not dispute it Sir Percival be a very handsome and a very agreeable man . there ! I have write it down at last , and I be glad it be over . 


 18th . feel weary and depress this morning , I leave Laura with Mrs. Vesey , and go out alone for one of my brisk midday walk , which I have discontinue too much of late . I take the dry airy road over the moor that lead to Todd 's Corner . after have be out half an hour , I be excessively surprised to see Sir Percival approach I from the direction of the farm . he be walk rapidly , swing his stick , his head erect as usual , and his shooting jacket fly open in the wind . when we meet he do not wait for I to ask any question he tell I at once that he have be to the farm to inquire if Mr. or Mrs. Todd have receive any tiding , since his last visit to Limmeridge , of Anne Catherick . 

 " you find , of course , that they have hear nothing ? " I say . 

 " nothing whatever , " he reply . " I begin to be seriously afraid that we have lose she . do you happen to know , " he continue , look I in the face very attentively " if the artist Mr. Hartright be in a position to give we any further information ? " 

 " he have neither hear of she , nor see she , since he leave Cumberland , " I answer . 

 " very sad , " say Sir Percival , speak like a man who be disappoint , and yet , oddly enough , look at the same time like a man who be relieve . " it be impossible to say what misfortune may not have happen to the miserable creature . I be inexpressibly annoyed at the failure of all my effort to restore she to the care and protection which she so urgently need . " 

 this time he really look annoyed . I say a few sympathise word , and we then talk of other subject on our way back to the house . surely my chance meet with he on the moor have disclose another favourable trait in his character ? surely it be singularly considerate and unselfish of he to think of Anne Catherick on the eve of his marriage , and to go all the way to Todd 's Corner to make inquiry about she , when he might have pass the time so much more agreeably in Laura 's society ? consider that he can only have act from motif of pure charity , his conduct , under the circumstance , show unusual good feeling and deserve extraordinary praise . well ! I give he extraordinary praise and there be an end of it . 



 19th . More discovery in the inexhaustible mine of Sir Percival 's virtue . 

 to - day I approach the subject of my propose sojourn under his wife 's roof when he bring she back to England . I have hardly drop my first hint in this direction before he catch I warmly by the hand , and say I have make the very offer to he which he have be , on his side , most anxious to make to I . I be the companion of all other whom he most sincerely long to secure for his wife , and he beg I to believe that I have confer a last favour on he by make the proposal to live with Laura after her marriage , exactly as I have always live with she before it . 

 when I have thank he in her name and mine for his considerate kindness to both of we , we pass next to the subject of his wedding tour , and begin to talk of the english society in Rome to which Laura be to be introduce . he run over the name of several friend whom he expect to meet abroad this winter . they be all English , as well as I can remember , with one exception . the one exception be Count Fosco . 

 the mention of the Count 's name , and the discovery that he and his wife be likely to meet the bride and bridegroom on the continent , put Laura 's marriage , for the first time , in a distinctly favourable light . it be likely to be the mean of heal a family feud . Hitherto Madame Fosco have choose to forget her obligation as Laura 's aunt out of sheer spite against the late Mr. Fairlie for his conduct in the affair of the legacy . now however , she can persist in this course of conduct no long . Sir Percival and Count Fosco be old and fast friend , and their wife will have no choice but to meet on civil term . Madame Fosco in her maiden day be one of the most impertinent woman I ever meet with capricious , exacting , and vain to the last degree of absurdity . if her husband have succeed in bring she to her sens , he deserve the gratitude of every member of the family , and he may have mine to begin with . 

 I be become anxious to know the Count . he be the most intimate friend of Laura 's husband , and in that capacity he excite my strong interest . neither Laura nor I have ever see he . all I know of he be that his accidental presence , year ago , on the step of the Trinita del Monte at Rome , assist Sir Percival 's escape from robbery and assassination at the critical moment when he be wound in the hand , and might the next instant have be wound in the heart . I remember also that , at the time of the late Mr. Fairlie 's absurd objection to his sister 's marriage , the Count write he a very temperate and sensible letter on the subject , which , I be ashamed to say , remain unanswered . this be all I know of Sir Percival 's friend . I wonder if he will ever come to England ? I wonder if I shall like he ? 

 my pen be run away into mere speculation . let I return to sober matter of fact . it be certain that Sir Percival 's reception of my venturesome proposal to live with his wife be more than kind , it be almost affectionate . I be sure Laura 's husband will have no reason to complain of I if I can only go on as I have begin . I have already declare he to be handsome , agreeable , full of good feeling towards the unfortunate and full of affectionate kindness towards I . really , I hardly know myself again , in my new character of Sir Percival 's warm friend . 


 20th . I hate Sir Percival ! I flatly deny his good look . I consider he to be eminently ill - temper and disagreeable , and totally want in kindness and good feeling . last night the card for the married couple be send home . Laura open the packet and see her future name in print for the first time . Sir Percival look over her shoulder familiarly at the new card which have already transform Miss Fairlie into Lady Glyde smile with the most odious self - complacency , and whisper something in her ear . I do not   know what it be Laura have refuse to tell I but I see her face turn to such a deadly whiteness that I think she would have faint . he take no notice of the change he seem to be barbarously unconscious that he have say anything to pain she . all my old feeling of hostility towards he revive on the instant , and all the hour that have pass since have do nothing to dissipate they . I be more unreasonable and more unjust than ever . in three word how glibly my pen write they ! in three word , I hate he . 


 21st . have the anxiety of this anxious time shake I a little , at last ? I have be write , for the last few day , in a tone of levity which , Heaven know , be far enough from my heart , and which it have rather shock I to discover on look back at the entry in my journal . 

 perhaps I may have catch the feverish excitement of Laura 's spirit for the last week . if so , the fit have already pass away from I , and have leave I in a very strange state of mind . a persistent idea have be force itself on my attention , ever since last night , that something will yet happen to prevent the marriage . what have produce this singular fancy ? be it the indirect result of my apprehension for Laura 's future ? or have it be unconsciously suggest to I by the increase restlessness and irritability which I have certainly observe in Sir Percival 's manner as the wedding - day draw near and nearer ? impossible to say . I know that I have the idea surely the wild idea , under the circumstance , that ever enter a woman 's head ? but try as I may , I can not trace it back to its source . 

 this last day have be all confusion and wretchedness . how can I write about it ? and yet , I must write . anything be well than brood over my own gloomy thought . 

 Kind Mrs. Vesey , whom we have all too much overlook and forget of late , innocently cause we a sad morning to begin with . she have be , for month past , secretly make a warm Shetland shawl for her dear pupil a most beautiful and surprising piece of work to be do by a woman at her age and with her habit . the gift be present this morning , and poor warm - hearted Laura completely break down when the shawl be put proudly on her shoulder by the love old friend and guardian of her motherless childhood . I be hardly allow time to quiet they both , or even to dry my own eye , when I be send for by Mr. Fairlie , to be favour with a long recital of his arrangement for the preservation of his own tranquillity on the wedding - day . 

 " Dear Laura " be to receive his present a shabby ring , with her affectionate uncle 's hair for an ornament , instead of a precious stone , and with a heartless french inscription inside , about congenial sentiment and eternal friendship " dear Laura " be to receive this tender tribute from my hand immediately , so that she might have plenty of time to recover from the agitation produce by the gift before she appear in Mr. Fairlie 's presence . " Dear Laura " be to pay he a little visit that evening , and to be kind enough not to make a scene . " Dear Laura " be to pay he another little visit in her wedding - dress the next morning , and to be kind enough , again , not to make a scene . " Dear Laura " be to look in once more , for the third time , before go away , but without harrow his feeling by say when she be go away , and without tear " in the name of pity , in the name of everything , dear Marian , that be most affectionate and most domestic , and most delightfully and charmingly self - compose , without TEARS ! " I be so exasperate by this miserable selfish trifling , at such a time , that I should certainly have shock Mr. Fairlie by some of the hard and rude truth he have ever hear in his life , if the arrival of Mr. Arnold from Polesdean have not call I away to new duty downstairs . 

 the rest of the day be indescribable . I believe no one in the house really know how it pass . the confusion of small event , all huddle together one on the other , bewildered everybody . there be dress send home that have be forget there be trunk to be pack and unpacked and pack again there be present from friend far and near , friend high and low . we be all needlessly hurry , all nervously expectant of the morrow . Sir Percival , especially , be too restless now to remain five minute together in the same place . that short , sharp cough of his trouble he more than ever . he be in and out of door all day long , and he seem to grow so inquisitive on a sudden , that he question the very stranger who come on small errand to the house . add to all this , the one perpetual thought in Laura 's mind and mine , that we be to part the next day , and the haunt dread , unexpresse by either of we , and yet ever present to both , that this deplorable marriage might prove to be the one fatal error of her life and the one hopeless sorrow of mine . for the first time in all the year of our close and happy intercourse we almost avoid look each other in the face , and we refrain , by common consent , from speak together in private through the whole evening . I can dwell on it no long . whatever future sorrow may be in store for I , I shall always look back on this twenty - first of December as the most comfortless and most miserable day of my life . 

 I be write these line in the solitude of my own room , long after midnight , have just come back from a steal look at Laura in her pretty little white bed the bed she have occupy since the day of her girlhood . 

 there she lay , unconscious that I be look at her quiet , more quiet than I have dare to hope , but not sleep . the glimmer of the night - light show I that her eye be only partially close the trace of tear glisten between her eyelid . my little keepsake only a brooch lie on the table at her bedside , with her prayer - book , and the miniature portrait of her father which she take with she wherever she go . I wait a moment , look at she from behind her pillow , as she lie beneath I , with one arm and hand rest on the white coverlid , so still , so quietly breathe , that the frill on her night - dress never move I wait , look at she , as I have see she thousand of time , as I shall never see she again and then steal back to my room . my own love ! with all your wealth , and all your beauty , how friendless you be ! the one man who would give his heart 's life to serve you be far away , toss , this stormy night , on the awful sea . who else be leave to you ? no father , no brother no living creature but the helpless , useless woman who write these sad line , and watch by you for the morning , in sorrow that she can not compose , in doubt that she can not conquer . oh , what a trust be to be place in that man 's hand to - morrow ! if ever he forget it if ever he injure a hair of her head ! 


 the TWENTY - second of DECEMBER . seven o'clock . a wild , unsettled morning . she have just rise well and calmer , now that the time have come , than she be yesterday . 



 ten o'clock . she be dress . we have kiss each other we have promise each other not to lose courage . I be away for a moment in my own room . in the whirl and confusion of my thought , I can detect that strange fancy of some hindrance happen to stop the marriage still hang about my mind . be it hang about his mind too ? I see he from the window , move hither and thither uneasily among the carriage at the door . how can I write such folly ! the marriage be a certainty . in less than half an hour we start for the church . 


 Eleven o'clock . it be all over . they be marry . 


 three o'clock . they be go ! I be blind with cry I can write no more 


  the First Epoch of the Story close here . 




 the SECOND EPOCH 

 the story continue BY MARIAN HALCOMBE . 



 I 

 BLACKWATER PARK , HAMPSHIRE . 


 June 11th , 1850 . six month to look back on six long , lonely month since Laura and I last see each other ! 

 how many day have I still to wait ? only one ! to - morrow , the twelfth , the traveller return to England . I can hardly realise my own happiness I can hardly believe that the next four - and - twenty hour will complete the last day of separation between Laura and I . 

 she and her husband have be in Italy all the winter , and afterwards in the Tyrol . they come back , accompany by Count Fosco and his wife , who propose to settle somewhere in the neighbourhood of London , and who have engage to stay at Blackwater Park for the summer month before decide on a place of residence . so long as Laura return , no matter who return with she . Sir Percival may fill the house from floor to ceiling , if he like , on condition that his wife and I inhabit it together . 

 meanwhile , here I be , establish at Blackwater Park , " the ancient and interesting seat "   as the county history obligingly inform I   " of Sir Percival Glyde , Bart . , " and the future abide - place   as I may now venture to add on my account   of plain Marian Halcombe , spinster , now settle in a snug little sitting - room , with a cup of tea by her side , and all her earthly possession range round she in three box and a bag . 

 I leave Limmeridge yesterday , have receive Laura 's delightful letter from Paris the day before . I have be previously uncertain whether I be to meet they in London or in Hampshire , but this last letter inform I that Sir Percival propose to land at Southampton , and to travel straight on to his country - house . he have spend so much money abroad that he have none leave to defray the expense of live in London for the remainder of the season , and he be economically resolve to pass the summer and autumn quietly at Blackwater . Laura have have more than enough of excitement and change of scene , and be pleased at the prospect of country tranquillity and retirement which her husband 's prudence provide for she . as for I , I be ready to be happy anywhere in her society . we be all , therefore , well content in our various way , to begin with . 

 last night I sleep in London , and be delay there so long to - day by various call and commission , that I do not reach Blackwater this evening till after dusk . 

 judge by my vague impression of the place thus far , it be the exact opposite of Limmeridge . 

 the house be situate on a dead flat , and seem to be shut in almost suffocated , to my north - country notion , by tree . I have see nobody but the man - servant who open the door to I , and the housekeeper , a very civil person , who show I the way to my own room , and get I my tea . I have a nice little boudoir and bedroom , at the end of a long passage on the first floor . the servant and some of the spare room be on the second floor , and all the live room be on the ground floor . I have not see one of they yet , and I know nothing about the house , except that one wing of it be say to be five hundred year old , that it have a moat round it once , and that it get its name of Blackwater from a lake in the park . 

 Eleven o'clock have just strike , in a ghostly and solemn manner , from a turret over the centre of the house , which I see when I come in . a large dog have be wake , apparently by the sound of the bell , and be howl and yawn drearily , somewhere round a corner . I hear echo footstep in the passage below , and the iron thumping of bolt and bar at the house door . the servant be evidently go to bed . shall I follow their example ? 

 no , I be not half sleepy enough . Sleepy , do I say ? I feel as if I should never close my eye again . the bare anticipation of see that dear face , and hear that well - know voice to - morrow , keep I in a perpetual fever of excitement . if I only have the privilege of a man , I would order out Sir Percival 's good horse instantly , and tear away on a night - gallop , eastward , to meet the rise sun a long , hard , heavy , ceaseless gallop of hour and hour , like the famous highwayman 's ride to York . be , however , nothing but a woman , condemn to patience , propriety , and petticoat for life , I must respect the house - keeper 's opinion , and try to compose myself in some feeble and feminine way . 

 reading be out of the question I can not   fix my attention on book . let I try if I can write myself into sleepiness and fatigue . my journal have be very much neglect of late . what can I recall stand , as I now do , on the threshold of a new life of person and event , of chance and change , during the past six month the long , weary , empty interval since Laura 's wedding - day ? 


 Walter Hartright be uppermost in my memory , and he pass first in the shadowy procession of my absent friend . I receive a few line from he , after the landing of the expedition in Honduras , write more cheerfully and hopefully than he have write yet . a month or six week later I see an extract from an american newspaper , describe the departure of the adventurer on their inland journey . they be last see enter a wild primeval forest , each man with his rifle on his shoulder and his baggage at his back . since that time , civilisation have lose all trace of they . not a line more have I receive from Walter , not a fragment of news from the expedition have appear in any of the public journal . 

 the same dense , dishearten obscurity hang over the fate and fortune of Anne Catherick , and her companion , Mrs. Clements . nothing whatever have be hear of either of they . whether they be in the country or out of it , whether they be live or dead , no one know . even Sir Percival 's solicitor have lose all hope , and have order the useless search after the fugitive to be finally give up . 

 our good old friend Mr. Gilmore have meet with a sad check in his active professional career . early in the spring we be alarm by hear that he have be find insensible at his desk , and that the seizure be pronounce to be an apoplectic fit . he have be long complain of fulness and oppression in the head , and his doctor have warn he of the consequence that would follow his persistency in continue to work , early and late , as if he be still a young man . the result now be that he have be positively order to keep out of his office for a year to come , at least , and to seek repose of body and relief of mind by altogether change his usual mode of life . the business be leave , accordingly , to be carry on by his partner , and he be himself , at this moment , away in Germany , visit some relation who be settle there in mercantile pursuit . thus another true friend and trustworthy adviser be lose to we lose , I earnestly hope and trust , for a time only . 

 Poor Mrs. Vesey travel with I as far as London . it be impossible to abandon she to solitude at Limmeridge after Laura and I have both leave the house , and we have arrange that she be to live with an unmarried young sister of her , who keep a school at Clapham . she be to come here this autumn to visit her pupil I might almost say her adopt child . I see the good old lady safe to her destination , and leave she in the care of her relative , quietly happy at the prospect of see Laura again in a few month ' time . 

 as for Mr. Fairlie , I believe I be guilty of no injustice if I describe he as be unutterably relieve by have the house clear of we woman . the idea of his miss his niece be simply preposterous he use to let month pass in the old time without attempt to see she and in my case and Mrs. Vesey 's , I take leave to consider his tell we both that he be half heart - break at our departure , to be equivalent to a confession that he be secretly rejoice to get rid of we . his last caprice have lead he to keep two photographer incessantly employ in produce sun - picture of all the treasure and curiosity in his possession . one complete copy of the collection of the photograph be to be present to the Mechanics ' Institution of Carlisle , mount on the fine cardboard , with ostentatious red - letter inscription underneath , " Madonna and Child by Raphael . in the possession of Frederick Fairlie , Esquire . " " copper coin of the period of Tiglath Pileser . in the possession of Frederick Fairlie , Esquire . " " Unique Rembrandt etch . know all over Europe as the smudge , from a printer 's blot in the corner which exist in no other copy . value at three hundred guineas . in the possession of Frederick Fairlie , Esq . " dozen of photograph of this sort , and all inscribe in this manner , be complete before I leave Cumberland , and hundred more remain to be do . with this new interest to occupy he , Mr. Fairlie will be a happy man for month and month to come , and the two unfortunate photographer will share the social martyrdom which he have hitherto inflict on his valet alone . 

 so much for the person and event which hold the foremost place in my memory . what next of the one person who hold the foremost place in my heart ? Laura have be present to my thought all the while I have be write these line . what can I recall of she during the past six month , before I close my journal for the night ? 

 I have only her letter to guide I , and on the most important of all the question which our correspondence can discuss , every one of those letter leave I in the dark . 

 do he treat she kindly ? be she happy now than she be when I part with she on the wedding - day ? all my letter have contain these two inquiry , put more or less directly , now in one form , and now in another , and all , on that point only , have remain without reply , or have be answer as if my question merely relate to the state of her health . she inform I , over and over again , that she be perfectly well that travel agree with she that she be get through the winter , for the first time in her life , without catch cold but not a word can I find anywhere which tell I plainly that she be reconcile to her marriage , and that she can now look back to the twenty - second of December without any bitter feeling of repentance and regret . the name of her husband be only mention in her letter , as she might mention the name of a friend who be travel with they , and who have undertake to make all the arrangement for the journey . " Sir Percival " have settle that we leave on such a day " Sir Percival " have decide that we travel by such a road . sometimes she write " Percival " only , but very seldom in nine case out of ten she give he his title . 

 I can not find that his habit and opinion have change and colour her in any single particular . the usual moral transformation which be insensibly work in a young , fresh , sensitive woman by her marriage , seem never to have take place in Laura . she write of her own thought and impression , amid all the wonder she have see , exactly as she might have write to some one else , if I have be travel with she instead of her husband . I see no betrayal anywhere of sympathy of any kind exist between they . even when she wander from the subject of her travel , and occupy herself with the prospect that await she in England , her speculation be busy with her future as my sister , and persistently neglect to notice her future as Sir Percival 's wife . in all this there be no undertone of complaint to warn I that she be absolutely unhappy in her married life . the impression I have derive from our correspondence do not , thank God , lead I to any such distressing conclusion as that . I only see a sad torpor , an unchangeable indifference , when I turn my mind from she in the old character of a sister , and look at she , through the medium of her letter , in the new character of a wife . in other word , it be always Laura Fairlie who have be write to I for the last six month , and never Lady Glyde . 

 the strange silence which she maintain on the subject of her husband 's character and conduct , she preserve with almost equal resolution in the few reference which her later letter contain to the name of her husband 's bosom friend , Count Fosco . 

 for some unexplained reason the Count and his wife appear to have change their plan abruptly , at the end of last autumn , and to have go to Vienna instead of go to Rome , at which latter place Sir Percival have expect to find they when he leave England . they only quit Vienna in the spring , and travel as far as the Tyrol to meet the bride and bridegroom on their homeward journey . Laura write readily enough about the meeting with Madame Fosco , and assure I that she have find her aunt so much change for the well so much quieter , and so much more sensible as a wife than she be as a single woman that I shall hardly know she again when I see she here . but on the subject of Count Fosco   who interest I infinitely more than his wife , Laura be provokingly circumspect and silent . she only say that he puzzle she , and that she will not tell I what her impression of he be until I have see he , and form my own opinion first . 

 this , to my mind , look ill for the Count . Laura have preserve , far more perfectly than most people do in later life , the child 's subtle faculty of know a friend by instinct , and if I be right in assume that her first impression of Count Fosco have not be favourable , I for one am in some danger of doubt and distrust that illustrious foreigner before I have so much as set eye on he . but , patience , patience this uncertainty , and many uncertainty more , can not last much long . to - morrow will see all my doubt in a fair way of be clear up , soon or later . 

 twelve o'clock have strike , and I have just come back to close these page , after look out at my open window . 

 it be a still , sultry , moonless night . the star be dull and few . the tree that shut out the view on all side look dimly black and solid in the distance , like a great wall of rock . I hear the croaking of frog , faint and far off , and the echo of the great clock hum in the airless calm long after the stroke have cease . I wonder how Blackwater Park will look in the daytime ? I do not   altogether like it by night . 


 12th . a day of investigation and discovery a more interesting day , for many reason , than I have venture to anticipate . 

 I begin my sight - seeing , of course , with the house . 

 the main body of the building be of the time of that highly - overrate woman , Queen Elizabeth . on the ground floor there be two hugely long gallery , with low ceiling lie parallel with each other , and render additionally dark and dismal by hideous family portrait every one of which I should like to burn . the room on the floor above the two gallery be keep in tolerable repair , but be very seldom used . the civil housekeeper , who act as my guide , offer to show I over they , but considerately add that she fear I should find they rather out of order . my respect for the integrity of my own petticoat and stocking infinitely exceed my respect for all the Elizabethan bedroom in the kingdom , so I positively decline explore the upper region of dust and dirt at the risk of soil my nice clean clothe . the housekeeper say , " I be quite of your opinion , miss , " and appear to think I the most sensible woman she have meet with for a long time past . 

 so much , then , for the main building . two wing be add at either end of it . the half - ruin wing on the left   as you approach the house   be once a place of residence stand by itself , and be build in the fourteenth century . one of Sir Percival 's maternal ancestor I do not   remember , and do not   care which tack on the main building , at right angle to it , in the aforesaid Queen Elizabeth 's time . the housekeeper tell I that the architecture of " the old wing , " both outside and inside , be consider remarkably fine by good judge . on further investigation I discover that good judge could only exercise their ability on Sir Percival 's piece of antiquity by previously dismiss from their mind all fear of damp , darkness , and rat . under these circumstance , I unhesitatingly acknowledge myself to be no judge at all , and suggest that we should treat " the old wing " precisely as we have previously treat the Elizabethan bedroom . once more the housekeeper say , " I be quite of your opinion , miss , " and once more she look at I with undisguised admiration of my extraordinary common - sense . 

 we go next to the wing on the right , which be build , by way of complete the wonderful architectural jumble at Blackwater Park , in the time of George the Second . 

 this be the habitable part of the house , which have be repair and redecorate inside on Laura 's account . my two room , and all the good bedroom besides , be on the first floor , and the basement contain a drawing - room , a dining - room , a morning - room , a library , and a pretty little boudoir for Laura , all very nicely ornament in the bright modern way , and all very elegantly furnish with the delightful modern luxury . none of the room be anything like so large and airy as our room at Limmeridge , but they all look pleasant to live in . I be terribly afraid , from what I have hear of Blackwater Park , of fatigue antique chair , and dismal stain glass , and musty , frouzy hanging , and all the barbarous lumber which people bear without a sense of comfort accumulate about they , in defiance of the consideration due to the convenience of their friend . it be an inexpressible relief to find that the nineteenth century have invade this strange future home of mine , and have sweep the dirty " good old time " out of the way of our daily life . 

 I dawdle away the morning part of the time in the room downstairs , and part out of door in the great square which be form by the three side of the house , and by the lofty iron railing and gate which protect it in front . a large circular fish - pond with stone side , and an allegorical leaden monster in the middle , occupy the centre of the square . the pond itself be full of gold and silver fish , and be encircle by a broad belt of the soft turf I ever walk on . I loiter here on the shady side pleasantly enough till luncheon - time , and after that take my broad straw hat and wander out alone in the warm lovely sunlight to explore the ground . 

 Daylight confirm the impression which I have feel the night before , of there be too many tree at Blackwater . the house be stifle by they . they be , for the most part , young , and plant far too thickly . I suspect there must have be a ruinous cutting down of timber all over the estate before Sir Percival 's time , and an angry anxiety on the part of the next possessor to fill up all the gap as thickly and rapidly as possible . after look about I in front of the house , I observe a flower - garden on my left hand , and walk towards it to see what I could discover in that direction . 

 on a near view the garden prove to be small and poor and ill kept . I leave it behind I , open a little gate in a ring fence , and find myself in a plantation of fir - tree . 

 a pretty wind path , artificially make , lead I on among the tree , and my north - country experience soon inform I that I be approach sandy , heathy ground . after a walk of more than half a mile , I should think , among the fir , the path take a sharp turn the tree abruptly cease to appear on either side of I , and I find myself stand suddenly on the margin of a vast open space , and look down at the Blackwater lake from which the house take its name . 

 the ground , shelve away below I , be all sand , with a few little heathy hillock to break the monotony of it in certain place . the lake itself have evidently once flow to the spot on which I stand , and have be gradually waste and dry up to less than a third of its former size . I see its still , stagnant water , a quarter of a mile away from I in the hollow , separate into pool and pond by twin reed and rush , and little knoll of earth . on the farth bank from I the tree rise thickly again , and shut out the view , and cast their black shadow on the sluggish , shallow water . as I walk down to the lake , I see that the ground on its farth side be damp and marshy , overgrow with rank grass and dismal willow . the water , which be clear enough on the open sandy side , where the sun shine , look black and poisonous opposite to I , where it lie deeply under the shade of the spongy bank , and the rank overhang thicket and tangle tree . the frog be croak , and the rat be slip in and out of the shadowy water , like live shadow themselves , as I get near to the marshy side of the lake . I see here , lie half in and half out of the water , the rotten wreck of an old overturned boat , with a sickly spot of sunlight glimmer through a gap in the tree on its dry surface , and a snake bask in the midst of the spot , fantastically coil and treacherously still . far and near the view suggest the same dreary impression of solitude and decay , and the glorious brightness of the summer sky overhead seem only to deepen and harden the gloom and barrenness of the wilderness on which it shine . I turn and retrace my step to the high heathy ground , direct they a little aside from my former path towards a shabby old wooden shed , which stand on the outer skirt of the fir plantation , and which have hitherto be too unimportant to share my notice with the wide , wild prospect of the lake . 

 on approach the shed I find that it have once be a boat - house , and that an attempt have apparently be make to convert it afterwards into a sort of rude arbour , by place inside it a firwood seat , a few stool , and a table . I enter the place , and sit down for a little while to rest and get my breath again . 

 I have not be in the boat - house more than a minute when it strike I that the sound of my own quick breathing be very strangely echo by something beneath I . I listen intently for a moment , and hear a low , thick , sob breath that seem to come from the ground under the seat which I be occupy . my nerve be not easily shake by trifle , but on this occasion I start to my foot in a fright call out receive no answer summon back my recreant courage , and look under the seat . 

 there , crouch up in the farth corner , lie the forlorn cause of my terror , in the shape of a poor little dog a black and white spaniel . the creature moan feebly when I look at it and call to it , but never stir . I move away the seat and look close . the poor little dog 's eye be glaze fast , and there be spot of blood on its glossy white side . the misery of a weak , helpless , dumb creature be surely one of the sad of all the mournful sight which this world can show . I lift the poor dog in my arm as gently as I could , and contrive a sort of make - shift hammock for he to lie in , by gather up the front of my dress all round he . in this way I take the creature , as painlessly as possible , and as fast as possible , back to the house . 

 find no one in the hall I go up at once to my own sitting - room , make a bed for the dog with one of my old shawl , and ring the bell . the large and fat of all possible house - maid answer it , in a state of cheerful stupidity which would have provoke the patience of a saint . the girl 's fat , shapeless face actually stretch into a broad grin at the sight of the wound creature on the floor . 

 " what do you see there to laugh at ? " I ask , as angrily as if she have be a servant of my own . " do you know whose dog it be ? " 

 " no , miss , that I certainly do not . " she stoop , and look down at the spaniel 's injure side brighten suddenly with the irradiation of a new idea and point to the wound with a chuckle of satisfaction , say , " that be Baxter 's doing , that be . " 

 I be so exasperate that I could have box her ear . " Baxter ? " I say . " who be the brute you call Baxter ? " 

 the girl grin again more cheerfully than ever . " bless you , miss ! Baxter 's the keeper , and when he find strange dog hunt about , he take and shoot them . it be keeper 's dooty miss , I think that dog will die . here be where he be be shoot , be not   it ? that be Baxter 's doing , that be . Baxter 's doing , miss , and Baxter 's dooty . " 

 I be almost wicked enough to wish that Baxter have shoot the housemaid instead of the dog . see that it be quite useless to expect this densely impenetrable personage to give I any help in relieve the suffering creature at our foot , I tell she to request the housekeeper 's attendance with my compliment . she go out exactly as she have come in , grin from ear to ear . as the door close on she she say to herself softly , " it be Baxter 's doing and Baxter 's dooty that be what it be . " 

 the housekeeper , a person of some education and intelligence , thoughtfully bring upstairs with she some milk and some warm water . the instant she see the dog on the floor she start and change colour . 

 " why , Lord bless I , " cry the housekeeper , " that must be Mrs. Catherick 's dog ! " 

 " Whose ? " I ask , in the utmost astonishment . 

 " Mrs. Catherick 's . you seem to know Mrs. Catherick , Miss Halcombe ? " 

 " not personally , but I have hear of she . do she live here ? have she have any news of her daughter ? " 

 " no , Miss Halcombe , she come here to ask for news . " 

 " when ? " 

 " only yesterday . she say some one have report that a stranger answer to the description of her daughter have be see in our neighbourhood . no such report have reach we here , and no such report be know in the village , when I send to make inquiry there on Mrs. Catherick 's account . she certainly bring this poor little dog with she when she come , and I see it trot out after she when she go away . I suppose the creature stray into the plantation , and get shoot . where do you find it , Miss Halcombe ? " 

 " in the old shed that look out on the lake . " 

 " ah , yes , that be the plantation side , and the poor thing drag itself , I suppose , to the near shelter , as dog will , to die . if you can moisten its lip with the milk , Miss Halcombe , I will wash the clot hair from the wound . I be very much afraid it be too late to do any good . however , we can but try . " 

 Mrs. Catherick ! the name still ring in my ear , as if the housekeeper have only that moment surprise I by utter it . while we be attend to the dog , the word of Walter Hartright 's caution to I return to my memory : " if ever Anne Catherick cross your path , make well use of the opportunity , Miss Halcombe , than I make of it . " the finding of the wound spaniel have lead I already to the discovery of Mrs. Catherick 's visit to Blackwater Park , and that event might lead in its turn , to something more . I determine to make the most of the chance which be now offer to I , and to gain as much information as I could . 

 " do you say that Mrs. Catherick live anywhere in this neighbourhood ? " I ask . 

 " oh dear , no , " say the housekeeper . " she live at Welmingham , quite at the other end of the county five - and - twenty mile off , at least . " 

 " I suppose you have know Mrs. Catherick for some year ? " 

 " on the contrary , Miss Halcombe , I never see she before she come here yesterday . I have hear of she , of course , because I have hear of Sir Percival 's kindness in put her daughter under medical care . Mrs. Catherick be rather a strange person in her manner , but extremely respectable - looking . she seem sorely put out when she find that there be no foundation none , at least , that any of we could discover for the report of her daughter have be see in this neighbourhood . " 

 " I be rather interested about Mrs. Catherick , " I go on , continue the conversation as long as possible . " I wish I have arrive here soon enough to see she yesterday . do she stay for any length of time ? " 

 " yes , " say the housekeeper , ' she stay for some time ; and I think she would have remain long , if I have not be call away to speak to a strange gentleman a gentleman who come to ask when Sir Percival be expect back . Mrs. Catherick get up and leave at once , when she hear the maid tell I what the visitor 's errand be . she say to I , at part , that there be no need to tell Sir Percival of she come here . I think that rather an odd remark to make , especially to a person in my responsible situation . " 

 I think it an odd remark too . Sir Percival have certainly lead I to believe , at Limmeridge , that the most perfect confidence exist between himself and Mrs. Catherick . if that be the case , why should she be anxious to have her visit at Blackwater Park keep a secret from he ? 

 " probably , " I say , see that the housekeeper expect I to give my opinion on Mrs. Catherick 's parting word , " probably she think the announcement of her visit might vex Sir Percival to no purpose , by remind he that her lost daughter be not find yet . do she talk much on that subject ? " 

 " very little , " reply the housekeeper . " she talk principally of Sir Percival , and ask a great many question about where he have be travel , and what sort of lady his new wife be . she seem to be more soured and put out than distressed , by fail to find any trace of her daughter in these part . ' I give she up , ' be the last word she say that I can remember ; ' I give she up , ma'am , for lost . ' and from that she pass at once to her question about Lady Glyde , want to know if she be a handsome , amiable lady , comely and healthy and young ah , dear ! I think how it would end . look , Miss Halcombe , the poor thing be out of its misery at last ! " 

 the dog be dead . it have give a faint , sob cry , it have suffer an instant 's convulsion of the limb , just as those last word , " comely and healthy and young , " drop from the housekeeper 's lip . the change have happen with startling suddenness in one moment the creature lie lifeless under our hand . 

 eight o'clock . I have just return from din downstairs , in solitary state . the sunset be burn redly on the wilderness of tree that I see from my window , and I be pore over my journal again , to calm my impatience for the return of the traveller . they ought to have arrive , by my calculation , before this . how still and lonely the house be in the drowsy evening quiet ! oh I ! how many minute more before I hear the carriage wheel and run downstairs to find myself in Laura 's arm ? 

 the poor little dog ! I wish my first day at Blackwater Park have not be associate with death , though it be only the death of a stray animal . 

 Welmingham I see , on look back through these private page of mine , that Welmingham be the name of the place where Mrs. Catherick live . her note be still in my possession , the note in answer to that letter about her unhappy daughter which Sir Percival oblige I to write . one of these day , when I can find a safe opportunity , I will take the note with I by way of introduction , and try what I can make of Mrs. Catherick at a personal interview . I do not   understand she wish to conceal her visit to this place from Sir Percival 's knowledge , and I do not   feel half so sure , as the housekeeper seem to do , that her daughter Anne be not in the neighbourhood after all . what would Walter Hartright have say in this emergency ? poor , dear Hartright ! I be begin to feel the want of his honest advice and his willing help already . 

 surely I hear something . be it a bustle of footstep below stair ? yes ! I hear the horse ' foot I hear the roll wheel 



 II 

 June 15th . the confusion of their arrival have have time to subside . two day have elapse since the return of the traveller , and that interval have suffice to put the new machinery of our life at Blackwater Park in fair working order . I may now return to my journal , with some little chance of be able to continue the entry in it as collectedly as usual . 

 I think I must begin by put down an odd remark which have suggest itself to I since Laura come back . 

 when two member of a family or two intimate friend be separate , and one go abroad and one remain at home , the return of the relative or friend who have be travel always seem to place the relative or friend who have be stay at home at a painful disadvantage when the two first meet . the sudden encounter of the new thought and new habit eagerly gain in the one case , with the old thought and old habit passively preserve in the other , seem at first to part the sympathy of the most love relative and the fond friend , and to set a sudden strangeness , unexpected by both and uncontrollable by both , between they on either side . after the first happiness of my meeting with Laura be over , after we have sit down together hand in hand to recover breath enough and calmness enough to talk , I feel this strangeness instantly , and I could see that she feel it too . it have partially wear away , now that we have fall back into most of our old habit , and it will probably disappear before long . but it have certainly have an influence over the first impression that I have form of she , now that we be live together again for which reason only I have think fit to mention it here . 

 she have find I unaltered , but I have find she change . 

 change in person , and in one respect change in character . I can not absolutely say that she be less beautiful than she use to be I can only say that she be less beautiful to I . 

 other , who do not look at she with my eye and my recollection , would probably think she improve . there be more colour and more decision and roundness of outline in her face than there use to be , and her figure seem more firmly set and more sure and easy in all its movement than it be in her maiden day . but I miss something when I look at her something that once belong to the happy , innocent life of Laura Fairlie , and that I can not find in Lady Glyde . there be in the old time a freshness , a softness , an ever - vary and yet ever - remain tenderness of beauty in her face , the charm of which it be not possible to express in word , or , as poor Hartright use often to say , in paint either . this be go . I think I see the faint reflection of it for a moment when she turn pale under the agitation of our sudden meeting on the evening of her return , but it have never reappear since . none of her letter have prepare I for a personal change in she . on the contrary , they have lead I to expect that her marriage have leave she , in appearance at least , quite unaltered . perhaps I read her letter wrongly in the past , and be now read her face wrongly in the present ? no matter ! whether her beauty have gain or whether it have lose in the last six month , the separation either way have make her own dear self more precious to I than ever , and that be one good result of her marriage , at any rate ! 

 the second change , the change that I have observe in her character , have not surprise I , because I be prepared for it in this case by the tone of her letter . now that she be at home again , I find she just as unwilling to enter into any detail on the subject of her married life as I have previously find she all through the time of our separation , when we could only communicate with each other by write . at the first approach I make to the forbidden topic she put her hand on my lip with a look and gesture which touchingly , almost painfully , recall to my memory the day of her girlhood and the happy bygone time when there be no secret between we . 

 " whenever you and I be together , marian , " she say , " we shall both be happy and easy with one another , if we accept my married life for what it be , and say and think as little about it as possible . I would tell you everything , darling , about myself , " she go on , nervously buckling and unbuckle the ribbon round my waist , " if my confidence could only end there . but they could not they would lead I into confidence about my husband too ; and now I be married , I think I have well avoid they , for his sake , and for your sake , and for mine . I do not   say that they would distress you , or distress I I would not   have you think that for the world . but I want to be so happy , now I have get you back again , and I want you to be so happy too " she break off abruptly , and look round the room , my own sitting - room , in which we be talk . " ah ! " she cry , clap her hand with a bright smile of recognition , " another old friend find already ! your book - case , Marian your dear - little - shabby - old - satin - wood book - case how glad I be you bring it with you from Limmeridge ! and the horrid heavy man 's umbrella , that you always would walk out with when it rain ! and first and foremost of all , your own dear , dark , clever , gipsy - face , look at I just as usual ! it be so like home again to be here . how can we make it more like home still ? I will put my father 's portrait in your room instead of in mine and I will keep all my little treasure from Limmeridge here and we will pass hour and hour every day with these four friendly wall round we . oh , Marian ! " she say , suddenly seat herself on a footstool at my knee , and look up earnestly in my face , " promise you will never marry , and leave I . it be selfish to say so , but you be so much well off as a single woman unless unless you be very fond of your husband but you will not   be very fond of anybody but I , will you ? " she stop again , cross my hand on my lap , and lay her face on they . " have you be write many letter , and receive many letter lately ? " she ask , in low , suddenly - alter tone . I understand what the question mean , but I think it my duty not to encourage she by meet her half way . " have you hear from he ? " she go on , coax I to forgive the more direct appeal on which she now venture , by kiss my hand , upon which her face still rest . " be he well and happy , and get on in his profession ? have he recover himself and forget I ? " 

 she should not have ask those question . she should have remember her own resolution , on the morning when Sir Percival hold she to her marriage engagement , and when she resign the book of Hartright 's drawing into my hand for ever . but , ah I ! where be the faultless human creature who can persevere in a good resolution , without sometimes fail and fall back ? where be the woman who have ever really tear from her heart the image that have be once fix in it by a true love ? book tell we that such unearthly creature have exist but what do our own experience say in answer to book ? 

 I make no attempt to remonstrate with she : perhaps , because I sincerely appreciate the fearless candour which let I see , what other woman in her position might have have reason for conceal even from their dear friend perhaps , because I feel , in my own heart and conscience , that in her place I should have ask the same question and have the same thought . all I could honestly do be to reply that I have not write to he or hear from he lately , and then to turn the conversation to less dangerous topic . 

 there have be much to sadden I in our interview my first confidential interview with she since her return . the change which her marriage have produce in our relation towards each other , by place a forbidden subject between we , for the first time in our life ; the melancholy conviction of the dearth of all warmth of feeling , of all close sympathy , between her husband and herself , which her own unwilling word now force on my mind ; the distressing discovery that the influence of that ill - fated attachment still remain   no matter how innocently , how harmlessly   root as deeply as ever in her heart all these be disclosure to sadden any woman who love she as dearly , and feel for she as acutely , as I do . 

 there be only one consolation to set against they a consolation that ought to comfort I , and that do comfort I . all the grace and gentleness of her character all the frank affection of her nature all the sweet , simple , womanly charm which use to make she the darling and delight of every one who approach she , have come back to I with herself . of my other impression I be sometimes a little inclined to doubt . of this last , good , happy of all impression , I grow more and more certain every hour in the day . 

 let I turn , now , from she to her travel companion . her husband must engage my attention first . what have I observe in Sir Percival , since his return , to improve my opinion of he ? 

 I can hardly say . small vexation and annoyance seem to have beset he since he come back , and no man , under those circumstance , be ever present at his good . he look , as I think , thin than he be when he leave England . his wearisome cough and his comfortless restlessness have certainly increase . his manner at least his manner towards I be much more abrupt than it use to be . he greet I , on the evening of his return , with little or nothing of the ceremony and civility of former time no polite speech of welcome no appearance of extraordinary gratification at see I nothing but a short shake of the hand , and a sharp " how - d'ye - do , Miss Halcombe glad to see you again . " he seem to accept I as one of the necessary fixture of Blackwater Park , to be satisfied at find I establish in my proper place , and then to pass I over altogether . 

 Most man show something of their disposition in their own house , which they have conceal elsewhere , and Sir Percival have already display a mania for order and regularity , which be quite a new revelation of he , so far as my previous knowledge of his character be concern . if I take a book from the library and leave it on the table , he follow I and put it back again . if I rise from a chair , and let it remain where I have be sit , he carefully restore it to its proper place against the wall . he pick up stray flower - blossom from the carpet , and mutter to himself as discontentedly as if they be hot cinder burn hole in it , and he storm at the servant if there be a crease in the tablecloth , or a knife miss from its place at the dinner - table , as fiercely as if they have personally insult he . 

 I have already refer to the small annoyance which appear to have trouble he since his return . much of the alteration for the bad which I have notice in he may be due to these . I try to persuade myself that it be so , because I be anxious not to be dishearten already about the future . it be certainly try to any man 's temper to be meet by a vexation the moment he set foot in his own house again , after a long absence , and this annoying circumstance do really happen to Sir Percival in my presence . 

 on the evening of their arrival the housekeeper follow I into the hall to receive her master and mistress and their guest . the instant he see she , Sir Percival ask if any one have call lately . the housekeeper mention to he , in reply , what she have previously mention to I , the visit of the strange gentleman to make inquiry about the time of her master 's return . he ask immediately for the gentleman 's name . no name have be leave . the gentleman 's business ? no business have be mention . what be the gentleman like ? the housekeeper try to describe he , but fail to distinguish the nameless visitor by any personal peculiarity which her master could recognise . Sir Percival frown , stamp angrily on the floor , and walk on into the house , take no notice of anybody . why he should have be so discompose by a trifle I can not say but he be seriously discompose , beyond all doubt . 

 upon the whole , it will be good , perhaps , if I abstain from form a decisive opinion of his manner , language , and conduct in his own house , until time have enable he to shake off the anxiety , whatever they may be , which now evidently trouble his mind in secret . I will turn over to a new page , and my pen shall let Laura 's husband alone for the present . 

 the two guest the Count and Countess Fosco come next in my catalogue . I will dispose of the Countess first , so as to have do with the woman as soon as possible . 

 Laura be certainly not chargeable with any exaggeration , in write I word that I should hardly recognise her aunt again when we meet . never before have I behold such a change produce in a woman by her marriage as have be produce in Madame Fosco . 

 as Eleanor Fairlie   aged seven - and - thirty , she be always talk pretentious nonsense , and always worry the unfortunate man with every small exaction which a vain and foolish woman can impose on long - suffer male humanity . as Madame Fosco   age three - and - forty , she sit for hour together without say a word , freeze up in the strange manner in herself . the hideously ridiculous love - lock which use to hang on either side of her face be now replace by stiff little row of very short curl , of the sort one see in old - fashioned wig . a plain , matronly cap cover her head , and make she look , for the first time in her life since I remember she , like a decent woman . nobody   put her husband out of the question , of course   now see in she , what everybody once see I mean the structure of the female skeleton , in the upper region of the collar - bone and the shoulder - blade . clothe in quiet black or grey gown , make high round the throat dress that she would have laugh at , or scream at , as the whim of the moment incline she , in her maiden day she sit speechless in corner ; her dry white hand   so dry that the pore of her skin look chalky   incessantly engage , either in monotonous embroidery work or in roll up endless cigarette for the Count 's own particular smoking . on the few occasion when her cold blue eye be off her work , they be generally turn on her husband , with the look of mute submissive inquiry which we be all familiar with in the eye of a faithful dog . the only approach to an inward thaw which I have yet detect under her outer covering of icy constraint , have betray itself , once or twice , in the form of a suppress tigerish jealousy of any woman in the house   the maid include   to whom the Count speak , or on whom he look with anything approach to special interest or attention . except in this one particular , she be always , morning , noon , and night , indoor and out , fair weather or foul , as cold as a statue , and as impenetrable as the stone out of which it be cut . for the common purpose of society the extraordinary change thus produce in she be , beyond all doubt , a change for the well , see that it have transform she into a civil , silent , unobtrusive woman , who be never in the way . how far she be really reform or deteriorate in her secret self , be another question . I have once or twice see sudden change of expression on her pinched lip , and hear sudden inflexion of tone in her calm voice , which have lead I to suspect that her present state of suppression may have seal up something dangerous in her nature , which use to evaporate harmlessly in the freedom of her former life . it be quite possible that I may be altogether wrong in this idea . my own impression , however , be , that I be right . time will show . 

 and the magician who have work this wonderful transformation the foreign husband who have tame this once wayward english woman till her own relation hardly know she again the count himself ? what of the Count ? 

 this in two word : he look like a man who could tame anything . if he have marry a tigress , instead of a woman , he would have tame the tigress . if he have marry I , I should have make his cigarette , as his wife do I should have hold my tongue when he look at I , as she hold her . 

 I be almost afraid to confess it , even to these secret page . the man have interest I , have attract I , have force I to like he . in two short day he have make his way straight into my favourable estimation , and how he have work the miracle be more than I can tell . 

 it absolutely startle I , now he be in my mind , to find how plainly I see he ! how much more plainly than I see Sir Percival , or Mr. Fairlie , or Walter Hartright , or any other absent person of whom I think , with the one exception of Laura herself ! I can hear his voice , as if he be speak at this moment . I know what his conversation be yesterday , as well as if I be hear it now . how be I to describe he ? there be peculiarity in his personal appearance , his habit , and his amusement , which I should blame in the bold term , or ridicule in the most merciless manner , if I have see they in another man . what be it that make I unable to blame they , or to ridicule they in HIM ? 

 for example , he be immensely fat . before this time I have always especially dislike corpulent humanity . I have always maintain that the popular notion of connect excessive grossness of size and excessive good - humour as inseparable ally be equivalent to declare , either that no people but amiable people ever get fat , or that the accidental addition of so many pound of flesh have a directly favourable influence over the disposition of the person on whose body they accumulate . I have invariably combat both these absurd assertion by quote example of fat people who be as mean , vicious , and cruel as the leanest and the bad of their neighbour . I have ask whether Henry the Eighth be an amiable character ? whether Pope Alexander the Sixth be a good man ? whether Mr. Murderer and Mrs. Murderess Manning be not both unusually stout people ? whether hire nurse , proverbially as cruel a set of woman as be to be find in all England , be not , for the most part , also as fat a set of woman as be to be find in all England ? and so on , through dozen of other example , modern and ancient , native and foreign , high and low . hold these strong opinion on the subject with might and main as I do at this moment , here , nevertheless , be Count Fosco , as fat as Henry the Eighth himself , establish in my favour , at one day 's notice , without let or hindrance from his own odious corpulence . marvellous indeed ! 

 be it his face that have recommend he ? 

 it may be his face . he be a most remarkable likeness , on a large scale , of the great Napoleon . his feature have Napoleon 's magnificent regularity his expression recall the grandly calm , immovable power of the Great soldier 's face . this striking resemblance certainly impress I , to begin with ; but there be something in he besides the resemblance , which have impress I more . I think the influence I be now try to find be in his eye . they be the most unfathomable grey eye I ever see , and they have at time a cold , clear , beautiful , irresistible glitter in they which force I to look at he , and yet cause I sensation , when I do look , which I would rather not feel . other part of his face and head have their strange peculiarity . his complexion , for instance , have a singular sallow - fairness , so much at variance with the dark - brown colour of his hair , that I suspect the hair of be a wig , and his face , closely shaven all over , be smooth and free from all mark and wrinkle than mine , though   accord to Sir Percival 's account of he   he be close on sixty year of age . but these be not the prominent personal characteristic which distinguish he , to my mind , from all the other man I have ever see . the marked peculiarity which single he out from the rank and file of humanity lie entirely , so far as I can tell at present , in the extraordinary expression and extraordinary power of his eye . 

 his manner and his command of our language may also have assist he , in some degree , to establish himself in my good opinion . he have that quiet deference , that look of pleased , attentive interest in listen to a woman , and that secret gentleness in his voice in speak to a woman , which , say what we may , we can none of we resist . here , too , his unusual command of the english language necessarily help he . I have often hear of the extraordinary aptitude which many Italians show in master our strong , hard , northern speech ; but , until I see Count Fosco , I have never suppose it possible that any foreigner could have speak English as he speak it . there be time when it be almost impossible to detect , by his accent that he be not a countryman of our own , and as for fluency , there be very few bear englishman who can talk with as few stoppage and repetition as the Count . he may construct his sentence more or less in the foreign way , but I have never yet hear he use a wrong expression , or hesitate for a moment in his choice of a word . 

 all the small characteristic of this strange man have something strikingly original and perplexingly contradictory in they . fat as he be and old as he be , his movement be astonishingly light and easy . he be as noiseless in a room as any of we woman , and more than that , with all his look of unmistakable mental firmness and power , he be as nervously sensitive as the weak of we . he start at chance noise as inveterately as Laura herself . he wince and shudder yesterday , when Sir Percival beat one of the spaniel , so that I feel ashamed of my own want of tenderness and sensibility by comparison with the Count . 

 the relation of this last incident remind I of one of his most curious peculiarity , which I have not yet mention his extraordinary fondness for pet animal . 

 some of these he have leave on the continent , but he have bring with he to this house a cockatoo , two canary - bird , and a whole family of white mouse . he attend to all the necessity of these strange favourite himself , and he have teach the creature to be surprisingly fond of he and familiar with he . the cockatoo , a most vicious and treacherous bird towards every one else , absolutely seem to love he . when he let it out of its cage , it hop on to his knee , and claw its way up his great big body , and rub its top - knot against his sallow double chin in the most caressing manner imaginable . he have only to set the door of the canary ' cage open , and to call they , and the pretty little cleverly train creature perch fearlessly on his hand , mount his fat outstretche finger one by one , when he tell they to " go upstairs , " and sing together as if they would burst their throat with delight when they get to the top finger . his white mouse live in a little pagoda of gaily - paint wirework , design and make by himself . they be almost as tame as the canary , and they be perpetually let out like the canary . they crawl all over he , pop in and out of his waistcoat , and sit in couple , white as snow , on his capacious shoulder . he seem to be even fonder of his mouse than of his other pet , smile at they , and kiss they , and call they by all sort of endear name . if it be possible to suppose an Englishman with any taste for such childish interest and amusement as these , that Englishman would certainly feel rather ashamed of they , and would be anxious to apologise for they , in the company of grow - up people . but the Count , apparently , see nothing ridiculous in the amazing contrast between his colossal self and his frail little pet . he would blandly kiss his white mouse and twitter to his canary - bird amid an assembly of english fox - hunter , and would only pity they as barbarian when they be all laugh their loud at he . 

 it seem hardly credible while I be write it down , but it be certainly true , that this same man , who have all the fondness of an old maid for his cockatoo , and all the small dexterity of an organ - boy in manage his white mouse , can talk , when anything happen to rouse he , with a daring independence of thought , a knowledge of book in every language , and an experience of society in half the capital of Europe , which would make he the prominent personage of any assembly in the civilised world . this trainer of canary - bird , this architect of a pagoda for white mouse , be   as Sir Percival himself have tell I   one of the first experimental chemist live , and have discover , among other wonderful invention , a means of petrify the body after death , so as to preserve it , as hard as marble , to the end of time . this fat , indolent , elderly man , whose nerve be so finely string that he start at chance noise , and wince when he see a house - spaniel get a whipping , go into the stable - yard on the morning after his arrival , and put his hand on the head of a chain bloodhound a beast so savage that the very groom who feed he keep out of his reach . his wife and I be present , and I shall not forget the scene that follow , short as it be . 

 " mind that dog , sir , " say the groom ; " he fly at everybody ! " " he do that , my friend , " reply the Count quietly , " because everybody be afraid of he . let we see if he fly at I . " and he lay his plump , yellow - white finger , on which the canary - bird have be perch ten minute before , upon the formidable brute 's head , and look he straight in the eye . " you big dog be all coward , " he say , address the animal contemptuously , with his face and the dog 's within an inch of each other . " you would kill a poor cat , you infernal coward . you would fly at a starve beggar , you infernal coward . anything that you can surprise unawares anything that be afraid of your big body , and your wicked white tooth , and your slobbering , bloodthirsty mouth , be the thing you like to fly at . you could throttle I at this moment , you mean , miserable bully , and you dare not   so much as look I in the face , because I be not afraid of you . will you think well of it , and try your tooth in my fat neck ? bah ! not you ! " he turn away , laugh at the astonishment of the man in the yard , and the dog creep back meekly to his kennel . " ah ! my nice waistcoat ! " he say pathetically . " I be sorry I come here . some of that brute 's slobber have get on my pretty clean waistcoat . " those word express another of his incomprehensible oddity . he be as fond of fine clothe as the veri fool in existence , and have appear in four magnificent waistcoat already all of light garish colour , and all immensely large even for he in the two day of his residence at Blackwater Park . 

 his tact and cleverness in small thing be quite as noticeable as the singular inconsistency in his character , and the childish triviality of his ordinary taste and pursuit . 

 I can see already that he mean to live on excellent term with all of we during the period of his sojourn in this place . he have evidently discover that Laura secretly dislike he   she confess as much to I when I press she on the subject   but he have also find out that she be extravagantly fond of flower . whenever she want a nosegay he have get one to give she , gather and arrange by himself , and greatly to my amusement , he be always cunningly provide with a duplicate , compose of exactly the same flower , group in exactly the same way , to appease his icily jealous wife before she can so much as think herself aggrieve . his management of the Countess   in public   be a sight to see . he bow to she , he habitually address she as " my angel , " he carry his canary to pay she little visit on his finger and to sing to she , he kiss her hand when she give he his cigarette ; he present she with sugar - plum in return , which he put into her mouth playfully , from a box in his pocket . the rod of iron with which he rule she never appear in company it be a private rod , and be always keep upstairs . 

 his method of recommend himself to I be entirely different . he flatter my vanity by talk to I as seriously and sensibly as if I be a man . yes ! I can find he out when I be away from he I know he flatter my vanity , when I think of he up here in my own room and yet , when I go downstairs , and get into his company again , he will blind I again , and I shall be flatter again , just as if I have never find he out at all ! he can manage I as he manage his wife and Laura , as he manage the bloodhound in the stable - yard , as he manage Sir Percival himself , every hour in the day . " my good Percival ! how I like your rough english humour ! " " my good Percival ! how I enjoy your solid english sense ! " he put the rude remark Sir Percival can make on his effeminate taste and amusement quietly away from he in that manner always call the baronet by his christian name , smile at he with the calm superiority , pat he on the shoulder , and bear with he benignantly , as a good - humour father bear with a wayward son . 

 the interest which I really can not help feel in this strangely original man have lead I to question Sir Percival about his past life . 

 Sir Percival either know little , or will tell I little , about it . he and the Count first meet many year ago , at Rome , under the dangerous circumstance to which I have allude elsewhere . since that time they have be perpetually together in London , in Paris , and in Vienna but never in Italy again ; the Count have , oddly enough , not cross the frontier of his native country for year past . perhaps he have be make the victim of some political persecution ? at all event , he seem to be patriotically anxious not to lose sight of any of his own countryman who may happen to be in England . on the evening of his arrival he ask how far we be from the near town , and whether we know of any italian gentleman who might happen to be settle there . he be certainly in correspondence with people on the continent , for his letter have all sort of odd stamp on they , and I see one for he this morning , wait in his place at the breakfast - table , with a huge , official - look seal on it . perhaps he be in correspondence with his government ? and yet , that be hardly to be reconcile either with my other idea that he may be a political exile . 

 how much I seem to have write about Count Fosco ! and what do it all amount to ? as poor , dear Mr. Gilmore would ask , in his impenetrable business - like way I can only repeat that I do assuredly feel , even on this short acquaintance , a strange , half - willing , half - unwilling liking for the Count . he seem to have establish over I the same sort of ascendency which he have evidently gain over Sir Percival . free , and even rude , as he may occasionally be in his manner towards his fat friend , Sir Percival be nevertheless afraid , as I can plainly see , of give any serious offence to the Count . I wonder whether I be afraid too ? I certainly never see a man , in all my experience , whom I should be so sorry to have for an enemy . be this because I like he , or because I be afraid of he ? Chi sa ? as Count Fosco might say in his own language . who know ? 


 June 16th . something to chronicle to - day besides my own idea and impression . a visitor have arrive quite unknown to Laura and to I , and apparently quite unexpected by Sir Percival . 

 we be all at lunch , in the room with the new french window that open into the verandah , and the Count   who devour pastry as I have never yet see it devour by any human being but girl at boarding - school   have just amuse we by ask gravely for his fourth tart when the servant enter to announce the visitor . 

 " Mr. Merriman have just come , Sir Percival , and wish to see you immediately . " 

 Sir Percival start , and look at the man with an expression of angry alarm . 

 " Mr. Merriman ! " he repeat , as if he think his own ear must have deceive he . 

 " yes , Sir Percival Mr. Merriman , from London . " 

 " where be he ? " 

 " in the library , Sir Percival . " 

 he leave the table the instant the last answer be give , and hurry out of the room without say a word to any of we . 

 " who be Mr. Merriman ? " ask Laura , appeal to I . 

 " I have not the least idea , " be all I could say in reply . 

 the Count have finish his fourth tart , and have go to a side - table to look after his vicious cockatoo . he turn round to we with the bird perch on his shoulder . 

 " Mr. Merriman be Sir Percival 's solicitor , " he say quietly . 

 Sir Percival 's solicitor . it be a perfectly straightforward answer to Laura 's question , and yet , under the circumstance , it be not satisfactory . if Mr. Merriman have be specially send for by his client , there would have be nothing very wonderful in his leave town to obey the summon . but when a lawyer travel from London to Hampshire without be send for , and when his arrival at a gentleman 's house seriously startle the gentleman himself , it may be safely take for grant that the legal visitor be the bearer of some very important and very unexpected news news which may be either very good or very bad , but which can not , in either case , be of the common everyday kind . 

 Laura and I sit silent at the table for a quarter of an hour or more , wonder uneasily what have happen , and wait for the chance of Sir Percival 's speedy return . there be no sign of his return , and we rise to leave the room . 

 the Count , attentive as usual , advanced from the corner in which he have be feed his cockatoo , with the bird still perch on his shoulder , and open the door for we . Laura and Madame Fosco go out first . just as I be on the point of follow they he make a sign with his hand , and speak to I , before I pass he , in the oddest manner . 

 " yes , " he say , quietly answer the unexpressed idea at that moment in my mind , as if I have plainly confide it to he in so many word " yes , Miss Halcombe , something have happen . " 

 I be on the point of answering , " I never say so , " but the vicious cockatoo ruffle his clipped wing and give a screech that set all my nerve on edge in an instant , and make I only too glad to get out of the room . 

 I join Laura at the foot of the stair . the thought in her mind be the same as the thought in mine , which Count Fosco have surprise , and when she speak her word be almost the echo of his . she , too , say to I secretly that she be afraid something have happen . 



 III 

 June 16th . I have a few line more to add to this day 's entry before I go to bed to - night . 

 about two hour after Sir Percival rise from the luncheon - table to receive his solicitor , Mr. Merriman , in the library , I leave my room alone to take a walk in the plantation . just as I be at the end of the landing the library door open and the two gentleman come out . think it well not to disturb they by appear on the stair , I resolve to defer go down till they have cross the hall . although they speak to each other in guarded tone , their word be pronounce with sufficient distinctness of utterance to reach my ear . 

 " make your mind easy , Sir Percival , " I hear the lawyer say ; " it all rest with Lady Glyde . " 

 I have turn to go back to my own room for a minute or two , but the sound of Laura 's name on the lip of a stranger stop I instantly . I daresay it be very wrong and very discreditable to listen , but where be the woman , in the whole range of our sex , who can regulate her action by the abstract principle of honour , when those principle point one way , and when her affection , and the interest which grow out of they , point the other ? 

 I listen and under similar circumstance I would listen again yes ! with my ear at the keyhole , if I could not possibly manage it in any other way . 

 " you quite understand , Sir Percival , " the lawyer go on . " Lady Glyde be to sign her name in the presence of a witness or of two witness , if you wish to be particularly careful and be then to put her finger on the seal and say , ' I deliver this as my act and deed . ' if that be do in a week 's time the arrangement will be perfectly successful , and the anxiety will be all over . if not " 

 " what do you mean by ' if not ' ? " ask Sir Percival angrily . " if the thing must be do it shall be do . I promise you that , Merriman . " 

 " just so , Sir Percival just so ; but there be two alternative in all transaction , and we lawyer like to look both of they in the face boldly . if through any extraordinary circumstance the arrangement should not be make , I think I may be able to get the party to accept bill at three month . but how the money be to be raise when the bill fall due " 

 " Damn the bill ! the money be only to be get in one way , and in that way , I tell you again , it shall be get . take a glass of wine , Merriman , before you go . " 

 " much oblige , Sir Percival , I have not a moment to lose if I be to catch the up - train . you will let I know as soon as the arrangement be complete ? and you will not forget the caution I recommend " 

 " of course I will not . there be the dog - cart at the door for you . my groom will get you to the station in no time . Benjamin , drive like mad ! jump in . if Mr. Merriman miss the train you lose your place . hold fast , Merriman , and if you be upset trust to the devil to save his own . " with that parting benediction the baronet turn about and walk back to the library . 

 I have not hear much , but the little that have reach my ear be enough to make I feel uneasy . the ' something " that " have happen " be but too plainly a serious money embarrassment , and Sir Percival 's relief from it depend upon Laura . the prospect of see she involve in her husband 's secret difficulty fill I with dismay , exaggerated , no doubt , by my ignorance of business and my settled distrust of Sir Percival . instead of go out , as I propose , I go back immediately to Laura 's room to tell she what I have hear . 

 she receive my bad news so composedly as to surprise I . she evidently know more of her husband 's character and her husband 's embarrassment than I have suspect up to this time . 

 " I fear as much , " she say , " when I hear of that strange gentleman who call , and decline to leave his name . " 

 " who do you think the gentleman be , then ? " I ask . 

 " some person who have heavy claim on Sir Percival , " she answer , " and who have be the cause of Mr. Merriman 's visit here to - day . " 

 " do you know anything about those claim ? " 

 " no , I know no particular . " 

 " you will sign nothing , Laura , without first look at it ? " 

 " certainly not , Marian . whatever I can harmlessly and honestly do to help he I will do for the sake of make your life and mine , love , as easy and as happy as possible . but I will do nothing ignorantly , which we might , one day , have reason to feel ashamed of . let we say no more about it now . you have get your hat on suppose we go and dream away the afternoon in the ground ? " 

 on leave the house we direct our step to the near shade . 

 as we pass an open space among the tree in front of the house , there be Count Fosco , slowly walk backwards and forwards on the grass , sun himself in the full blaze of the hot June afternoon . he have a broad straw hat on , with a violet - colour ribbon round it . a blue blouse , with profuse white fancy - work over the bosom , cover his prodigious body , and be gird about the place where his waist might once have be with a broad scarlet leather belt . nankeen trouser , display more white fancy - work over the ankle , and purple morocco slipper , adorn his low extremity . he be sing Figaro 's famous song in the Barber of Seville , with that crisply fluent vocalisation which be never hear from any other than an italian throat , accompany himself on the concertina , which he play with ecstatic throwing - up of his arm , and graceful twisting and turning of his head , like a fat St. Cecilia masquerade in male attire . " figaro qua ! figaro la ! Figaro su ! Figaro giu ! " sing the Count , jauntily toss up the concertina at arm 's length , and bow to we , on one side of the instrument , with the airy grace and elegance of Figaro himself at twenty year of age . 

 " take my word for it , Laura , that man know something of Sir Percival 's embarrassment , " I say , as we return the Count 's salutation from a safe distance . 

 " what make you think that ? " she ask . 

 " how should he have know , otherwise , that Mr. Merriman be Sir Percival 's solicitor ? " I rejoin . " besides , when I follow you out of the luncheon - room , he tell I , without a single word of inquiry on my part , that something have happen . depend upon it , he know more than we do . " 

 " do not   ask he any question if he do . do not   take he into our confidence ! " 

 " you seem to dislike he , Laura , in a very determined manner . what have he say or do to justify you ? " 

 " nothing , Marian . on the contrary , he be all kindness and attention on our journey home , and he several time check Sir Percival 's outbreak of temper , in the most considerate manner towards I . perhaps I dislike he because he have so much more power over my husband than I have . perhaps it hurt my pride to be under any obligation to his interference . all I know be , that I do dislike he . " 

 the rest of the day and evening pass quietly enough . the Count and I play at chess . for the first two game he politely allow I to conquer he , and then , when he see that I have find he out , beg my pardon , and at the third game checkmate I in ten minute . Sir Percival never once refer , all through the evening , to the lawyer 's visit . but either that event , or something else , have produce a singular alteration for the well in he . he be as polite and agreeable to all of we , as he use to be in the day of his probation at Limmeridge , and he be so amazingly attentive and kind to his wife , that even icy Madame Fosco be rouse into look at he with a grave surprise . what do this mean ? I think I can guess I be afraid Laura can guess and I be sure Count Fosco know . I catch Sir Percival look at he for approval more than once in the course of the evening . 


 June 17th . a day of event . I most fervently hope I may not have to add , a day of disaster as well . 

 Sir Percival be as silent at breakfast as he have be the evening before , on the subject of the mysterious " arrangement "   as the lawyer call it   which be hang over our head . an hour afterwards , however , he suddenly enter the morning - room , where his wife and I be wait , with our hat on , for Madame Fosco to join we , and inquire for the Count . 

 " we expect to see he here directly , " I say . 

 " the fact be , " Sir Percival go on , walk nervously about the room , " I want Fosco and his wife in the library , for a mere business formality , and I want you there , Laura , for a minute too . " he stop , and appear to notice , for the first time , that we be in our walking costume . " have you just come in ? " he ask , " or be you just go out ? " 

 " we be all think of go to the lake this morning , " say Laura . " but if you have any other arrangement to propose " 

 " no , no , " he answer hastily . " my arrangement can wait . after lunch will do as well for it as after breakfast . all go to the lake , eh ? a good idea . let us have an idle morning I will be one of the party . " 

 there be no mistake his manner , even if it have be possible to mistake the uncharacteristic readiness which his word express , to submit his own plan and project to the convenience of other . he be evidently relieve at find any excuse for delay the business formality in the library , to which his own word have refer . my heart sink within I as I draw the inevitable inference . 

 the Count and his wife join we at that moment . the lady have her husband 's embroider tobacco - pouch , and her store of paper in her hand , for the manufacture of the eternal cigarette . the gentleman , dress , as usual , in his blouse and straw hat , carry the gay little pagoda - cage , with his darle white mouse in it , and smile on they , and on we , with a bland amiability which it be impossible to resist . 

 " with your kind permission , " say the Count , " I will take my small family here my poor - little - harmless - pretty - Mouseys , out for an airing along with we . there be dog about the house , and shall I leave my forlorn white child at the mercy of the dog ? ah , never ! " 

 he chirrup paternally at his small white child through the bar of the pagoda , and we all leave the house for the lake . 

 in the plantation Sir Percival stray away from we . it seem to be part of his restless disposition always to separate himself from his companion on these occasion , and always to occupy himself when he be alone in cut new walking - stick for his own use . the mere act of cut and lop at hazard appear to please he . he have fill the house with walking - stick of his own making , not one of which he ever take up for a second time . when they have be once use his interest in they be all exhaust , and he think of nothing but go on and make more . 

 at the old boat - house he join we again . I will put down the conversation that ensue when we be all settle in our place exactly as it pass . it be an important conversation , so far as I be concern , for it have seriously dispose I to distrust the influence which Count Fosco have exercise over my thought and feeling , and to resist it for the future as resolutely as I can . 

 the boat - house be large enough to hold we all , but Sir Percival remain outside trim the last new stick with his pocket - axe . we three woman find plenty of room on the large seat . Laura take her work , and Madame Fosco begin her cigarette . I , as usual , have nothing to do . my hand always be , and always will be , as awkward as a man 's . the Count good - humouredly take a stool many size too small for he , and balance himself on it with his back against the side of the shed , which creak and groan under his weight . he put the pagoda - cage on his lap , and let out the mouse to crawl over he as usual . they be pretty , innocent - looking little creature , but the sight of they creep about a man 's body be for some reason not pleasant to I . it excite a strange responsive creeping in my own nerve , and suggest hideous idea of man die in prison with the crawl creature of the dungeon preying on they undisturbed . 

 the morning be windy and cloudy , and the rapid alternation of shadow and sunlight over the waste of the lake make the view look doubly wild , weird , and gloomy . 

 " some people call that picturesque , " say Sir Percival , point over the wide prospect with his half - finish walking - stick . " I call it a blot on a gentleman 's property . in my great - grandfather 's time the lake flow to this place . look at it now ! it be not four foot deep anywhere , and it be all puddle and pool . I wish I could afford to drain it , and plant it all over . my bailiff   a superstitious idiot   say he be quite sure the lake have a curse on it , like the Dead Sea . what do you think , Fosco ? it look just the place for a murder , do not   it ? " 

 " my good Percival , " remonstrate the Count . " what be your solid english sense think of ? the water be too shallow to hide the body , and there be sand everywhere to print off the murderer 's footstep . it be , upon the whole , the very bad place for a murder that I ever set my eye on . " 

 " Humbug ! " say Sir Percival , cut away fiercely at his stick . " you know what I mean . the dreary scenery , the lonely situation . if you choose to understand I , you can if you do not   choose , I be not go to trouble myself to explain my meaning . " 

 " and why not , " ask the Count , " when your meaning can be explain by anybody in two word ? if a fool be go to commit a murder , your lake be the first place he would choose for it . if a wise man be go to commit a murder , your lake be the last place he would choose for it . be that your meaning ? if it be , there be your explanation for you ready make . take it , Percival , with your good Fosco 's blessing . " 

 Laura look at the Count with her dislike for he appear a little too plainly in her face . he be so busy with his mouse that he do not notice she . 

 " I be sorry to hear the lake - view connect with anything so horrible as the idea of murder , " she say . " and if Count Fosco must divide murderer into class , I think he have be very unfortunate in his choice of expression . to describe they as fool only seem like treat they with an indulgence to which they have no claim . and to describe they as wise man sound to I like a downright contradiction in term . I have always hear that truly wise man be truly good man , and have a horror of crime . " 

 " my dear lady , " say the Count , " those be admirable sentiment , and I have see they state at the top of copy - book . " he lift one of the white mouse in the palm of his hand , and speak to it in his whimsical way . " my pretty little smooth white rascal , " he say , " here be a moral lesson for you . a truly wise mouse be a truly good mouse . Mention that , if you please , to your companion , and never gnaw at the bar of your cage again as long as you live . " 

 " it be easy to turn everything into ridicule , " say Laura resolutely ; " but you will not find it quite so easy , Count Fosco , to give I an instance of a wise man who have be a great criminal . " 

 the Count shrug his huge shoulder , and smile on Laura in the friendly manner . 

 " most true ! " he say . " the fool 's crime be the crime that be find out , and the wise man 's crime be the crime that be not find out . if I could give you an instance , it would not be the instance of a wise man . Dear Lady Glyde , your sound english common sense have be too much for I . it be checkmate for I this time , Miss Halcombe ha ? " 

 " stand to your gun , Laura , " sneered Sir Percival , who have be listen in his place at the door . " tell he next , that crime cause their own detection . there be another bit of copy - book morality for you , Fosco . crime cause their own detection . what infernal humbug ! " 

 " I believe it to be true , " say Laura quietly . 

 Sir Percival burst out laugh , so violently , so outrageously , that he quite startle we all the count more than any of we . 

 " I believe it too , " I say , come to Laura 's rescue . 

 Sir Percival , who have be unaccountably amuse at his wife 's remark , be just as unaccountably irritate by mine . he strike the new stick savagely on the sand , and walk away from we . 

 " poor dear Percival ! " cry Count Fosco , look after he gaily , " he be the victim of English spleen . but , my dear Miss Halcombe , my dear Lady Glyde , do you really believe that crime cause their own detection ? and you , my angel , " he continue , turn to his wife , who have not utter a word yet , " do you think so too ? " 

 " I wait to be instruct , " reply the Countess , in tone of freeze reproof , intend for Laura and I , " before I venture on give my opinion in the presence of well - inform man . " 

 " do you , indeed ? " I say . " I remember the time , Countess , when you advocate the Rights of Women , and freedom of female opinion be one of they . " 

 " what be your view of the subject , Count ? " ask Madame Fosco , calmly proceed with her cigarette , and not take the least notice of I . 

 the Count stroke one of his white mouse reflectively with his chubby little finger before he answer . 

 " it be truly wonderful , " he say , " how easily Society can console itself for the bad of its shortcoming with a little bit of clap - trap . the machinery it have set up for the detection of crime be miserably ineffective and yet only invent a moral epigram , say that it work well , and you blind everybody to its blunder from that moment . crime cause their own detection , do they ? and murder will out   another moral epigram , will it ? ask Coroners who sit at inquest in large town if that be true , Lady Glyde . ask secretary of life - assurance company if that be true , Miss Halcombe . read your own public journal . in the few case that get into the newspaper , be there not instance of slain body find , and no murderer ever discover ? Multiply the case that be report by the case that be not report , and the body that be find by the body that be not find , and what conclusion do you come to ? this . that there be foolish criminal who be discover , and wise criminal who escape . the hiding of a crime , or the detection of a crime , what be it ? a trial of skill between the police on one side , and the individual on the other . when the criminal be a brutal , ignorant fool , the police in nine case out of ten win . when the criminal be a resolute , educate , highly - intelligent man , the police in nine case out of ten lose . if the police win , you generally hear all about it . if the police lose , you generally hear nothing . and on this tottering foundation you build up your comfortable moral maxim that Crime cause its own detection ! yes all the crime you know of . and what of the rest ? " 

 " devilish true , and very well put , " cry a voice at the entrance of the boat - house . Sir Percival have recover his equanimity , and have come back while we be listen to the Count . 

 " some of it may be true , " I say , " and all of it may be very well put . but I do not   see why Count Fosco should celebrate the victory of the criminal over Society with so much exultation , or why you , Sir Percival , should applaud he so loudly for do it . " 

 " do you hear that , Fosco ? " ask Sir Percival . " take my advice , and make your peace with your audience . tell they virtue 's a fine thing they like that , I can promise you . " 

 the Count laugh inwardly and silently , and two of the white mouse in his waistcoat , alarm by the internal convulsion go on beneath they , dart out in a violent hurry , and scramble into their cage again . 

 " the lady , my good Percival , shall tell I about virtue , " he say . " they be well authority than I be , for they know what virtue be , and I do not . " 

 " you hear he ? " say Sir Percival . " be not   it awful ? " 

 " it be true , " say the Count quietly . " I be a citizen of the world , and I have meet , in my time , with so many different sort of virtue , that I be puzzle , in my old age , to say which be the right sort and which be the wrong . here , in England , there be one virtue . and there , in China , there be another virtue . and John Englishman say my virtue be the genuine virtue . and John Chinaman say my virtue be the genuine virtue . and I say yes to one , or no to the other , and be just as much bewilder about it in the case of John with the top - boot as I be in the case of John with the pigtail . ah , nice little Mousey ! come , kiss I . what be your own private notion of a virtuous man , my pret - pret - pretty ? a man who keep you warm , and give you plenty to eat . and a good notion , too , for it be intelligible , at the least . " 

 " stay a minute , Count , " I interpose . " accept your illustration , surely we have one unquestionable virtue in England which be want in China . the chinese authority kill thousand of innocent people on the most frivolous pretext . we in England be free from all guilt of that kind we commit no such dreadful crime we abhor reckless bloodshed with all our heart . " 

 " quite right , Marian , " say Laura . " well think of , and well express . " 

 " pray allow the Count to proceed , " say Madame Fosco , with stern civility . " you will find , young lady , that he never speak without have excellent reason for all that he say . " 

 " thank you , my angel , " reply the Count . " have a bon - bon ? " he take out of his pocket a pretty little inlay box , and place it open on the table . " Chocolat a la Vanille , " cry the impenetrable man , cheerfully rattle the sweetmeat in the box , and bow all round . " offer by Fosco as an act of homage to the charming society . " 

 " be good enough to go on , Count , " say his wife , with a spiteful reference to myself . " oblige I by answer Miss Halcombe . " 

 " Miss Halcombe be unanswerable , " reply the polite Italian ; " that be to say , so far as she go . yes ! I agree with she . John Bull do abhor the crime of John Chinaman . he be the quick old gentleman at find out fault that be his neighbour ' , and the slow old gentleman at find out the fault that be his own , who exist on the face of creation . be he so very much well in this way than the people whom he condemn in their way ? English Society , Miss Halcombe , be as often the accomplice as it be the enemy of crime . yes ! yes ! crime be in this country what crime be in other country a good friend to a man and to those about he as often as it be an enemy . a great rascal provide for his wife and family . the bad he be the more he make they the object for your sympathy . he often provide also for himself . a profligate spendthrift who be always borrow money will get more from his friend than the rigidly honest man who only borrow of they once , under pressure of the dire want . in the one case the friend will not be at all surprised , and they will give . in the other case they will be very much surprised , and they will hesitate . be the prison that Mr. Scoundrel live in at the end of his career a more uncomfortable place than the workhouse that Mr. Honesty live in at the end of his career ? when John - Howard - Philanthropist want to relieve misery he go to find it in prison , where crime be wretched not in hut and hovel , where virtue be wretche too . who be the english poet who have win the most universal sympathy who make the easy of all subject for pathetic writing and pathetic painting ? that nice young person who begin life with a forgery , and end it by a suicide your dear , romantic , interesting Chatterton . which get on well , do you think , of two poor starving dressmaker the woman who resist temptation and be honest , or the woman who fall under temptation and steal ? you all know that the stealing be the making of that second woman 's fortune it advertise she from length to breadth of good - humour , charitable England and she be relieve , as the breaker of a commandment , when she would have be leave to starve , as the keeper of it . come here , my jolly little Mouse ! hey ! presto ! pass ! I transform you , for the time be , into a respectable lady . stop there , in the palm of my great big hand , my dear , and listen . you marry the poor man whom you love , Mouse , and one half your friend pity , and the other half blame you . and now , on the contrary , you sell yourself for gold to a man you do not   care for , and all your friend rejoice over you , and a minister of public worship sanction the base horror of the vilest of all human bargain , and smile and smirk afterwards at your table , if you be polite enough to ask he to breakfast . hey ! presto ! pass ! be a mouse again , and squeak . if you continue to be a lady much long , I shall have you tell I that society abhor crime and then , Mouse , I shall doubt if your own eye and ear be really of any use to you . ah ! I be a bad man , Lady Glyde , be I not ? I say what other people only think , and when all the rest of the world be in a conspiracy to accept the mask for the true face , mine be the rash hand that tear off the plump pasteboard , and show the bare bone beneath . I will get up on my big elephant 's leg , before I do myself any more harm in your amiable estimation I will get up and take a little airy walk of my own . dear lady , as your excellent Sheridan say , I go and leave my character behind I . " 

 he get up , put the cage on the table , and pause for a moment to count the mouse in it . " one , two , three , four ha ! " he cry , with a look of horror , " where , in the name of Heaven , be the fifth the young , the whitest , the most amiable of all my Benjamin of mouse ! " 

 neither Laura nor I be in any favorable disposition to be amuse . the Count 's glib cynicism have reveal a new aspect of his nature from which we both recoil . but it be impossible to resist the comical distress of so very large a man at the loss of so very small a mouse . we laugh in spite of ourselves ; and when Madame Fosco rise to set the example of leave the boat - house empty , so that her husband might search it to its remotest corner , we rise also to follow she out . 

 before we have take three step , the Count 's quick eye discover the lose mouse under the seat that we have be occupy . he pull aside the bench , take the little animal up in his hand , and then suddenly stop , on his knee , look intently at a particular place on the ground just beneath he . 

 when he rise to his foot again , his hand shake so that he could hardly put the mouse back in the cage , and his face be of a faint livid yellow hue all over . 

 " Percival ! " he say , in a whisper . " Percival ! come here . " 

 Sir Percival have pay no attention to any of we for the last ten minute . he have be entirely absorb in write figure on the sand , and then rub they out again with the point of his stick . 

 " what be the matter now ? " he ask , lounge carelessly into the boat - house . 

 " do you see nothing there ? " say the Count , catch he nervously by the collar with one hand , and point with the other to the place near which he have find the mouse . 

 " I see plenty of dry sand , " answer Sir Percival , " and a spot of dirt in the middle of it . " 

 " not dirt , " whisper the Count , fasten the other hand suddenly on Sir Percival 's collar , and shake it in his agitation . " blood . " 

 Laura be near enough to hear the last word , softly as he whisper it . she turn to I with a look of terror . 

 " Nonsense , my dear , " I say . " there be no need to be alarm . it be only the blood of a poor little stray dog . " 

 everybody be astonish , and everybody 's eye be fix on I inquiringly . 

 " how do you know that ? " ask Sir Percival , speak first . 

 " I find the dog here , die , on the day when you all return from abroad , " I reply . " the poor creature have stray into the plantation , and have be shoot by your keeper . " 

 " whose dog be it ? " inquire Sir Percival . " not one of mine ? " 

 " do you try to save the poor thing ? " ask Laura earnestly . " surely you try to save it , Marian ? " 

 " yes , " I say , " the housekeeper and I both do our good but the dog be mortally wound , and he die under our hand . " 

 " whose dog be it ? " persist Sir Percival , repeat his question a little irritably . " one of mine ? " 

 " no , not one of your . " 

 " whose then ? do the housekeeper know ? " 

 the housekeeper 's report of Mrs. Catherick 's desire to conceal her visit to Blackwater Park from Sir Percival 's knowledge recur to my memory the moment he put that last question , and I half doubt the discretion of answer it ; but in my anxiety to quiet the general alarm , I have thoughtlessly advance too far to draw back , except at the risk of exciting suspicion , which might only make matter bad . there be nothing for it but to answer at once , without reference to result . 

 " yes , " I say . " the housekeeper know . she tell I it be Mrs. Catherick 's dog . " 

 Sir Percival have hitherto remain at the inner end of the boat - house with Count Fosco , while I speak to he from the door . but the instant Mrs. Catherick 's name pass my lip he push by the Count roughly , and place himself face to face with I under the open daylight . 

 " how come the housekeeper to know it be Mrs. Catherick 's dog ? " he ask , fix his eye on mine with a frown interest and attention , which half anger , half startle I . 

 " she know it , " I say quietly , " because Mrs. Catherick bring the dog with she . " 

 " bring it with she ? where do she bring it with she ? " 

 " to this house . " 

 " what the devil do Mrs. Catherick want at this house ? " 

 the manner in which he put the question be even more offensive than the language in which he express it . I mark my sense of his want of common politeness by silently turn away from he . 

 just as I move the Count 's persuasive hand be lay on his shoulder , and the Count 's mellifluous voice interpose to quiet he . 

 " my dear Percival ! gently gently ! " 

 Sir Percival look round in his angriest manner . the Count only smile and repeat the soothe application . 

 " gently , my good friend gently ! " 

 Sir Percival hesitate , follow I a few step , and , to my great surprise , offer I an apology . 

 " I beg your pardon , Miss Halcombe , " he say . " I have be out of order lately , and I be afraid I be a little irritable . but I should like to know what Mrs. Catherick could possibly want here . when do she come ? be the housekeeper the only person who see she ? " 

 " the only person , " I answer , ' so far as I know . " 

 the Count interpose again . 

 " in that case why not question the housekeeper ? " he say . " why not go , Percival , to the fountain - head of information at once ? " 

 " quite right ! " say Sir Percival . " of course the housekeeper be the first person to question . excessively stupid of I not to see it myself . " with those word he instantly leave we to return to the house . 

 the motive of the Count 's interference , which have puzzle I at first , betray itself when Sir Percival 's back be turn . he have a host of question to put to I about Mrs. Catherick , and the cause of her visit to Blackwater Park , which he could scarcely have ask in his friend 's presence . I make my answer as short as I civilly could , for I have already determine to check the least approach to any exchanging of confidence between Count Fosco and myself . Laura , however , unconsciously help he to extract all my information , by make inquiry herself , which leave I no alternative but to reply to she , or to appear in the very unenviable and very false character of a depositary of Sir Percival 's secret . the end of it be , that , in about ten minute ' time , the Count know as much as I know of Mrs. Catherick , and of the event which have so strangely connect we with her daughter , Anne , from the time when Hartright meet with she to this day . 

 the effect of my information on he be , in one respect , curious enough . 

 intimately as he know Sir Percival , and closely as he appear to be associate with Sir Percival 's private affair in general , he be certainly as far as I be from know anything of the true story of Anne Catherick . the unsolved mystery in connection with this unhappy woman be now render doubly suspicious , in my eye , by the absolute conviction which I feel , that the clue to it have be hide by Sir Percival from the most intimate friend he have in the world . it be impossible to mistake the eager curiosity of the Count 's look and manner while he drink in greedily every word that fall from my lip . there be many kind of curiosity , I know but there be no misinterpreting the curiosity of blank surprise : if I ever see it in my life I see it in the Count 's face . 

 while the question and answer be go on , we have all be stroll quietly back through the plantation . as soon as we reach the house the first object that we see in front of it be Sir Percival 's dog - cart , with the horse put to and the groom wait by it in his stable - jacket . if these unexpected appearance be to be trust , the examination of the house - keeper have produce important result already . 

 " a fine horse , my friend , " say the Count , address the groom with the most engaging familiarity of manner , " you be go to drive out ? " 

 " I be not go , sir , " reply the man , look at his stable - jacket , and evidently wonder whether the foreign gentleman take it for his livery . " my master drive himself . " 

 " Aha ! " say the Count , " do he indeed ? I wonder he give himself the trouble when he have get you to drive for he . be he go to fatigue that nice , shin , pretty horse by take he very far to - day ? " 

 " I do not   know , sir , " answer the man . " the horse be a mare , if you please , sir . she be the highest - courage thing we have   get in the stable . her name 's Brown Molly , sir , and she will go till she drop . Sir Percival usually take Isaac of York for the short distance . " 

 " and your shin courageous Brown Molly for the long ? " 

 " logical inference , Miss Halcombe , " continue the Count , wheel round briskly , and address I . " Sir Percival be go a long distance to - day . " 

 I make no reply . I have my own inference to draw , from what I know through the housekeeper and from what I see before I , and I do not choose to share they with Count Fosco . 

 when Sir Percival be in Cumberland   I think to myself , he walk away a long distance , on Anne 's account , to question the family at Todd 's Corner . now he be in Hampshire , be he go to drive away a long distance , on Anne 's account again , to question Mrs. Catherick at Welmingham ? 

 we all enter the house . as we cross the hall Sir Percival come out from the library to meet we . he look hurried and pale and anxious but for all that , he be in his most polite mood when he speak to we . 

 " I be sorry to say I be oblige to leave you , " he begin " a long drive a matter that I can not   very well put off . I shall be back in good time to - morrow but before I go I should like that little business - formality , which I speak of this morning , to be settle . Laura , will you come into the library ? it will not   take a minute a mere formality . Countess , may I trouble you also ? I want you and the Countess , Fosco , to be witness to a signature nothing more . come in at once and get it over . " 

 he hold the library door open until they have pass in , follow they , and shut it softly . 

 I remain , for a moment afterwards , stand alone in the hall , with my heart beat fast and my mind misgive I sadly . then I go on to the staircase , and ascend slowly to my own room . 



 IV 

 June 17th . just as my hand be on the door of my room , I hear Sir Percival 's voice call to I from below . 

 " I must beg you to come downstairs again , " he say . " it be Fosco 's fault , Miss Halcombe , not mine . he have start some nonsensical objection to his wife be one of the witness , and have oblige I to ask you to join we in the library . " 

 I enter the room immediately with Sir Percival . Laura be wait by the writing - table , twist and turn her garden hat uneasily in her hand . Madame Fosco sit near she , in an arm - chair , imperturbably admire her husband , who stand by himself at the other end of the library , pick off the dead leaf from the flower in the window . 

 the moment I appear the Count advanced to meet I , and to offer his explanation . 

 " a thousand pardon , Miss Halcombe , " he say . " you know the character which be give to my countryman by the English ? we Italians be all wily and suspicious by nature , in the estimation of the good John Bull . set I down , if you please , as be no well than the rest of my race . I be a wily italian and a suspicious italian . you have think so yourself , dear lady , have you not ? well ! it be part of my wiliness and part of my suspicion to object to Madame Fosco be a witness to Lady Glyde 's signature , when I be also a witness myself . " 

 " there be not the shadow of a reason for his objection , " interpose Sir Percival . " I have explain to he that the law of England allow Madame Fosco to witness a signature as well as her husband . " 

 " I admit it , " resume the Count . " the law of England say , yes , but the conscience of Fosco say , no . " he spread out his fat finger on the bosom of his blouse , and bow solemnly , as if he wish to introduce his conscience to we all , in the character of an illustrious addition to the society . " what this document which Lady Glyde be about to sign may be , " he continue , " I neither know nor desire to know . I only say this , circumstance may happen in the future which may oblige Percival , or his representative , to appeal to the two witness , in which case it be certainly desirable that those witness should represent two opinion which be perfectly independent the one of the other . this can not be if my wife sign as well as myself , because we have but one opinion between we , and that opinion be mine . I will not have it cast in my tooth , at some future day , that Madame Fosco act under my coercion , and be , in plain fact , no witness at all . I speak in Percival 's interest , when I propose that my name shall appear   as the near friend of the husband , and your name , Miss Halcombe   as the near friend of the wife . I be a Jesuit , if you please to think so a splitter of straw a man of trifle and crochet and scruple but you will humour I , I hope , in merciful consideration for my suspicious italian character , and my uneasy italian conscience . " he bow again , step back a few pace , and withdraw his conscience from our society as politely as he have introduce it . 

 the Count 's scruple might have be honourable and reasonable enough , but there be something in his manner of express they which increase my unwillingness to be concern in the business of the signature . no consideration of less importance than my consideration for Laura would have induce I to consent to be a witness at all . one look , however , at her anxious face decide I to risk anything rather than desert she . 

 " I will readily remain in the room , " I say . " and if I find no reason for start any small scruple on my side , you may rely on I as a witness . " 

 Sir Percival look at I sharply , as if he be about to say something . but at the same moment , Madame Fosco attract his attention by rise from her chair . she have catch her husband 's eye , and have evidently receive her order to leave the room . 

 " you need not   go , " say Sir Percival . 

 Madame Fosco look for her order again , get they again , say she would prefer leave we to our business , and resolutely walk out . the Count light a cigarette , go back to the flower in the window , and puff little jet of smoke at the leaf , in a state of the deep anxiety about kill the insect . 

 meanwhile Sir Percival unlock a cupboard beneath one of the book - case , and produce from it a piece of parchment , fold longwise , many time over . he place it on the table , open the last fold only , and keep his hand on the rest . the last fold display a strip of blank parchment with little wafer stick on it at certain place . every line of the writing be hide in the part which he still hold fold up under his hand . Laura and I look at each other . her face be pale , but it show no indecision and no fear . 

 Sir Percival dip a pen in ink , and hand it to his wife . " sign your name there , " he say , point to the place . " you and Fosco be to sign afterwards , Miss Halcombe , opposite those two wafer . come here , Fosco ! witness a signature be not to be do by moon out of window and smoking into the flower . " 

 the Count throw away his cigarette , and join we at the table , with his hand carelessly thrust into the scarlet belt of his blouse , and his eye steadily fix on Sir Percival 's face . Laura , who be on the other side of her husband , with the pen in her hand , look at he too . he stand between they hold the fold parchment down firmly on the table , and glance across at I , as I sit opposite to he , with such a sinister mixture of suspicion and embarrassment on his face that he look more like a prisoner at the bar than a gentleman in his own house . 

 " sign there , " he repeat , turn suddenly on Laura , and point once more to the place on the parchment . 

 " what be it I be to sign ? " she ask quietly . 

 " I have no time to explain , " he answer . " the dog - cart be at the door , and I must go directly . besides , if I have time , you would not   understand . it be a purely formal document , full of legal technicality , and all that sort of thing . come ! come ! sign your name , and let we have do as soon as possible . " 

 " I ought surely to know what I be sign , Sir Percival , before I write my name ? " 

 " nonsense ! what have woman to do with business ? I tell you again , you can not   understand it . " 

 " at any rate , let I try to understand it . whenever Mr. Gilmore have any business for I to do , he always explain it first , and I always understand he . " 

 " I dare say he do . he be your servant , and be oblige to explain . I be your husband , and be not oblige . how much long do you mean to keep I here ? I tell you again , there be no time for read anything the dog - cart be wait at the door . once for all , will you sign or will you not ? " 

 she still have the pen in her hand , but she make no approach to sign her name with it . 

 " if my signature pledge I to anything , " she say , ' surely I have some claim to know what that pledge be ? " 

 he lift up the parchment , and strike it angrily on the table . 

 " speak out ! " he say . " you be always famous for tell the truth . never mind Miss Halcombe , never mind Fosco say , in plain term , you distrust I . " 

 the Count take one of his hand out of his belt and lay it on Sir Percival 's shoulder . Sir Percival shake it off irritably . the Count put it on again with unruffled composure . 

 " control your unfortunate temper , Percival , " he say " Lady Glyde be right . " 

 " right ! " cry Sir Percival . " a wife right in distrust her husband ! " 

 " it be unjust and cruel to accuse I of distrust you , " say Laura . " ask Marian if I be not justify in want to know what this writing require of I before I sign it . " 

 " I will not   have any appeal make to Miss Halcombe , " retort Sir Percival . " Miss Halcombe have nothing to do with the matter . " 

 I have not speak hitherto , and I would much rather not have speak now . but the expression of distress in Laura 's face when she turn it towards I , and the insolent injustice of her husband 's conduct , leave I no other alternative than to give my opinion , for her sake , as soon as I be ask for it . 

 " excuse I , Sir Percival , " I say " but as one of the witness to the signature , I venture to think that I have something to do with the matter . Laura 's objection seem to I a perfectly fair one , and speak for myself only , I can not assume the responsibility of witness her signature , unless she first understand what the writing be which you wish she to sign . " 

 " a cool declaration , upon my soul ! " cry Sir Percival . " the next time you invite yourself to a man 's house , Miss Halcombe , I recommend you not to repay his hospitality by take his wife 's side against he in a matter that do not   concern you . " 

 I start to my foot as suddenly as if he have strike I . if I have be a man , I would have knock he down on the threshold of his own door , and have leave his house , never on any earthly consideration to enter it again . but I be only a woman and I love his wife so dearly ! 

 thank God , that faithful love help I , and I sit down again without say a word . she know what I have suffer and what I have suppress . she run round to I , with the tear stream from her eye . " oh , Marian ! " she whisper softly . " if my mother have be alive , she could have do no more for I ! " 

 " come back and sign ! " cry Sir Percival from the other side of the table . 

 " Shall I ? " she ask in my ear ; " I will , if you tell I . " 

 " no , " I answer . " the right and the truth be with you sign nothing , unless you have read it first . " 

 " come back and sign ! " he reiterate , in his loud and angriest tone . 

 the Count , who have watch Laura and I with a close and silent attention , interpose for the second time . 

 " Percival ! " he say . " I remember that I be in the presence of lady . be good enough , if you please , to remember it too . " 

 Sir Percival turn on he speechless with passion . the Count 's firm hand slowly tighten its grasp on his shoulder , and the Count 's steady voice quietly repeat , " be good enough , if you please , to remember it too . " 

 they both look at each other . Sir Percival slowly draw his shoulder from under the Count 's hand , slowly turn his face away from the Count 's eye , doggedly look down for a little while at the parchment on the table , and then speak , with the sullen submission of a tame animal , rather than the become resignation of a convinced man . 

 " I do not   want to offend anybody , " he say , " but my wife 's obstinacy be enough to try the patience of a saint . I have tell she this be merely a formal document and what more can she want ? you may say what you please , but it be no part of a woman 's duty to set her husband at defiance . once more , Lady Glyde , and for the last time , will you sign or will you not ? " 

 Laura return to his side of the table , and take up the pen again . 

 " I will sign with pleasure , " she say , " if you will only treat I as a responsible being . I care little what sacrifice be require of I , if it will affect no one else , and lead to no ill result " 

 " who talk of a sacrifice be require of you ? " he break in , with a half - suppress return of his former violence . 

 " I only mean , " she resume , " that I would refuse no concession which I could honourably make . if I have a scruple about sign my name to an engagement of which I know nothing , why should you visit it on I so severely ? it be rather hard , I think , to treat Count Fosco 's scruple so much more indulgently than you have treat mine . " 

 this unfortunate , yet most natural , reference to the Count 's extraordinary power over her husband , indirect as it be , set Sir Percival 's smoulder temper on fire again in an instant . 

 " scruple ! " he repeat . " your scruple ! it be rather late in the day for you to be scrupulous . I should have think you have get over all weakness of that sort , when you make a virtue of necessity by marry I . " 

 the instant he speak those word , Laura throw down the pen look at he with an expression in her eye which , throughout all my experience of she , I have never see in they before , and turn she back on he in dead silence . 

 this strong expression of the most open and the most bitter contempt be so entirely unlike herself , so utterly out of her character , that it silence we all . there be something hide , beyond a doubt , under the mere surface - brutality of the word which her husband have just address to she . there be some lurk insult beneath they , of which I be wholly ignorant , but which have leave the mark of its profanation so plainly on her face that even a stranger might have see it . 

 the Count , who be no stranger , see it as distinctly as I do . when I leave my chair to join Laura , I hear he whisper under his breath to Sir Percival , " you idiot ! " 

 Laura walk before I to the door as I advance , and at the same time her husband speak to she once more . 

 " you positively refuse , then , to give I your signature ? " he say , in the altered tone of a man who be conscious that he have let his own licence of language seriously injure he . 

 " after what you have just say to I , " she reply firmly , " I refuse my signature until I have read every line in that parchment from the first word to the last . come away , Marian , we have remain here long enough . " 

 " one moment ! " interpose the count before Sir Percival could speak again " one moment , Lady Glyde , I implore you ! " 

 Laura would have leave the room without notice he , but I stop she . 

 " do not   make an enemy of the Count ! " I whisper . " whatever you do , do not   make an enemy of the Count ! " 

 she yield to I . I close the door again , and we stand near it wait . Sir Percival sit down at the table , with his elbow on the fold parchment , and his head rest on his clench fist . the Count stand between we master of the dreadful position in which we be place , as he be master of everything else . 

 " Lady Glyde , " he say , with a gentleness which seem to address itself to our forlorn situation instead of to ourselves , " pray pardon I if I venture to offer one suggestion , and pray believe that I speak out of my profound respect and my friendly regard for the mistress of this house . " he turn sharply towards Sir Percival . " be it absolutely necessary , " he ask " that this thing here , under your elbow , should be sign to - day ? " 

 " it be necessary to my plan and wish , " return the other sulkily . " but that consideration , as you may have notice , have no influence with Lady Glyde . " 

 " answer my plain question plainly . can the business of the signature be put off till to - morrow yes or no ? " 

 " yes , if you will have it so . " 

 " then what be you waste your time for here ? let the signature wait till to - morrow let it wait till you come back . " 

 Sir Percival look up with a frown and an oath . 

 " you be take a tone with I that I do not   like , " he say . " a tone I will not   bear from any man . " 

 " I be advise you for your good , " return the Count , with a smile of quiet contempt . " give yourself time give Lady Glyde time . have you forget that your dog - cart be wait at the door ? my tone surprise you ha ? I dare say it do it be the tone of a man who can keep his temper . how many dos of good advice have I give you in my time ? More than you can count . have I ever be wrong ? I defy you to quote I an instance of it . go ! take your drive . the matter of the signature can wait till to - morrow . let it wait and renew it when you come back . " 

 Sir Percival hesitate and look at his watch . his anxiety about the secret journey which he be to take that day , revive by the Count 's word , be now evidently dispute possession of his mind with his anxiety to obtain Laura 's signature . he consider for a little while , and then get up from his chair . 

 " it be easy to argue I down , " he say , " when I have no time to answer you . I will take your advice , Fosco not because I want it , or believe in it , but because I can not   stop here any long . " he pause , and look round darkly at his wife . " if you do not   give I your signature when I come back to - morrow ! " the rest be lose in the noise of his opening the book - case cupboard again , and lock up the parchment once more . he take his hat and glove off the table , and make for the door . Laura and I draw back to let he pass . " remember to - morrow ! " he say to his wife , and go out . 

 we wait to give he time to cross the hall and drive away . the Count approach we while we be stand near the door . 

 " you have just see Percival at his bad , Miss Halcombe , " he say . " as his old friend , I be sorry for he and ashamed of he . as his old friend , I promise you that he shall not break out to - morrow in the same disgraceful manner in which he have break out to - day . " 

 Laura have take my arm while he be speak and she press it significantly when he have do . it would have be a hard trial to any woman to stand by and see the office of apologist for her husband 's misconduct quietly assume by his male friend in her own house and it be a trial to she . I thank the count civilly , and let she out . yes ! I thank he : for I feel already , with a sense of inexpressible helplessness and humiliation , that it be either his interest or his caprice to make sure of my continue to reside at Blackwater Park , and I know after Sir Percival 's conduct to I , that without the support of the Count 's influence , I could not hope to remain there . his influence , the influence of all other that I dread most , be actually the one tie which now hold I to Laura in the hour of her utmost need ! 

 we hear the wheel of the dog - cart crash on the gravel of the drive as we come into the hall . Sir Percival have start on his journey . 

 " where be he go to , Marian ? " Laura whisper . " every fresh thing he do seem to terrify I about the future . have you any suspicion ? " 

 after what she have undergo that morning , I be unwilling to tell she my suspicion . 

 " how should I know his secret ? " I say evasively . 

 " I wonder if the housekeeper know ? " she persist . 

 " certainly not , " I reply . " she must be quite as ignorant as we be . " 

 Laura shake her head doubtfully . 

 " do you not hear from the housekeeper that there be a report of Anne Catherick have be see in this neighbourhood ? do not   you think he may have go away to look for she ? " 

 " I would rather compose myself , Laura , by not think about it at all , and after what have happen , you have well follow my example . come into my room , and rest and quiet yourself a little . " 

 we sit down together close to the window , and let the fragrant summer air breathe over our face . 

 " I be ashamed to look at you , Marian , " she say , " after what you submit to downstair , for my sake . oh , my own love , I be almost heartbroken when I think of it ! but I will try to make it up to you I will indeed ! " 

 " hush ! hush ! " I reply ; " do not   talk so . what be the trifling mortification of my pride compare to the dreadful sacrifice of your happiness ? " 

 " you hear what he say to I ? " she go on quickly and vehemently . " you hear the word but you do not   know what they mean you do not   know why I throw down the pen and turn my back on he . " she rise in sudden agitation , and walk about the room . " I have keep many thing from your knowledge , Marian , for fear of distress you , and make you unhappy at the outset of our new life . you do not   know how he have use I . and yet you ought to know , for you see how he use I to - day . you hear he sneer at my presuming to be scrupulous you hear he say I have make a virtue of necessity in marry he . " she sit down again , her face flush deeply , and her hand twist and twin together in her lap . " I can not   tell you about it now , " she say ; " I shall burst out cry if I tell you now later , Marian , when I be more sure of myself . my poor head ache , darling ache , ache , ache . where be your smell - bottle ? let I talk to you about yourself . I wish I have give he my signature , for your sake . shall I give it to he to - morrow ? I would rather compromise myself than compromise you . after your take my part against he , he will lay all the blame on you if I refuse again . what shall we do ? oh , for a friend to help we and advise we ! a friend we could really trust ! " 

 she sigh bitterly . I see in her face that she be think of Hartright see it the more plainly because her last word set I think of he too . in six month only from her marriage we want the faithful service he have offer to we in his farewell word . how little I once think that we should ever want it at all ! 

 " we must do what we can to help ourselves , " I say . " let we try to talk it over calmly , Laura let we do all in our power to decide for the good . " 

 put what she know of her husband 's embarrassment and what I have hear of his conversation with the lawyer together , we arrive necessarily at the conclusion that the parchment in the library have be draw up for the purpose of borrow money , and that Laura 's signature be absolutely necessary to fit it for the attainment of Sir Percival 's object . 

 the second question , concern the nature of the legal contract by which the money be to be obtain , and the degree of personal responsibility to which Laura might subject herself if she sign it in the dark , involve consideration which lie far beyond any knowledge and experience that either of we possess . my own conviction lead I to believe that the hidden content of the parchment conceal a transaction of the mean and the most fraudulent kind . 

 I have not form this conclusion in consequence of Sir Percival 's refusal to show the writing or to explain it , for that refusal might well have proceed from his obstinate disposition and his domineering temper alone . my sole motive for distrust his honesty spring from the change which I have observe in his language and his manner at Blackwater Park , a change which convince I that he have be act a part throughout the whole period of his probation at Limmeridge House . his elaborate delicacy , his ceremonious politeness which harmonise so agreeably with Mr. Gilmore 's old - fashioned notion , his modesty with Laura , his candour with I , his moderation with Mr. Fairlie all these be the artifice of a mean , cunning , and brutal man , who have drop his disguise when his practised duplicity have gain its end , and have openly show himself in the library on that very day . I say nothing of the grief which this discovery cause I on Laura 's account , for it be not to be express by any word of mine . I only refer to it at all , because it decide I to oppose her sign the parchment , whatever the consequence might be , unless she be first make acquainted with the content . 

 under these circumstance , the one chance for we when to - morrow come be to be provide with an objection to give the signature , which might rest on sufficiently firm commercial or legal ground to shake Sir Percival 's resolution , and to make he suspect that we two woman understand the law and obligation of business as well as himself . 

 after some ponder , I determine to write to the only honest man within reach whom we could trust to help we discreetly in our forlorn situation . that man be Mr. Gilmore 's partner , Mr. Kyrle , who conduct the business now that our old friend have be oblige to withdraw from it , and to leave London on account of his health . I explain to Laura that I have Mr. Gilmore 's own authority for place implicit confidence in his partner 's integrity , discretion , and accurate knowledge of all her affair , and with her full approval I sit down at once to write the letter , I begin by state our position to Mr. Kyrle exactly as it be , and then ask for his advice in return , express in plain , downright term which he could comprehend without any danger of misinterpretation and mistake . my letter be as short as I could possibly make it , and be , I hope , unencumbered by needless apology and needless detail . 

 just as I be about to put the address on the envelope an obstacle be discover by Laura , which in the effort and preoccupation of writing have escape my mind altogether . 

 " how be we to get the answer in time ? " she ask . " your letter will not be deliver in London before to - morrow morning , and the post will not bring the reply here till the morning after . " 

 the only way of overcome this difficulty be to have the answer bring to we from the lawyer 's office by a special messenger . I write a postscript to that effect , beg that the messenger might be despatch with the reply by the eleven o'clock morning train , which would bring he to our station at twenty minute past one , and so enable he to reach Blackwater Park by two o'clock at the late . he be to be direct to ask for I , to answer no question address to he by any one else , and to deliver his letter into no hand but mine . 

 " in case Sir Percival should come back to - morrow before two o'clock , " I say to Laura , " the wise plan for you to adopt be to be out in the ground all the morning with your book or your work , and not to appear at the house till the messenger have have time to arrive with the letter . I will wait here for he all the morning , to guard against any misadventure or mistake . by follow this arrangement I hope and believe we shall avoid be take by surprise . let we go down to the drawing - room now . we may excite suspicion if we remain shut up together too long . " 

 " Suspicion ? " she repeat . " whose suspicion can we excite , now that Sir Percival have leave the house ? do you mean Count Fosco ? " 

 " perhaps I do , Laura . " 

 " you be begin to dislike he as much as I do , Marian . " 

 " no , not to dislike he . dislike be always more or less associate with contempt I can see nothing in the Count to despise . " 

 " you be not afraid of he , be you ? " 

 " perhaps I be a little . " 

 " Afraid of he , after his interference in our favour to - day ! " 

 " yes . I be more afraid of his interference than I be of Sir Percival 's violence . remember what I say to you in the library . whatever you do , Laura , do not   make an enemy of the count ! " 

 we go downstairs . Laura enter the drawing - room , while I proceed across the hall , with my letter in my hand , to put it into the post - bag , which hang against the wall opposite to I . 

 the house door be open , and as I cross past it , I see Count Fosco and his wife stand talk together on the step outside , with their face turn towards I . 

 the Countess come into the hall rather hastily , and ask if I have leisure enough for five minute ' private conversation . feel a little surprised by such an appeal from such a person , I put my letter into the bag , and reply that I be quite at her disposal . she take my arm with unaccustomed friendliness and familiarity , and instead of lead I into an empty room , draw I out with she to the belt of turf which surround the large fish - pond . 

 as we pass the Count on the step he bow and smile , and then go at once into the house , push the hall door to after he , but not actually close it . 

 the Countess walk I gently round the fish - pond . I expect to be make the depositary of some extraordinary confidence , and I be astonish to find that Madame Fosco 's communication for my private ear be nothing more than a polite assurance of her sympathy for I , after what have happen in the library . her husband have tell she of all that have pass , and of the insolent manner in which Sir Percival have speak to I . this information have so shocked and distress she , on my account and on Laura 's , that she have make up her mind , if anything of the sort happen again , to mark her sense of Sir Percival 's outrageous conduct by leave the house . the Count have approve of her idea , and she now hop that I approve of it too . 

 I think this a very strange proceeding on the part of such a remarkably reserve woman as Madame Fosco , especially after the interchange of sharp speech which have pass between we during the conversation in the boat - house on that very morning . however , it be my plain duty to meet a polite and friendly advance on the part of one of my elder with a polite and friendly reply . I answer the Countess accordingly in her own tone , and then , think we have say all that be necessary on either side , make an attempt to get back to the house . 

 but Madame Fosco seem resolve not to part with I , and to my unspeakable amazement , resolve also to talk . Hitherto the most silent of woman , she now persecute I with fluent conventionality on the subject of married life , on the subject of Sir Percival and Laura , on the subject of her own happiness , on the subject of the late Mr. Fairlie 's conduct to she in the matter of her legacy , and on half a dozen other subject besides , until she have detain I walk round and round the fish - pond for more than half an hour , and have quite weary I out . whether she discover this or not , I can not say , but she stop as abruptly as she have begin look towards the house door , resume her icy manner in a moment , and drop my arm of her own accord before I could think of an excuse for accomplish my own release from she . 

 as I push open the door and enter the hall , I find myself suddenly face to face with the Count again . he be just put a letter into the post - bag . 

 after he have drop it in and have close the bag , he ask I where I have leave Madame Fosco . I tell he , and he go out at the hall door immediately to join his wife . his manner when he speak to I be so unusually quiet and subdue that I turn and look after he , wonder if he be ill or out of spirit . 

 why my next proceeding be to go straight up to the post - bag and take out my own letter and look at it again , with a vague distrust on I , and why the look at it for the second time instantly suggest the idea to my mind of seal the envelope for its great security be mystery which be either too deep or too shallow for I to fathom . woman , as everybody know , constantly act on impulse which they can not explain even to themselves , and I can only suppose that one of those impulse be the hidden cause of my unaccountable conduct on this occasion . 

 whatever influence animate I , I find cause to congratulate myself on have obey it as soon as I prepare to seal the letter in my own room . I have originally close the envelope in the usual way by moisten the adhesive point and press it on the paper beneath , and when I now try it with my finger , after a lapse of full three - quarter of an hour , the envelope open on the instant , without stick or tearing . perhaps I have fasten it insufficiently ? perhaps there might have be some defect in the adhesive gum ? 

 or , perhaps no ! it be quite revolt enough to feel that third conjecture stir in my mind . I would rather not see it confront I in plain black and white . 

 I almost dread to - morrow so much depend on my discretion and self - control . there be two precaution , at all event , which I be sure not to forget . I must be careful to keep up friendly appearance with the Count , and I must be well on my guard when the messenger from the office come here with the answer to my letter . 



 V 

 June 17th . when the dinner hour bring we together again , Count Fosco be in his usual excellent spirit . he exert himself to interest and amuse we , as if he be determined to efface from our memory all recollection of what have pass in the library that afternoon . lively description of his adventure in travel , amusing anecdote of remarkable people whom he have meet with abroad , quaint comparison between the social custom of various nation , illustrate by example draw from man and woman indiscriminately all over Europe , humorous confession of the innocent folly of his own early life , when he rule the fashion of a second - rate italian town , and write preposterous romance on the french model for a second - rate italian newspaper all flow in succession so easily and so gaily from his lip , and all address our various curiosity and various interest so directly and so delicately , that Laura and I listen to he with as much attention and , inconsistent as it may seem , with as much admiration also , as Madame Fosco herself . woman can resist a man 's love , a man 's fame , a man 's personal appearance , and a man 's money , but they can not resist a man 's tongue when he know how to talk to they . 

 after dinner , while the favourable impression which he have produce on we be still vivid in our mind , the Count modestly withdraw to read in the library . 

 Laura propose a stroll in the ground to enjoy the close of the long evening . it be necessary in common politeness to ask Madame Fosco to join we , but this time she have apparently receive her order beforehand , and she beg we would kindly excuse she . " the Count will probably want a fresh supply of cigarette , " she remark by way of apology , " and nobody can make they to his satisfaction but myself . " her cold blue eye almost warm as she speak the word she look actually proud of be the officiating medium through which her lord and master compose himself with tobacco - smoke ! 

 Laura and I go out together alone . 

 it be a misty , heavy evening . there be a sense of blight in the air ; the flower be droop in the garden , and the ground be parch and dewless . the western heaven , as we see it over the quiet tree , be of a pale yellow hue , and the sun be set faintly in a haze . come rain seem near it would fall probably with the fall of night . 

 " which way shall we go ? " I ask 

 " towards the lake , Marian , if you like , " she answer . 

 " you seem unaccountably fond , Laura , of that dismal lake . " 

 " no , not of the lake but of the scenery about it . the sand and heath and the fir - tree be the only object I can discover , in all this large place , to remind I of Limmeridge . but we will walk in some other direction if you prefer it . " 

 " I have no favourite walk at Blackwater Park , my love . one be the same as another to I . let we go to the lake we may find it cool in the open space than we find it here . " 

 we walk through the shadowy plantation in silence . the heaviness in the evening air oppress we both , and when we reach the boat - house we be glad to sit down and rest inside . 

 a white fog hung low over the lake . the dense brown line of the tree on the opposite bank appear above it , like a dwarf forest float in the sky . the sandy ground , shelve downward from where we sit , be lose mysteriously in the outward layer of the fog . the silence be horrible . no rustling of the leaf no bird 's note in the wood no cry of water - fowl from the pool of the hidden lake . even the croaking of the frog have cease to - night . 

 " it be very desolate and gloomy , " say Laura . " but we can be more alone here than anywhere else . " 

 she speak quietly and look at the wilderness of sand and mist with steady , thoughtful eye . I could see that her mind be too much occupy to feel the dreary impression from without which have fasten themselves already on mine . 

 " I promise , Marian , to tell you the truth about my married life , instead of leave you any long to guess it for yourself , " she begin . " that secret be the first I have ever have from you , love , and I be determined it shall be the last . I be silent , as you know , for your sake and perhaps a little for my own sake as well . it be very hard for a woman to confess that the man to whom she have give she whole life be the man of all other who care least for the gift . if you be marry yourself , Marian and especially if you be happily married you would feel for I as no single woman can feel , however kind and true she may be . " 

 what answer could I make ? I could only take her hand and look at she with my whole heart as well as my eye would let I . 

 " how often , " she go on , " I have hear you laugh over what you use to call your ' poverty ! ' how often you have make I mock - speech of congratulation on my wealth ! oh , Marian , never laugh again . thank God for your poverty it have make you your own mistress , and have save you from the lot that have fall on I . " 

 a sad beginning on the lip of a young wife ! sad in its quiet plain - speak truth . the few day we have all pass together at Blackwater Park have be many enough to show I to show any one what her husband have marry she for . 

 " you shall not be distress , " she say , " by hear how soon my disappointment and my trial begin or even by know what they be . it be bad enough to have they on my memory . if I tell you how he receive the first and last attempt at remonstrance that I ever make , you will know how he have always treat I , as well as if I have describe it in so many word . it be one day at Rome when we have ride out together to the tomb of Cecilia Metella . the sky be calm and lovely , and the grand old ruin look beautiful , and the remembrance that a husband 's love have raise it in the old time to a wife 's memory , make I feel more tenderly and more anxiously towards my husband than I have ever feel yet . ' would you build such a tomb for ME , Percival ? ' I ask he . ' you say you love I dearly before we be marry , and yet , since that time ' I could get no far . marian ! he be not even look at I ! I pull down my veil , think it well not to let he see that the tear be in my eye . I fancy he have not pay any attention to I , but he have . he say , ' come away , ' and laugh to himself as he help I on to my horse . he mount his own horse and laugh again as we ride away . ' if I do build you a tomb , ' he say , ' it will be do with your own money . I wonder whether Cecilia Metella have a fortune and pay for her . ' I make no reply how could I , when I be cry behind my veil ? ' ah , you light - complexion woman be all sulky , ' he say . ' what do you want ? compliment and soft speech ? well ! I be in a good humour this morning . consider the compliment pay and the speech say . ' man little know when they say hard thing to we how well we remember they , and how much harm they do we . it would have be well for I if I have go on crying , but his contempt dry up my tear and harden my heart . from that time , Marian , I never check myself again in thinking of Walter Hartright . I let the memory of those happy day , when we be so fond of each other in secret , come back and comfort I . what else have I to look to for consolation ? if we have be together you would have help I to well thing . I know it be wrong , darling , but tell I if I be wrong without any excuse . " 

 I be oblige to turn my face from she . " do not   ask I ! " I say . " have I suffer as you have suffer ? what right have I to decide ? " 

 " I use to think of he , " she pursue , drop her voice and move close to I , " I use to think of he when Percival leave I alone at night to go among the Opera people . I use to fancy what I might have be if it have please God to bless I with poverty , and if I have be his wife . I use to see myself in my neat cheap gown , sit at home and wait for he while he be earn our bread sit at home and work for he and love he all the well because I have to work for he see he come in tired and take off his hat and coat for he , and , Marian , please he with little dish at dinner that I have learn to make for his sake . oh ! I hope he be never lonely enough and sad enough to think of I and see I as I have think of HIM and see HIM ! " 

 as she say those melancholy word , all the lose tenderness return to her voice , and all the lose beauty tremble back into her face . her eye rest as lovingly on the blighted , solitary , ill - omen view before we , as if they see the friendly hill of Cumberland in the dim and threatening sky . 

 " do not   speak of Walter any more , " I say , as soon as I could control myself . " oh , Laura , spare we both the wretchedness of talk of he now ! " 

 she rouse herself , and look at I tenderly . 

 " I would rather be silent about he for ever , " she answer , " than cause you a moment 's pain . " 

 " it be in your interest , " I plead ; " it be for your sake that I speak . if your husband hear you " 

 " it would not surprise he if he do hear I . " 

 she make that strange reply with a weary calmness and coldness . the change in her manner , when she give the answer , startle I almost as much as the answer itself . 

 " not surprise he ! " I repeat . " Laura ! remember what you be say you frighten I ! " 

 " it be true , " she say ; " it be what I want to tell you to - day , when we be talk in your room . my only secret when I open my heart to he at Limmeridge be a harmless secret , Marian you say so yourself . the name be all I keep from he , and he have discover it . " 

 I hear she , but I could say nothing . her last word have kill the little hope that still live in I . 

 " it happen at Rome , " she go on , as wearily calm and cold as ever . " we be at a little party give to the English by some friend of Sir Percival 's Mr. and Mrs. Markland . Mrs. Markland have the reputation of sketch very beautifully , and some of the guest prevail on she to show we her drawing . we all admire they , but something I say attract her attention particularly to I . ' surely you draw yourself ? ' she ask . ' I use to draw a little once , ' I answer , ' but I have give it up . ' ' if you have once draw , ' she say , ' you may take to it again one of these day , and if you do , I wish you would let I recommend you a master . ' I say nothing you know why , Marian and try to change the conversation . but Mrs. Markland persist . ' I have have all sort of teacher , ' she go on , ' but the good of all , the most intelligent and the most attentive , be a Mr. Hartright . if you ever take up your drawing again , do try he as a master . he be a young man modest and gentlemanlike I be sure you will like he . ' think of those word be speak to I publicly , in the presence of stranger stranger who have be invite to meet the bride and bridegroom ! I do all I could to control myself I say nothing , and look down close at the drawing . when I venture to raise my head again , my eye and my husband 's eye meet , and I know , by his look , that my face have betray I . ' we will see about Mr. Hartright , ' he say , look at I all the time , ' when we get back to England . I agree with you , Mrs. Markland I think Lady Glyde be sure to like he . ' he lay an emphasis on the last word which make my cheek burn , and set my heart beat as if it would stifle I . nothing more be say . we come away early . he be silent in the carriage drive back to the hotel . he help I out , and follow I upstairs as usual . but the moment we be in the drawing - room , he lock the door , push I down into a chair , and stand over I with his hand on my shoulder . ' ever since that morning when you make your audacious confession to I at Limmeridge , ' he say , ' I have want to find out the man , and I find he in your face to - night . your drawing - master be the man , and his name be Hartright . you shall repent it , and he shall repent it , to the last hour of your life . now go to bed and dream of he if you like , with the mark of my horsewhip on his shoulder . ' whenever he be angry with I now he refer to what I acknowledge to he in your presence with a sneer or a threat . I have no power to prevent he from put his own horrible construction on the confidence I place in he . I have no influence to make he believe I , or to keep he silent . you look surprised to - day when you hear he tell I that I have make a virtue of necessity in marry he . you will not be surprised again when you hear he repeat it , the next time he be out of temper Oh , Marian ! do not ! do not ! you hurt I ! " 

 I have catch she in my arm , and the sting and torment of my remorse have close they round she like a vice . yes ! my remorse . the white despair of Walter 's face , when my cruel word strike he to the heart in the summer - house at Limmeridge , rise before I in mute , unendurable reproach . my hand have point the way which lead the man my sister love , step by step , far from his country and his friend . between those two young heart I have stand , to sunder they for ever , the one from the other , and his life and her life lie waste before I alike in witness of the deed . I have do this , and do it for Sir Percival Glyde . 

 for Sir Percival Glyde . 


 I hear her speak , and I know by the tone of her voice that she be comfort I I , who deserve nothing but the reproach of her silence ! how long it be before I master the absorb misery of my own thought , I can not tell . I be first conscious that she be kiss I , and then my eye seem to wake on a sudden to their sense of outward thing , and I know that I be look mechanically straight before I at the prospect of the lake . 

 " it be late , " I hear her whisper . " it will be dark in the plantation . " she shake my arm and repeat , " Marian ! it will be dark in the plantation . " 

 " give I a minute long , " I say " a minute , to get well in . " 

 I be afraid to trust myself to look at she yet , and I keep my eye fix on the view . 

 it be late . the dense brown line of tree in the sky have fade in the gathering darkness to the faint resemblance of a long wreath of smoke . the mist over the lake below have stealthily enlarge , and advance on we . the silence be as breathless as ever , but the horror of it have go , and the solemn mystery of its stillness be all that remain . 

 " we be far from the house , " she whisper . " let we go back . " 

 she stop suddenly , and turn her face from I towards the entrance of the boat - house . 

 " Marian ! " she say , tremble violently . " do you see nothing ? look ! " 

 " where ? " 

 " down there , below we . " 

 she point . my eye follow her hand , and I see it too . 

 a living figure be move over the waste of heath in the distance . it cross our range of view from the boat - house , and pass darkly along the outer edge of the mist . it stop far off , in front of we wait and pass on ; move slowly , with the white cloud of mist behind it and above it slowly , slowly , till it glide by the edge of the boat - house , and we see it no more . 

 we be both unnerved by what have pass between we that evening . some minute elapse before Laura would venture into the plantation , and before I could make up my mind to lead she back to the house . 

 " be it a man or a woman ? " she ask in a whisper , as we move at last into the dark dampness of the outer air . 

 " I be not certain . " 

 " which do you think ? " 

 " it look like a woman . " 

 " I be afraid it be a man in a long cloak . " 

 " it may be a man . in this dim light it be not possible to be certain . " 

 " wait , Marian ! I be frightened I do not   see the path . suppose the figure should follow we ? " 

 " not at all likely , Laura . there be really nothing to be alarmed about . the shore of the lake be not far from the village , and they be free to any one to walk on by day or night . it be only wonderful we have see no living creature there before . " 

 we be now in the plantation . it be very dark so dark , that we find some difficulty in keep the path . I give Laura my arm , and we walk as fast as we could on our way back . 

 before we be half - way through she stop , and force I to stop with she . she be listen . 

 " hush , " she whisper . " I hear something behind we . " 

 " dead leaf , " I say to cheer she , " or a twig blow off the tree . " 

 " it be summer time , Marian , and there be not a breath of wind . listen ! " 

 I hear the sound too a sound like a light footstep follow we . 

 " no matter who it be , or what it be , " I say , " let we walk on . in another minute , if there be anything to alarm we , we shall be near enough to the house to be hear . " 

 we go on quickly so quickly , that Laura be breathless by the time we be nearly through the plantation , and within sight of the light window . 

 I wait a moment to give her breathing - time . just as we be about to proceed she stop I again , and sign to I with her hand to listen once more . we both hear distinctly a long , heavy sigh behind we , in the black depth of the tree . 

 " who be there ? " I call out . 

 there be no answer . 

 " who be there ? " I repeat . 

 an instant of silence follow , and then we hear the light fall of the footstep again , fainter and fainter sink away into the darkness sink , sink , sink till they be lose in the silence . 

 we hurry out from the tree to the open lawn beyond cross it rapidly ; and without another word pass between we , reach the house . 

 in the light of the hall - lamp Laura look at I , with white cheek and startled eye . 

 " I be half dead with fear , " she say . " who could it have be ? " 

 " we will try to guess to - morrow , " I reply . " in the meantime say nothing to any one of what we have hear and see . " 

 " why not ? " 

 " because silence be safe , and we have need of safety in this house . " 

 I send Laura upstairs immediately , wait a minute to take off my hat and put my hair smooth , and then go at once to make my first investigation in the library , on pretence of search for a book . 

 there sit the Count , fill out the large easy - chair in the house , smoking and read calmly , with his foot on an ottoman , his cravat across his knee , and his shirt collar wide open . and there sit Madame Fosco , like a quiet child , on a stool by his side , make cigarette . neither husband nor wife could , by any possibility , have be out late that evening , and have just get back to the house in a hurry . I feel that my object in visit the library be answer the moment I set eye on they . 

 Count Fosco rise in polite confusion and tie his cravat on when I enter the room . 

 " pray do not   let I disturb you , " I say . " I have only come here to get a book . " 

 " all unfortunate man of my size suffer from the heat , " say the Count , refresh himself gravely with a large green fan . " I wish I could change place with my excellent wife . she be as cool at this moment as a fish in the pond outside . " 

 the Countess allow herself to thaw under the influence of her husband 's quaint comparison . " I be never warm , Miss Halcombe , " she remark , with the modest air of a woman who be confess to one of her own merit . 

 " have you and Lady Glyde be out this evening ? " ask the Count , while I be take a book from the shelf to preserve appearance . 

 " yes , we go out to get a little air . " 

 " may I ask in what direction ? " 

 " in the direction of the lake as far as the boat - house . " 

 " Aha ? as far as the boat - house ? " 

 under other circumstance I might have resent his curiosity . but to - night I hail it as another proof that neither he nor his wife be connect with the mysterious appearance at the lake . 

 " no more adventure , I suppose , this evening ? " he go on . " no more discovery , like your discovery of the wound dog ? " 

 he fix his unfathomable grey eye on I , with that cold , clear , irresistible glitter in they which always force I to look at he , and always make I uneasy while I do look . an unutterable suspicion that his mind be pry into mine overcome I at these time , and it overcome I now . 

 " no , " I say shortly ; " no adventure no discovery . " 

 I try to look away from he and leave the room . strange as it seem , I hardly think I should have succeed in the attempt if Madame Fosco have not help I by cause he to move and look away first . 

 " count , you be keep Miss Halcombe standing , " she say . 

 the moment he turn round to get I a chair , I seize my opportunity thank he make my excuse and slip out . 

 an hour later , when Laura 's maid happen to be in her mistress 's room , I take occasion to refer to the closeness of the night , with a view to ascertain next how the servant have be pass their time . 

 " have you be suffer much from the heat downstairs ? " I ask . 

 " no , miss , " say the girl , " we have not feel it to speak of . " 

 " you have be out in the wood then , I suppose ? " 

 " some of we think of go , miss . but cook say she should take her chair into the cool court - yard , outside the kitchen door , and on second thought , all the rest of we take our chair out there too . " 

 the housekeeper be now the only person who remain to be account for . 

 " be Mrs. Michelson go to bed yet ? " I inquire . 

 " I should think not , miss , " say the girl , smile . " Mrs. Michelson be more likely to be get up just now than go to bed . " 

 " why ? what do you mean ? have Mrs. Michelson be take to her bed in the daytime ? " 

 " no , miss , not exactly , but the next thing to it . she be be asleep all the evening on the sofa in her own room . " 

 put together what I observe for myself in the library , and what I have just hear from Laura 's maid , one conclusion seem inevitable . the figure we see at the lake be not the figure of Madame Fosco , of her husband , or of any of the servant . the footstep we hear behind we be not the footstep of any one belong to the house . 

 who could it have be ? 

 it seem useless to inquire . I can not even decide whether the figure be a man 's or a woman 's . I can only say that I think it be a woman 's . 



 VI 

 June 18th . the misery of self - reproach which I suffer yesterday evening , on hear what Laura tell I in the boat - house , return in the loneliness of the night , and keep I wake and wretche for hour . 

 I light my candle at last , and search through my old journal to see what my share in the fatal error of her marriage have really be , and what I might have once do to save she from it . the result soothe I a little for it show that , however blindly and ignorantly I act , I act for the good . cry generally do I harm ; but it be not so last night I think it relieve I . I rise this morning with a settle resolution and a quiet mind . nothing Sir Percival can say or do shall ever irritate I again , or make I forget for one moment that I be stay here in defiance of mortification , insult , and threat , for Laura 's service and for Laura 's sake . 

 the speculation in which we might have indulge this morning , on the subject of the figure at the lake and the footstep in the plantation , have be all suspend by a trifling accident which have cause Laura great regret . she have lose the little brooch I give she for a keepsake on the day before her marriage . as she wear it when we go out yesterday evening we can only suppose that it must have drop from her dress , either in the boat - house or on our way back . the servant have be send to search , and have return unsuccessful . and now Laura herself have go to look for it . whether she find it or not the loss will help to excuse her absence from the house , if Sir Percival return before the letter from Mr. Gilmore 's partner be place in my hand . 

 one o'clock have just strike . I be consider whether I have well wait here for the arrival of the messenger from London , or slip away quietly , and watch for he outside the lodge gate . 

 my suspicion of everybody and everything in this house incline I to think that the second plan may be the good . the Count be safe in the breakfast - room . I hear he , through the door , as I run upstairs ten minute since , exercise his canary - bird at their trick : " come out on my little finger , my pret - pret - prettie ! come out , and hop upstairs ! one , two , three and up ! three , two , one and down ! one , two , three twit - twit - twit - tweet ! " the bird burst into their usual ecstasy of singing , and the Count chirrup and whistle at they in return , as if he be a bird himself . my room door be open , and I can hear the shrill singing and whistle at this very moment . if I be really to slip out without be observe , now be my time . 


 FOUR O'CLOCK . the three hour that have pass since I make my last entry have turn the whole march of event at Blackwater Park in a new direction . whether for good or for evil , I can not and dare not decide . 

 let I get back first to the place at which I leave off , or I shall lose myself in the confusion of my own thought . 

 I go out , as I have propose , to meet the messenger with my letter from London at the lodge gate . on the stair I see no one . in the hall I hear the Count still exercise his bird . but on cross the quadrangle outside , I pass Madame Fosco , walk by herself in her favourite circle , round and round the great fish - pond . I at once slacken my pace , so as to avoid all appearance of be in a hurry , and even go the length , for caution 's sake , of inquire if she think of go out before lunch . she smile at I in the friendly manner say she prefer remain near the house , nod pleasantly , and re - enter the hall . I look back , and see that she have close the door before I have open the wicket by the side of the carriage gate . 

 in less than a quarter of an hour I reach the lodge . 

 the lane outside take a sudden turn to the left , run on straight for a hundred yard or so , and then take another sharp turn to the right to join the high - road . between these two turn , hide from the lodge on one side , and from the way to the station on the other , I wait , walk backwards and forwards . high hedge be on either side of I , and for twenty minute , by my watch , I neither see nor hear anything . at the end of that time the sound of a carriage catch my ear , and I be meet , as I advance towards the second turning , by a fly from the railway . I make a sign to the driver to stop . as he obey I a respectable - look man put his head out of the window to see what be the matter . 

 " I beg your pardon , " I say , " but be I right in suppose that you be go to Blackwater Park ? " 

 " yes , ma'am . " 

 " with a letter for any one ? " 

 " with a letter for Miss Halcombe , ma'am . " 

 " you may give I the letter . I be Miss Halcombe . " 

 the man touch his hat , get out of the fly immediately , and give I the letter . 

 I open it at once and read these line . I copy they here , think it well to destroy the original for caution 's sake . 



 " DEAR MADAM , your letter receive this morning have cause I very great anxiety . I will reply to it as briefly and plainly as possible . 

 " my careful consideration of the statement make by yourself , and my knowledge of Lady Glyde 's position , as define in the settlement , lead I , I regret to say , to the conclusion that a loan of the trust money to Sir Percival   or , in other word , a loan of some portion of the twenty thousand pound of Lady Glyde 's fortune   be in contemplation , and that she be make a party to the deed , in order to secure her approval of a flagrant breach of trust , and to have her signature produce against she if she should complain hereafter . it be impossible , on any other supposition , to account , situate as she be , for her execution to a deed of any kind be want at all . 

 " in the event of Lady Glyde 's signing such a document , as I be compel to suppose the deed in question to be , her trustee would be at liberty to advance money to Sir Percival out of her twenty thousand pound . if the amount so lent should not be pay back , and if Lady Glyde should have child , their fortune will then be diminish by the sum , large or small , so advanced . in plainer term still , the transaction , for anything that Lady Glyde know to the contrary , may be a fraud upon her unborn child . 

 " under these serious circumstance , I would recommend Lady Glyde to assign as a reason for withhold her signature , that she wish the deed to be first submit to myself , as her family solicitor   in the absence of my partner , Mr. Gilmore . no reasonable objection can be make to take this course for , if the transaction be an honourable one , there will necessarily be no difficulty in my give my approval . 

 " sincerely assure you of my readiness to afford any additional help or advice that may be want , I beg to remain , Madam , your faithful servant , 

 " WILLIAM KYRLE . " 


 I read this kind and sensible letter very thankfully . it supply Laura with a reason for object to the signature which be unanswerable , and which we could both of we understand . the messenger wait near I while I be read to receive his direction when I have do . 

 " will you be good enough to say that I understand the letter , and that I be very much oblige ? " I say . " there be no other reply necessary at present . " 

 exactly at the moment when I be speak those word , hold the letter open in my hand , Count Fosco turn the corner of the lane from the high - road , and stand before I as if he have spring up out of the earth . 

 the suddenness of his appearance , in the very last place under heaven in which I should have expect to see he , take I completely by surprise . the messenger wish I good - morning , and get into the fly again . I could not say a word to he I be not even able to return his bow . the conviction that I be discover and by that man , of all other absolutely petrify I . 

 " be you go back to the house , Miss Halcombe ? " he inquire , without show the least surprise on his side , and without even look after the fly , which drive off while he be speak to I . 

 I collect myself sufficiently to make a sign in the affirmative . 

 " I be go back too , " he say . " pray allow I the pleasure of accompany you . will you take my arm ? you look surprised at see I ! " 

 I take his arm . the first of my scatter sens that come back be the sense that warn I to sacrifice anything rather than make an enemy of he . 

 " you look surprised at see I ! " he repeat in his quietly pertinacious way . 

 " I think , Count , I hear you with your bird in the breakfast - room , " I answer , as quietly and firmly as I could . 

 " surely . but my little feather child , dear lady , be only too like other child . they have their day of perversity , and this morning be one of they . my wife come in as I be put they back in their cage , and say she have leave you go out alone for a walk . you tell she so , do you not ? " 

 " certainly . " 

 " well , Miss Halcombe , the pleasure of accompany you be too great a temptation for I to resist . at my age there be no harm in confess so much as that , be there ? I seize my hat , and set off to offer myself as your escort . even so fat an old man as Fosco be surely well than no escort at all ? I take the wrong path I come back in despair , and here I be , arrive   may I say it ?   at the height of my wish . " 

 he talk on in this complimentary strain with a fluency which leave I no exertion to make beyond the effort of maintain my composure . he never refer in the most distant manner to what he have see in the lane , or to the letter which I still have in my hand . this ominous discretion help to convince I that he must have surprise , by the most dishonourable mean , the secret of my application in Laura 's interest to the lawyer ; and that , have now assure himself of the private manner in which I have receive the answer , he have discover enough to suit his purpose , and be only bent on try to quiet the suspicion which he know he must have arouse in my mind . I be wise enough , under these circumstance , not to attempt to deceive he by plausible explanation , and woman enough , notwithstanding my dread of he , to feel as if my hand be taint by rest on his arm . 

 on the drive in front of the house we meet the dog - cart be take round to the stable . Sir Percival have just return . he come out to meet we at the house - door . whatever other result his journey might have have , it have not end in soften his savage temper . 

 " oh ! here be two of you come back , " he say , with a lower face . " what be the meaning of the house be desert in this way ? where be Lady Glyde ? " 

 I tell he of the loss of the brooch , and say that Laura have go into the plantation to look for it . 

 " Brooch or no brooch , " he growl sulkily , " I recommend she not to forget her appointment in the library this afternoon . I shall expect to see she in half an hour . " 

 I take my hand from the Count 's arm , and slowly ascend the step . he honour I with one of his magnificent bow , and then address himself gaily to the scowling master of the house . 

 " tell I , Percival , " he say , " have you have a pleasant drive ? and have your pretty shin Brown Molly come back at all tired ? " 

 " Brown Molly be hang and the drive too ! I want my lunch . " 

 " and I want five minute ' talk with you , Percival , first , " return the Count . " five minute ' talk , my friend , here on the grass . " 

 " what about ? " 

 " about business that very much concern you . " 

 I linger long enough in pass through the hall - door to hear this question and answer , and to see Sir Percival thrust his hand into his pocket in sullen hesitation . 

 " if you want to badger I with any more of your infernal scruple , " he say , " I for one will not   hear they . I want my lunch . " 

 " come out here and speak to I , " repeat the Count , still perfectly uninfluence by the rude speech that his friend could make to he . 

 Sir Percival descend the step . the Count take he by the arm , and walk he away gently . the " business , " I be sure , refer to the question of the signature . they be speak of Laura and of I beyond a doubt . I feel heart - sick and faint with anxiety . it might be of the last importance to both of we to know what they be say to each other at that moment , and not one word of it could by any possibility reach my ear . 

 I walk about the house , from room to room , with the lawyer 's letter in my bosom   I be afraid by this time even to trust it under lock and key , till the oppression of my suspense half madden I . there be no sign of Laura 's return , and I think of go out to look for she . but my strength be so exhausted by the trial and anxiety of the morning that the heat of the day quite overpower I , and after an attempt to get to the door I be oblige to return to the drawing - room and lie down on the near sofa to recover . 

 I be just compose myself when the door open softly and the Count look in . 

 " a thousand pardon , Miss Halcombe , " he say ; " I only venture to disturb you because I be the bearer of good news . Percival who be capricious in everything , as you know have see fit to alter his mind at the last moment , and the business of the signature be put off for the present . a great relief to all of we , Miss Halcombe , as I see with pleasure in your face . pray present my good respect and felicitation , when you mention this pleasant change of circumstance to Lady Glyde . " 

 he leave I before I have recover my astonishment . there could be no doubt that this extraordinary alteration of purpose in the matter of the signature be due to his influence , and that his discovery of my application to London yesterday , and of my have receive an answer to it to - day , have offer he the mean of interfere with certain success . 

 I feel these impression , but my mind seem to share the exhaustion of my body , and I be in no condition to dwell on they with any useful reference to the doubtful present or the threatening future . I try a second time to run out and find Laura , but my head be giddy and my knee tremble under I . there be no choice but to give it up again and return to the sofa , sorely against my will . 

 the quiet in the house , and the low murmur hum of summer insect outside the open window , soothe I . my eye close of themselves , and I pass gradually into a strange condition , which be not wake for I know nothing of what be go on about I , and not sleep for I be conscious of my own repose . in this state my fevere mind break loose from I , while my weary body be at rest , and in a trance , or day - dream of my fancy I know not what to call it I see Walter Hartright . I have not think of he since I rise that morning Laura have not say one word to I either directly or indirectly refer to he and yet I see he now as plainly as if the past time have return , and we be both together again at Limmeridge House . 

 he appear to I as one among many other man , none of whose face I could plainly discern . they be all lie on the step of an immense ruin temple . colossal tropical tree with rank creeper twin endlessly about their trunk , and hideous stone idol glimmer and grin at interval behind leaf and stalk and branch surround the temple and shut out the sky , and throw a dismal shadow over the forlorn band of man on the step . white exhalation twist and curl up stealthily from the ground , approach the man in wreath like smoke , touch they , and stretch they out dead , one by one , in the place where they lay . an agony of pity and fear for Walter loosen my tongue , and I implore he to escape . " come back , come back ! " I say . " remember your promise to she and to I . come back to we before the Pestilence reach you and lay you dead like the rest ! " 

 he look at I with an unearthly quiet in his face . " wait , " he say , " I shall come back . the night when I meet the lost woman on the highway be the night which set my life apart to be the instrument of a Design that be yet unseen . here , lose in the wilderness , or there , welcome back in the land of my birth , I be still walk on the dark road which lead I , and you , and the sister of your love and mine , to the unknown Retribution and the inevitable end . wait and look . the pestilence which touch the rest will pass I . " 

 I see he again . he be still in the forest , and the number of his lost companion have dwindle to very few . the temple be go , and the idol be go and in their place the figure of dark , dwarfish man lurk murderously among the tree , with bow in their hand , and arrow fit to the string . once more I fear for Walter , and cry out to warn he . once more he turn to I , with the immovable quiet in his face . 

 " another step , " he say , " on the dark road . wait and look . the arrow that strike the rest will spare I . " 

 I see he for the third time in a wreck ship , strand on a wild , sandy shore . the overloaded boat be make away from he for the land , and he alone be leave to sink with the ship . I cry to he to hail the hindmost boat , and to make a last effort for his life . the quiet face look at I in return , and the unmoved voice give I back the changeless reply . " another step on the journey . wait and look . the Sea which drown the rest will spare I . " 

 I see he for the last time . he be kneel by a tomb of white marble , and the shadow of a veiled woman rise out of the grave beneath and wait by his side . the unearthly quiet of his face have change to an unearthly sorrow . but the terrible certainty of his word remain the same . " Darker and darker , " he say ; " far and far yet . death take the good , the beautiful , and the young and spar I . the Pestilence that waste , the Arrow that strike , the Sea that drown , the Grave that close over Love and Hope , be step of my journey , and take I near and nearer to the end . " 

 my heart sink under a dread beyond word , under a grief beyond tear . the darkness close round the pilgrim at the marble tomb close round the veiled woman from the grave close round the dreamer who look on they . I see and hear no more . 

 I be arouse by a hand lay on my shoulder . it be Laura 's . 

 she have drop on her knee by the side of the sofa . her face be flushed and agitated , and her eye meet mine in a wild bewildered manner . I start the instant I see she . 

 " what have happen ? " I ask . " what have frighten you ? " 

 she look round at the half - open door , put her lip close to my ear , and answer in a whisper 

 " Marian ! the figure at the lake the footstep last night I have   just see she ! I have   just speak to she ! " 

 " who , for Heaven 's sake ? " 

 " Anne Catherick . " 

 I be so startled by the disturbance in Laura 's face and manner , and so dismay by the first wake impression of my dream , that I be not fit to bear the revelation which burst upon I when that name pass her lip . I could only stand rooted to the floor , look at she in breathless silence . 

 she be too much absorb by what have happen to notice the effect which her reply have produce on I . " I have see Anne Catherick ! I have speak to Anne Catherick ! " she repeat as if I have not hear she . " oh , Marian , I have such thing to tell you ! come away we may be interrupt here come at once into my room . " 

 with those eager word she catch I by the hand , and lead I through the library , to the end room on the ground floor , which have be fit up for her own especial use . no third person , except her maid , could have any excuse for surprise we here . she push I in before she , lock the door , and draw the chintz curtain that hang over the inside . 

 the strange , stunned feeling which have take possession of I still remain . but a grow conviction that the complication which have long threaten to gather about she , and to gather about I , have suddenly close fast round we both , be now begin to penetrate my mind . I could not express it in word I could hardly even realise it dimly in my own thought . " Anne Catherick ! " I whisper to myself , with useless , helpless reiteration " Anne Catherick ! " 

 Laura draw I to the near seat , an ottoman in the middle of the room . " look ! " she say , " look here ! " and point to the bosom of her dress . 

 I see , for the first time , that the lose brooch be pin in its place again . there be something real in the sight of it , something real in the touching of it afterwards , which seem to steady the whirl and confusion in my thought , and to help I to compose myself . 

 " where do you find your brooch ? " the first word I could say to she be the word which put that trivial question at that important moment . 

 " she find it , Marian . " 

 " where ? " 

 " on the floor of the boat - house . oh , how shall I begin how shall I tell you about it ! she talk to I so strangely she look so fearfully ill she leave I so suddenly ! " 

 her voice rise as the tumult of her recollection press upon her mind . the inveterate distrust which weigh , night and day , on my spirit in this house , instantly rouse I to warn she just as the sight of the brooch have rouse I to question she , the moment before . 

 " speak low , " I say . " the window be open , and the garden path run beneath it . begin at the beginning , Laura . tell I , word for word , what pass between that woman and you . " 

 " shall I close the window ? " 

 " no , only speak low only remember that Anne Catherick be a dangerous subject under your husband 's roof . where do you first see she ? " 

 " at the boat - house , Marian . I go out , as you know , to find my brooch , and I walk along the path through the plantation , look down on the ground carefully at every step . in that way I get on , after a long time , to the boat - house , and as soon as I be inside it , I go on my knee to hunt over the floor . I be still search with my back to the doorway , when I hear a soft , strange voice behind I say , ' Miss Fairlie . ' " 

 " Miss Fairlie ! " 

 " yes , my old name the dear , familiar name that I think I have part from for ever . I start up not frightened , the voice be too kind and gentle to frighten anybody but very much surprised . there , look at I from the doorway , stand a woman , whose face I never remember to have see before " 

 " how be she dress ? " 

 " she have a neat , pretty white gown on , and over it a poor wear thin dark shawl . her bonnet be of brown straw , as poor and wear as the shawl . I be strike by the difference between her gown and the rest of her dress , and she see that I notice it . ' do not   look at my bonnet and shawl , ' she say , speak in a quick , breathless , sudden way ; ' if I must not   wear white , I do not   care what I wear . look at my gown as much as you please I be not ashamed of that . ' very strange , be it not ? before I could say anything to soothe she , she hold out one of her hand , and I see my brooch in it . I be so pleased and so grateful , that I go quite close to she to say what I really feel . ' be you thankful enough to do I one little kindness ? ' she ask . ' yes , indeed , ' I answer , ' any kindness in my power I shall be glad to show you . ' ' then let I pin your brooch on for you , now I have find it . ' her request be so unexpected , Marian , and she make it with such extraordinary eagerness , that I draw back a step or two , not well know what to do . ' ah ! ' she say , ' your mother would have let I pin on the brooch . ' there be something in her voice and her look , as well as in her mention my mother in that reproachful manner , which make I ashamed of my distrust . I take her hand with the brooch in it , and put it up gently on the bosom of my dress . ' you know my mother ? ' I say . ' be it very long ago ? have I ever see you before ? ' her hand be busy fasten the brooch : she stop and press they against my breast . ' you do not   remember a fine spring day at Limmeridge , ' she say , ' and your mother walk down the path that lead to the school , with a little girl on each side of she ? I have have nothing else to think of since , and I remember it . you be one of the little girl , and I be the other . pretty , clever Miss Fairlie , and poor daze Anne Catherick be near to each other then than they be now ! ' " 

 " do you remember she , Laura , when she tell you her name ? " 

 " yes , I remember your ask I about Anne Catherick at Limmeridge , and your say that she have once be consider like I . " 

 " what remind you of that , Laura ? " 

 " she remind I . while I be look at she , while she be very close to I , it come over my mind suddenly that we be like each other ! her face be pale and thin and weary but the sight of it startle I , as if it have be the sight of my own face in the glass after a long illness . the discovery I do not   know why give I such a shock , that I be perfectly incapable of speak to she for the moment . " 

 " do she seem hurt by your silence ? " 

 " I be afraid she be hurt by it . ' you have not get your mother 's face , ' she say , ' or your mother 's heart . your mother 's face be dark , and your mother 's heart , Miss Fairlie , be the heart of an angel . ' ' I be sure I feel kindly towards you , ' I say , ' though I may not be able to express it as I ought . why do you call I Miss Fairlie ? ' ' because I love the name of Fairlie and hate the name of Glyde , ' she break out violently . I have see nothing like madness in she before this , but I fancy I see it now in her eye . ' I only think you might not know I be marry , ' I say , remember the wild letter she write to I at Limmeridge , and try to quiet she . she sigh bitterly , and turn away from I . ' not know you be marry ? ' she repeat . ' I be here because you be married . I be here to make atonement to you , before I meet your mother in the world beyond the grave . ' she draw far and far away from I , till she be out of the boat - house , and then she watch and listen for a little while . when she turn round to speak again , instead of come back , she stop where she be , look in at I , with a hand on each side of the entrance . ' do you see I at the lake last night ? ' she say . ' do you hear I follow you in the wood ? I have be wait for day together to speak to you alone I have leave the only friend I have in the world , anxious and frighten about I I have risk be shut up again in the mad - house and all for your sake , Miss Fairlie , all for your sake . ' her word alarm I , Marian , and yet there be something in the way she speak that make I pity she with all my heart . I be sure my pity must have be sincere , for it make I bold enough to ask the poor creature to come in , and sit down in the boat - house , by my side . " 

 " do she do so ? " 

 " no . she shake her head , and tell I she must stop where she be , to watch and listen , and see that no third person surprise we . and from first to last , there she wait at the entrance , with a hand on each side of it , sometimes bend in suddenly to speak to I , sometimes draw back suddenly to look about she . ' I be here yesterday , ' she say , ' before it come dark , and I hear you , and the lady with you , talk together . I hear you tell she about your husband . I hear you say you have no influence to make he believe you , and no influence to keep he silent . ah ! I know what those word mean my conscience tell I while I be listen . why do I ever let you marry he ! oh , my fear my mad , miserable , wicked fear ! ' she cover up her face in her poor worn shawl , and moan and murmur to herself behind it . I begin to be afraid she might break out into some terrible despair which neither she nor I could master . ' try to quiet yourself , ' I say ; ' try to tell I how you might have prevent my marriage . ' she take the shawl from her face , and look at I vacantly . ' I ought to have have heart enough to stop at Limmeridge , ' she answer . ' I ought never to have let the news of his come there frighten I away . I ought to have warn you and save you before it be too late . why do I only have courage enough to write you that letter ? why do I only do harm , when I want and mean to do good ? oh , my fear my mad , miserable , wicked fear ! ' she repeat those word again , and hide her face again in the end of her poor worn shawl . it be dreadful to see she , and dreadful to hear she . " 

 " surely , Laura , you ask what the fear be which she dwelt on so earnestly ? " 

 " yes , I ask that . " 

 " and what do she say ? " 

 " she ask I in return , if I should not be afraid of a man who have shut I up in a mad - house , and who would shut I up again , if he could ? I say , ' be you afraid still ? surely you would not be here if you be afraid now ? ' ' no , ' she say , ' I be not afraid now . ' I ask why not . she suddenly bent forward into the boat - house , and say , ' can not   you guess why ? ' I shake my head . ' look at I , ' she go on . I tell she I be grieve to see that she look very sorrowful and very ill . she smile for the first time . ' Ill ? ' she repeat ; ' I be die . you know why I be not afraid of he now . do you think I shall meet your mother in heaven ? will she forgive I if I do ? ' I be so shocked and so startled , that I could make no reply . ' I have be think of it , ' she go on , ' all the time I have be in hiding from your husband , all the time I lay ill . my thought have drive I here I want to make atonement I want to undo all I can of the harm I once do . ' I beg she as earnestly as I could to tell I what she mean . she still look at I with fixed vacant eye . ' shall I undo the harm ? ' she say to herself doubtfully . ' you have friend to take your part . if you know his secret , he will be afraid of you , he will not   dare use you as he use I . he must treat you mercifully for his own sake , if he be afraid of you and your friend . and if he treat you mercifully , and if I can say it be my doing ' I listen eagerly for more , but she stop at those word . " 

 " you try to make she go on ? " 

 " I try , but she only draw herself away from I again , and lean her face and arm against the side of the boat - house . ' oh ! ' I hear she say , with a dreadful , distracted tenderness in her voice , ' oh ! if I could only be bury with your mother ! if I could only wake at her side , when the angel 's trumpet sound , and the graf give up their dead at the resurrection ! ' Marian ! I tremble from head to foot it be horrible to hear she . ' but there be no hope of that , ' she say , move a little , so as to look at I again , ' no hope for a poor stranger like I . I shall not rest under the marble cross that I wash with my own hand , and make so white and pure for her sake . oh no ! oh no ! God 's mercy , not man 's , will take I to she , where the wicked cease from troubling and the weary be at rest . ' she speak those word quietly and sorrowfully , with a heavy , hopeless sigh , and then wait a little . her face be confused and trouble , she seem to be think , or try to think . ' what be it I say just now ? ' she ask after a while . ' when your mother be in my mind , everything else go out of it . what be I say ? what be I say ? ' I remind the poor creature , as kindly and delicately as I could . ' ah , yes , yes , ' she say , still in a vacant , perplexed manner . ' you be helpless with your wicked husband . yes . and I must do what I have come to do here I must make it up to you for have be afraid to speak out at a well time . ' ' what be it you have to tell I ? ' I ask . ' the Secret that your cruel husband be afraid of , ' she answer . ' I once threaten he with the Secret , and frighten he . you shall threaten he with the Secret , and frighten he too . ' her face darken , and a hard , angry stare fix itself in her eye . she begin wave her hand at I in a vacant , unmeaning manner . ' my mother know the secret , ' she say . ' my mother have waste under the secret half her lifetime . one day , when I be grow up , she say something to I . and the next day your husband ' " 

 " yes ! yes ! go on . what do she tell you about your husband ? " 

 " she stop again , Marian , at that point " 

 " and say no more ? " 

 " and listen eagerly . ' hush ! ' she whisper , still wave her hand at I . ' hush ! ' she move aside out of the doorway , move slowly and stealthily , step by step , till I lose she past the edge of the boat - house . " 

 " surely you follow she ? " 

 " yes , my anxiety make I bold enough to rise and follow she . just as I reach the entrance , she appear again suddenly , round the side of the boat - house . ' the Secret , ' I whisper to she ' wait and tell I the Secret ! ' she catch hold of my arm , and look at I with wild frightened eye . ' not now , ' she say , ' we be not alone we be watch . come here to - morrow at this time by yourself mind by yourself . ' she push I roughly into the boat - house again , and I see she no more . " 

 " oh , Laura , Laura , another chance lose ! if I have only be near you she should not have escape we . on which side do you lose sight of she ? " 

 " on the left side , where the ground sink and the wood be thick . " 

 " do you run out again ? do you call after she ? " 

 " how could I ? I be too terrified to move or speak . " 

 " but when you do move when you come out ? " 

 " I run back here , to tell you what have happen . " 

 " do you see any one , or hear any one , in the plantation ? " 

 " no , it seem to be all still and quiet when I pass through it . " 

 I wait for a moment to consider . be this third person , suppose to have be secretly present at the interview , a reality , or the creature of Anne Catherick 's excited fancy ? it be impossible to determine . the one thing certain be , that we have fail again on the very brink of discovery fail utterly and irretrievably , unless Anne Catherick keep her appointment at the boat - house for the next day . 

 " be you quite sure you have tell I everything that pass ? every word that be say ? " I inquire . 

 " I think so , " she answer . " my power of memory , Marian , be not like your . but I be so strongly impressed , so deeply interested , that nothing of any importance can possibly have escape I . " 

 " my dear Laura , the mere trifle be of importance where Anne Catherick be concern . think again . do no chance reference escape she as to the place in which she be live at the present time ? " 

 " none that I can remember . " 

 " do she not mention a companion and friend a woman name Mrs. Clements ? " 

 " oh yes ! yes ! I forget that . she tell I Mrs. Clements want sadly to go with she to the lake and take care of she , and beg and pray that she would not venture into this neighbourhood alone . " 

 " be that all she say about Mrs. Clements ? " 

 " yes , that be all . " 

 " she tell you nothing about the place in which she take refuge after leave Todd 's Corner ? " 

 " nothing I be quite sure . " 

 " nor where she have live since ? nor what her illness have be ? " 

 " no , Marian , not a word . tell I , pray tell I , what you think about it . I do not   know what to think , or what to do next . " 

 " you must do this , my love : you must carefully keep the appointment at the boat - house to - morrow . it be impossible to say what interest may not depend on your seeing that woman again . you shall not be leave to yourself a second time . I will follow you at a safe distance . nobody shall see I , but I will keep within hearing of your voice , if anything happen . Anne Catherick have escape Walter Hartright , and have escape you . whatever happen , she shall not escape I . " 

 Laura 's eye read mine attentively . 

 " you believe , " she say , " in this secret that my husband be afraid of ? suppose , Marian , it should only exist after all in Anne Catherick 's fancy ? suppose she only want to see I and to speak to I , for the sake of old remembrance ? her manner be so strange I almost doubt she . would you trust she in other thing ? " 

 " I trust nothing , Laura , but my own observation of your husband 's conduct . I judge Anne Catherick 's word by his action , and I believe there be a secret . " 

 I say no more , and get up to leave the room . thought be trouble I which I might have tell she if we have speak together long , and which it might have be dangerous for she to know . the influence of the terrible dream from which she have awaken I hang darkly and heavily over every fresh impression which the progress of her narrative produce on my mind . I feel the ominous future come close , chill I with an unutterable awe , force on I the conviction of an unseen design in the long series of complication which have now fasten round we . I think of Hartright as I see he in the body when he say farewell ; as I see he in the spirit in my dream and I too begin to doubt now whether we be not advance blindfold to an appoint and an inevitable end . 

 leave Laura to go upstairs alone , I go out to look about I in the walk near the house . the circumstance under which Anne Catherick have part from she have make I secretly anxious to know how Count Fosco be pass the afternoon , and have render I secretly distrustful of the result of that solitary journey from which Sir Percival have return but a few hour since . 

 after look for they in every direction and discover nothing , I return to the house , and enter the different room on the ground floor one after another . they be all empty . I come out again into the hall , and go upstairs to return to Laura . Madame Fosco open her door as I pass it in my way along the passage , and I stop to see if she could inform I of the whereabouts of her husband and Sir Percival . yes , she have see they both from her window more than an hour since . the Count have look up with his customary kindness , and have mention with his habitual attention to she in the small trifle , that he and his friend be go out together for a long walk . 

 for a long walk ! they have never yet be in each other 's company with that object in my experience of they . Sir Percival care for no exercise but riding , and the Count   except when he be polite enough to be my escort   care for no exercise at all . 

 when I join Laura again , I find that she have call to mind in my absence the impending question of the signature to the deed , which , in the interest of discuss her interview with Anne Catherick , we have hitherto overlook . her first word when I see she express her surprise at the absence of the expect summon to attend Sir Percival in the library . 

 " you may make your mind easy on that subject , " I say . " for the present , at least , neither your resolution nor mine will be expose to any further trial . Sir Percival have alter his plan the business of the signature be put off . " 

 " put off ? " Laura repeat amazedly . " who tell you so ? " 

 " my authority be Count Fosco . I believe it be to his interference that we be indebted for your husband 's sudden change of purpose . " 

 " it seem impossible , marian . if the object of my signing be , as we suppose , to obtain money for Sir Percival that he urgently want , how can the matter be put off ? " 

 " I think , Laura , we have the mean at hand of set that doubt at rest . have you forget the conversation that I hear between Sir Percival and the lawyer as they be cross the hall ? " 

 " no , but I do not   remember " 

 " I do . there be two alternative propose . one be to obtain your signature to the parchment . the other be to gain time by give bill at three month . the last resource be evidently the resource now adopt , and we may fairly hope to be relieve from our share in Sir Percival 's embarrassment for some time to come . " 

 " oh , Marian , it sound too good to be true ! " 

 " do it , my love ? you compliment I on my ready memory not long since , but you seem to doubt it now . I will get my journal , and you shall see if I be right or wrong . " 

 I go away and get the book at once . 

 on look back to the entry refer to the lawyer 's visit , we find that my recollection of the two alternative present be accurately correct . it be almost as great a relief to my mind as to Laura 's , to find that my memory have serve I , on this occasion , as faithfully as usual . in the perilous uncertainty of our present situation , it be hard to say what future interest may not depend upon the regularity of the entry in my journal , and upon the reliability of my recollection at the time when I make they . 

 Laura 's face and manner suggest to I that this last consideration have occur to she as well as to myself . anyway , it be only a trifling matter , and I be almost ashamed to put it down here in write it seem to set the forlornness of our situation in such a miserably vivid light . we must have little indeed to depend on , when the discovery that my memory can still be trust to serve we be hail as if it be the discovery of a new friend ! 

 the first bell for dinner separate we . just as it have do ringing , Sir Percival and the Count return from their walk . we hear the master of the house storm at the servant for be five minute late , and the master 's guest interposing , as usual , in the interest of propriety , patience , and peace . 

 the evening have come and go . no extraordinary event have happen . but I have notice certain peculiarity in the conduct of Sir Percival and the Count , which have send I to my bed feel very anxious and uneasy about Anne Catherick , and about the result which to - morrow may produce . 

 I know enough by this time , to be sure , that the aspect of Sir Percival which be the most false , and which , therefore , mean the bad , be his polite aspect . that long walk with his friend have end in improve his manner , especially towards his wife . to Laura 's secret surprise and to my secret alarm , he call she by her christian name , ask if she have hear lately from her uncle , inquire when Mrs. Vesey be to receive her invitation to Blackwater , and show she so many other little attention that he almost recall the day of his hateful courtship at Limmeridge House . this be a bad sign to begin with , and I think it more ominous still that he should pretend after dinner to fall asleep in the drawing - room , and that his eye should cunningly follow Laura and I when he think we neither of we suspect he . I have never have any doubt that his sudden journey by himself take he to Welmingham to question Mrs. Catherick but the experience of to - night have make I fear that the expedition be not undertake in vain , and that he have get the information which he unquestionably leave we to collect . if I know where Anne Catherick be to be find , I would be up to - morrow with sunrise and warn she . 

 while the aspect under which Sir Percival present himself to - night be unhappily but too familiar to I , the aspect under which the Count appear be , on the other hand , entirely new in my experience of he . he permit I , this evening , to make his acquaintance , for the first time , in the character of a Man of Sentiment of sentiment , as I believe , really feel , not assume for the occasion . 

 for instance , he be quiet and subdue his eye and his voice express a restrained sensibility . he wear   as if there be some hide connection between his showy finery and his deep feeling   the most magnificent waistcoat he have yet appear in it be make of pale sea - green silk , and delicately trim with fine silver braid . his voice sink into the tender inflection , his smile express a thoughtful , fatherly admiration , whenever he speak to Laura or to I . he press his wife 's hand under the table when she thank he for trifle little attention at dinner . he take wine with she . " your health and happiness , my angel ! " he say , with fond glisten eye . he eat little or nothing , and sigh , and say " Good Percival ! " when his friend laugh at he . after dinner , he take Laura by the hand , and ask she if she would be ' so sweet as to play to he . " she comply , through sheer astonishment . he sit by the piano , with his watch - chain resting in fold , like a golden serpent , on the sea - green protuberance of his waistcoat . his immense head lie languidly on one side , and he gently beat time with two of his yellow - white finger . he highly approve of the music , and tenderly admire Laura 's manner of play not as poor Hartright use to praise it , with an innocent enjoyment of the sweet sound , but with a clear , cultivate , practical knowledge of the merit of the composition , in the first place , and of the merit of the player 's touch in the second . as the evening close in , he beg that the lovely die light might not be profane , just yet , by the appearance of the lamp . he come , with his horribly silent tread , to the distant window at which I be stand , to be out of his way and to avoid the very sight of he he come to ask I to support his protest against the lamp . if any one of they could only have burn he up at that moment , I would have go down to the kitchen and fetch it myself . 

 " surely you like this modest , tremble english twilight ? " he say softly . " ah ! I love it . I feel my inborn admiration of all that be noble , and great , and good , purify by the breath of heaven on an evening like this . nature have such imperishable charm , such inextinguishable tenderness for I ! I be an old , fat man talk which would become your lip , Miss Halcombe , sound like a derision and a mockery on mine . it be hard to be laugh at in my moment of sentiment , as if my soul be like myself , old and overgrown . Observe , dear lady , what a light be die on the tree ! do it penetrate your heart , as it penetrate mine ? " 

 he pause , look at I , and repeat the famous line of Dante on the evening - time , with a melody and tenderness which add a charm of their own to the matchless beauty of the poetry itself . 

 " Bah ! " he cry suddenly , as the last cadence of those noble italian word die away on his lip ; " I make an old fool of myself , and only weary you all ! let we shut up the window in our bosom and get back to the matter - of - fact world . percival ! I sanction the admission of the lamp . Lady Glyde Miss Halcombe Eleanor , my good wife which of you will indulge I with a game at domino ? " 

 he address we all , but he look especially at Laura . 

 she have learn to feel my dread of offend he , and she accept his proposal . it be more than I could have do at that moment . I could not have sit down at the same table with he for any consideration . his eye seem to reach my inmost soul through the thickening obscurity of the twilight . his voice tremble along every nerve in my body , and turn I hot and cold alternately . the mystery and terror of my dream , which have haunt I at interval all through the evening , now oppress my mind with an unendurable foreboding and an unutterable awe . I see the white tomb again , and the veiled woman rise out of it by Hartright 's side . the thought of Laura well up like a spring in the depth of my heart , and fill it with water of bitterness , never , never know to it before . I catch she by the hand as she pass I on her way to the table , and kiss she as if that night be to part we for ever . while they be all gaze at I in astonishment , I run out through the low window which be open before I to the ground run out to hide from they in the darkness , to hide even from myself . 


 we separate that evening later than usual . towards midnight the summer silence be break by the shuddering of a low , melancholy wind among the tree . we all feel the sudden chill in the atmosphere , but the Count be the first to notice the stealthy rise of the wind . he stop while he be light my candle for I , and hold up his hand warningly 

 " listen ! " he say . " there will be a change to - morrow . " 



 VII 

 June 19th . the event of yesterday warn I to be ready , soon or later , to meet the bad . to - day be not yet at an end , and the bad have come . 

 judge by the close calculation of time that Laura and I could make , we arrive at the conclusion that Anne Catherick must have appear at the boat - house at half - past two o'clock on the afternoon of yesterday . I accordingly arrange that Laura should just show herself at the luncheon - table to - day , and should then slip out at the first opportunity , leave I behind to preserve appearance , and to follow she as soon as I could safely do so . this mode of proceeding , if no obstacle occur to thwart we , would enable she to be at the boat - house before half - past two , and   when I leave the table , in my turn   would take I to a safe position in the plantation before three . 

 the change in the weather , which last night 's wind warn we to expect , come with the morning . it be rain heavily when I get up , and it continue to rain until twelve o'clock when the cloud disperse , the blue sky appear , and the sun shine again with the bright promise of a fine afternoon . 

 my anxiety to know how Sir Percival and the Count would occupy the early part of the day be by no mean set at rest , so far as Sir Percival be concern , by his leave we immediately after breakfast , and go out by himself , in spite of the rain . he neither tell we where he be go nor when we might expect he back . we see he pass the breakfast - room window hastily , with his high boot and his waterproof coat on and that be all . 

 the Count pass the morning quietly indoor , some part of it in the library , some part in the drawing - room , play odd and end of music on the piano , and hum to himself . judge by appearance , the sentimental side of his character be persistently inclined to betray itself still . he be silent and sensitive , and ready to sigh and languish ponderously   as only fat man can sigh and languish   on the small provocation . 

 luncheon - time come and Sir Percival do not return . the Count take his friend 's place at the table , plaintively devour the great part of a fruit tart , submerge under a whole jugful of cream , and explain the full merit of the achievement to we as soon as he have do . " a taste for sweet , " he say in his soft tone and his tender manner , " be the innocent taste of woman and child . I love to share it with they it be another bond , dear lady , between you and I . " 

 Laura leave the table in ten minute ' time . I be sorely tempt to accompany she . but if we have both go out together we must have excite suspicion , and bad still , if we allow Anne Catherick to see Laura , accompany by a second person who be a stranger to she , we should in all probability forfeit her confidence from that moment , never to regain it again . 

 I wait , therefore , as patiently as I could , until the servant come in to clear the table . when I quit the room , there be no sign , in the house or out of it , of Sir Percival 's return . I leave the Count with a piece of sugar between his lip , and the vicious cockatoo scramble up his waistcoat to get at it , while Madame Fosco , sit opposite to her husband , watch the proceeding of his bird and himself as attentively as if she have never see anything of the sort before in her life . on my way to the plantation I keep carefully beyond the range of view from the luncheon - room window . nobody see I and nobody follow I . it be then a quarter to three o'clock by my watch . 

 once among the tree I walk rapidly , until I have advance more than half - way through the plantation . at that point I slacken my pace and proceed cautiously , but I see no one , and hear no voice . by little and little I come within view of the back of the boat - house stop and listen then go on , till I be close behind it , and must have hear any person who be talk inside . still the silence be unbroken still far and near no sign of a living creature appear anywhere . 

 after skirt round by the back of the building , first on one side and then on the other , and make no discovery , I venture in front of it , and fairly look in . the place be empty . 

 I call , " Laura ! " at first softly , then louder and louder . no one answer and no one appear . for all that I could see and hear , the only human creature in the neighbourhood of the lake and the plantation be myself . 

 my heart begin to beat violently , but I keep my resolution , and search , first the boat - house and then the ground in front of it , for any sign which might show I whether Laura have really reach the place or not . no mark of her presence appear inside the building , but I find trace of she outside it , in footstep on the sand . 

 I detect the footstep of two person large footstep like a man 's , and small footstep , which , by put my own foot into they and test their size in that manner , I feel certain be Laura 's . the ground be confusedly mark in this way just before the boat - house . close against one side of it , under shelter of the project roof , I discover a little hole in the sand a hole artificially make , beyond a doubt . I just notice it , and then turn away immediately to trace the footstep as far as I could , and to follow the direction in which they might lead I . 

 they lead I , start from the left - hand side of the boat - house , along the edge of the tree , a distance , I should think , of between two and three hundred yard , and then the sandy ground show no further trace of they . feel that the person whose course I be track must necessarily have enter the plantation at this point , I enter it too . at first I could find no path , but I discover one afterwards , just faintly trace among the tree , and follow it . it take I , for some distance , in the direction of the village , until I stop at a point where another foot - track cross it . the bramble grow thickly on either side of this second path . I stand look down it , uncertain which way to take next , and while I look I see on one thorny branch some fragment of fringe from a woman 's shawl . a close examination of the fringe satisfy I that it have be tear from a shawl of Laura 's , and I instantly follow the second path . it bring I out at last , to my great relief , at the back of the house . I say to my great relief , because I infer that Laura must , for some unknown reason , have return before I by this roundabout way . I go in by the court - yard and the office . the first person whom I meet in cross the servant ' hall be Mrs. Michelson , the housekeeper . 

 " do you know , " I ask , " whether Lady Glyde have come in from her walk or not ? " 

 " my lady come in a little while ago with Sir Percival , " answer the housekeeper . " I be afraid , Miss Halcombe , something very distressing have happen . " 

 my heart sink within I . " you do not   mean an accident ? " I say faintly . 

 " no , no thank God , no accident . but my lady run upstairs to her own room in tear , and Sir Percival have order I to give Fanny warning to leave in an hour 's time . " 

 Fanny be Laura 's maid a good affectionate girl who have be with she for year the only person in the house whose fidelity and devotion we could both depend upon . 

 " where be Fanny ? " I inquire . 

 " in my room , Miss Halcombe . the young woman be quite overcome , and I tell she to sit down and try to recover herself . " 

 I go to Mrs. Michelson 's room , and find Fanny in a corner , with her box by her side , cry bitterly . 

 she could give I no explanation whatever of her sudden dismissal . Sir Percival have order that she should have a month 's wage , in place of a month 's warning , and go . no reason have be assign no objection have be make to her conduct . she have be forbid to appeal to her mistress , forbid even to see she for a moment to say good - bye . she be to go without explanation or farewell , and to go at once . 

 after soothe the poor girl by a few friendly word , I ask where she propose to sleep that night . she reply that she think of go to the little inn in the village , the landlady of which be a respectable woman , know to the servant at Blackwater Park . the next morning , by leave early , she might get back to her friend in Cumberland without stop in London , where she be a total stranger . 

 I feel directly that Fanny 's departure offer we a safe mean of communication with London and with Limmeridge House , of which it might be very important to avail ourselves . accordingly , I tell she that she might expect to hear from her mistress or from I in the course of the evening , and that she might depend on our both do all that lie in our power to help she , under the trial of leave we for the present . those word say , I shake hand with she and go upstairs . 

 the door which lead to Laura 's room be the door of an ante - chamber opening on to the passage . when I try it , it be bolt on the inside . 

 I knock , and the door be open by the same heavy , overgrown housemaid whose lumpish insensibility have try my patience so severely on the day when I find the wound dog . 

 I have , since that time , discover that her name be Margaret Porcher , and that she be the most awkward , slatternly , and obstinate servant in the house . 

 on open the door she instantly step out to the threshold , and stand grin at I in stolid silence . 

 " why do you stand there ? " I say . " do not   you see that I want to come in ? " 

 " ah , but you must not   come in , " be the answer , with another and a broad grin still . 

 " how dare you talk to I in that way ? stand back instantly ! " 

 she stretch out a great red hand and arm on each side of she , so as to bar the doorway , and slowly nod her addle head at I . 

 " Master 's order , " she say , and nod again . 

 I have need of all my self - control to warn I against contest the matter with she , and to remind I that the next word I have to say must be address to her master . I turn my back on she , and instantly go downstairs to find he . my resolution to keep my temper under all the irritation that Sir Percival could offer be , by this time , as completely forget I say so to my shame as if I have never make it . it do I good , after all I have suffer and suppress in that house it actually do I good to feel how angry I be . 

 the drawing - room and the breakfast - room be both empty . I go on to the library , and there I find Sir Percival , the Count , and Madame Fosco . they be all three stand up , close together , and Sir Percival have a little slip of paper in his hand . as I open the door I hear the Count say to he , " no a thousand time over , no . " 

 I walk straight up to he , and look he full in the face . 

 " be I to understand , Sir Percival , that your wife 's room be a prison , and that your housemaid be the gaoler who keep it ? " I ask . 

 " yes , that be what you be to understand , " he answer . " take care my gaoler have not   get double duty to do take care your room be not a prison too . " 

 " take you care how you treat your wife , and how you threaten I , " I break out in the heat of my anger . " there be law in England to protect woman from cruelty and outrage . if you hurt a hair of Laura 's head , if you dare to interfere with my freedom , come what may , to those law I will appeal . " 

 instead of answer I he turn round to the Count . 

 " what do I tell you ? " he ask . " what do you say now ? " 

 " what I say before , " reply the Count " no . " 

 even in the vehemence of my anger I feel his calm , cold , grey eye on my face . they turn away from I as soon as he have speak , and look significantly at his wife . Madame Fosco immediately move close to my side , and in that position address Sir Percival before either of we could speak again . 

 " favour I with your attention for one moment , " she say , in her clear icily - suppress tone . " I have to thank you , Sir Percival , for your hospitality , and to decline take advantage of it any long . I remain in no house in which lady be treat as your wife and Miss Halcombe have be treat here to - day ! " 

 Sir Percival draw back a step , and star at she in dead silence . the declaration he have just hear a declaration which he well know , as I well know , Madame Fosco would not have venture to make without her husband 's permission seem to petrify he with surprise . the Count stand by , and look at his wife with the most enthusiastic admiration . 

 " she be sublime ! " he say to himself . he approach she while he speak , and draw her hand through his arm . " I be at your service , Eleanor , " he go on , with a quiet dignity that I have never notice in he before . " and at Miss Halcombe 's service , if she will honour I by accept all the assistance I can offer she . " 

 " damn it ! what do you mean ? " cry Sir Percival , as the Count quietly move away with his wife to the door . 

 " at other time I mean what I say , but at this time I mean what my wife say , " reply the impenetrable italian . " we have change place , Percival , for once , and Madame Fosco 's opinion be mine . " 

 Sir Percival crumple up the paper in his hand , and push past the Count , with another oath , stand between he and the door . 

 " have your own way , " he say , with baffled rage in his low , half - whisper tone . " have your own way and see what come of it . " with those word he leave the room . 

 Madame Fosco glance inquiringly at her husband . " he have go away very suddenly , " she say . " what do it mean ? " 

 " it mean that you and I together have bring the worst - temper man in all England to his sens , " answer the Count . " it mean , Miss Halcombe , that Lady Glyde be relieve from a gross indignity , and you from the repetition of an unpardonable insult . suffer I to express my admiration of your conduct and your courage at a very try moment . " 

 " sincere admiration , " suggest Madame Fosco . 

 " sincere admiration , " echo the Count . 

 I have no long the strength of my first angry resistance to outrage and injury to support I . my heart - sick anxiety to see Laura , my sense of my own helpless ignorance of what have happen at the boat - house , press on I with an intolerable weight . I try to keep up appearance by speak to the Count and his wife in the tone which they have choose to adopt in speak to I , but the word fail on my lip my breath come short and thick my eye look longingly , in silence , at the door . the Count , understand my anxiety , open it , go out , and pull it to after he . at the same time Sir Percival 's heavy step descend the stair . I hear they whisper together outside , while Madame Fosco be assure I , in her calm and most conventional manner , that she rejoice , for all our sake , that Sir Percival 's conduct have not oblige her husband and herself to leave Blackwater Park . before she have do speak the whispering cease , the door open , and the Count look in . 

 " Miss Halcombe , " he say , " I be happy to inform you that Lady Glyde be mistress again in her own house . I think it might be more agreeable to you to hear of this change for the well from I than from Sir Percival , and I have therefore expressly return to mention it . " 

 " admirable delicacy ! " say Madame Fosco , pay back her husband 's tribute of admiration with the Count 's own coin , in the Count 's own manner . he smile and bow as if he have receive a formal compliment from a polite stranger , and draw back to let I pass out first . 

 Sir Percival be stand in the hall . as I hurry to the stair I hear he call impatiently to the Count to come out of the library . 

 " what be you wait there for ? " he say . " I want to speak to you . " 

 " and I want to think a little by myself , " reply the other . " wait till later , Percival , wait till later . " 

 neither he nor his friend say any more . I gain the top of the stair and run along the passage . in my haste and my agitation I leave the door of the ante - chamber open , but I close the door of the bedroom the moment I be inside it . 

 Laura be sit alone at the far end of the room , her arm rest wearily on a table , and her face hide in her hand . she start up with a cry of delight when she see I . 

 " how do you get here ? " she ask . " who give you leave ? not Sir Percival ? " 

 in my overpowering anxiety to hear what she have to tell I , I could not answer she I could only put question on my side . Laura 's eagerness to know what have pass downstair prove , however , too strong to be resist . she persistently repeat her inquiry . 

 " the Count , of course , " I answer impatiently . " whose influence in the house " 

 she stop I with a gesture of disgust . 

 " do not   speak of he , " she cry . " the Count be the vile creature breathing ! the Count be a miserable Spy ! " 

 before we could either of we say another word we be alarm by a soft knocking at the door of the bedroom . 

 I have not yet sit down , and I go first to see who it be . when I open the door Madame Fosco confront I with my handkerchief in her hand . 

 " you drop this downstairs , Miss Halcombe , " she say , " and I think I could bring it to you , as I be pass by to my own room . " 

 her face , naturally pale , have turn to such a ghastly whiteness that I start at the sight of it . her hand , so sure and steady at all other time , tremble violently , and her eye look wolfishly past I through the open door , and fix on Laura . 

 she have be listen before she knock ! I see it in her white face , I see it in her trembling hand , I see it in her look at Laura . 

 after wait an instant she turn from I in silence , and slowly walk away . 

 I close the door again . " oh , Laura ! Laura ! we shall both rue the day when you call the Count a Spy ! " 

 " you would have call he so yourself , Marian , if you have know what I know . Anne Catherick be right . there be a third person watch we in the plantation yesterday , and that third person - " 

 " be you sure it be the Count ? " 

 " I be absolutely certain . he be Sir Percival 's spy he be Sir Percival 's informer he set Sir Percival watch and wait , all the morning through , for Anne Catherick and for I . " 

 " be Anne find ? do you see she at the lake ? " 

 " no . she have save herself by keep away from the place . when I get to the boat - house no one be there . " 

 " yes ? yes ? " 

 " I go in and sit wait for a few minute . but my restlessness make I get up again , to walk about a little . as I pass out I see some mark on the sand , close under the front of the boat - house . I stoop down to examine they , and discover a word write in large letter on the sand . the word be look . " 

 " and you scrap away the sand , and dig a hollow place in it ? " 

 " how do you know that , Marian ? " 

 " I see the hollow place myself when I follow you to the boat - house . go on go on ! " 

 " yes , I scrap away the sand on the surface , and in a little while I come to a strip of paper hide beneath , which have write on it . the writing be sign with Anne Catherick 's initial . " 

 " where be it ? " 

 " Sir Percival have take it from I . " 

 " can you remember what the writing be ? do you think you can repeat it to I ? " 

 " in substance I can , Marian . it be very short . you would have remember it , word for word . " 

 " try to tell I what the substance be before we go any far . " 

 she comply . I write the line down here exactly as she repeat they to I . they run thus 


 " I be see with you , yesterday , by a tall , stout old man , and have to run to save myself . he be not quick enough on his foot to follow I , and he lose I among the tree . I dare not risk come back here to - day at the same time . I write this , and hide it in the sand , at six in the morning , to tell you so . when we speak next of your wicked husband 's Secret we must speak safely , or not at all . try to have patience . I promise you shall see I again and that soon . A. C. " 


 the reference to the " tall , stout old man "   the term of which Laura be certain that she have repeat to I correctly   leave no doubt as to who the intruder have be . I call to mind that I have tell Sir Percival , in the Count 's presence the day before , that Laura have go to the boat - house to look for her brooch . in all probability he have follow she there , in his officious way , to relieve her mind about the matter of the signature , immediately after he have mention the change in Sir Percival 's plan to I in the drawing - room . in this case he could only have get to the neighbourhood of the boat - house at the very moment when Anne Catherick discover he . the suspiciously hurry manner in which she part from Laura have no doubt prompt his useless attempt to follow she . of the conversation which have previously take place between they he could have hear nothing . the distance between the house and the lake , and the time at which he leave I in the drawing - room , as compare with the time at which Laura and Anne Catherick have be speak together , prove that fact to we at any rate , beyond a doubt . 

 have arrive at something like a conclusion so far , my next great interest be to know what discovery Sir Percival have make after Count Fosco have give he his information . 

 " how come you to lose possession of the letter ? " I ask . " what do you do with it when you find it in the sand ? " 

 " after read it once through , " she reply , " I take it into the boat - house with I to sit down and look over it a second time . while I be read a shadow fall across the paper . I look up , and see Sir Percival stand in the doorway watch I . " 

 " do you try to hide the letter ? " 

 " I try , but he stop I . ' you need not   trouble to hide that , ' he say . ' I happen to have read it . ' I could only look at he helplessly I could say nothing . ' you understand ? ' he go on ; ' I have read it . I dig it up out of the sand two hour since , and bury it again , and write the word above it again , and leave it ready to your hand . you can not   lie yourself out of the scrape now . you see Anne Catherick in secret yesterday , and you have get her letter in your hand at this moment . I have not catch she yet , but I have catch you . give I the letter . ' he step close up to I I be alone with he , Marian what could I do ? I give he the letter . " 

 " what do he say when you give it to he ? " 

 " at first he say nothing . he take I by the arm , and lead I out of the boat - house , and look about he on all side , as if he be afraid of our be see or hear . then he clasp his hand fast round my arm , and whisper to I , ' what do Anne Catherick say to you yesterday ? I insist on hear every word , from first to last . ' " 

 " do you tell he ? " 

 " I be alone with he , Marian his cruel hand be bruise my arm what could I do ? " 

 " be the mark on your arm still ? let I see it . " 

 " why do you want to see it ? " 

 " I want to see it , Laura , because our endurance must end , and our resistance must begin to - day . that mark be a weapon to strike he with . let I see it now I may have to swear to it at some future time . " 

 " oh , Marian , do not   look so do not   talk so ! it do not   hurt I now ! " 

 " let I see it ! " 

 she show I the mark . I be past grieve over they , past cry over they , past shudder over they . they say we be either well than man , or bad . if the temptation that have fall in some woman 's way , and make they bad , have fall in mine at that moment thank God ! my face betray nothing that his wife could read . the gentle , innocent , affectionate creature think I be frightened for she and sorry for she , and think no more . 

 " do not   think too seriously of it , Marian , " she say simply , as she pull she sleeve down again . " it do not   hurt I now . " 

 " I will try to think quietly of it , my love , for your sake . well ! well ! and you tell he all that Anne Catherick have say to you all that you tell I ? " 

 " yes , all . he insist on it I be alone with he I could conceal nothing . " 

 " do he say anything when you have do ? " 

 " he look at I , and laugh to himself in a mocking , bitter way . ' I mean to have the rest out of you , ' he say , ' do you hear ? the rest . ' I declare to he solemnly that I have tell he everything I know . ' not you , ' he answer , ' you know more than you choose to tell . will not   you tell it ? you shall ! I will wring it out of you at home if I can not   wring it out of you here . ' he lead I away by a strange path through the plantation a path where there be no hope of our meeting you and he speak no more till we come within sight of the house . then he stop again , and say , ' will you take a second chance , if I give it to you ? will you think well of it , and tell I the rest ? ' I could only repeat the same word I have speak before . he curse my obstinacy , and go on , and take I with he to the house . ' you can not   deceive I , ' he say , ' you know more than you choose to tell . I will have your secret out of you , and I will have it out of that sister of yours as well . there shall be no more plotting and whispering between you . neither you nor she shall see each other again till you have confess the truth . I will have you watch morning , noon , and night , till you confess the truth . ' he be deaf to everything I could say . he take I straight upstairs into my own room . Fanny be sit there , do some work for I , and he instantly order she out . ' I will take good care YOU'RE not mix up in the conspiracy , ' he say . ' you shall leave this house to - day . if your mistress want a maid , she shall have one of my choosing . ' he push I into the room , and lock the door on I . he set that senseless woman to watch I outside , Marian ! he look and speak like a madman . you may hardly understand it he do indeed . " 

 " I do understand it , Laura . he be mad mad with the terror of a guilty conscience . every word you have say make I positively certain that when Anne Catherick leave you yesterday you be on the eve of discover a secret which might have be your vile husband 's ruin , and he think you have discover it . nothing you can say or do will quiet that guilty distrust , and convince his false nature of your truth . I do not   say this , my love , to alarm you . I say it to open your eye to your position , and to convince you of the urgent necessity of let I act , as I good can , for your protection while the chance be our own . Count Fosco 's interference have secure I access to you to - day , but he may withdraw that interference to - morrow . Sir Percival have already dismiss Fanny because she be a quick - witted girl , and devotedly attach to you , and have choose a woman to take her place who care nothing for your interest , and whose dull intelligence lower she to the level of the watch - dog in the yard . it be impossible to say what violent measure he may take next , unless we make the most of our opportunity while we have they . " 

 " what can we do , Marian ? oh , if we could only leave this house , never to see it again ! " 

 " listen to I , my love , and try to think that you be not quite helpless so long as I be here with you . " 

 " I will think so I do think so . do not   altogether forget poor fanny in thinking of I . she want help and comfort too . " 

 " I will not forget she . I see she before I come up here , and I have arrange to communicate with she to - night . letter be not safe in the post - bag at Blackwater Park , and I shall have two to write to - day , in your interest , which must pass through no hand but Fanny 's . " 

 " what letter ? " 

 " I mean to write first , Laura , to Mr. Gilmore 's partner , who have offer to help we in any fresh emergency . little as I know of the law , I be certain that it can protect a woman from such treatment as that ruffian have inflict on you to - day . I will go into no detail about Anne Catherick , because I have no certain information to give . but the lawyer shall know of those bruise on your arm , and of the violence offer to you in this room he shall , before I rest to - night ! " 

 " but think of the exposure , Marian ! " 

 " I be calculate on the exposure . Sir Percival have more to dread from it than you have . the prospect of an exposure may bring he to term when nothing else will . " 

 I rise as I speak , but Laura entreat I not to leave she . " you will drive he to desperation , " she say , " and increase our danger tenfold . " 

 I feel the truth the disheartening truth of those word . but I could not bring myself plainly to acknowledge it to she . in our dreadful position there be no help and no hope for we but in risk the bad . I say so in guard term . she sigh bitterly , but do not contest the matter . she only ask about the second letter that I have propose writing . to whom be it to be address ? 

 " to Mr. Fairlie , " I say . " your uncle be your near male relative , and the head of the family . he must and shall interfere . " 

 Laura shake her head sorrowfully . 

 " yes , yes , " I go on , " your uncle be a weak , selfish , worldly man , I know , but he be not Sir Percival Glyde , and he have no such friend about he as Count Fosco . I expect nothing from his kindness or his tenderness of feeling towards you or towards I , but he will do anything to pamper his own indolence , and to secure his own quiet . let I only persuade he that his interference at this moment will save he inevitable trouble and wretchedness and responsibility hereafter , and he will bestir himself for his own sake . I know how to deal with he , Laura I have have some practice . " 

 " if you could only prevail on he to let I go back to Limmeridge for a little while and stay there quietly with you , Marian , I could be almost as happy again as I be before I be marry ! " 

 those word set I think in a new direction . would it be possible to place Sir Percival between the two alternative of either expose himself to the scandal of legal interference on his wife 's behalf , or of allow she to be quietly separate from he for a time under pretext of a visit to her uncle 's house ? and could he , in that case , be reckon on as likely to accept the last resource ? it be doubtful more than doubtful . and yet , hopeless as the experiment seem , surely it be worth try . I resolve to try it in sheer despair of know what well to do . 

 " your uncle shall know the wish you have just express , " I say , " and I will ask the lawyer 's advice on the subject as well . Good may come of it and will come of it , I hope . " 

 say that I rise again , and again Laura try to make I resume my seat . 

 " do not   leave I , " she say uneasily . " my desk be on that table . you can write here . " 

 it try I to the quick to refuse she , even in her own interest . but we have be too long shut up alone together already . our chance of see each other again might entirely depend on our not exciting any fresh suspicion . it be full time to show myself , quietly and unconcernedly , among the wretch who be at that very moment , perhaps , think of we and talk of we downstairs . I explain the miserable necessity to Laura , and prevail on she to recognise it as I do . 

 " I will come back again , love , in an hour or less , " I say . " the bad be over for to - day . keep yourself quiet and fear nothing . " 

 " be the key in the door , marian ? can I lock it on the inside ? " 

 " yes , here be the key . lock the door , and open it to nobody until I come upstairs again . " 

 I kiss she and leave she . it be a relief to I as I walk away to hear the key turn in the lock , and to know that the door be at her own command . 



 VIII 

 June 19th . I have only get as far as the top of the stair when the locking of Laura 's door suggest to I the precaution of also lock my own door , and keep the key safely about I while I be out of the room . my journal be already secure with other paper in the table drawer , but my writing material be leave out . these include a seal bear the common device of two dove drink out of the same cup , and some sheet of blot - paper , which have the impression on they of the closing line of my writing in these page trace during the past night . distort by the suspicion which have now become a part of myself , even such trifle as these look too dangerous to be trust without a guard even the locked table drawer seem to be not sufficiently protect in my absence until the mean of access to it have be carefully secure as well . 

 I find no appearance of any one have enter the room while I have be talk with Laura . my writing material   which I have give the servant instruction never to meddle with   be scatter over the table much as usual . the only circumstance in connection with they that at all strike I be that the seal lie tidily in the tray with the pencil and the wax . it be not in my careless habit   I be sorry to say   to put it there , neither do I remember put it there . but as I could not call to mind , on the other hand , where else I have throw it down , and as I be also doubtful whether I might not for once have lay it mechanically in the right place , I abstain from add to the perplexity with which the day 's event have fill my mind by trouble it afresh about a trifle . I lock the door , put the key in my pocket , and go downstairs . 

 Madame Fosco be alone in the hall look at the weather - glass . 

 " still fall , " she say . " I be afraid we must expect more rain . " 

 her face be compose again to its customary expression and its customary colour . but the hand with which she point to the dial of the weather - glass still tremble . 

 could she have tell her husband already that she have overhear Laura revile he , in my company , as a ' spy ? " my strong suspicion that she must have tell he , my irresistible dread   all the more overpowering from its very vagueness   of the consequence which might follow , my fixed conviction , derive from various little self - betrayal which woman notice in each other , that Madame Fosco , in spite of her well - assume external civility , have not forgive her niece for innocently stand between she and the legacy of ten thousand pound all rush upon my mind together , all impel I to speak in the vain hope of use my own influence and my own power of persuasion for the atonement of Laura 's offence . 

 " may I trust to your kindness to excuse I , Madame Fosco , if I venture to speak to you on an exceedingly painful subject ? " 

 she cross her hand in front of she and bow her head solemnly , without utter a word , and without take her eye off mine for a moment . 

 " when you be so good as to bring I back my handkerchief , " I go on , " I be very , very much afraid you must have accidentally hear Laura say something which I be unwilling to repeat , and which I will not attempt to defend . I will only venture to hope that you have not think it of sufficient importance to be mention to the count ? " 

 " I think it of no importance whatever , " say Madame Fosco sharply and suddenly . " but , " she add , resume her icy manner in a moment , " I have no secret from my husband even in trifle . when he notice just now that I look distressed , it be my painful duty to tell he why I be distressed , and I frankly acknowledge to you , Miss Halcombe , that I have tell he . " 

 I be prepared to hear it , and yet she turn I cold all over when she say those word . 

 " let I earnestly entreat you , Madame Fosco let I earnestly entreat the count to make some allowance for the sad position in which my sister be place . she speak while she be smart under the insult and injustice inflict on she by her husband , and she be not herself when she say those rash word . may I hope that they will be considerately and generously forgive ? " 

 " most assuredly , " say the Count 's quiet voice behind I . he have steal on we with his noiseless tread and his book in his hand from the library . 

 " when Lady Glyde say those hasty word , " he go on , ' she do I an injustice which I lament and forgive . let we never return to the subject , Miss Halcombe ; let we all comfortably combine to forget it from this moment . " 

 " you be very kind , " I say , " you relieve I inexpressibly . " 

 I try to continue , but his eye be on I ; his deadly smile that hide everything be set , hard , and unwavere on his broad , smooth face . my distrust of his unfathomable falseness , my sense of my own degradation in stoop to conciliate his wife and himself , so disturbed and confuse I , that the next word fail on my lip , and I stand there in silence . 

 " I beg you on my knee to say no more , Miss Halcombe I be truly shocked that you should have think it necessary to say so much . " with that polite speech he take my hand oh , how I despise myself ! oh , how little comfort there be even in know that I submit to it for Laura 's sake ! he take my hand and put it to his poisonous lip . never do I know all my horror of he till then . that innocent familiarity turn my blood as if it have be the vile insult that a man could offer I . yet I hide my disgust from he I try to smile I , who once mercilessly despise deceit in other woman , be as false as the bad of they , as false as the Judas whose lip have touch my hand . 

 I could not have maintain my degrade self - control it be all that redeem I in my own estimation to know that I could not if he have still continue to keep his eye on my face . his wife 's tigerish jealousy come to my rescue and force his attention away from I the moment he possess himself of my hand . her cold blue eye catch light , her dull white cheek flush into bright colour , she look year young than her age in an instant . 

 " Count ! " she say . " your foreign form of politeness be not understand by Englishwomen . " 

 " Pardon I , my angel ! the good and dearest Englishwoman in the world understand they . " with those word he drop my hand and quietly raise his wife 's hand to his lip in place of it . 

 I run back up the stair to take refuge in my own room . if there have be time to think , my thought , when I be alone again , would have cause I bitter suffering . but there be no time to think . happily for the preservation of my calmness and my courage there be time for nothing but action . 

 the letter to the lawyer and to Mr. Fairlie be still to be write , and I sit down at once without a moment 's hesitation to devote myself to they . 

 there be no multitude of resource to perplex I there be absolutely no one to depend on , in the first instance , but myself . Sir Percival have neither friend nor relative in the neighbourhood whose intercession I could attempt to employ . he be on the cold term in some case on the bad term with the family of his own rank and station who live near he . we two woman have neither father nor brother to come to the house and take our part . there be no choice but to write those two doubtful letter , or to put Laura in the wrong and myself in the wrong , and to make all peaceable negotiation in the future impossible by secretly escape from Blackwater Park . nothing but the most imminent personal peril could justify our take that second course . the letter must be try first , and I write they . 

 I say nothing to the lawyer about Anne Catherick , because   as I have already hint to Laura   that topic be connect with a mystery which we could not yet explain , and which it would therefore be useless to write about to a professional man . I leave my correspondent to attribute Sir Percival 's disgraceful conduct , if he please , to fresh dispute about money matter , and simply consult he on the possibility of take legal proceeding for Laura 's protection in the event of her husband 's refusal to allow she to leave Blackwater Park for a time and return with I to Limmeridge . I refer he to Mr. Fairlie for the detail of this last arrangement I assure he that I write with Laura 's authority and I end by entreat he to act in her name to the utmost extent of his power and with the least possible loss of time . 

 the letter to Mr. Fairlie occupy I next . I appeal to he on the term which I have mention to Laura as the most likely to make he bestir himself ; I enclose a copy of my letter to the lawyer to show he how serious the case be , and I represent our removal to Limmeridge as the only compromise which would prevent the danger and distress of Laura 's present position from inevitably affect her uncle as well as herself at no very distant time . 

 when I have do , and have seal and direct the two envelope , I go back with the letter to Laura 's room , to show she that they be write . 

 " have anybody disturb you ? " I ask , when she open the door to I . 

 " nobody have knock , " she reply . " but I hear some one in the outer room . " 

 " be it a man or a woman ? " 

 " a woman . I hear the rustling of her gown . " 

 " a rustling like silk ? " 

 " yes , like silk . " 

 Madame Fosco have evidently be watch outside . the mischief she might do by herself be little to be fear . but the mischief she might do , as a willing instrument in her husband 's hand , be too formidable to be overlook . 

 " what become of the rustling of the gown when you no long hear it in the ante - room ? " I inquire . " do you hear it go past your wall , along the passage ? " 

 " yes . I keep still and listen , and just hear it . " 

 " which way do it go ? " 

 " towards your room . " 

 I consider again . the sound have not catch my ear . but I be then deeply absorb in my letter , and I write with a heavy hand and a quill pen , scrap and scratch noisily over the paper . it be more likely that Madame Fosco would hear the scraping of my pen than that I should hear the rustling of her dress . another reason   if I have want one   for not trust my letter to the post - bag in the hall . 

 Laura see I think . " More difficulty ! " she say wearily ; " more difficulty and more danger ! " 

 " no danger , " I reply . " some little difficulty , perhaps . I be think of the safe way of put my two letter into Fanny 's hand . " 

 " you have really write they , then ? oh , Marian , run no risk pray , pray run no risk ! " 

 " no , no no fear . let I see what o'clock be it now ? " 

 it be a quarter to six . there would be time for I to get to the village inn , and to come back again before dinner . if I wait till the evening I might find no second opportunity of safely leave the house . 

 " keep the key turn in the lock . Laura , " I say , " and do not   be afraid about I . if you hear any inquiry make , call through the door , and say that I be go out for a walk . " 

 " when shall you be back ? " 

 " before dinner , without fail . Courage , my love . by this time to - morrow you will have a clear - head , trustworthy man act for your good . Mr. Gilmore 's partner be our next good friend to Mr. Gilmore himself . " 

 a moment 's reflection , as soon as I be alone , convince I that I have well not appear in my walking - dress until I have first discover what be go on in the low part of the house . I have not ascertain yet whether Sir Percival be indoor or out . 

 the singing of the canary in the library , and the smell of tobacco - smoke that come through the door , which be not close , tell I at once where the Count be . I look over my shoulder as I pass the doorway , and see to my surprise that he be exhibit the docility of the bird in his most engagingly polite manner to the housekeeper . he must have specially invite she to see they for she would never have think of go into the library of her own accord . the man 's slight action have a purpose of some kind at the bottom of every one of they . what could be his purpose here ? 

 it be no time then to inquire into his motif . I look about for Madame Fosco next , and find she follow her favourite circle round and round the fish - pond . 

 I be a little doubtful how she would meet I , after the outbreak of jealousy of which I have be the cause so short a time since . but her husband have tame she in the interval , and she now speak to I with the same civility as usual . my only object in address myself to she be to ascertain if she know what have become of Sir Percival . I contrive to refer to he indirectly , and after a little fencing on either side she at last mention that he have go out . 

 " which of the horse have he take ? " I ask carelessly . 

 " none of they , " she reply . " he go away two hour since on foot . as I understand it , his object be to make fresh inquiry about the woman name Anne Catherick . he appear to be unreasonably anxious about trace she . do you happen to know if she be dangerously mad , Miss Halcombe ? " 

 " I do not , Countess . " 

 " be you go in ? " 

 " yes , I think so . I suppose it will soon be time to dress for dinner . " 

 we enter the house together . Madame Fosco stroll into the library , and close the door . I go at once to fetch my hat and shawl . every moment be of importance , if I be to get to Fanny at the inn and be back before dinner . 

 when I cross the hall again no one be there , and the singing of the bird in the library have cease . I could not stop to make any fresh investigation . I could only assure myself that the way be clear , and then leave the house with the two letter safe in my pocket . 

 on my way to the village I prepare myself for the possibility of meet Sir Percival . as long as I have he to deal with alone I feel certain of not lose my presence of mind . any woman who be sure of her own wit be a match at any time for a man who be not sure of his own temper . I have no such fear of Sir Percival as I have of the Count . instead of flutter , it have compose I , to hear of the errand on which he have go out . while the tracing of Anne Catherick be the great anxiety that occupy he , Laura and I might hope for some cessation of any active persecution at his hand . for our sake now , as well as for Anne 's , I hop and pray fervently that she might still escape he . 

 I walk on as briskly as the heat would let I till I reach the cross - road which lead to the village , look back from time to time to make sure that I be not follow by any one . 

 nothing be behind I all the way but an empty country waggon . the noise make by the lumber wheel annoy I , and when I find that the waggon take the road to the village , as well as myself , I stop to let it go by and pass out of hearing . as I look toward it , more attentively than before , I think I detect at interval the foot of a man walk close behind it , the carter be in front , by the side of his horse . the part of the cross - road which I have just pass over be so narrow that the waggon come after I brush the tree and thicket on either side , and I have to wait until it go by before I could test the correctness of my impression . apparently that impression be wrong , for when the waggon have pass I the road behind it be quite clear . 

 I reach the inn without meet Sir Percival , and without notice anything more , and be glad to find that the landlady have receive Fanny with all possible kindness . the girl have a little parlour to sit in , away from the noise of the taproom , and a clean bedchamber at the top of the house . she begin cry again at the sight of I , and say , poor soul , truly enough , that it be dreadful to feel herself turn out into the world as if she have commit some unpardonable fault , when no blame could be lay at her door by anybody not even by her master , who have send she away . 

 " try to make the good of it , Fanny , " I say . " your mistress and I will stand your friend , and will take care that your character shall not suffer . now , listen to I . I have very little time to spare , and I be go to put a great trust in your hand . I wish you to take care of these two letter . the one with the stamp on it you be to put into the post when you reach London to - morrow . the other , direct to Mr. Fairlie , you be to deliver to he yourself as soon as you get home . keep both the letter about you and give they up to no one . they be of the last importance to your mistress 's interest . " 

 Fanny put the letter into the bosom of her dress . " there they shall stop , miss , " she say , " till I have do what you tell I . " 

 " mind you be at the station in good time to - morrow morning , " I continue . " and when you see the housekeeper at Limmeridge give she my compliment , and say that you be in my service until Lady Glyde be able to take you back . we may meet again soon than you think . so keep a good heart , and do not   miss the seven o'clock train . " 

 " thank you , miss thank you kindly . it give one courage to hear your voice again . please to offer my duty to my lady , and say I leave all the thing as tidy as I could in the time . oh , dear ! dear ! who will dress she for dinner to - day ? it really break my heart , miss , to think of it . " 


 when I get back to the house I have only a quarter of an hour to spare to put myself in order for dinner , and to say two word to Laura before I go downstairs . 

 " the letter be in Fanny 's hand , " I whisper to she at the door . " do you mean to join we at dinner ? " 

 " oh , no , no not for the world . " 

 " have anything happen ? have any one disturb you ? " 

 " yes just now Sir Percival " 

 " do he come in ? " 

 " no , he frighten I by a thump on the door outside . I say , ' who be there ? ' ' you know , ' he answer . ' will you alter your mind , and tell I the rest ? you shall ! soon or later I will wring it out of you . you know where Anne Catherick be at this moment . ' ' indeed , indeed , ' I say , ' I do not . ' ' you do ! ' he call back . ' I will crush your obstinacy mind that ! I will wring it out of you ! ' he go away with those word go away , Marian , hardly five minute ago . " 

 he have not find Anne ! we be safe for that night he have not find she yet . 

 " you be go downstairs , Marian ? come up again in the evening . " 

 " yes , yes . do not   be uneasy if I be a little late I must be careful not to give offence by leave they too soon . " 

 the dinner - bell rang and I hasten away . 

 Sir Percival take Madame Fosco into the dining - room , and the Count give I his arm . he be hot and flushed , and be not dress with his customary care and completeness . have he , too , be out before dinner , and be late in get back ? or be he only suffer from the heat a little more severely than usual ? 

 however this might be , he be unquestionably trouble by some secret annoyance or anxiety , which , with all his power of deception , he be not able entirely to conceal . through the whole of dinner he be almost as silent as Sir Percival himself , and he , every now and then , look at his wife with an expression of furtive uneasiness which be quite new in my experience of he . the one social obligation which he seem to be self - possess enough to perform as carefully as ever be the obligation of be persistently civil and attentive to I . what vile object he have in view I can not still discover , but be the design what it may , invariable politeness towards myself , invariable humility towards Laura , and invariable suppression   at any cost   of Sir Percival 's clumsy violence , have be the mean he have resolutely and impenetrably use to get to his end ever since he set foot in this house . I suspect it when he first interfere in our favour , on the day when the deed be produce in the library , and I feel certain of it now . 

 when Madame Fosco and I rise to leave the table , the Count rise also to accompany we back to the drawing - room . 

 " what be you go away for ? " ask Sir Percival " I mean you , Fosco . " 

 " I be go away because I have have dinner enough , and wine enough , " answer the Count . " be so kind , Percival , as to make allowance for my foreign habit of go out with the lady , as well as come in with they . " 

 " Nonsense ! another glass of claret will not   hurt you . sit down again like an Englishman . I want half an hour 's quiet talk with you over our wine . " 

 " a quiet talk , Percival , with all my heart , but not now , and not over the wine . later in the evening , if you please later in the evening . " 

 " civil ! " say Sir Percival savagely . " civil behaviour , upon my soul , to a man in his own house ! " 

 I have more than once see he look at the Count uneasily during dinner - time , and have observe that the Count carefully abstain from look at he in return . this circumstance , couple with the host 's anxiety for a little quiet talk over the wine , and the guest 's obstinate resolution not to sit down again at the table , revive in my memory the request which Sir Percival have vainly address to his friend early in the day to come out of the library and speak to he . the Count have defer grant that private interview , when it be first ask for in the afternoon , and have again defer grant it , when it be a second time ask for at the dinner - table . whatever the come subject of discussion between they might be , it be clearly an important subject in Sir Percival 's estimation and perhaps   judge from his evident reluctance to approach it   a dangerous subject as well , in the estimation of the Count . 

 these consideration occur to I while we be pass from the dining - room to the drawing - room . Sir Percival 's angry commentary on his friend 's desertion of he have not produce the slight effect . the Count obstinately accompany we to the tea - table wait a minute or two in the room go out into the hall and return with the post - bag in his hand . it be then eight o'clock the hour at which the letter be always despatch from Blackwater Park . 

 " have you any letter for the post , Miss Halcombe ? " he ask , approach I with the bag . 

 I see Madame Fosco , who be make the tea , pause , with the sugar - tong in her hand , to listen for my answer . 

 " no , Count , thank you . no letter to - day . " 

 he give the bag to the servant , who be then in the room ; sit down at the piano , and play the air of the lively Neapolitan street - song , " La mia Carolina , " twice over . his wife , who be usually the most deliberate of woman in all her movement , make the tea as quickly as I could have make it myself finish her own cup in two minute , and quietly glide out of the room . 

 I rise to follow her example partly because I suspect she of attempt some treachery upstairs with Laura , partly because I be resolve not to remain alone in the same room with her husband . 

 before I could get to the door the Count stop I , by a request for a cup of tea . I give he the cup of tea , and try a second time to get away . he stop I again this time by go back to the piano , and suddenly appeal to I on a musical question in which he declare that the honour of his country be concern . 

 I vainly plead my own total ignorance of music , and total want of taste in that direction . he only appeal to I again with a vehemence which set all further protest on my part at defiance . " the English and the Germans   he indignantly declare   be always revile the Italians for their inability to cultivate the high kind of music . we be perpetually talk of our oratorio , and they be perpetually talk of their symphony . do we forget and do they forget his immortal friend and countryman , Rossini ? what be Moses in Egypt but a sublime oratorio , which be act on the stage instead of be coldly sing in a concert - room ? what be the overture to Guillaume Tell but a symphony under another name ? have I hear Moses in Egypt ? would I listen to this , and this , and this , and say if anything more sublimely sacred and grand have ever be compose by mortal man ? " and without wait for a word of assent or dissent on my part , look I hard in the face all the time , he begin thunder on the piano , and sing to it with loud and lofty enthusiasm only interrupt himself , at interval , to announce to I fiercely the title of the different piece of music : " Chorus of Egyptians in the Plague of Darkness , Miss Halcombe ! " " Recitativo of Moses with the table of the Law . " " Prayer of Israelites , at the passage of the Red Sea . Aha ! aha ! be that sacred ? be that sublime ? " the piano tremble under his powerful hand , and the teacup on the table rattle , as his big bass voice thunder out the note , and his heavy foot beat time on the floor . 

 there be something horrible something fierce and devilish in the outburst of his delight at his own singing and playing , and in the triumph with which he watch its effect upon I as I shrink near and near to the door . I be release at last , not by my own effort , but by Sir Percival 's interposition . he open the dining - room door , and call out angrily to know what " that infernal noise " mean . the Count instantly get up from the piano . " ah ! if Percival be come , " he say , " harmony and melody be both at an end . the Muse of Music , Miss Halcombe , desert we in dismay , and I , the fat old minstrel , exhale the rest of my enthusiasm in the open air ! " he stalk out into the verandah , put his hand in his pocket , and resume the Recitativo of Moses , sotto voce , in the garden . 

 I hear Sir Percival call after he from the dining - room window . but he take no notice he seem determined not to hear . that long - defer quiet talk between they be still to be put off , be still to wait for the Count 's absolute will and pleasure . 

 he have detain I in the drawing - room nearly half an hour from the time when his wife leave we . where have she be , and what have she be do in that interval ? 

 I go upstairs to ascertain , but I make no discovery , and when I question Laura , I find that she have not hear anything . nobody have disturb she , no faint rustling of the silk dress have be audible , either in the ante - room or in the passage . 

 it be then twenty minute to nine . after go to my room to get my journal , I return , and sit with Laura , sometimes write , sometimes stop to talk with she . nobody come near we , and nothing happen . we remain together till ten o'clock . I then rise , say my last cheering word , and wish her good - night . she lock her door again after we have arrange that I should come in and see she the first thing in the morning . 

 I have a few sentence more to add to my diary before go to bed myself , and as I go down again to the drawing - room after leave Laura for the last time that weary day , I resolve merely to show myself there , to make my excuse , and then to retire an hour early than usual for the night . 

 Sir Percival , and the Count and his wife , be sit together . Sir Percival be yawn in an easy - chair , the Count be read , Madame Fosco be fan herself . strange to say , her face be flush now . she , who never suffer from the heat , be most undoubtedly suffer from it to - night . 

 " I be afraid , Countess , you be not quite so well as usual ? " I say . 

 " the very remark I be about to make to you , " she reply . " you be look pale , my dear . " 

 my dear ! it be the first time she have ever address I with that familiarity ! there be an insolent smile too on her face when she say the word . 

 " I be suffer from one of my bad headache , " I answer coldly . 

 " ah , indeed ? want of exercise , I suppose ? a walk before dinner would have be just the thing for you . " she refer to the " walk " with a strange emphasis . have she see I go out ? no matter if she have . the letter be safe now in Fanny 's hand . 

 " come and have a smoke , Fosco , " say Sir Percival , rise , with another uneasy look at his friend . 

 " with pleasure , Percival , when the lady have go to bed , " reply the Count . 

 " excuse I , Countess , if I set you the example of retire , " I say . " the only remedy for such a headache as mine be go to bed . " 

 I take my leave . there be the same insolent smile on the woman 's face when I shake hand with she . Sir Percival pay no attention to I . he be look impatiently at Madame Fosco , who show no sign of leave the room with I . the Count smile to himself behind his book . there be yet another delay to that quiet talk with Sir Percival and the Countess be the impediment this time . 



 IX 

 June 19th . once safely shut into my own room , I open these page , and prepare to go on with that part of the day 's record which be still leave to write . 

 for ten minute or more I sit idle , with the pen in my hand , think over the event of the last twelve hour . when I at last address myself to my task , I find a difficulty in proceed with it which I have never experience before . in spite of my effort to fix my thought on the matter in hand , they wander away with the strange persistency in the one direction of Sir Percival and the Count , and all the interest which I try to concentrate on my journal centre instead in that private interview between they which have be put off all through the day , and which be now to take place in the silence and solitude of the night . 

 in this perverse state of my mind , the recollection of what have pass since the morning would not come back to I , and there be no resource but to close my journal and to get away from it for a little while . 

 I open the door which lead from my bedroom into my sitting - room , and have pass through , pull it to again , to prevent any accident in case of draught with the candle leave on the dressing - table . my sitting - room window be wide open , and I lean out listlessly to look at the night . 

 it be dark and quiet . neither moon nor star be visible . there be a smell like rain in the still , heavy air , and I put my hand out of window . no . the rain be only threaten , it have not come yet . 

 I remain lean on the window - sill for nearly a quarter of an hour , look out absently into the black darkness , and hear nothing , except now and then the voice of the servant , or the distant sound of a closing door , in the low part of the house . 

 just as I be turn away wearily from the window to go back to the bedroom and make a second attempt to complete the unfinished entry in my journal , I smell the odour of tobacco - smoke stealing towards I on the heavy night air . the next moment I see a tiny red spark advance from the farth end of the house in the pitch darkness . I hear no footstep , and I could see nothing but the spark . it travel along in the night , pass the window at which I be stand , and stop opposite my bedroom window , inside which I have leave the light burn on the dressing - table . 

 the spark remain stationary for a moment , then move back again in the direction from which it have advance . as I follow its progress I see a second red spark , large than the first , approach from the distance . the two meet together in the darkness . remembering who smoke cigarette and who smoke cigar , I infer immediately that the Count have come out first to look and listen under my window , and that Sir Percival have afterwards join he . they must both have be walk on the lawn or I should certainly have hear Sir Percival 's heavy footfall , though the Count 's soft step might have escape I , even on the gravel walk . 

 I wait quietly at the window , certain that they could neither of they see I in the darkness of the room . 

 " what be the matter ? " I hear Sir Percival say in a low voice . " why do not   you come in and sit down ? " 

 " I want to see the light out of that window , " reply the count softly . 

 " what harm do the light do ? " 

 " it show she be not in bed yet . she be sharp enough to suspect something , and bold enough to come downstairs and listen , if she can get the chance . Patience , Percival patience . " 

 " Humbug ! you be always talk of patience . " 

 " I shall talk of something else presently . my good friend , you be on the edge of your domestic precipice , and if I let you give the woman one other chance , on my sacred word of honour they will push you over it ! " 

 " what the devil do you mean ? " 

 " we will come to our explanation , Percival , when the light be out of that window , and when I have have one little look at the room on each side of the library , and a peep at the staircase as well . " 

 they slowly move away , and the rest of the conversation between they   which have be conduct throughout in the same low tone   cease to be audible . it be no matter . I have hear enough to determine I on justify the Count 's opinion of my sharpness and my courage . before the red spark be out of sight in the darkness I have make up my mind that there should be a listener when those two man sit down to their talk and that the listener , in spite of all the Count 's precaution to the contrary , should be myself . I want but one motive to sanction the act to my own conscience , and to give I courage enough for perform it and that motive I have . Laura 's honour , Laura 's happiness Laura 's life itself might depend on my quick ear and my faithful memory to - night . 

 I have hear the Count say that he mean to examine the room on each side of the library , and the staircase as well , before he enter on any explanation with Sir Percival . this expression of his intention be necessarily sufficient to inform I that the library be the room in which he propose that the conversation should take place . the one moment of time which be long enough to bring I to that conclusion be also the moment which show I a means of baffle his precaution or , in other word , of hear what he and Sir Percival say to each other , without the risk of descend at all into the low region of the house . 

 in speak of the room on the ground floor I have mention incidentally the verandah outside they , on which they all open by mean of french window , extend from the cornice to the floor . the top of this verandah be flat , the rain - water be carry off from it by pipe into tank which help to supply the house . on the narrow leaden roof , which run along past the bedroom , and which be rather less , I should think , than three foot below the sill of the window , a row of flower - pot be range , with wide interval between each pot the whole be protect from fall in high wind by an ornamental iron rail along the edge of the roof . 

 the plan which have now occur to I be to get out at my sitting - room window on to this roof , to creep along noiselessly till I reach that part of it which be immediately over the library window , and to crouch down between the flower - pot , with my ear against the outer railing . if Sir Percival and the Count sit and smoke to - night , as I have see they sit and smoke many night before , with their chair close at the open window , and their foot stretch on the zinc garden seat which be place under the verandah , every word they say to each other above a whisper   and no long conversation , as we all know by experience , can be carry on in a whisper   must inevitably reach my ear . if , on the other hand , they choose to - night to sit far back inside the room , then the chance be that I should hear little or nothing and in that case , I must run the far more serious risk of try to outwit they downstairs . 

 strongly as I be fortify in my resolution by the desperate nature of our situation , I hop most fervently that I might escape this last emergency . my courage be only a woman 's courage after all , and it be very near to fail I when I think of trust myself on the ground floor , at the dead of night , within reach of Sir Percival and the Count . 

 I go softly back to my bedroom to try the safe experiment of the verandah roof first . 

 a complete change in my dress be imperatively necessary for many reason . I take off my silk gown to begin with , because the slight noise from it on that still night might have betray I . I next remove the white and cumbersome part of my underclothing , and replace they by a petticoat of dark flannel . over this I put my black travelling cloak , and pull the hood on to my head . in my ordinary evening costume I take up the room of three man at least . in my present dress , when it be hold close about I , no man could have pass through the narrow space more easily than i. the little breadth leave on the roof of the verandah , between the flower - pot on one side and the wall and the window of the house on the other , make this a serious consideration . if I knock anything down , if I make the least noise , who could say what the consequence might be ? 

 I only wait to put the match near the candle before I extinguish it , and grope my way back into the sitting - room , I lock that door , as I have lock my bedroom door then quietly get out of the window , and cautiously set my foot on the leaden roof of the verandah . 

 my two room be at the inner extremity of the new wing of the house in which we all live , and I have five window to pass before I could reach the position it be necessary to take up immediately over the library . the first window belong to a spare room which be empty . the second and third window belong to Laura 's room . the fourth window belong to Sir Percival 's room . the fifth belong to the Countess 's room . the other , by which it be not necessary for I to pass , be the window of the Count 's dressing - room , of the bathroom , and of the second empty spare room . 

 no sound reach my ear the black blind darkness of the night be all round I when I first stand on the verandah , except at that part of it which Madame Fosco 's window overlook . there , at the very place above the library to which my course be direct there I see a gleam of light ! the Countess be not yet in bed . 

 it be too late to draw back it be no time to wait . I determine to go on at all hazard , and trust for security to my own caution and to the darkness of the night . " for Laura 's sake ! " I think to myself , as I take the first step forward on the roof , with one hand hold my cloak close round I , and the other groping against the wall of the house . it be well to brush close by the wall than to risk strike my foot against the flower - pot within a few inch of I , on the other side . 

 I pass the dark window of the spare room , try the leaden roof at each step with my foot before I risk rest my weight on it . I pass the dark window of Laura 's room   " God bless she and keep she to - night ! " . I pass the dark window of Sir Percival 's room . then I wait a moment , kneel down with my hand to support I , and so creep to my position , under the protection of the low wall between the bottom of the lighted window and the verandah roof . 

 when I venture to look up at the window itself I find that the top of it only be open , and that the blind inside be draw down . while I be look I see the shadow of Madame Fosco pass across the white field of the blind then pass slowly back again . thus far she could not have hear I , or the shadow would surely have stop at the blind , even if she have want courage enough to open the window and look out ? 

 I place myself sideways against the railing of the verandah first ascertaining , by touch they , the position of the flower - pot on either side of I . there be room enough for I to sit between they and no more . the sweet - scented leaf of the flower on my left hand just brush my cheek as I lightly rest my head against the railing . 

 the first sound that reach I from below be cause by the opening or closing   most probably the latter   of three door in succession the door , no doubt , lead into the hall and into the room on each side of the library , which the Count have pledge himself to examine . the first object that I see be the red spark again travel out into the night from under the verandah , move away towards my window , wait a moment , and then return to the place from which it have set out . 

 " the devil take your restlessness ! when do you mean to sit down ? " growl Sir Percival 's voice beneath I . 

 " ouf ! how hot it be ! " say the Count , sigh and puff wearily . 

 his exclamation be follow by the scraping of the garden chair on the tile pavement under the verandah the welcome sound which tell I they be go to sit close at the window as usual . so far the chance be mine . the clock in the turret strike the quarter to twelve as they settle themselves in their chair . I hear Madame Fosco through the open window yawning , and see her shadow pass once more across the white field of the blind . 

 meanwhile , Sir Percival and the Count begin talk together below , now and then drop their voice a little low than usual , but never sink they to a whisper . the strangeness and peril of my situation , the dread , which I could not master , of Madame Fosco 's lighted window , make it difficult , almost impossible , for I , at first , to keep my presence of mind , and to fix my attention solely on the conversation beneath . for some minute I could only succeed in gather the general substance of it . I understand the Count to say that the one window alight be his wife 's , that the ground floor of the house be quite clear , and that they might now speak to each other without fear of accident . Sir Percival merely answer by upbraid his friend with have unjustifiably slight his wish and neglect his interest all through the day . the Count thereupon defend himself by declare that he have be beset by certain trouble and anxiety which have absorb all his attention , and that the only safe time to come to an explanation be a time when they could feel certain of be neither interrupted nor overheard . " we be at a serious crisis in our affair , Percival , " he say , " and if we be to decide on the future at all , we must decide secretly to - night . " 

 that sentence of the Count 's be the first which my attention be ready enough to master exactly as it be speak . from this point , with certain break and interruption , my whole interest fix breathlessly on the conversation , and I follow it word for word . 

 " Crisis ? " repeat Sir Percival . " it be a bad crisis than you think for , I can tell you . " 

 " so I should suppose , from your behaviour for the last day or two , " return the other coolly . " but wait a little . before we advance to what I do not know , let we be quite certain of what I do know . let we first see if I be right about the time that be past , before I make any proposal to you for the time that be to come . " 

 " stop till I get the brandy and water . have some yourself . " 

 " thank you , Percival . the cold water with pleasure , a spoon , and the basin of sugar . Eau sucree , my friend nothing more . " 

 " sugar - and - water for a man of your age ! there ! mix your sickly mess . you foreigner be all alike . " 

 " now listen , Percival . I will put our position plainly before you , as I understand it , and you shall say if I be right or wrong . you and I both come back to this house from the Continent with our affair very seriously embarrassed " 

 " cut it short ! I want some thousand and you some hundred , and without the money we be both in a fair way to go to the dog together . there be the situation . make what you can of it . go on . " 

 " well , Percival , in your own solid english word , you want some thousand and I want some hundred , and the only way of get they be for you to raise the money for your own necessity   with a small margin beyond for my poor little hundred   by the help of your wife . what do I tell you about your wife on our way to England ? and what do I tell you again when we have come here , and when I have see for myself the sort of woman Miss Halcombe be ? " 

 " how should I know ? you talk nineteen to the dozen , I suppose , just as usual . " 

 " I say this : human ingenuity , my friend , have hitherto only discover two way in which a man can manage a woman . one way be to knock she down a method largely adopt by the brutal low order of the people , but utterly abhorrent to the refined and educate class above they . the other way   much long , much more difficult , but in the end not less certain   be never to accept a provocation at a woman 's hand . it hold with animal , it hold with child , and it hold with woman , who be nothing but child grow up . quiet resolution be the one quality the animal , the child , and the woman all fail in . if they can once shake this superior quality in their master , they get the well of HIM . if they can never succeed in disturb it , he get the well of they . I say to you , remember that plain truth when you want your wife to help you to the money . I say , remember it doubly and trebly in the presence of your wife 's sister , Miss Halcombe . have you remember it ? not once in all the implication that have twist themselves about we in this house . every provocation that your wife and her sister could offer to you , you instantly accept from they . your mad temper lose the signature to the deed , lose the ready money , set Miss Halcombe write to the lawyer for the first time . " 

 " first time ! have she write again ? " 

 " yes , she have write again to - day . " 

 a chair fall on the pavement of the verandah fall with a crash , as if it have be kick down . 

 it be well for I that the Count 's revelation rouse Sir Percival 's anger as it do . on hear that I have be once more discover I start so that the railing against which I lean crack again . have he follow I to the inn ? do he infer that I must have give my letter to Fanny when I tell he I have none for the post - bag . even if it be so , how could he have examine the letter when they have go straight from my hand to the bosom of the girl 's dress ? 

 " thank your lucky star , " I hear the Count say next , " that you have I in the house to undo the harm as fast as you do it . thank your lucky star that I say no when you be mad enough to talk of turn the key to - day on Miss Halcombe , as you turn it in your mischievous folly on your wife . where be your eye ? can you look at Miss Halcombe and not see that she have the foresight and the resolution of a man ? with that woman for my friend I would snap these finger of mine at the world . with that woman for my enemy , I , with all my brain and experience I , Fosco , cunning as the devil himself , as you have tell I a hundred time I walk , in your english phrase , upon egg - shell ! and this grand creature I drink her health in my sugar - and - water this grand creature , who stand in the strength of her love and her courage , firm as a rock , between we two and that poor , flimsy , pretty blonde wife of yours this magnificent woman , whom I admire with all my soul , though I oppose she in your interest and in mine , you drive to extremity as if she be no sharp and no bold than the rest of her sex . Percival ! Percival ! you deserve to fail , and you have fail . " 

 there be a pause . I write the villain 's word about myself because I mean to remember they because I hope yet for the day when I may speak out once for all in his presence , and cast they back one by one in his tooth . 

 Sir Percival be the first to break the silence again . 

 " yes , yes , bully and bluster as much as you like , " he say sulkily ; " the difficulty about the money be not the only difficulty . you would be for take strong measure with the woman yourself if you know as much as I do . " 

 " we will come to that second difficulty all in good time , " rejoin the Count . " you may confuse yourself , Percival , as much as you please , but you shall not confuse I . let the question of the money be settle first . have I convince your obstinacy ? have I show you that your temper will not let you help yourself ? or must I go back , and   as you put it in your dear straightforward English   bully and bluster a little more ? " 

 " Pooh ! it be easy enough to grumble at I . say what be to be do that be a little hard . " 

 " be it ? bah ! this be what be to be do : you give up all direction in the business from to - night you leave it for the future in my hand only . I be talk to a practical british man ha ? well , Practical , will that do for you ? " 

 " what do you propose if I leave it all to you ? " 

 " answer I first . be it to be in my hand or not ? " 

 " say it be in your hand what then ? " 

 " a few question , Percival , to begin with . I must wait a little yet , to let circumstance guide I , and I must know , in every possible way , what those circumstance be likely to be . there be no time to lose . I have tell you already that Miss Halcombe have write to the lawyer to - day for the second time . " 

 " how do you find it out ? what do she say ? " 

 " if I tell you , Percival , we should only come back at the end to where we be now . enough that I have find it out and the finding have cause that trouble and anxiety which make I so inaccessible to you all through to - day . now , to refresh my memory about your affair it be some time since I talk they over with you . the money have be raise , in the absence of your wife 's signature , by mean of bill at three month raise at a cost that make my poverty - stricken foreign hair stand on end to think of it ! when the bill be due , be there really and truly no earthly way of pay they but by the help of your wife ? " 

 " none . " 

 " what ! you have no money at the banker ? " 

 " a few hundred , when I want as many thousand . " 

 " have you no other security to borrow upon ? " 

 " not a shred . " 

 " what have you actually get with your wife at the present moment ? " 

 " nothing but the interest of her twenty thousand pound barely enough to pay our daily expense . " 

 " what do you expect from your wife ? " 

 " three thousand a year when her uncle die . " 

 " a fine fortune , Percival . what sort of a man be this uncle ? old ? " 

 " no neither old nor young . " 

 " a good - temper , freely - live man ? marry ? no I think my wife tell I , not marry . " 

 " of course not . if he be marry , and have a son , Lady Glyde would not be next heir to the property . I will tell you what he be . he be a maudlin , twaddling , selfish fool , and bore everybody who come near he about the state of his health . " 

 " man of that sort , Percival , live long , and marry malevolently when you least expect it . I do not   give you much , my friend , for your chance of the three thousand a year . be there nothing more that come to you from your wife ? " 

 " nothing . " 

 " absolutely nothing ? " 

 " absolutely nothing except in case of her death . " 

 " aha ! in the case of her death . " 

 there be another pause . the Count move from the verandah to the gravel walk outside . I know that he have move by his voice . " the rain have come at last , " I hear he say . it have come . the state of my cloak show that it have be fall thickly for some little time . 

 the Count go back under the verandah I hear the chair creak beneath his weight as he sit down in it again . 

 " well , Percival , " he say , " and in the case of Lady Glyde 's death , what do you get then ? " 

 " if she leave no child " 

 " which she be likely to do ? " 

 " which she be not in the least likely to do " 

 " yes ? " 

 " why , then I get she twenty thousand pound . " 

 " pay down ? " 

 " pay down . " 

 they be silent once more . as their voice cease Madame Fosco 's shadow darken the blind again . instead of pass this time , it remain , for a moment , quite still . I see her finger steal round the corner of the blind , and draw it on one side . the dim white outline of her face , look out straight over I , appear behind the window . I keep still , shroud from head to foot in my black cloak . the rain , which be fast wet I , drip over the glass , blur it , and prevent she from see anything . " More rain ! " I hear she say to herself . she drop the blind , and I breathe again freely . 

 the talk go on below I , the Count resume it this time . 

 " Percival ! do you care about your wife ? " 

 " Fosco ! that be rather a downright question . " 

 " I be a downright man , and I repeat it . " 

 " why the devil do you look at I in that way ? " 

 " you will not   answer I ? well , then , let we say your wife die before the summer be out " 

 " drop it , Fosco ! " 

 " let we say your wife die " 

 " drop it , I tell you ! " 

 " in that case , you would gain twenty thousand pound , and you would lose " 

 " I should lose the chance of three thousand a year . " 

 " the REMOTE chance , Percival the remote chance only . and you want money , at once . in your position the gain be certain the loss doubtful . " 

 " speak for yourself as well as for I . some of the money I want have be borrow for you . and if you come to gain , my wife 's death would be ten thousand pound in your wife 's pocket . sharp as you be , you seem to have conveniently forget Madame Fosco 's legacy . do not   look at I in that way ! I will not   have it ! what with your look and your question , upon my soul , you make my flesh creep ! " 

 " your flesh ? do flesh mean conscience in English ? I speak of your wife 's death as I speak of a possibility . why not ? the respectable lawyer who scribble - scrabble your deed and your will look the death of live people in the face . do lawyer make your flesh creep ? why should I ? it be my business to - night to clear up your position beyond the possibility of mistake , and I have now do it . here be your position . if your wife live , you pay those bill with her signature to the parchment . if your wife die , you pay they with her death . " 

 as he speak the light in Madame Fosco 's room be extinguish , and the whole second floor of the house be now sink in darkness . 

 " talk ! talk ! " grumble Sir Percival . " one would think , to hear you , that my wife 's signature to the deed be get already . " 

 " you have leave the matter in my hand , " retort the Count , " and I have more than two month before I to turn round in . say no more about it , if you please , for the present . when the bill be due , you will see for yourself if my ' talk ! talk ! ' be worth something , or if it be not . and now , Percival , have do with the money matter for to - night , I can place my attention at your disposal , if you wish to consult I on that second difficulty which have mix itself up with our little embarrassment , and which have so alter you for the bad , that I hardly know you again . speak , my friend and pardon I if I shock your fiery national taste by mix myself a second glass of sugar - and - water . " 

 " it be very well to say speak , " reply Sir Percival , in a far more quiet and more polite tone than he have yet adopt , " but it be not so easy to know how to begin . " 

 " shall I help you ? " suggest the Count . " shall I give this private difficulty of yours a name ? what if I call it Anne Catherick ? " 

 " look here , Fosco , you and I have know each other for a long time , and if you have help I out of one or two scrape before this , I have do the good I could to help you in return , as far as money would go . we have make as many friendly sacrifice , on both side , as man could , but we have have our secret from each other , of course have not   we ? " 

 " you have have a secret from I , Percival . there be a skeleton in your cupboard here at Blackwater Park that have peep out in these last few day at other people besides yourself . " 

 " well , suppose it have . if it do not   concern you , you need not   be curious about it , need you ? " 

 " do I look curious about it ? " 

 " yes , you do . " 

 " so ! so ! my face speak the truth , then ? what an immense foundation of good there must be in the nature of a man who arrive at my age , and whose face have not yet lose the habit of speak the truth ! Come , Glyde ! let we be candid one with the other . this secret of yours have seek I : I have not seek it . let we say I be curious do you ask I , as your old friend , to respect your secret , and to leave it , once for all , in your own keeping ? " 

 " yes that be just what I do ask . " 

 " then my curiosity be at an end . it die in I from this moment . " 

 " do you really mean that ? " 

 " what make you doubt I ? " 

 " I have have some experience , Fosco , of your roundabout way , and I be not so sure that you will not   worm it out of I after all . " 

 the chair below suddenly creak again I feel the trellis - work pillar under I shake from top to bottom . the Count have start to his foot , and have strike it with his hand in indignation . 

 " Percival ! Percival ! " he cry passionately , " do you know I no well than that ? have all your experience show you nothing of my character yet ? I be a man of the antique type ! I be capable of the most exalted act of virtue when I have the chance of perform they . it have be the misfortune of my life that I have have few chance . my conception of friendship be sublime ! be it my fault that your skeleton have peep out at I ? why do I confess my curiosity ? you poor superficial Englishman , it be to magnify my own self - control . I could draw your secret out of you , if I like , as I draw this finger out of the palm of my hand you know I could ! but you have appeal to my friendship , and the duty of friendship be sacred to I . see ! I trample my base curiosity under my foot . my exalted sentiment lift I above it . recognise they , Percival ! imitate they , Percival ! shake hand I forgive you . " 

 his voice falter over the last word falter , as if he be actually shed tear ! 

 Sir Percival confusedly attempt to excuse himself , but the Count be too magnanimous to listen to he . 

 " no ! " he say . " when my friend have wound I , I can pardon he without apology . tell I , in plain word , do you want my help ? " 

 " yes , badly enough . " 

 " and you can ask for it without compromise yourself ? " 

 " I can try , at any rate . " 

 " try , then . " 

 " well , this be how it stand : I tell you to - day that I have do my good to find Anne Catherick , and fail . " 

 " yes , you do . " 

 " Fosco ! I be a lost man if I don't find she . " 

 " ha ! be it so serious as that ? " 

 a little stream of light travel out under the verandah , and fall over the gravel - walk . the Count have take the lamp from the inner part of the room to see his friend clearly by the light of it . 

 " yes ! " he say . " your face speak the truth this time . serious , indeed as serious as the money matter themselves . " 

 " more serious . as true as I sit here , more serious ! " 

 the light disappear again and the talk go on . 

 " I show you the letter to my wife that Anne Catherick hide in the sand , " Sir Percival continue . " there be no boasting in that letter , Fosco she do know the Secret . " 

 " say as little as possible , Percival , in my presence , of the Secret . do she know it from you ? " 

 " no , from her mother . " 

 " two woman in possession of your private mind bad , bad , bad , my friend ! one question here , before we go any far . the motive of your shut up the daughter in the asylum be now plain enough to I , but the manner of her escape be not quite so clear . do you suspect the people in charge of she of close their eye purposely , at the instance of some enemy who could afford to make it worth their while ? " 

 " no , she be the well - behave patient they have and , like fool , they trust she . she be just mad enough to be shut up , and just sane enough to ruin I when she be at large if you understand that ? " 

 " I do understand it . now , Percival , come at once to the point , and then I shall know what to do . where be the danger of your position at the present moment ? " 

 " Anne Catherick be in this neighbourhood , and in communication with Lady Glyde there be the danger , plain enough . who can read the letter she hide in the sand , and not see that my wife be in possession of the Secret , deny it as she may ? " 

 " one moment , Percival . if Lady Glyde do know the Secret , she must know also that it be a compromise secret for you . as your wife , surely it be her interest to keep it ? " 

 " be it ? I be come to that . it might be her interest if she care two straw about I . but I happen to be an encumbrance in the way of another man . she be in love with he before she marry I she be in love with he now an infernal vagabond of a drawing - master , name Hartright . " 

 " my dear friend ! what be there extraordinary in that ? they be all in love with some other man . who get the first of a woman 's heart ? in all my experience I have never yet meet with the man who be number one . number two , sometimes . Number three , Four , five , often . number one , never ! he exist , of course but I have not meet with he . " 

 " wait ! I have not   do yet . who do you think help Anne Catherick to get the start , when the people from the mad - house be after she ? Hartright . who do you think see she again in Cumberland ? Hartright . both time he speak to she alone . stop ! do not   interrupt I . the scoundrel 's as sweet on my wife as she be on he . he know the Secret , and she know the Secret . once let they both get together again , and it be her interest and his interest to turn their information against I . " 

 " gently , Percival gently ! be you insensible to the virtue of Lady Glyde ? " 

 " that for the virtue of Lady Glyde ! I believe in nothing about she but her money . do not   you see how the case stand ? she might be harmless enough by herself ; but if she and that vagabond Hartright " 

 " yes , yes , I see . where be Mr. Hartright ? " 

 " out of the country . if he mean to keep a whole skin on his bone , I recommend he not to come back in a hurry . " 

 " be you sure he be out of the country ? " 

 " certain . I have he watch from the time he leave Cumberland to the time he sail . oh , I have   be careful , I can tell you ! Anne Catherick live with some people at a farmhouse near Limmeridge . I go there myself , after she have give I the slip , and make sure that they know nothing . I give her mother a form of letter to write to Miss Halcombe , exonerate I from any bad motive in put she under restraint . I have   spend , I be afraid to say how much , in try to trace she , and in spite of it all , she turn up here and escape I on my own property ! how do I know who else may see she , who else may speak to she ? that pry scoundrel , Hartright , may come back without my know it , and may make use of she to - morrow " 

 " not he , Percival ! while I be on the spot , and while that woman be in the neighbourhood , I will answer for our lay hand on she before Mr. Hartright even if he do come back . I see ! yes , yes , I see ! the finding of Anne Catherick be the first necessity make your mind easy about the rest . your wife be here , under your thumb Miss Halcombe be inseparable from she , and be , therefore , under your thumb also and Mr. Hartright be out of the country . this invisible Anne of yours be all we have to think of for the present . you have make your inquiry ? " 

 " yes . I have be to her mother , I have ransack the village and all to no purpose . " 

 " be her mother to be depend on ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " she have tell your secret once . " 

 " she will not   tell it again . " 

 " why not ? be her own interest concern in keep it , as well as your ? " 

 " yes deeply concerned . " 

 " I be glad to hear it , Percival , for your sake . do not   be discourage , my friend . our money matter , as I tell you , leave I plenty of time to turn round in , and I may search for Anne Catherick to - morrow to well purpose than you . one last question before we go to bed . " 

 " what be it ? " 

 " it be this . when I go to the boat - house to tell Lady Glyde that the little difficulty of her signature be put off , accident take I there in time to see a strange woman part in a very suspicious manner from your wife . but accident do not bring I near enough to see this same woman 's face plainly . I must know how to recognise our invisible Anne . what be she like ? " 

 " like ? come ! I will tell you in two word . she be a sickly likeness of my wife . " 

 the chair creak , and the pillar shake once more . the Count be on his foot again this time in astonishment . 

 " what ! ! ! " he exclaim eagerly . 

 " Fancy my wife , after a bad illness , with a touch of something wrong in her head and there be Anne Catherick for you , " answer Sir Percival . 

 " be they relate to each other ? " 

 " not a bit of it . " 

 " and yet so like ? " 

 " yes , so like . what be you laugh about ? " 

 there be no answer , and no sound of any kind . the Count be laugh in his smooth silent internal way . 

 " what be you laugh about ? " reiterate Sir Percival . 

 " perhaps at my own fancy , my good friend . allow I my italian humour do I not come of the illustrious nation which invent the exhibition of Punch ? well , well , well , I shall know Anne Catherick when I see she and so enough for to - night . make your mind easy , Percival . Sleep , my son , the sleep of the just , and see what I will do for you when daylight come to help we both . I have my project and my plan here in my big head . you shall pay those bill and find Anne Catherick my sacred word of honour on it , but you shall ! be I a friend to be treasure in the good corner of your heart , or be I not ? be I worth those loan of money which you so delicately remind I of a little while since ? whatever you do , never wound I in my sentiment any more . recognise they , Percival ! imitate they , Percival ! I forgive you again I shake hand again . good - night ! " 


 not another word be speak . I hear the Count close the library door . I hear Sir Percival bar up the window - shutter . it have be rain , rain all the time . I be cramp by my position and chill to the bone . when I first try to move , the effort be so painful to I that I be oblige to desist . I try a second time , and succeed in rise to my knee on the wet roof . 

 as I creep to the wall , and raise myself against it , I look back , and see the window of the Count 's dressing - room gleam into light . my sink courage flicker up in I again , and keep my eye fix on his window , as I steal my way back , step by step , past the wall of the house . 

 the clock strike the quarter after one , when I lay my hand on the window - sill of my own room . I have see nothing and hear nothing which could lead I to suppose that my retreat have be discover . 



 X 

 June 20th . eight o'clock . the sun be shin in a clear sky . I have not be near my bed I have not once close my weary wakeful eye . from the same window at which I look out into the darkness of last night , I look out now at the bright stillness of the morning . 

 I count the hour that have pass since I escape to the shelter of this room by my own sensation and those hour seem like week . 

 how short a time , and yet how long to I since I sink down in the darkness , here , on the floor drench to the skin , cramp in every limb , cold to the bone , a useless , helpless , panic - stricken creature . 

 I hardly know when I rouse myself . I hardly know when I grope my way back to the bedroom , and light the candle , and search   with a strange ignorance , at first , of where to look for they   for dry clothe to warm I . the doing of these thing be in my mind , but not the time when they be do . 

 can I even remember when the chill , cramp feel leave I , and the throb heat come in its place ? 

 surely it be before the sun rise ? yes , I hear the clock strike three . I remember the time by the sudden brightness and clearness , the feverish strain and excitement of all my faculty which come with it . I remember my resolution to control myself , to wait patiently hour after hour , till the chance offer of remove Laura from this horrible place , without the danger of immediate discovery and pursuit . I remember the persuasion settle itself in my mind that the word those two man have say to each other would furnish we , not only with our justification for leave the house , but with our weapon of defence against they as well . I recall the impulse that awaken in I to preserve those word in writing , exactly as they be speak , while the time be my own , and while my memory vividly retain they . all this I remember plainly : there be no confusion in my head yet . the come in here from the bedroom , with my pen and ink and paper , before sunrise the sitting down at the widely - open window to get all the air I could to cool I the ceaseless writing , fast and fast , hot and hotter , drive on more and more wakefully , all through the dreadful interval before the house be astir again how clearly I recall it , from the beginning by candle - light , to the end on the page before this , in the sunshine of the new day ! 

 why do I sit here still ? why do I weary my hot eye and my burn head by write more ? why not lie down and rest myself , and try to quench the fever that consume I , in sleep ? 

 I dare not attempt it . a fear beyond all other fear have get possession of I . I be afraid of this heat that parch my skin . I be afraid of the creeping and throb that I feel in my head . if I lie down now , how do I know that I may have the sense and the strength to rise again ? 

 oh , the rain , the rain the cruel rain that chill I last night ! 

 nine o'clock . be it nine strike , or eight ? nine , surely ? I be shiver again shiver , from head to foot , in the summer air . have I be sit here asleep ? I do not   know what I have be do . 

 oh , my God ! be I go to be ill ? 


 Ill , at such a time as this ! 

 my head I be sadly afraid of my head . I can write , but the line all run together . I see the word . Laura I can write Laura , and see I write it . eight or nine which be it ? 

 so cold , so cold oh , that rain last night ! and the stroke of the clock , the stroke I can not   count , keep strike in my head 

 note   at this place the entry in the Diary cease to be legible . the two or three line which follow contain fragment of word only , mingle with blot and scratch of the pen . the last mark on the paper bear some resemblance to the first two letter   L and a   of the name of Lady Glyde . 

 on the next page of the Diary , another entry appear . it be in a man 's handwriting , large , bold , and firmly regular , and the date be " June the 21st . " it contain these line  


 POSTSCRIPT by a SINCERE FRIEND 


 the illness of our excellent Miss Halcombe have afford I the opportunity of enjoy an unexpected intellectual pleasure . 

 I refer to the perusal   which I have just complete   of this interesting Diary . 

 there be many hundred page here . I can lay my hand on my heart , and declare that every page have charm , refresh , delight I . 

 to a man of my sentiment it be unspeakably gratify to be able to say this . 

 admirable woman ! 

 I allude to Miss Halcombe . 

 stupendous effort ! 

 I refer to the Diary . 

 yes ! these page be amazing . the tact which I find here , the discretion , the rare courage , the wonderful power of memory , the accurate observation of character , the easy grace of style , the charming outburst of womanly feeling , have all inexpressibly increase my admiration of this sublime creature , of this magnificent Marian . the presentation of my own character be masterly in the extreme . I certify , with my whole heart , to the fidelity of the portrait . I feel how vivid an impression I must have produce to have be paint in such strong , such rich , such massive colour as these . I lament afresh the cruel necessity which set our interest at variance , and oppose we to each other . under happy circumstance how worthy I should have be of Miss Halcombe how worthy Miss Halcombe would have be of I . 

 the sentiment which animate my heart assure I that the line I have just write express a Profound Truth . 

 those sentiment exalt I above all merely personal consideration . I bear witness , in the most disinterested manner , to the excellence of the stratagem by which this unparalleled woman surprise the private interview between Percival and myself also to the marvellous accuracy of her report of the whole conversation from its beginning to its end . 

 those sentiment have induce I to offer to the unimpressionable doctor who attend on she my vast knowledge of chemistry , and my luminous experience of the more subtle resource which medical and magnetic science have place at the disposal of mankind . he have hitherto decline to avail himself of my assistance . miserable man ! 

 finally , those sentiment dictate the line grateful , sympathetic , paternal line which appear in this place . I close the book . my strict sense of propriety restore it   by the hand of my wife   to its place on the writer 's table . event be hurry I away . circumstance be guide I to serious issue . vast perspective of success unroll themselves before my eye . I accomplish my destiny with a calmness which be terrible to myself . nothing but the homage of my admiration be my own . I deposit it with respectful tenderness at the foot of Miss Halcombe . 

 I breathe my wish for her recovery . 

 I condole with she on the inevitable failure of every plan that she have form for her sister 's benefit . at the same time , I entreat she to believe that the information which I have derive from her Diary will in no respect help I to contribute to that failure . it simply confirm the plan of conduct which I have previously arrange . I have to thank these page for awaken the fine sensibility in my nature nothing more . 

 to a person of similar sensibility this simple assertion will explain and excuse everything . 

 Miss Halcombe be a person of similar sensibility . 

 in that persuasion I sign myself , 
 Fosco . 



 the story continued BY FREDERICK FAIRLIE , ESQ . , of LIMMERIDGE HOUSE 2 


  2   the manner in which Mr. Fairlie 's Narrative and other Narratives that be shortly to follow it , be originally obtain , form the subject of an explanation which will appear at a later period . 


 it be the grand misfortune of my life that nobody will let I alone . 

 why I ask everybody why worry I ? nobody answer that question , and nobody let I alone . relative , friend , and stranger all combine to annoy I . what have I do ? I ask myself , I ask my servant , Louis , fifty time a day what have I do ? neither of we can tell . most extraordinary ! 

 the last annoyance that have assail I be the annoyance of be call upon to write this Narrative . be a man in my state of nervous wretchedness capable of write narrative ? when I put this extremely reasonable objection , I be tell that certain very serious event relate to my niece have happen within my experience , and that I be the fit person to describe they on that account . I be threaten if I fail to exert myself in the manner require , with consequence which I can not so much as think of without perfect prostration . there be really no need to threaten I . shatter by my miserable health and my family trouble , I be incapable of resistance . if you insist , you take your unjust advantage of I , and I give way immediately . I will endeavour to remember what I can   under protest , and to write what I can   also under protest , and what I can not   remember and can not   write , Louis must remember and write for I . he be an ass , and I be an invalid , and we be likely to make all sort of mistake between we . how humiliating ! 

 I be tell to remember date . good heaven ! I never do such a thing in my life how be I to begin now ? 

 I have ask Louis . he be not quite such an ass as I have hitherto suppose . he remember the date of the event , within a week or two and I remember the name of the person . the date be towards the end of June , or the beginning of July , and the name   in my opinion a remarkably vulgar one   be Fanny . 

 at the end of June , or the beginning of July , then , I be recline in my customary state , surround by the various object of art which I have collect about I to improve the taste of the barbarous people in my neighbourhood . that be to say , I have the photograph of my picture , and print , and coin , and so forth , all about I , which I intend , one of these day , to present   the photograph , I mean , if the clumsy english language will let I mean anything   to present to the institution at Carlisle   horrid place ! , with a view to improve the taste of the member   goth and Vandals to a man . it might be suppose that a gentleman who be in course of confer a great national benefit on his countryman be the last gentleman in the world to be unfeelingly worried about private difficulty and family affair . quite a mistake , I assure you , in my case . 

 however , there I be , recline , with my art - treasure about I , and want a quiet morning . because I want a quiet morning , of course Louis come in . it be perfectly natural that I should inquire what the deuce he mean by make his appearance when I have not ring my bell . I seldom swear it be such an ungentlemanlike habit but when Louis answer by a grin , I think it be also perfectly natural that I should damn he for grin . at any rate , I do . 

 this rigorous mode of treatment , I have observe , invariably bring person in the low class of life to their sens . it bring Louis to his sens . he be so obliging as to leave off grinning , and inform I that a Young Person be outside want to see I . he add   with the odious talkativeness of servant , that her name be Fanny . 

 " who be fanny ? " 

 " Lady Glyde 's maid , sir . " 

 " what do Lady Glyde 's maid want with I ? " 

 " a letter , sir " 

 " take it . " 

 " she refuse to give it to anybody but you , sir . " 

 " who send the letter ? " 

 " Miss Halcombe , sir . " 

 the moment I hear Miss Halcombe 's name I give up . it be a habit of mine always to give up to Miss Halcombe . I find , by experience , that it save noise . I give up on this occasion . Dear Marian ! 

 " let Lady Glyde 's maid come in , Louis . stop ! do her shoe creak ? " 

 I be oblige to ask the question . creak shoe invariably upset I for the day . I be resign to see the Young Person , but I be not resign to let the Young Person 's shoe upset I . there be a limit even to my endurance . 

 Louis affirm distinctly that her shoe be to be depend upon . I wave my hand . he introduce she . be it necessary to say that she express her sense of embarrassment by shut up her mouth and breathe through her nose ? to the student of female human nature in the low order , surely not . 

 let I do the girl justice . her shoe do not creak . but why do Young Persons in service all perspire at the hand ? why have they all get fat nose and hard cheek ? and why be their face so sadly unfinished , especially about the corner of the eyelid ? I be not strong enough to think deeply myself on any subject , but I appeal to professional man , who be . why have we no variety in our breed of Young Persons ? 

 " you have a letter for I , from Miss Halcombe ? put it down on the table , please , and do not   upset anything . how be Miss Halcombe ? " 

 " very well , thank you , sir . " 

 " and Lady Glyde ? " 

 I receive no answer . the Young Person 's face become more unfinished than ever , and I think she begin to cry . I certainly see something moist about her eye . tear or perspiration ? Louis   whom I have just consult   be incline to think , tear . he be in her class of life , and he ought to know well . let we say , tear . 

 except when the refining process of art judiciously remove from they all resemblance to nature , I distinctly object to tear . tear be scientifically describe as a secretion . I can understand that a secretion may be healthy or unhealthy , but I can not see the interest of a secretion from a sentimental point of view . perhaps my own secretion be all wrong together , I be a little prejudiced on the subject . no matter . I behave , on this occasion , with all possible propriety and feeling . I close my eye and say to Louis 

 " endeavour to ascertain what she mean . " 

 Louis endeavour , and the Young Person endeavour . they succeed in confuse each other to such an extent that I be bind in common gratitude to say , they really amuse I . I think I shall send for they again when I be in low spirit . I have just mention this idea to Louis . strange to say , it seem to make he uncomfortable . poor devil ! 

 surely I be not expect to repeat my niece 's maid 's explanation of her tear , interpret in the English of my swiss valet ? the thing be manifestly impossible . I can give my own impression and feeling perhaps . will that do as well ? please say , yes . 

 my idea be that she begin by tell I   through Louis   that her master have dismiss she from her mistress 's service .   Observe , throughout , the strange irrelevancy of the Young Person . be it my fault that she have lose her place ?   on her dismissal , she have go to the inn to sleep .   I do not   keep the inn why mention it to I ?   between six o'clock and seven Miss Halcombe have come to say good - bye , and have give she two letter , one for I , and one for a gentleman in London .   I be not a gentleman in London hang the gentleman in London !   she have carefully put the two letter into her bosom   what have I to do with her bosom ? ; she have be very unhappy , when Miss Halcombe have go away again ; she have not have the heart to put bit or drop between her lip till it be near bedtime , and then , when it be close on nine o'clock , she have think she should like a cup of tea .   be I responsible for any of these vulgar fluctuation , which begin with unhappiness and end with tea ?   just as she be warm the POT   I give the word on the authority of Louis , who say he know what they mean , and wish to explain , but I snub he on principle   just as she be warm the pot the door open , and she be strike of a heap   her own word again , and perfectly unintelligible this time to Louis , as well as to myself   by the appearance in the inn parlour of her ladyship the Countess . I give my niece 's maid 's description of my sister 's title with a sense of the high relish . my poor dear sister be a tiresome woman who marry a foreigner . to resume : the door open , her ladyship the Countess appear in the parlour , and the Young Person be strike of a heap . most remarkable ! 


 I must really rest a little before I can get on any far . when I have recline for a few minute , with my eye close , and when Louis have refresh my poor ache temple with a little eau - de - cologne , I may be able to proceed . 

 her ladyship the Countess 

 no . I be able to proceed , but not to sit up . I will recline and dictate . Louis have a horrid accent , but he know the language , and can write . how very convenient ! 


 her ladyship , the Countess , explain her unexpected appearance at the inn by tell Fanny that she have come to bring one or two little message which Miss Halcombe in her hurry have forget . the Young Person thereupon wait anxiously to hear what the message be , but the Countess seem disinclined to mention they   so like my sister 's tiresome way !   until Fanny have have her tea . her ladyship be surprisingly kind and thoughtful about it   extremely unlike my sister , and say , " I be sure , my poor girl , you must want your tea . we can let the message wait till afterwards . come , come , if nothing else will put you at your ease , I will make the tea and have a cup with you . " I think those be the word , as report excitably , in my presence , by the Young Person . at any rate , the Countess insist on make the tea , and carry her ridiculous ostentation of humility so far as to take one cup herself , and to insist on the girl 's take the other . the girl drink the tea , and accord to her own account , solemnise the extraordinary occasion five minute afterwards by faint dead away for the first time in her life . here again I use her own word . Louis think they be accompany by an increase secretion of tear . I can not   say myself . the effort of listen be quite as much as I could manage , my eye be close . 

 where do I leave off ? ah , yes she faint after drink a cup of tea with the Countess a proceeding which might have interest I if I have be her medical man , but be nothing of the sort I feel bored by hear of it , nothing more . when she come to herself in half an hour 's time she be on the sofa , and nobody be with she but the landlady . the Countess , find it too late to remain any long at the inn , have go away as soon as the girl show sign of recover , and the landlady have be good enough to help she upstairs to bed . 

 leave by herself , she have feel in her bosom   I regret the necessity of refer to this part of the subject a second time , and have find the two letter there quite safe , but strangely crumple . she have be giddy in the night , but have get up well enough to travel in the morning . she have put the letter address to that obtrusive stranger , the gentleman in London into the post , and have now deliver the other letter into my hand as she be tell . this be the plain truth , and though she could not blame herself for any intentional neglect , she be sadly trouble in her mind , and sadly in want of a word of advice . at this point Louis think the secretion appear again . perhaps they do , but it be of infinitely great importance to mention that at this point also I lose my patience , open my eye , and interfere . 

 " what be the purport of all this ? " I inquire . 

 my niece 's irrelevant maid star , and stand speechless . 

 " endeavour to explain , " I say to my servant . " translate I , Louis . " 

 Louis endeavour and translate . in other word , he descend immediately into a bottomless pit of confusion , and the Young Person follow he down . I really do not   know when I have be so amused . I leave they at the bottom of the pit as long as they divert I . when they cease to divert I , I exert my intelligence , and pull they up again . 

 it be unnecessary to say that my interference enable I , in due course of time , to ascertain the purport of the Young Person 's remark . 

 I discover that she be uneasy in her mind , because the train of event that she have just describe to I have prevent she from receive those supplementary message which Miss Halcombe have intrust to the Countess to deliver . she be afraid the message might have be of great importance to her mistress 's interest . her dread of Sir Percival have deter she from go to Blackwater Park late at night to inquire about they , and Miss Halcombe 's own direction to she , on no account to miss the train in the morning , have prevent she from wait at the inn the next day . she be most anxious that the misfortune of her fainting - fit should not lead to the second misfortune of make her mistress think her neglectful , and she would humbly beg to ask I whether I would advise she to write her explanation and excuse to Miss Halcombe , request to receive the message by letter , if it be not too late . I make no apology for this extremely prosy paragraph . I have be order to write it . there be people , unaccountable as it may appear , who actually take more interest in what my niece 's maid say to I on this occasion than in what I say to my niece 's maid . amusing perversity ! 

 " I should feel very much oblige to you , sir , if you would kindly tell I what I have well do , " remark the Young Person . 

 " let thing stop as they be , " I say , adapt my language to my listener . " I invariably let thing stop as they be . yes . be that all ? " 

 " if you think it would be a liberty in I , sir , to write , of course I would not   venture to do so . but I be so very anxious to do all I can to serve my mistress faithfully " 

 People in the low class of life never know when or how to go out of a room . they invariably require to be help out by their better . I think it high time to help the Young Person out . I do it with two judicious word 

 " good - morning . " 

 something outside or inside this singular girl suddenly creak . Louis , who be look at she   which I be not , say she creak when she curtsey . curious . be it her shoe , her stay , or her bone ? Louis think it be her stay . most extraordinary ! 



 as soon as I be leave by myself I have a little nap I really want it . when I awake again I notice dear Marian 's letter . if I have have the least idea of what it contain I should certainly not have attempt to open it . be , unfortunately for myself , quite innocent of all suspicion , I read the letter . it immediately upset I for the day . 

 I be , by nature , one of the most easy - temper creature that ever live I make allowance for everybody , and I take offence at nothing . but as I have before remark , there be limit to my endurance . I lay down Marian 's letter , and feel myself justly feel myself an injure man . 

 I be about to make a remark . it be , of course , applicable to the very serious matter now under notice , or I should not allow it to appear in this place . 

 nothing , in my opinion , set the odious selfishness of mankind in such a repulsively vivid light as the treatment , in all class of society , which the single people receive at the hand of the married people . when you have once show yourself too considerate and self - deny to add a family of your own to an already overcrowded population , you be vindictively mark out by your married friend , who have no similar consideration and no similar self - denial , as the recipient of half their conjugal trouble , and the bear friend of all their child . husband and wife talk of the care of matrimony , and bachelor and spinster bear they . take my own case . I considerately remain single , and my poor dear brother Philip inconsiderately marry . what do he do when he die ? he leave his daughter to I . she be a sweet girl she be also a dreadful responsibility . why lie she on my shoulder ? because I be bind , in the harmless character of a single man , to relieve my married connection of all their own trouble . I do my good with my brother 's responsibility I marry my niece , with infinite fuss and difficulty , to the man her father want she to marry . she and her husband disagree , and unpleasant consequence follow . what do she do with those consequence ? she transfer they to I . why transfer they to I ? because I be bind , in the harmless character of a single man , to relieve my married connection of all their own trouble . poor single people ! poor human nature ! 

 it be quite unnecessary to say that Marian 's letter threaten I . everybody threaten I . all sort of horror be to fall on my devoted head if I hesitate to turn Limmeridge House into an asylum for my niece and her misfortune . I do hesitate , nevertheless . 

 I have mention that my usual course , hitherto , have be to submit to dear Marian , and save noise . but on this occasion , the consequence involve in her extremely inconsiderate proposal be of a nature to make I pause . if I open Limmeridge House as an asylum to Lady Glyde , what security have I against Sir Percival Glyde 's follow she here in a state of violent resentment against I for harbour his wife ? I see such a perfect labyrinth of trouble involve in this proceeding that I determine to feel my ground , as it be . I write , therefore , to dear Marian to beg   as she have no husband to lay claim to she   that she would come here by herself , first , and talk the matter over with I . if she could answer my objection to my own perfect satisfaction , then I assure she that I would receive our sweet Laura with the great pleasure , but not otherwise . 

 I feel , of course , at the time , that this temporise on my part would probably end in bring Marian here in a state of virtuous indignation , bang door . but then , the other course of proceeding might end in bring Sir Percival here in a state of virtuous indignation , bang door also , and of the two indignation and banging I prefer Marian 's , because I be use to she . accordingly I despatch the letter by return of post . it gain I time , at all event and , oh dear I ! what a point that be to begin with . 

 when I be totally prostrate   do I mention that I be totally prostrate by Marian 's letter ?   it always take I three day to get up again . I be very unreasonable I expect three day of quiet . of course I do not   get they . 

 the third day 's post bring I a most impertinent letter from a person with whom I be totally unacquainted . he describe himself as the act partner of our man of business our dear , pig - head old Gilmore and he inform I that he have lately receive , by the post , a letter address to he in Miss Halcombe 's handwriting . on open the envelope , he have discover , to his astonishment , that it contain nothing but a blank sheet of note - paper . this circumstance appear to he so suspicious   as suggest to his restless legal mind that the letter have be tamper with   that he have at once write to Miss Halcombe , and have receive no answer by return of post . in this difficulty , instead of act like a sensible man and let thing take their proper course , his next absurd proceeding , on his own showing , be to pester I by write to inquire if I know anything about it . what the deuce should I know about it ? why alarm I as well as himself ? I write back to that effect . it be one of my keenest letter . I have produce nothing with a sharp epistolary edge to it since I tender his dismissal in write to that extremely troublesome person , Mr. Walter Hartright . 

 my letter produce its effect . I hear nothing more from the lawyer . 

 this perhaps be not altogether surprising . but it be certainly a remarkable circumstance that no second letter reach I from Marian , and that no warning sign appear of her arrival . her unexpected absence do I amazing good . it be so very soothing and pleasant to infer   as I do of course   that my married connection have make it up again . five day of undisturbed tranquillity , of delicious single blessedness , quite restore I . on the sixth day I feel strong enough to send for my photographer , and to set he at work again on the presentation copy of my art - treasure , with a view , as I have already mention , to the improvement of taste in this barbarous neighbourhood . I have just dismiss he to his workshop , and have just begin coquet with my coin , when Louis suddenly make his appearance with a card in his hand . 

 " another Young Person ? " I say . " I will not   see she . in my state of health Young Persons disagree with I . not at home . " 

 " it be a gentleman this time , sir . " 

 a gentleman of course make a difference . I look at the card . 

 Gracious Heaven ! my tiresome sister 's foreign husband , Count Fosco . 



 be it necessary to say what my first impression be when I look at my visitor 's card ? surely not ! my sister have marry a foreigner , there be but one impression that any man in his sens could possibly feel . of course the Count have come to borrow money of I . 

 " Louis , " I say , " do you think he would go away if you give he five shilling ? " 

 Louis look quite shocked . he surprise I inexpressibly by declare that my sister 's foreign husband be dress superbly , and look the picture of prosperity . under these circumstance my first impression alter to a certain extent . I now take it for grant that the Count have matrimonial difficulty of his own to contend with , and that he have come , like the rest of the family , to cast they all on my shoulder . 

 " do he mention his business ? " I ask . 

 " Count Fosco say he have come here , sir , because Miss Halcombe be unable to leave Blackwater Park . " 

 fresh trouble , apparently . not exactly his own , as I have suppose , but dear Marian 's . trouble , anyway . oh dear ! 

 " show he in , " I say resignedly . 

 the Count 's first appearance really startle I . he be such an alarmingly large person that I quite tremble . I feel certain that he would shake the floor and knock down my art - treasure . he do neither the one nor the other . he be refreshingly dress in summer costume his manner be delightfully self - possess and quiet he have a charming smile . my first impression of he be highly favourable . it be not creditable to my penetration as the sequel will show to acknowledge this , but I be a naturally candid man , and I do acknowledge it notwithstanding . 

 " allow I to present myself , Mr. Fairlie , " he say . " I come from Blackwater Park , and I have the honour and the happiness of be Madame Fosco 's husband . let I take my first and last advantage of that circumstance by entreat you not to make a stranger of I . I beg you will not disturb yourself I beg you will not move . " 

 " you be very good , " I reply . " I wish I be strong enough to get up . charm to see you at Limmeridge . please take a chair . " 

 " I be afraid you be suffer to - day , " say the Count . 

 " as usual , " I say . " I be nothing but a bundle of nerve dress up to look like a man . " 

 " I have study many subject in my time , " remark this sympathetic person . " among other the inexhaustible subject of nerve . may I make a suggestion , at once the simple and the most profound ? will you let I alter the light in your room ? " 

 " certainly if you will be so very kind as not to let any of it in on I . " 

 he walk to the window . such a contrast to dear Marian ! so extremely considerate in all his movement ! 

 " Light , " he say , in that delightfully confidential tone which be so soothing to an invalid , " be the first essential . light stimulate , nourishe , preserve . you can no more do without it , Mr. Fairlie , than if you be a flower . observe . here , where you sit , I close the shutter to compose you . there , where you do not sit , I draw up the blind and let in the invigorate sun . admit the light into your room if you can not bear it on yourself . Light , sir , be the grand decree of Providence . you accept Providence with your own restriction . accept light on the same term . " 

 I think this very convincing and attentive . he have take I in up to that point about the light , he have certainly take I in . 

 " you see I confuse , " he say , return to his place " on my word of honour , Mr. Fairlie , you see I confused in your presence . " 

 " shocked to hear it , I be sure . may I inquire why ? " 

 " Sir , can I enter this room   where you sit a sufferer , and see you surround by these admirable object of Art , without discover that you be a man whose feeling be acutely impressionable , whose sympathy be perpetually alive ? tell I , can I do this ? " 

 if I have be strong enough to sit up in my chair I should , of course , have bow . not be strong enough , I smile my acknowledgment instead . it do just as well , we both understand one another . 

 " pray follow my train of thought , " continue the Count . " I sit here , a man of refine sympathy myself , in the presence of another man of refined sympathy also . I be conscious of a terrible necessity for lacerate those sympathy by refer to domestic event of a very melancholy kind . what be the inevitable consequence ? I have do myself the honour of point it out to you already . I sit confused . " 

 be it at this point that I begin to suspect he be go to bore I ? I rather think it be . 

 " be it absolutely necessary to refer to these unpleasant matter ? " I inquire . " in our homely english phrase , Count Fosco , will not   they keep ? " 

 the Count , with the most alarming solemnity , sigh and shake his head . 

 " must I really hear they ? " 

 he shrug his shoulder   it be the first foreign thing he have do since he have be in the room , and look at I in an unpleasantly penetrate manner . my instinct tell I that I have well close my eye . I obey my instinct . 

 " please break it gently , " I plead . " anybody dead ? " 

 " dead ! " cry the Count , with unnecessary foreign fierceness . " Mr. Fairlie , your national composure terrify I . in the name of Heaven , what have I say or do to make you think I the messenger of death ? " 

 " pray accept my apology , " I answer . " you have say and do nothing . I make it a rule in these distressing case always to anticipate the bad . it break the blow by meet it half - way , and so on . inexpressibly relieve , I be sure , to hear that nobody be dead . anybody ill ? " 

 I open my eye and look at he . be he very yellow when he come in , or have he turn very yellow in the last minute or two ? I really can not   say , and I can not   ask Louis , because he be not in the room at the time . 

 " anybody ill ? " I repeat , observe that my national composure still appear to affect he . 

 " that be part of my bad news , Mr. Fairlie . yes . somebody be ill . " 

 " grieve , I be sure . which of they be it ? " 

 " to my profound sorrow , Miss Halcombe . perhaps you be in some degree prepare to hear this ? perhaps when you find that Miss Halcombe do not come here by herself , as you propose , and do not write a second time , your affectionate anxiety may have make you fear that she be ill ? " 

 I have no doubt my affectionate anxiety have lead to that melancholy apprehension at some time or other , but at the moment my wretched memory entirely fail to remind I of the circumstance . however , I say yes , in justice to myself . I be much shocked . it be so very uncharacteristic of such a robust person as dear Marian to be ill , that I could only suppose she have meet with an accident . a horse , or a false step on the stair , or something of that sort . 

 " be it serious ? " I ask . 

 " serious beyond a doubt , " he reply . " dangerous I hope and trust not . Miss Halcombe unhappily expose herself to be wet through by a heavy rain . the cold that follow be of an aggravated kind , and it have now bring with it the bad consequence fever . " 

 when I hear the word fever , and when I remember at the same moment that the unscrupulous person who be now address I have just come from Blackwater Park , I think I should have faint on the spot . 

 " Good God ! " I say . " be it infectious ? " 

 " not at present , " he answer , with detestable composure . " it may turn to infection but no such deplorable complication have take place when I leave Blackwater Park . I have feel the deep interest in the case , Mr. Fairlie I have endeavour to assist the regular medical attendant in watch it accept my personal assurance of the uninfectious nature of the fever when I last see it . " 

 accept his assurance ! I never be far from accept anything in my life . I would not have believe he on his oath . he be too yellow to be believe . he look like a walk - west - indian - epidemic . he be big enough to carry typhus by the ton , and to dye the very carpet he walk on with scarlet fever . in certain emergency my mind be remarkably soon make up . I instantly determine to get rid of he . 

 " you will kindly excuse an invalid , " I say " but long conference of any kind invariably upset I . may I beg to know exactly what the object be to which I be indebted for the honour of your visit ? " 

 I fervently hop that this remarkably broad hint would throw he off his balance confuse he reduce he to polite apology in short , get he out of the room . on the contrary , it only settle he in his chair . he become additionally solemn , and dignified , and confidential . he hold up two of his horrid finger and give I another of his unpleasantly penetrate look . what be I to do ? I be not strong enough to quarrel with he . conceive my situation , if you please . be language adequate to describe it ? I think not . 

 " the object of my visit , " he go on , quite irrepressibly , " be number on my finger . they be two . first , I come to bear my testimony , with profound sorrow , to the lamentable disagreement between Sir Percival and Lady Glyde . I be Sir Percival 's old friend I be relate to Lady Glyde by marriage I be an eye - witness of all that have happen at Blackwater Park . in those three capacity I speak with authority , with confidence , with honourable regret . Sir , I inform you , as the head of Lady Glyde 's family , that Miss Halcombe have exaggerate nothing in the letter which she write to your address . I affirm that the remedy which that admirable lady have propose be the only remedy that will spare you the horror of public scandal . a temporary separation between husband and wife be the one peaceable solution of this difficulty . part they for the present , and when all cause of irritation be remove , I , who have now the honour of address you I will undertake to bring Sir Percival to reason . Lady Glyde be innocent , Lady Glyde be injure , but follow my thought here ! she be , on that very account   I say it with shame , the cause of irritation while she remain under her husband 's roof . no other house can receive she with propriety but your . I invite you to open it . " 

 cool . here be a matrimonial hailstorm pour in the South of England , and I be invite , by a man with fever in every fold of his coat , to come out from the North of England and take my share of the pelting . I try to put the point forcibly , just as I have put it here . the Count deliberately lower one of his horrid finger , keep the other up , and go on rode over I , as it be , without even the common coach - manlike attention of cry " Hi ! " before he knock I down . 

 " follow my thought once more , if you please , " he resume . " my first object you have hear . my second object in come to this house be to do what Miss Halcombe 's illness have prevent she from do for herself . my large experience be consult on all difficult matter at Blackwater Park , and my friendly advice be request on the interesting subject of your letter to Miss Halcombe . I understand at once for my sympathy be your sympathy why you wish to see she here before you pledge yourself to invite Lady Glyde . you be most right , sir , in hesitate to receive the wife until you be quite certain that the husband will not exert his authority to reclaim she . I agree to that . I also agree that such delicate explanation as this difficulty involve be not explanation which can be properly dispose of by write only . my presence here   to my own great inconvenience   be the proof that I speak sincerely . as for the explanation themselves , I Fosco I , who know Sir Percival much well than Miss Halcombe know he , affirm to you , on my honour and my word , that he will not come near this house , or attempt to communicate with this house , while his wife be live in it . his affair be embarrassed . offer he his freedom by mean of the absence of Lady Glyde . I promise you he will take his freedom , and go back to the continent at the early moment when he can get away . be this clear to you as crystal ? yes , it be . have you question to address to I ? be it so , I be here to answer . Ask , Mr. Fairlie oblige I by ask to your heart 's content . " 

 he have say so much already in spite of I , and he look so dreadfully capable of say a great deal more also in spite of I , that I decline his amiable invitation in pure self - defence . 

 " many thank , " I reply . " I be sink fast . in my state of health I must take thing for grant . allow I to do so on this occasion . we quite understand each other . yes . much oblige , I be sure , for your kind interference . if I ever get well , and ever have a second opportunity of improve our acquaintance " 

 he get up . I think he be go . no . More talk , more time for the development of infectious influence in my room , too remember that , in my room ! 

 " one moment yet , " he say , " one moment before I take my leave . I ask permission at part to impress on you an urgent necessity . it be this , sir . you must not think of wait till Miss Halcombe recover before you receive Lady Glyde . Miss Halcombe have the attendance of the doctor , of the housekeeper at Blackwater Park , and of an experienced nurse as well three person for whose capacity and devotion I answer with my life . I tell you that . I tell you , also , that the anxiety and alarm of her sister 's illness have already affect the health and spirit of Lady Glyde , and have make she totally unfit to be of use in the sick - room . her position with her husband grow more and more deplorable and dangerous every day . if you leave she any long at Blackwater Park , you do nothing whatever to hasten her sister 's recovery , and at the same time , you risk the public scandal , which you and I , and all of we , be bind in the sacred interest of the family to avoid . with all my soul , I advise you to remove the serious responsibility of delay from your own shoulder by write to Lady Glyde to come here at once . do your affectionate , your honourable , your inevitable duty , and whatever happen in the future , no one can lay the blame on you . I speak from my large experience I offer my friendly advice . be it accept yes , or no ? " 

 I look at he merely look at he with my sense of his amazing assurance , and my dawn resolution to ring for Louis and have he show out of the room express in every line of my face . it be perfectly incredible , but quite true , that my face do not appear to produce the slight impression on he . bear without nerve evidently bear without nerve . 

 " you hesitate ? " he say . " Mr. Fairlie ! I understand that hesitation . you object see , sir , how my sympathy look straight down into your thought ! you object that Lady Glyde be not in health and not in spirit to take the long journey , from Hampshire to this place , by herself . her own maid be remove from she , as you know , and of other servant fit to travel with she , from one end of England to another , there be none at Blackwater Park . you object , again , that she can not comfortably stop and rest in London , on her way here , because she can not comfortably go alone to a public hotel where she be a total stranger . in one breath , I grant both objection in another breath , I remove they . follow I , if you please , for the last time . it be my intention , when I return to England with Sir Percival , to settle myself in the neighbourhood of London . that purpose have just be happily accomplish . I have take , for six month , a little furnished house in the quarter call St. John 's Wood . be so oblige as to keep this fact in your mind , and observe the programme I now propose . Lady Glyde travel to London   a short journey   I myself meet she at the station I take she to rest and sleep at my house , which be also the house of her aunt when she be restore I escort she to the station again she travel to this place , and her own maid   who be now under your roof   receive she at the carriage - door . here be comfort consult here be the interest of propriety consult here be your own duty duty of hospitality , sympathy , protection , to an unhappy lady in need of all three smooth and make easy , from the beginning to the end . I cordially invite you , sir , to second my effort in the sacred interest of the family . I seriously advise you to write , by my hand , offer the hospitality of your house   and heart , and the hospitality of my house   and heart , to that injured and unfortunate lady whose cause I plead to - day . " 

 he wave his horrid hand at I he strike his infectious breast he address I oratorically , as if I be lay up in the House of Commons . it be high time to take a desperate course of some sort . it be also high time to send for Louis , and adopt the precaution of fumigate the room . 

 in this try emergency an idea occur to I an inestimable idea which , so to speak , kill two intrusive bird with one stone . I determine to get rid of the Count 's tiresome eloquence , and of Lady Glyde 's tiresome trouble , by comply with this odious foreigner 's request , and write the letter at once . there be not the least danger of the invitation be accept , for there be not the least chance that Laura would consent to leave Blackwater Park while Marian be lie there ill . how this charmingly convenient obstacle could have escape the officious penetration of the Count , it be impossible to conceive but it have escape he . my dread that he might yet discover it , if I allow he any more time to think , stimulate I to such an amazing degree , that I struggle into a sit position seize , really seize , the write material by my side , and produce the letter as rapidly as if I have be a common clerk in an office . " Dearest Laura , please come , whenever you like . break the journey by sleep in London at your aunt 's house . grieve to hear of dear Marian 's illness . ever affectionately your . " I hand these line , at arm 's length , to the Count I sink back in my chair I say , " excuse I I be entirely prostrate I can do no more . will you rest and lunch downstairs ? love to all , and sympathy , and so on . good - morning . " 

 he make another speech the man be absolutely inexhaustible . I close my eye I endeavour to hear as little as possible . in spite of my endeavour I be oblige to hear a great deal . my sister 's endless husband congratulate himself , and congratulate I , on the result of our interview he mention a great deal more about his sympathy and mine he deplore my miserable health he offer to write I a prescription he impress on I the necessity of not forget what he have say about the importance of light he accept my oblige invitation to rest and lunch he recommend I to expect Lady Glyde in two or three day ' time he beg my permission to look forward to our next meeting , instead of pain himself and pain I , by say farewell he add a great deal more , which , I rejoice to think , I do not attend to at the time , and do not remember now . I hear his sympathetic voice travel away from I by degree but , large as he be , I never hear he . he have the negative merit of be absolutely noiseless . I do not   know when he open the door , or when he shut it . I venture to make use of my eye again , after an interval of silence and he be go . 

 I rang for Louis , and retire to my bathroom . tepid water , strengthen with aromatic vinegar , for myself , and copious fumigation for my study , be the obvious precaution to take , and of course I adopt they . I rejoice to say they prove successful . I enjoy my customary siesta . I awake moist and cool . 

 my first inquiry be for the Count . have we really get rid of he ? yes he have go away by the afternoon train . have he lunch , and if so , upon what ? entirely upon fruit - tart and cream . what a man ! what a digestion ! 



 be I expect to say anything more ? I believe not . I believe I have reach the limit assign to I . the shocking circumstance which happen at a later period do not , I be thankful to say , happen in my presence . I do beg and entreat that nobody will be so very unfeeling as to lay any part of the blame of those circumstance on I . I do everything for the good . I be not answerable for a deplorable calamity , which it be quite impossible to foresee . I be shatter by it I have suffer under it , as nobody else have suffer . my servant , Louis   who be really attach to I in his unintelligent way , think I shall never get over it . he see I dictate at this moment , with my handkerchief to my eye . I wish to mention , in justice to myself , that it be not my fault , and that I be quite exhausted and heartbroken . need I say more ? 




 the story continued BY ELIZA MICHELSON 

  Housekeeper at Blackwater Park 



 I 

 I be ask to state plainly what I know of the progress of Miss Halcombe 's illness and of the circumstance under which Lady Glyde leave Blackwater Park for London . 

 the reason give for make this demand on I be , that my testimony be want in the interest of truth . as the widow of a clergyman of the Church of England   reduce by misfortune to the necessity of accept a situation , I have be teach to place the claim of truth above all other consideration . I therefore comply with a request which I might otherwise , through reluctance to connect myself with distress family affair , have hesitate to grant . 

 I make no memorandum at the time , and I can not therefore be sure to a day of the date , but I believe I be correct in state that Miss Halcombe 's serious illness begin during the last fortnight or ten day in June . the breakfast hour be late at Blackwater Park sometimes as late as ten , never early than half - past nine . on the morning to which I be now refer , Miss Halcombe   who be usually the first to come down   do not make her appearance at the table . after the family have wait a quarter of an hour , the upper housemaid be send to see after she , and come run out of the room dreadfully frighten . I meet the servant on the stair , and go at once to Miss Halcombe to see what be the matter . the poor lady be incapable of tell I . she be walk about her room with a pen in her hand , quite light - head , in a state of burn fever . 

 Lady Glyde   be no long in Sir Percival 's service , I may , without impropriety , mention my former mistress by her name , instead of call she my lady   be the first to come in from her own bedroom . she be so dreadfully alarmed and distressed that she be quite useless . the Count Fosco , and his lady , who come upstairs immediately afterwards , be both most serviceable and kind . her ladyship assist I to get Miss Halcombe to her bed . his lordship the Count remain in the sitting - room , and have send for my medicine - chest , make a mixture for Miss Halcombe , and a cool lotion to be apply to her head , so as to lose no time before the doctor come . we apply the lotion , but we could not get she to take the mixture . Sir Percival undertake to send for the doctor . he despatch a groom , on horseback , for the near medical man , Mr. Dawson , of Oak Lodge . 

 Mr. Dawson arrive in less than an hour 's time . he be a respectable elderly man , well know all round the country , and we be much alarmed when we find that he consider the case to be a very serious one . 

 his lordship the Count affably enter into conversation with Mr. Dawson , and give his opinion with a judicious freedom . Mr. Dawson , not over - courteously , inquire if his lordship 's advice be the advice of a doctor , and be inform that it be the advice of one who have study medicine unprofessionally , reply that he be not accustomed to consult with amateur physician . the Count , with truly christian meekness of temper , smile and leave the room . before he go out he tell I that he might be find , in case he be want in the course of the day , at the boat - house on the bank of the lake . why he should have go there , I can not say . but he do go , remain away the whole day till seven o'clock , which be dinner - time . perhaps he wish to set the example of keep the house as quiet as possible . it be entirely in his character to do so . he be a most considerate nobleman . 

 Miss Halcombe pass a very bad night , the fever come and go , and get bad towards the morning instead of well . no nurse fit to wait on she be at hand in the neighbourhood , her ladyship the Countess and myself undertake the duty , relieve each other . Lady Glyde , most unwisely , insist on sit up with we . she be much too nervous and too delicate in health to bear the anxiety of Miss Halcombe 's illness calmly . she only do herself harm , without be of the least real assistance . a more gentle and affectionate lady never live but she cry , and she be frightened , two weakness which make she entirely unfit to be present in a sick - room . 

 Sir Percival and the Count come in the morning to make their inquiry . 

 Sir Percival   from distress , I presume , at his lady 's affliction and at Miss Halcombe 's illness   appear much confused and unsettle in his mind . his lordship testify , on the contrary , a become composure and interest . he have his straw hat in one hand , and his book in the other , and he mention to Sir Percival in my hearing that he would go out again and study at the lake . " let we keep the house quiet , " he say . " let we not smoke indoor , my friend , now Miss Halcombe be ill . you go your way , and I will go mine . when I study I like to be alone . good - morning , Mrs. Michelson . " 

 Sir Percival be not civil enough perhaps I ought in justice to say , not compose enough to take leave of I with the same polite attention . the only person in the house , indeed , who treat I , at that time or at any other , on the footing of a lady in distressed circumstance , be the Count . he have the manner of a true nobleman he be considerate towards every one . even the young person   Fanny by name   who attend on Lady Glyde be not beneath his notice . when she be send away by Sir Percival , his lordship   show I his sweet little bird at the time   be most kindly anxious to know what have become of she , where she be to go the day she leave Blackwater Park , and so on . it be in such little delicate attention that the advantage of aristocratic birth always show themselves . I make no apology for introduce these particular they be bring forward in justice to his lordship , whose character , I have reason to know , be view rather harshly in certain quarter . a nobleman who can respect a lady in distressed circumstance , and can take a fatherly interest in the fortune of an humble servant girl , show principle and feeling of too high an order to be lightly call in question . I advance no opinion I offer fact only . my endeavour through life be to judge not that I be not judge . one of my beloved husband 's fine sermon be on that text . I read it constantly in my own copy of the edition print by subscription , in the first day of my widowhood and at every fresh perusal I derive an increase of spiritual benefit and edification . 

 there be no improvement in Miss Halcombe , and the second night be even bad than the first . Mr. Dawson be constant in his attendance . the practical duty of nursing be still divide between the Countess and myself , Lady Glyde persist in sit up with we , though we both entreat she to take some rest . " my place be by Marian 's bedside , " be her only answer . " whether I be ill , or well , nothing will induce I to lose sight of she . " 

 towards midday I go downstairs to attend to some of my regular duty . an hour afterwards , on my way back to the sick - room , I see the Count   who have go out again early , for the third time   enter the hall , to all appearance in the high good spirit . Sir Percival , at the same moment , put his head out of the library door , and address his noble friend , with extreme eagerness , in these word 

 " have you find she ? " 

 his lordship 's large face become dimple all over with placid smile , but he make no reply in word . at the same time Sir Percival turn his head , observe that I be approach the stair , and look at I in the most rudely angry manner possible . 

 " come in here and tell I about it , " he say to the Count . " whenever there be woman in a house they be always sure to be go up or down stair . " 

 " my dear Percival , " observe his lordship kindly , " Mrs. Michelson have duty . pray recognise her admirable performance of they as sincerely as I do ! how be the sufferer , Mrs. Michelson ? " 

 " no well , my lord , I regret to say . " 

 " sad most sad ! " remark the Count . " you look fatigue , Mrs. Michelson . it be certainly time you and my wife have some help in nursing . I think I may be the mean of offer you that help . circumstance have happen which will oblige Madame Fosco to travel to London either to - morrow or the day after . she will go away in the morning and return at night , and she will bring back with she , to relieve you , a nurse of excellent conduct and capacity , who be now disengage . the woman be know to my wife as a person to be trust . before she come here say nothing about she , if you please , to the doctor , because he will look with an evil eye on any nurse of my providing . when she appear in this house she will speak for herself , and Mr. Dawson will be oblige to acknowledge that there be no excuse for not employ she . Lady Glyde will say the same . pray present my good respect and sympathy to Lady Glyde . " 

 I express my grateful acknowledgment for his lordship 's kind consideration . Sir Percival cut they short by call to his noble friend   use , I regret to say , a profane expression   to come into the library , and not to keep he wait there any long . 

 I proceed upstairs . we be poor err creature , and however well establish a woman 's principle may be she can not always keep on her guard against the temptation to exercise an idle curiosity . I be ashamed to say that an idle curiosity , on this occasion , get the well of my principle , and make I unduly inquisitive about the question which Sir Percival have address to his noble friend at the library door . who be the Count expect to find in the course of his studious morning ramble at Blackwater Park ? a woman , it be to be presume , from the term of Sir Percival 's inquiry . I do not suspect the Count of any impropriety I know his moral character too well . the only question I ask myself be have he find she ? 

 to resume . the night pass as usual without produce any change for the well in Miss Halcombe . the next day she seem to improve a little . the day after that her ladyship the Countess , without mention the object of her journey to any one in my hearing , proceed by the morning train to London her noble husband , with his customary attention , accompany she to the station . 

 I be now leave in sole charge of Miss Halcombe , with every apparent chance , in consequence of her sister 's resolution not to leave the bedside , of have Lady Glyde herself to nurse next . 

 the only circumstance of any importance that happen in the course of the day be the occurrence of another unpleasant meeting between the doctor and the Count . 

 his lordship , on return from the station , step up into Miss Halcombe 's sitting - room to make his inquiry . I go out from the bedroom to speak to he , Mr. Dawson and Lady Glyde be both with the patient at the time . the Count ask I many question about the treatment and the symptom . I inform he that the treatment be of the kind describe as ' saline , " and that the symptom , between the attack of fever , be certainly those of increase weakness and exhaustion . just as I be mention these last particular , Mr. Dawson come out from the bedroom . 

 " good - morning , sir , " say his lordship , step forward in the most urbane manner , and stop the doctor , with a high - breed resolution impossible to resist , " I greatly fear you find no improvement in the symptom to - day ? " 

 " I find decide improvement , " answer Mr. Dawson . 

 " you still persist in your lower treatment of this case of fever ? " continue his lordship . 

 " I persist in the treatment which be justify by my own professional experience , " say Mr. Dawson . 

 " permit I to put one question to you on the vast subject of professional experience , " observe the Count . " I presume to offer no more advice I only presume to make an inquiry . you live at some distance , sir , from the gigantic centre of scientific activity London and Paris . have you ever hear of the waste effect of fever be reasonably and intelligibly repair by fortify the exhausted patient with brandy , wine , ammonia , and quinine ? have that new heresy of the high medical authority ever reach your ear yes or no ? " 

 " when a professional man put that question to I I shall be glad to answer he , " say the doctor , open the door to go out . " you be not a professional man , and I beg to decline answer you . " 

 buffet in this inexcusably uncivil way on one cheek , the Count , like a practical christian , immediately turn the other , and say , in the sweetest manner , " good - morning , Mr. Dawson . " 

 if my late beloved husband have be so fortunate as to know his lordship , how highly he and the Count would have esteem each other ! 

 her ladyship the Countess return by the last train that night , and bring with she the nurse from London . I be instruct that this person 's name be Mrs. Rubelle . her personal appearance , and her imperfect English when she speak , inform I that she be a foreigner . 

 I have always cultivate a feeling of humane indulgence for foreigner . they do not possess our blessing and advantage , and they be , for the most part , bring up in the blind error of Popery . it have also always be my precept and practice , as it be my dear husband 's precept and practice before I   see Sermon XXIX . in the Collection by the late Rev. Samuel Michelson , M.A. , to do as I would be do by . on both these account I will not say that Mrs. Rubelle strike I as be a small , wiry , sly person , of fifty or thereabout , with a dark brown or Creole complexion and watchful light grey eye . nor will I mention , for the reason just allege , that I think her dress , though it be of the plain black silk , inappropriately costly in texture and unnecessarily refine in trim and finish , for a person in her position in life . I should not like these thing to be say of I , and therefore it be my duty not to say they of Mrs. Rubelle . I will merely mention that her manner be , not perhaps unpleasantly reserve , but only remarkably quiet and retire that she look about she a great deal , and say very little , which might have arise quite as much from her own modesty as from distrust of her position at Blackwater Park ; and that she decline to partake of supper   which be curious perhaps , but surely not suspicious ? , although I myself politely invite she to that meal in my own room . 

 at the Count 's particular suggestion   so like his lordship 's forgiving kindness ! , it be arrange that Mrs. Rubelle should not enter on her duty until she have be see and approve by the doctor the next morning . I sit up that night . Lady Glyde appear to be very unwilling that the new nurse should be employ to attend on Miss Halcombe . such want of liberality towards a foreigner on the part of a lady of her education and refinement surprise I . I venture to say , " my lady , we must all remember not to be hasty in our judgment on our inferior especially when they come from foreign part . " Lady Glyde do not appear to attend to I . she only sigh , and kiss Miss Halcombe 's hand as it lie on the counterpane . scarcely a judicious proceeding in a sick - room , with a patient whom it be highly desirable not to excite . but poor Lady Glyde know nothing of nurse nothing whatever , I be sorry to say . 

 the next morning Mrs. Rubelle be send to the sitting - room , to be approve by the doctor on his way through to the bedroom . 

 I leave Lady Glyde with Miss Halcombe , who be slumber at the time , and join Mrs. Rubelle , with the object of kindly prevent she from feel strange and nervous in consequence of the uncertainty of her situation . she do not appear to see it in that light . she seem to be quite satisfied , beforehand , that Mr. Dawson would approve of she , and she sit calmly look out of window , with every appearance of enjoy the country air . some people might have think such conduct suggestive of brazen assurance . I beg to say that I more liberally set it down to extraordinary strength of mind . 

 instead of the doctor come up to we , I be send for to see the doctor . I think this change of affair rather odd , but Mrs. Rubelle do not appear to be affect by it in any way . I leave she still calmly look out of the window , and still silently enjoy the country air . 

 Mr. Dawson be wait for I by himself in the breakfast - room . 

 " about this new nurse , Mrs. Michelson , " say the doctor . 

 " yes , sir ? " 

 " I find that she have be bring here from London by the wife of that fat old foreigner , who be always try to interfere with I . Mrs. Michelson , the fat old foreigner be a quack . " 

 this be very rude . I be naturally shock at it . 

 " be you aware , sir , " I say , " that you be talk of a nobleman ? " 

 " Pooh ! he be not   the first quack with a handle to his name . they be all count hang them ! " 

 " he would not be a friend of Sir Percival Glyde 's , sir , if he be not a member of the high aristocracy except the english aristocracy , of course . " 

 " very well , Mrs. Michelson , call he what you like , and let we get back to the nurse . I have be object to she already . " 

 " without have see she , sir ? " 

 " yes , without have see she . she may be the good nurse in existence , but she be not a nurse of my providing . I have put that objection to Sir Percival , as the master of the house . he do not   support I . he say a nurse of my providing would have be a stranger from London also , and he think the woman ought to have a trial , after his wife 's aunt have take the trouble to fetch she from London . there be some justice in that , and I can not   decently say no . but I have make it a condition that she be to go at once , if I find reason to complain of she . this proposal be one which I have some right to make , as medical attendant , Sir Percival have consent to it . now , Mrs. Michelson , I know I can depend on you , and I want you to keep a sharp eye on the nurse for the first day or two , and to see that she give Miss Halcombe no medicine but mine . this foreign nobleman of yours be die to try his quack remedy   mesmerism include   on my patient , and a nurse who be bring here by his wife may be a little too willing to help he . you understand ? very well , then , we may go upstairs . be the nurse there ? I will say a word to she before she go into the sick - room . " 

 we find Mrs. Rubelle still enjoy herself at the window . when I introduce she to Mr. Dawson , neither the doctor 's doubtful look nor the doctor 's search question appear to confuse she in the least . she answer he quietly in her broken English , and though he try hard to puzzle she , she never betray the least ignorance , so far , about any part of her duty . this be doubtless the result of strength of mind , as I say before , and not of brazen assurance , by any mean . 

 we all go into the bedroom . 

 Mrs. Rubelle look very attentively at the patient , curtsey to Lady Glyde , set one or two little thing right in the room , and sit down quietly in a corner to wait until she be want . her ladyship seem startled and annoy by the appearance of the strange nurse . no one say anything , for fear of rouse Miss Halcombe , who be still slumber , except the doctor , who whisper a question about the night . I softly answer , " much as usual , " and then Mr. Dawson go out . Lady Glyde follow he , I suppose to speak about Mrs. Rubelle . for my own part , I have make up my mind already that this quiet foreign person would keep her situation . she have all her wit about she , and she certainly understand her business . so far , I could hardly have do much well by the bedside myself . 

 remember Mr. Dawson 's caution to I , I subject Mrs. Rubelle to a severe scrutiny at certain interval for the next three or four day . I over and over again enter the room softly and suddenly , but I never find she out in any suspicious action . Lady Glyde , who watch she as attentively as I do , discover nothing either . I never detect a sign of the medicine bottle be tamper with , I never see Mrs. Rubelle say a word to the Count , or the Count to she . she manage Miss Halcombe with unquestionable care and discretion . the poor lady waver backwards and forwards between a sort of sleepy exhaustion , which be half faintness and half slumber , and attack of fever which bring with they more or less of wander in her mind . Mrs. Rubelle never disturb she in the first case , and never startle she in the second , by appear too suddenly at the bedside in the character of a stranger . honour to whom honour be due   whether foreign or English   and I give her privilege impartially to Mrs. Rubelle . she be remarkably uncommunicative about herself , and she be too quietly independent of all advice from experienced person who understand the duty of a sick - room but with these drawback , she be a good nurse , and she never give either Lady Glyde or Mr. Dawson the shadow of a reason for complain of she . 

 the next circumstance of importance that occur in the house be the temporary absence of the Count , occasion by business which take he to London . he go away   I think   on the morning of the fourth day after the arrival of Mrs. Rubelle , and at part he speak to Lady Glyde very seriously , in my presence , on the subject of Miss Halcombe . 

 " Trust Mr. Dawson , " he say , " for a few day more , if you please . but if there be not some change for the well in that time , send for advice from London , which this mule of a doctor must accept in spite of himself . offend Mr. Dawson , and save Miss Halcombe . I say this seriously , on my word of honour and from the bottom of my heart . " 

 his lordship speak with extreme feeling and kindness . but poor Lady Glyde 's nerve be so completely break down that she seem quite frightened at he . she tremble from head to foot , and allow he to take his leave without utter a word on her side . she turn to I when he have go , and say , " oh , Mrs. Michelson , I be heartbroken about my sister , and I have no friend to advise I ! do you think Mr. Dawson be wrong ? he tell I himself this morning that there be no fear , and no need to send for another doctor . " 

 " with all respect to Mr. Dawson , " I answer , " in your ladyship 's place I should remember the Count 's advice . " 

 Lady Glyde turn away from I suddenly , with an appearance of despair , for which I be quite unable to account . 

 " his advice ! " she say to herself . " God help we his advice ! " 


 the Count be away from Blackwater Park , as nearly as I remember , a week . 

 Sir Percival seem to feel the loss of his lordship in various way , and appear also , I think , much depressed and alter by the sickness and sorrow in the house . occasionally he be so very restless that I could not help notice it , come and go , and wander here and there and everywhere in the ground . his inquiry about Miss Halcombe , and about his lady   whose fail health seem to cause he sincere anxiety , be most attentive . I think his heart be much soften . if some kind clerical friend some such friend as he might have find in my late excellent husband have be near he at this time , cheer moral progress might have be make with Sir Percival . I seldom find myself mistaken on a point of this sort , have have experience to guide I in my happy married day . 

 her ladyship the Countess , who be now the only company for Sir Percival downstair , rather neglect he , as I consider or , perhaps , it might have be that he neglect she . a stranger might almost have suppose that they be bent , now they be leave together alone , on actually avoid one another . this , of course , could not be . but it do so happen , nevertheless , that the Countess make her dinner at luncheon - time , and that she always come upstairs towards evening , although Mrs. Rubelle have take the nursing duty entirely off her hand . Sir Percival din by himself , and William   the man out of livery   make the remark , in my hearing , that his master have put himself on half ration of food and on a double allowance of drink . I attach no importance to such an insolent observation as this on the part of a servant . I reprobate it at the time , and I wish to be understand as reprobate it once more on this occasion . 

 in the course of the next few day Miss Halcombe do certainly seem to all of we to be mend a little . our faith in Mr. Dawson revive . he appear to be very confident about the case , and he assure Lady Glyde , when she speak to he on the subject , that he would himself propose to send for a physician the moment he feel so much as the shadow of a doubt cross his own mind . 

 the only person among we who do not appear to be relieve by these word be the Countess . she say to I privately , that she could not feel easy about Miss Halcombe on Mr. Dawson 's authority , and that she should wait anxiously for her husband 's opinion on his return . that return , his letter inform she , would take place in three day ' time . the Count and Countess correspond regularly every morning during his lordship 's absence . they be in that respect , as in all other , a pattern to married people . 

 on the evening of the third day I notice a change in Miss Halcombe , which cause I serious apprehension . Mrs. Rubelle notice it too . we say nothing on the subject to Lady Glyde , who be then lie asleep , completely overpower by exhaustion , on the sofa in the sitting - room . 

 Mr. Dawson do not pay his evening visit till later than usual . as soon as he set eye on his patient I see his face alter . he try to hide it , but he look both confused and alarmed . a messenger be send to his residence for his medicine - chest , disinfect preparation be use in the room , and a bed be make up for he in the house by his own direction . " have the fever turn to infection ? " I whisper to he . " I be afraid it have , " he answer ; " we shall know well to - morrow morning . " 

 by Mr. Dawson 's own direction Lady Glyde be keep in ignorance of this change for the bad . he himself absolutely forbid she , on account of her health , to join we in the bedroom that night . she try to resist there be a sad scene but he have his medical authority to support he , and he carry his point . 

 the next morning one of the man - servant be send to London at eleven o'clock , with a letter to a physician in town , and with order to bring the new doctor back with he by the early possible train . half an hour after the messenger have go the Count return to Blackwater Park . 

 the Countess , on her own responsibility , immediately bring he in to see the patient . there be no impropriety that I could discover in she take this course . his lordship be a married man , he be old enough to be Miss Halcombe 's father , and he see she in the presence of a female relative , Lady Glyde 's aunt . Mr. Dawson nevertheless protest against his presence in the room , but I could plainly remark the doctor be too much alarmed to make any serious resistance on this occasion . 

 the poor suffering lady be past know any one about she . she seem to take her friend for enemy . when the Count approach she bedside her eye , which have be wander incessantly round and round the room before , settle on his face with a dreadful stare of terror , which I shall remember to my die day . the Count sit down by she , feel her pulse and her temple , look at she very attentively , and then turn round upon the doctor with such an expression of indignation and contempt in his face , that the word fail on Mr. Dawson 's lip , and he stand for a moment , pale with anger and alarm pale and perfectly speechless . 

 his lordship look next at I . 

 " when do the change happen ? " he ask . 

 I tell he the time . 

 " Has Lady Glyde be in the room since ? " 

 I reply that she have not . the doctor have absolutely forbid she to come into the room on the evening before , and have repeat the order again in the morning . 

 " have you and Mrs. Rubelle be make aware of the full extent of the mischief ? " be his next question . 

 we be aware , I answer , that the malady be consider infectious . he stop I before I could add anything more . 

 " it be typhus fever , " he say . 

 in the minute that pass , while these question and answer be go on , Mr. Dawson recover himself , and address the Count with his customary firmness . 

 " it be not typhus fever , " he remark sharply . " I protest against this intrusion , sir . no one have a right to put question here but I . I have do my duty to the good of my ability " 

 the Count interrupt he not by word , but only by point to the bed . Mr. Dawson seem to feel that silent contradiction to his assertion of his own ability , and to grow only the more angry under it . 

 " I say I have do my duty , " he reiterate . " a physician have be send for from London . I will consult on the nature of the fever with he , and with no one else . I insist on your leave the room . " 

 " I enter this room , sir , in the sacred interest of humanity , " say the Count . " and in the same interest , if the coming of the physician be delay , I will enter it again . I warn you once more that the fever have turn to typhus , and that your treatment be responsible for this lamentable change . if that unhappy lady die , I will give my testimony in a court of justice that your ignorance and obstinacy have be the cause of her death . " 

 before Mr. Dawson could answer , before the Count could leave we , the door be open from the sitting - room , and we see Lady Glyde on the threshold . 

 " I must and will come in , " she say , with extraordinary firmness . 

 instead of stop she , the Count move into the sitting - room , and make way for she to go in . on all other occasion he be the last man in the world to forget anything , but in the surprise of the moment he apparently forget the danger of infection from typhus , and the urgent necessity of force Lady Glyde to take proper care of herself . 

 to my astonishment Mr. Dawson show more presence of mind . he stop her ladyship at the first step she take towards the bedside . " I be sincerely sorry , I be sincerely grieve , " he say . " the fever may , I fear , be infectious . until I be certain that it be not , I entreat you to keep out of the room . " 

 she struggle for a moment , then suddenly drop her arm and sink forward . she have faint . the Countess and I take she from the doctor and carry she into her own room . the Count precede we , and wait in the passage till I come out and tell he that we have recover she from the swoon . 

 I go back to the doctor to tell he , by Lady Glyde 's desire , that she insist on speak to he immediately . he withdraw at once to quiet her ladyship 's agitation , and to assure she of the physician 's arrival in the course of a few hour . those hour pass very slowly . Sir Percival and the Count be together downstairs , and send up from time to time to make their inquiry . at last , between five and six o'clock , to our great relief , the physician come . 

 he be a young man than Mr. Dawson , very serious and very decide . what he think of the previous treatment I can not say , but it strike I as curious that he put many more question to myself and to Mrs. Rubelle than he put to the doctor , and that he do not appear to listen with much interest to what Mr. Dawson say , while he be examine Mr. Dawson 's patient . I begin to suspect , from what I observe in this way , that the Count have be right about the illness all the way through , and I be naturally confirm in that idea when Mr. Dawson , after some little delay , ask the one important question which the London doctor have be send for to set at rest . 

 " what be your opinion of the fever ? " he inquire . 

 " Typhus , " reply the physician " Typhus fever beyond all doubt . " 

 that quiet foreign person , Mrs. Rubelle , cross her thin brown hand in front of she , and look at I with a very significant smile . the Count himself could hardly have appear more gratified if he have be present in the room and have hear the confirmation of his own opinion . 

 after give we some useful direction about the management of the patient , and mention that he would come again in five day ' time , the physician withdraw to consult in private with Mr. Dawson . he would offer no opinion on Miss Halcombe 's chance of recovery he say it be impossible at that stage of the illness to pronounce one way or the other . 



 the five day pass anxiously . 

 Countess Fosco and myself take it by turn to relieve Mrs. Rubelle , Miss Halcombe 's condition grow bad and bad , and require our utmost care and attention . it be a terribly try time . Lady Glyde   support , as Mr. Dawson say , by the constant strain of her suspense on her sister 's account   rally in the most extraordinary manner , and show a firmness and determination for which I should myself never have give her credit . she insist on come into the sick - room two or three time every day , to look at Miss Halcombe with her own eye , promise not to go too close to the bed , if the doctor would consent to her wish so far . Mr. Dawson very unwillingly make the concession require of he I think he see that it be hopeless to dispute with she . she come in every day , and she self - denyingly keep her promise . I feel it personally so distress   as remind I of my own affliction during my husband 's last illness   to see how she suffer under these circumstance , that I must beg not to dwell on this part of the subject any long . it be more agreeable to I to mention that no fresh dispute take place between Mr. Dawson and the Count . his lordship make all his inquiry by deputy , and remain continually in company with Sir Percival downstairs . 

 on the fifth day the physician come again and give we a little hope . he say the tenth day from the first appearance of the typhus would probably decide the result of the illness , and he arrange for his third visit to take place on that date . the interval pass as before except that the Count go to London again one morning and return at night . 

 on the tenth day it please a merciful Providence to relieve our household from all further anxiety and alarm . the physician positively assure we that Miss Halcombe be out of danger . " she want no doctor now all she require be careful watching and nursing for some time to come , and that I see she have . " those be his own word . that evening I read my husband 's touching sermon on Recovery from Sickness , with more happiness and advantage   in a spiritual point of view   than I ever remember to have derive from it before . 

 the effect of the good news on poor Lady Glyde be , I grieve to say , quite overpower . she be too weak to bear the violent reaction , and in another day or two she sink into a state of debility and depression which oblige she to keep her room . rest and quiet , and change of air afterwards , be the good remedy which Mr. Dawson could suggest for her benefit . it be fortunate that matter be no bad , for , on the very day after she take to her room , the Count and the doctor have another disagreement and this time the dispute between they be of so serious a nature that Mr. Dawson leave the house . 

 I be not present at the time , but I understand that the subject of dispute be the amount of nourishment which it be necessary to give to assist Miss Halcombe 's convalescence after the exhaustion of the fever . Mr. Dawson , now that his patient be safe , be less inclined than ever to submit to unprofessional interference , and the Count   I can not imagine why   lose all the self - control which he have so judiciously preserve on former occasion , and taunt the doctor , over and over again , with his mistake about the fever when it change to typhus . the unfortunate affair end in Mr. Dawson 's appeal to Sir Percival , and threaten   now that he could leave without absolute danger to Miss Halcombe   to withdraw from his attendance at Blackwater Park if the Count 's interference be not peremptorily suppress from that moment . Sir Percival 's reply   though not designedly uncivil   have only result in make matter bad , and Mr. Dawson have thereupon withdraw from the house in a state of extreme indignation at Count Fosco 's usage of he , and have send in his bill the next morning . 

 we be now , therefore , leave without the attendance of a medical man . although there be no actual necessity for another doctor nursing and watch being , as the physician have observe , all that Miss Halcombe require I should still , if my authority have be consult , have obtain professional assistance from some other quarter , for form 's sake . 

 the matter do not seem to strike Sir Percival in that light . he say it would be time enough to send for another doctor if Miss Halcombe show any sign of a relapse . in the meanwhile we have the Count to consult in any minor difficulty , and we need not unnecessarily disturb our patient in her present weak and nervous condition by the presence of a stranger at her bedside . there be much that be reasonable , no doubt , in these consideration , but they leave I a little anxious nevertheless . nor be I quite satisfied in my own mind of the propriety of our conceal the doctor 's absence as we do from Lady Glyde . it be a merciful deception , I admit for she be in no state to bear any fresh anxiety . but still it be a deception , and , as such , to a person of my principle , at good a doubtful proceeding . 



 a second perplexing circumstance which happen on the same day , and which take I completely by surprise , add greatly to the sense of uneasiness that be now weigh on my mind . 

 I be send for to see Sir Percival in the library . the Count , who be with he when I go in , immediately rise and leave we alone together . Sir Percival civilly ask I to take a seat , and then , to my great astonishment , address I in these term 

 " I want to speak to you , Mrs. Michelson , about a matter which I decide on some time ago , and which I should have mention before , but for the sickness and trouble in the house . in plain word , I have reason for wish to break up my establishment immediately at this place leave you in charge , of course , as usual . as soon as Lady Glyde and Miss Halcombe can travel they must both have change of air . my friend , Count Fosco and the Countess , will leave we before that time to live in the neighbourhood of London , and I have reason for not open the house to any more company , with a view to economise as carefully as I can . I do not   blame you , but my expense here be a great deal too heavy . in short , I shall sell the horse , and get rid of all the servant at once . I never do thing by half , as you know , and I mean to have the house clear of a pack of useless people by this time to - morrow . " 

 I listen to he , perfectly aghast with astonishment . 

 " do you mean , Sir Percival , that I be to dismiss the indoor servant under my charge without the usual month 's warning ? " I ask . 

 " certainly I do . we may all be out of the house before another month , and I be not go to leave the servant here in idleness , with no master to wait on . " 

 " who be to do the cooking , Sir Percival , while you be still stay here ? " 

 " Margaret Porcher can roast and boil keep she . what do I want with a cook if I do not   mean to give any dinner - party ? " 

 " the servant you have mention be the most unintelligent servant in the house , Sir Percival . " 

 " keep she , I tell you , and have a woman in from the village to do the cleaning and go away again . my weekly expense must and shall be lower immediately . I do not   send for you to make objection , Mrs. Michelson I send for you to carry out my plan of economy . dismiss the whole lazy pack of indoor servant to - morrow , except Porcher . she be as strong as a horse and we will make her work like a horse . " 

 " you will excuse I for remind you , Sir Percival , that if the servant go to - morrow they must have a month 's wage in lieu of a month 's warning . " 

 " let they ! a month 's wage save a month 's waste and gluttony in the servant ' hall . " 

 this last remark convey an aspersion of the most offensive kind on my management . I have too much self - respect to defend myself under so gross an imputation . christian consideration for the helpless position of Miss Halcombe and Lady Glyde , and for the serious inconvenience which my sudden absence might inflict on they , alone prevent I from resign my situation on the spot . I rise immediately . it would have lower I in my own estimation to have permit the interview to continue a moment long . 

 " after that last remark , Sir Percival , I have nothing more to say . your direction shall be attend to . " pronounce those word , I bow my head with the most distant respect , and go out of the room . 

 the next day the servant leave in a body . Sir Percival himself dismiss the groom and stableman , send they , with all the horse but one , to London . of the whole domestic establishment , indoor and out , there now remain only myself , Margaret Porcher , and the gardener this last live in his own cottage , and be want to take care of the one horse that remain in the stable . 

 with the house leave in this strange and lonely condition with the mistress of it ill in her room with Miss Halcombe still as helpless as a child and with the doctor 's attendance withdraw from we in enmity it be surely not unnatural that my spirit should sink , and my customary composure be very hard to maintain . my mind be ill at ease . I wish the poor lady both well again , and I wish myself away from Blackwater Park . 



 II 

 the next event that occur be of so singular a nature that it might have cause I a feeling of superstitious surprise , if my mind have not be fortify by principle against any pagan weakness of that sort . the uneasy sense of something wrong in the family which have make I wish myself away from Blackwater Park , be actually follow , strange to say , by my departure from the house . it be true that my absence be for a temporary period only , but the coincidence be , in my opinion , not the less remarkable on that account . 

 my departure take place under the following circumstance 

 a day or two after the servant all leave I be again send for to see Sir Percival . the undeserved slur which he have cast on my management of the household do not , I be happy to say , prevent I from return good for evil to the good of my ability , by comply with his request as readily and respectfully as ever . it cost I a struggle with that fallen nature , which we all share in common , before I could suppress my feeling . be accustomed to self - discipline , I accomplish the sacrifice . 

 I find Sir Percival and Count Fosco sit together again . on this occasion his lordship remain present at the interview , and assist in the development of Sir Percival 's view . 

 the subject to which they now request my attention relate to the healthy change of air by which we all hop that Miss Halcombe and Lady Glyde might soon be enable to profit . Sir Percival mention that both the lady would probably pass the autumn   by invitation of Frederick Fairlie , Esquire   at Limmeridge House , Cumberland . but before they go there , it be his opinion , confirm by Count Fosco   who here take up the conversation and continue it to the end , that they would benefit by a short residence first in the genial climate of Torquay . the great object , therefore , be to engage lodging at that place , afford all the comfort and advantage of which they stand in need , and the great difficulty be to find an experienced person capable of choose the sort of residence which they want . in this emergency the Count beg to inquire , on Sir Percival 's behalf , whether I would object to give the lady the benefit of my assistance , by proceed myself to Torquay in their interest . 

 it be impossible for a person in my situation to meet any proposal , make in these term , with a positive objection . 

 I could only venture to represent the serious inconvenience of my leave Blackwater Park in the extraordinary absence of all the indoor servant , with the one exception of Margaret Porcher . but Sir Percival and his lordship declare that they be both willing to put up with inconvenience for the sake of the invalid . I next respectfully suggest write to an agent at Torquay , but I be meet here by be remind of the imprudence of take lodging without first see they . I be also inform that the Countess   who would otherwise have go to devonshire herself   could not , in Lady Glyde 's present condition , leave her niece , and that Sir Percival and the Count have business to transact together which would oblige they to remain at Blackwater Park . in short , it be clearly show I that if I do not undertake the errand , no one else could be trust with it . under these circumstance , I could only inform Sir Percival that my service be at the disposal of Miss Halcombe and Lady Glyde . 

 it be thereupon arrange that I should leave the next morning , that I should occupy one or two day in examine all the most convenient house in Torquay , and that I should return with my report as soon as I conveniently could . a memorandum be write for I by his lordship , state the requisite which the place I be send to take must be find to possess , and a note of the pecuniary limit assign to I be add by Sir Percival . 

 my own idea on read over these instruction be , that no such residence as I see describe could be find at any watering - place in England , and that , even if it could by chance be discover , it would certainly not be part with for any period on such term as I be permit to offer . I hint at these difficulty to both the gentleman , but Sir Percival   who undertake to answer I   do not appear to feel they . it be not for I to dispute the question . I say no more , but I feel a very strong conviction that the business on which I be send away be so beset by difficulty that my errand be almost hopeless at start . 

 before I leave I take care to satisfy myself that Miss Halcombe be go on favourably . 

 there be a painful expression of anxiety in her face which make I fear that her mind , on first recover itself , be not at ease . but she be certainly strengthen more rapidly than I could have venture to anticipate , and she be able to send kind message to Lady Glyde , say that she be fast get well , and entreat her ladyship not to exert herself again too soon . I leave she in charge of Mrs. Rubelle , who be still as quietly independent of every one else in the house as ever . when I knock at Lady Glyde 's door before go away , I be tell that she be still sadly weak and depressed , my informant be the Countess , who be then keep her company in her room . Sir Percival and the Count be walk on the road to the lodge as I be drive by in the chaise . I bow to they and quit the house , with not a live soul leave in the servant ' office but Margaret Porcher . 

 every one must feel what I have feel myself since that time , that these circumstance be more than unusual they be ! almost suspicious . let I , however , say again that it be impossible for I , in my dependent position , to act otherwise than I do . 

 the result of my errand at Torquay be exactly what I have foresee . no such lodging as I be instruct to take could be find in the whole place , and the term I be permit to give be much too low for the purpose , even if I have be able to discover what I want . I accordingly return to Blackwater Park , and inform Sir Percival , who meet I at the door , that my journey have be take in vain . he seem too much occupy with some other subject to care about the failure of my errand , and his first word inform I that even in the short time of my absence another remarkable change have take place in the house . 

 the Count and Countess Fosco have leave Blackwater Park for their new residence in St. John 's Wood . 

 I be not make aware of the motive for this sudden departure I be only tell that the Count have be very particular in leave his kind compliment to I . when I venture on ask Sir Percival whether Lady Glyde have any one to attend to her comfort in the absence of the Countess , he reply that she have Margaret Porcher to wait on she , and he add that a woman from the village have be send for to do the work downstairs . 

 the answer really shock I there be such a glaring impropriety in permit an under - housemaid to fill the place of confidential attendant on Lady Glyde . I go upstairs at once , and meet Margaret on the bedroom landing . her service have not be require   naturally enough , her mistress have sufficiently recover that morning to be able to leave her bed . I ask next after Miss Halcombe , but I be answer in a slouching , sulky way , which leave I no wise than I be before . 

 I do not choose to repeat the question , and perhaps provoke an impertinent reply . it be in every respect more become to a person in my position to present myself immediately in Lady Glyde 's room . 

 I find that her ladyship have certainly gain in health during the last few day . although still sadly weak and nervous , she be able to get up without assistance , and to walk slowly about her room , feel no bad effect from the exertion than a slight sensation of fatigue . she have be make a little anxious that morning about Miss Halcombe , through have receive no news of she from any one . I think this seem to imply a blamable want of attention on the part of Mrs. Rubelle , but I say nothing , and remain with Lady Glyde to assist she to dress . when she be ready we both leave the room together to go to Miss Halcombe . 

 we be stop in the passage by the appearance of Sir Percival . he look as if he have be purposely wait there to see we . 

 " where be you go ? " he say to Lady Glyde . 

 " To Marian 's room , " she answer . 

 " it may spare you a disappointment , " remark Sir Percival , " if I tell you at once that you will not find she there . " 

 " not find she there ! " 

 " no . she leave the house yesterday morning with Fosco and his wife . " 

 Lady Glyde be not strong enough to bear the surprise of this extraordinary statement . she turn fearfully pale , and lean back against the wall , look at her husband in dead silence . 

 I be so astonish myself that I hardly know what to say . I ask Sir Percival if he really mean that Miss Halcombe have leave Blackwater Park . 

 " I certainly mean it , " he answer . 

 " in her state , Sir Percival ! without mention her intention to Lady Glyde ! " 

 before he could reply her ladyship recover herself a little and speak . 

 " impossible ! " she cry out in a loud , frightened manner , take a step or two forward from the wall . " where be the doctor ? where be Mr. Dawson when Marian go away ? " 

 " Mr. Dawson be not   want , and be not   here , " say Sir Percival . " he leave of his own accord , which be enough of itself to show that she be strong enough to travel . how you stare ! if you do not   believe she have go , look for yourself . open her room door , and all the other room door if you like . " 

 she take he at his word , and I follow she . there be no one in Miss Halcombe 's room but Margaret Porcher , who be busy set it to right . there be no one in the spare room or the dressing - room when we look into they afterwards . Sir Percival still wait for we in the passage . as we be leave the last room that we have examine Lady Glyde whisper , " do not   go , Mrs. Michelson ! do not   leave I , for God 's sake ! " before I could say anything in return she be out again in the passage , speak to her husband . 

 " what do it mean , Sir Percival ? I insist I beg and pray you will tell I what it mean . " 

 " it mean , " he answer , " that Miss Halcombe be strong enough yesterday morning to sit up and be dress , and that she insist on take advantage of Fosco 's go to London to go there too . " 

 " to London ! " 

 " yes on her way to Limmeridge . " 

 Lady Glyde turn and appeal to I . 

 " you see Miss Halcombe last , " she say . " tell I plainly , Mrs. Michelson , do you think she look fit to travel ? " 

 " not in MY opinion , your ladyship . " 

 Sir Percival , on his side , instantly turn and appeal to I also . 

 " before you go away , " he say , " do you , or do you not , tell the nurse that Miss Halcombe look much strong and well ? " 

 " I certainly make the remark , Sir Percival . " 

 he address her ladyship again the moment I offer that reply . 

 " set one of Mrs. Michelson 's opinion fairly against the other , " he say , " and try to be reasonable about a perfectly plain matter . if she have not be well enough to be move do you think we should any of we have risk let she go ? she have get three competent people to look after her Fosco and your aunt , and Mrs. Rubelle , who go away with they expressly for that purpose . they take a whole carriage yesterday , and make a bed for she on the seat in case she feel tired . to - day , Fosco and Mrs. Rubelle go on with she themselves to Cumberland . " 

 " why do Marian go to Limmeridge and leave I here by myself ? " say her ladyship , interrupt Sir Percival . 

 " because your uncle will not   receive you till he have see your sister first , " he reply . " have you forget the letter he write to she at the beginning of her illness ? it be show to you , you read it yourself , and you ought to remember it . " 

 " I do remember it . " 

 " if you do , why should you be surprised at she leave you ? you want to be back at Limmeridge , and she have go there to get your uncle 's leave for you on his own term . " 

 Poor Lady Glyde 's eye fill with tear . 

 " Marian never leave I before , " she say , " without bid I good - bye . " 

 " she would have bid you good - bye this time , " return Sir Percival , " if she have not be afraid of herself and of you . she know you would try to stop she , she know you would distress she by cry . do you want to make any more objection ? if you do , you must come downstairs and ask question in the dining - room . these worry upset I . I want a glass of wine . " 

 he leave we suddenly . 

 his manner all through this strange conversation have be very unlike what it usually be . he seem to be almost as nervous and fluttered , every now and then , as his lady herself . I should never have suppose that his health have be so delicate , or his composure so easy to upset . 

 I try to prevail on Lady Glyde to go back to her room , but it be useless . she stop in the passage , with the look of a woman whose mind be panic - stricken . 

 " something have happen to my sister ! " she say . 

 " remember , my lady , what surprising energy there be in Miss Halcombe , " I suggest . " she might well make an effort which other lady in her situation would be unfit for . I hope and believe there be nothing wrong I do indeed . " 

 " I must follow Marian , " say her ladyship , with the same panic - stricken look . " I must go where she have go , I must see that she be alive and well with my own eye . come ! come down with I to Sir Percival . " 

 I hesitate , fear that my presence might be consider an intrusion . I attempt to represent this to her ladyship , but she be deaf to I . she hold my arm fast enough to force I to go downstairs with she , and she still cling to I with all the little strength she have at the moment when I open the dining - room door . 

 Sir Percival be sit at the table with a decanter of wine before he . he raise the glass to his lip as we go in and drain it at a draught . see that he look at I angrily when he put it down again , I attempt to make some apology for my accidental presence in the room . 

 " do you suppose there be any secret go on here ? " he break out suddenly ; " there be none there be nothing underhand , nothing keep from you or from any one . " after speak those strange word loudly and sternly , he fill himself another glass of wine and ask Lady Glyde what she want of he . 

 " if my sister be fit to travel I be fit to travel " say her ladyship , with more firmness than she have yet show . " I come to beg you will make allowance for my anxiety about Marian , and let I follow she at once by the afternoon train . " 

 " you must wait till to - morrow , " reply Sir Percival , " and then if you do not   hear to the contrary you can go . I do not   suppose you be at all likely to hear to the contrary , so I shall write to Fosco by to - night 's post . " 

 he say those last word hold his glass up to the light , and look at the wine in it instead of at Lady Glyde . indeed he never once look at she throughout the conversation . such a singular want of good breeding in a gentleman of his rank impress I , I own , very painfully . 

 " why should you write to Count Fosco ? " she ask , in extreme surprise . 

 " to tell he to expect you by the midday train , " say Sir Percival . " he will meet you at the station when you get to London , and take you on to sleep at your aunt 's in St. John 's Wood . " 

 Lady Glyde 's hand begin to tremble violently round my arm why I could not imagine . 

 " there be no necessity for Count Fosco to meet I , " she say . " I would rather not stay in London to sleep . " 

 " you must . you can not   take the whole journey to Cumberland in one day . you must rest a night in London and I do not   choose you to go by yourself to an hotel . Fosco make the offer to your uncle to give you house - room on the way down , and your uncle have accept it . here ! here be a letter from he address to yourself . I ought to have send it up this morning , but I forget . read it and see what Mr. Fairlie himself say to you . " 

 Lady Glyde look at the letter for a moment and then place it in my hand . 

 " read it , " she say faintly . " I do not   know what be the matter with I . I can not   read it myself . " 

 it be a note of only four line so short and so careless that it quite strike I . if I remember correctly it contain no more than these word 

 " Dearest Laura , please come whenever you like . break the journey by sleep at your aunt 's house . grieve to hear of dear Marian 's illness . affectionately your , Frederick Fairlie . " 

 " I would rather not go there I would rather not stay a night in London , " say her ladyship , break out eagerly with those word before I have quite do read the note , short as it be . " do not   write to Count Fosco ! pray , pray do not   write to he ! " 

 Sir Percival fill another glass from the decant so awkwardly that he upset it and spill all the wine over the table . " my sight seem to be fail I , " he mutter to himself , in an odd , muffled voice . he slowly set the glass up again , refill it , and drain it once more at a draught . I begin to fear , from his look and manner , that the wine be get into his head . 

 " pray do not   write to Count Fosco , " persist Lady Glyde , more earnestly than ever . 

 " why not , I should like to know ? " cry Sir Percival , with a sudden burst of anger that startle we both . " where can you stay more properly in London than at the place your uncle himself choose for you at your aunt 's house ? ask Mrs. Michelson . " 

 the arrangement propose be so unquestionably the right and the proper one , that I could make no possible objection to it . much as I sympathise with Lady Glyde in other respect , I could not sympathise with she in her unjust prejudice against Count Fosco . I never before meet with any lady of her rank and station who be so lamentably narrow - minded on the subject of foreigner . neither her uncle 's note nor Sir Percival 's increase impatience seem to have the least effect on she . she still object to stay a night in London , she still implore her husband not to write to the Count . 

 " drop it ! " say Sir Percival , rudely turn his back on we . " if you have not   sense enough to know what be good for yourself other people must know it for you . the arrangement be make and there be an end of it . you be only want to do what Miss Halcombe have do for you - " 

 " Marian ? " repeat her ladyship , in a bewildered manner ; " marian sleep in Count Fosco 's house ! " 

 " yes , in Count Fosco 's house . she sleep there last night to break the journey , and you be to follow her example , and do what your uncle tell you . you be to sleep at Fosco 's to - morrow night , as your sister do , to break the journey . do not   throw too many obstacle in my way ! do not   make I repent of let you go at all ! " 

 he start to his foot , and suddenly walk out into the verandah through the open glass door . 

 " will your ladyship excuse I , " I whisper , " if I suggest that we have well not wait here till Sir Percival come back ? I be very much afraid he be over - excited with wine . " 

 she consent to leave the room in a weary , absent manner . 

 as soon as we be safe upstairs again , I do all I could to compose her ladyship 's spirit . I remind she that Mr. Fairlie 's letter to Miss Halcombe and to herself do certainly sanction , and even render necessary , soon or later , the course that have be take . she agree to this , and even admit , of her own accord , that both letter be strictly in character with her uncle 's peculiar disposition but her fear about Miss Halcombe , and her unaccountable dread of sleep at the Count 's house in London , still remain unshaken in spite of every consideration that I could urge . I think it my duty to protest against Lady Glyde 's unfavourable opinion of his lordship , and I do so , with become forbearance and respect . 

 " your ladyship will pardon my freedom , " I remark , in conclusion , " but it be say , ' by their fruit ye shall know they . ' I be sure the Count 's constant kindness and constant attention , from the very beginning of Miss Halcombe 's illness , merit our good confidence and esteem . even his lordship 's serious misunderstanding with Mr. Dawson be entirely attributable to his anxiety on Miss Halcombe 's account . " 

 " what misunderstand ? " inquire her ladyship , with a look of sudden interest . 

 I relate the unhappy circumstance under which Mr. Dawson have withdraw his attendance mention they all the more readily because I disapprove of Sir Percival 's continue to conceal what have happen   as he have do in my presence   from the knowledge of Lady Glyde . 

 her ladyship start up , with every appearance of be additionally agitate and alarm by what I have tell she . 

 " bad ! bad than I think ! " she say , walk about the room , in a bewildered manner . " the Count know Mr. Dawson would never consent to Marian 's take a journey he purposely insult the doctor to get he out of the house . " 

 " oh , my lady ! my lady ! " I remonstrate . 

 " Mrs. Michelson ! " she go on vehemently , " no word that ever be speak will persuade I that my sister be in that man 's power and in that man 's house with her own consent . my horror of he be such , that nothing Sir Percival could say and no letter my uncle could write , would induce I , if I have only my own feeling to consult , to eat , drink , or sleep under his roof . but my misery of suspense about Marian give I the courage to follow she anywhere , to follow she even into Count Fosco 's house . " 

 I think it right , at this point , to mention that Miss Halcombe have already go on to Cumberland , accord to Sir Percival 's account of the matter . 

 " I be afraid to believe it ! " answer her ladyship . " I be afraid she be still in that man 's house . if I be wrong , if she have really go on to Limmeridge , I be resolve I will not sleep to - morrow night under Count Fosco 's roof . my dear friend in the world , next to my sister , live near London . you have hear I , you have hear Miss Halcombe , speak of Mrs. Vesey ? I mean to write , and propose to sleep at her house . I do not   know how I shall get there I do not   know how I shall avoid the Count but to that refuge I will escape in some way , if my sister have go to Cumberland . all I ask of you to do , be to see yourself that my letter to Mrs. Vesey go to London to - night , as certainly as Sir Percival 's letter go to Count Fosco . I have reason for not trust the post - bag downstairs . will you keep my secret , and help I in this ? it be the last favour , perhaps , that I shall ever ask of you . " 

 I hesitate , I think it all very strange , I almost fear that her ladyship 's mind have be a little affect by recent anxiety and suffering . at my own risk , however , I end by give my consent . if the letter have be address to a stranger , or to any one but a lady so well know to I by report as Mrs. Vesey , I might have refuse . I thank God look to what happen afterwards I thank God I never thwart that wish , or any other , which Lady Glyde express to I , on the last day of her residence at Blackwater Park . 

 the letter be write and give into my hand . I myself put it into the post - box in the village that evening . 

 we see nothing more of Sir Percival for the rest of the day . 

 I sleep , by Lady Glyde 's own desire , in the next room to her , with the door open between we . there be something so strange and dreadful in the loneliness and emptiness of the house , that I be glad , on my side , to have a companion near I . her ladyship sit up late , read letter and burn they , and empty her drawer and cabinet of little thing she prize , as if she never expect to return to Blackwater Park . her sleep be sadly disturb when she at last go to bed she cry out in it several time , once so loud that she wake herself . whatever her dream be , she do not think fit to communicate they to I . perhaps , in my situation , I have no right to expect that she should do so . it matter little now . I be sorry for she , I be indeed heartily sorry for she all the same . 

 the next day be fine and sunny . Sir Percival come up , after breakfast , to tell we that the chaise would be at the door at a quarter to twelve the train to London stop at our station at twenty minute after . he inform Lady Glyde that he be oblige to go out , but add that he hop to be back before she leave . if any unforeseen accident delay he , I be to accompany she to the station , and to take special care that she be in time for the train . Sir Percival communicate these direction very hastily walk here and there about the room all the time . her ladyship look attentively after he wherever he go . he never once look at she in return . 

 she only speak when he have do , and then she stop he as he approach the door , by hold out her hand . 

 " I shall see you no more , " she say , in a very marked manner . " this be our part our parting , it may be for ever . will you try to forgive I , Percival , as heartily as I forgive you ? " 

 his face turn of an awful whiteness all over , and great bead of perspiration break out on his bald forehead . " I shall come back , " he say , and make for the door , as hastily as if his wife 's farewell word have frighten he out of the room . 

 I have never like Sir Percival , but the manner in which he leave Lady Glyde make I feel ashamed of have eat his bread and live in his service . I think of say a few comfort and christian word to the poor lady , but there be something in her face , as she look after her husband when the door close on he , that make I alter my mind and keep silence . 

 at the time name the chaise draw up at the gate . her ladyship be right Sir Percival never come back . I wait for he till the last moment , and wait in vain . 

 no positive responsibility lie on my shoulder , and yet I do not feel easy in my mind . " it be of your own free will , " I say , as the chaise drive through the lodge - gate , " that your ladyship go to London ? " 

 " I will go anywhere , " she answer , " to end the dreadful suspense that I be suffer at this moment . " 

 she have make I feel almost as anxious and as uncertain about Miss Halcombe as she feel herself . I presume to ask she to write I a line , if all go well in London . she answer , " most willingly , Mrs. Michelson . " 

 " we all have our cross to bear , my lady , " I say , see her silent and thoughtful , after she have promise to write . 

 she make no reply she seem to be too much wrap up in her own thought to attend to I . 

 " I fear your ladyship rest badly last night , " I remark , after wait a little . 

 " yes , " she say , " I be terribly disturb by dream . " 

 " indeed , my lady ? " I think she be go to tell I her dream , but no , when she speak next it be only to ask a question . 

 " you post the letter to Mrs. Vesey with your own hand ? " 

 " yes , my lady . " 

 " do Sir Percival say , yesterday , that Count Fosco be to meet I at the terminus in London ? " 

 " he do , my lady . " 

 she sigh heavily when I answer that last question , and say no more . 

 we arrive at the station , with hardly two minute to spare . the gardener   who have drive we   manage about the luggage , while I take the ticket . the whistle of the train be sound when I join her ladyship on the platform . she look very strangely , and press her hand over her heart , as if some sudden pain or fright have overcome she at that moment . 

 " I wish you be go with I ! " she say , catch eagerly at my arm when I give she the ticket . 

 if there have be time , if I have feel the day before as I feel then , I would have make my arrangement to accompany she , even though the doing so have oblige I to give Sir Percival warn on the spot . as it be , her wish , express at the last moment only , be express too late for I to comply with they . she seem to understand this herself before I could explain it , and do not repeat her desire to have I for a travel companion . the train draw up at the platform . she give the gardener a present for his child , and take my hand , in her simple hearty manner , before she get into the carriage . 

 " you have be very kind to I and to my sister , " she say " kind when we be both friendless . I shall remember you gratefully , as long as I live to remember any one . good - bye and God bless you ! " 

 she speak those word with a tone and a look which bring the tear into my eye she speak they as if she be bid I farewell for ever . 

 " good - bye , my lady , " I say , put she into the carriage , and try to cheer she ; " good - bye , for the present only ; good - bye , with my good and kind wish for happy time . " 

 she shake her head , and shudder as she settle herself in the carriage . the guard close the door . " do you believe in dream ? " she whisper to I at the window . " my dream , last night , be dream I have never have before . the terror of they be hang over I still . " the whistle sound before I could answer , and the train move . her pale quiet face look at I for the last time look sorrowfully and solemnly from the window . she wave her hand , and I see she no more . 


 towards five o'clock on the afternoon of that same day , have a little time to myself in the midst of the household duty which now press upon I , I sit down alone in my own room , to try and compose my mind with the volume of my husband 's sermon . for the first time in my life I find my attention wander over those pious and cheer word . conclude that Lady Glyde 's departure must have disturb I far more seriously than I have myself suppose , I put the book aside , and go out to take a turn in the garden . Sir Percival have not yet return , to my knowledge , so I could feel no hesitation about show myself in the ground . 

 on turn the corner of the house , and gain a view of the garden , I be startle by see a stranger walk in it . the stranger be a woman she be lounge along the path with she back to I , and be gather the flower . 

 as I approach she hear I , and turn round . 

 my blood curdle in my vein . the strange woman in the garden be Mrs. Rubelle ! 

 I could neither move nor speak . she come up to I , as composedly as ever , with her flower in her hand . 

 " what be the matter , ma'am ? " she say quietly . 

 " you here ! " I gasp out . " not go to London ! not go to Cumberland ! " 

 Mrs. Rubelle smell at her flower with a smile of malicious pity . 

 " certainly not , " she say . " I have never leave Blackwater Park . " 

 I summon breath enough and courage enough for another question . 

 " where be Miss Halcombe ? " 

 Mrs. Rubelle fairly laugh at I this time , and reply in these word 

 " Miss Halcombe , ma'am , have not leave Blackwater Park either . " 

 when I hear that astounding answer , all my thought be startle back on the instant to my parting with Lady Glyde . I can hardly say I reproach myself , but at that moment I think I would have give many a year 's hard saving to have know four hour early what I know now . 

 Mrs. Rubelle wait , quietly arrange her nosegay , as if she expect I to say something . 

 I could say nothing . I think of Lady Glyde 's wear - out energy and weakly health , and I tremble for the time when the shock of the discovery that I have make would fall on she . for a minute or more my fear for the poor lady silence I . at the end of that time Mrs. Rubelle look up sideways from her flower , and say , " here be Sir Percival , ma'am , return from his ride . " 

 I see he as soon as she do . he come towards we , slash viciously at the flower with his riding - whip . when he be near enough to see my face he stop , strike at his boot with the whip , and burst out laugh , so harshly and so violently that the bird fly away , startle , from the tree by which he stand . 

 " well , Mrs. Michelson , " he say , " you have find it out at last , have you ? " 

 I make no reply . he turn to Mrs. Rubelle . 

 " when do you show yourself in the garden ? " 

 " I show myself about half an hour ago , sir . you say I might take my liberty again as soon as Lady Glyde have go away to London . " 

 " quite right . I do not   blame you I only ask the question . " he wait a moment , and then address himself once more to I . " you can not   believe it , can you ? " he say mockingly . " here ! come along and see for yourself . " 

 he lead the way round to the front of the house . I follow he , and Mrs. Rubelle follow I . after pass through the iron gate he stop , and point with his whip to the disuse middle wing of the building . 

 " there ! " he say . " look up at the first floor . you know the old Elizabethan bedroom ? Miss Halcombe be snug and safe in one of the good of they at this moment . take she in , Mrs. Rubelle   you have get your key ? ; take Mrs. Michelson in , and let her own eye satisfy she that there be no deception this time . " 

 the tone in which he speak to I , and the minute or two that have pass since we leave the garden , help I to recover my spirit a little . what I might have do at this critical moment , if all my life have be pass in service , I can not say . as it be , possess the feeling , the principle , and the bringing up of a lady , I could not hesitate about the right course to pursue . my duty to myself , and my duty to Lady Glyde , alike forbid I to remain in the employment of a man who have shamefully deceive we both by a series of atrocious falsehood . 

 " I must beg permission , Sir Percival , to speak a few word to you in private , " I say . " have do so , I shall be ready to proceed with this person to Miss Halcombe 's room . " 

 Mrs. Rubelle , whom I have indicate by a slight turn of my head , insolently sniff at her nosegay and walk away , with great deliberation , towards the house door . 

 " well , " say Sir Percival sharply , " what be it now ? " 

 " I wish to mention , sir , that I be desirous of resign the situation I now hold at Blackwater Park . " that be literally how I put it . I be resolve that the first word speak in his presence should be word which express my intention to leave his service . 

 he eye I with one of his black look , and thrust his hand savagely into the pocket of his riding - coat . 

 " why ? " he say , " why , I should like to know ? " 

 " it be not for I , Sir Percival , to express an opinion on what have take place in this house . I desire to give no offence . I merely wish to say that I do not feel it consistent with my duty to Lady Glyde and to myself to remain any long in your service . " 

 " be it consistent with your duty to I to stand there , cast suspicion on I to my face ? " he break out in his most violent manner . " I see what you be drive at . you have take your own mean , underhand view of an innocent deception practise on Lady Glyde for her own good . it be essential to her health that she should have a change of air immediately , and you know as well as I do she would never have go away if she have be tell Miss Halcombe be still leave here . she have be deceive in her own interest and I do not   care who know it . go , if you like there be plenty of housekeeper as good as you to be have for the asking . go when you please but take care how you spread scandal about I and my affair when you be out of my service . tell the truth , and nothing but the truth , or it will be the bad for you ! see Miss Halcombe for yourself see if she have not   be as well take care of in one part of the house as in the other . remember the doctor 's own order that Lady Glyde be to have a change of air at the early possible opportunity . bear all that well in mind , and then say anything against I and my proceeding if you dare ! " 

 he pour out these word fiercely , all in a breath , walk backwards and forwards , and strike about he in the air with his whip . 

 nothing that he say or do shook my opinion of the disgraceful series of falsehood that he have tell in my presence the day before , or of the cruel deception by which he have separate Lady Glyde from her sister , and have send she uselessly to London , when she be half distracted with anxiety on Miss Halcombe 's account . I naturally keep these thought to myself , and say nothing more to irritate he ; but I be not the less resolve to persist in my purpose . a soft answer turneth away wrath , and I suppress my own feeling accordingly when it be my turn to reply . 

 " while I be in your service , Sir Percival , " I say , " I hope I know my duty well enough not to inquire into your motif . when I be out of your service , I hope I know my own place well enough not to speak of matter which do not   concern I " 

 " when do you want to go ? " he ask , interrupt I without ceremony . " do not   suppose I be anxious to keep you do not   suppose I care about your leave the house . I be perfectly fair and open in this matter , from first to last . when do you want to go ? " 

 " I should wish to leave at your early convenience , Sir Percival . " 

 " my convenience have nothing to do with it . I shall be out of the house for good and all to - morrow morning , and I can settle your account to - night . if you want to study anybody 's convenience , it have well be Miss Halcombe 's . Mrs. Rubelle 's time be up to - day , and she have reason for wish to be in London to - night . if you go at once , Miss Halcombe will not   have a soul leave here to look after she . " 

 I hope it be unnecessary for I to say that I be quite incapable of desert Miss Halcombe in such an emergency as have now befall Lady Glyde and herself . after first distinctly ascertain from Sir Percival that Mrs. Rubelle be certain to leave at once if I take her place , and after also obtain permission to arrange for Mr. Dawson 's resume his attendance on his patient , I willingly consent to remain at Blackwater Park until Miss Halcombe no long require my service . it be settle that I should give Sir Percival 's solicitor a week 's notice before I leave , and that he be to undertake the necessary arrangement for appoint my successor . the matter be discuss in very few word . at its conclusion Sir Percival abruptly turn on his heel , and leave I free to join Mrs. Rubelle . that singular foreign person have be sit composedly on the door - step all this time , wait till I could follow she to Miss Halcombe 's room . 

 I have hardly walk half - way towards the house when Sir Percival , who have withdraw in the opposite direction , suddenly stop and call I back . 

 " why be you leave my service ? " he ask . 

 the question be so extraordinary , after what have just pass between we , that I hardly know what to say in answer to it . 

 " mind ! I do not   know why you be go , " he go on . " you must give a reason for leave I , I suppose , when you get another situation . what reason ? the breaking up of the family ? be that it ? " 

 " there can be no positive objection , Sir Percival , to that reason " 

 " very well ! that be all I want to know . if people apply for your character , that be your reason , state by yourself . you go in consequence of the breaking up of the family . " 

 he turn away again before I could say another word , and walk out rapidly into the ground . his manner be as strange as his language . I acknowledge he alarm I . 

 even the patience of Mrs. Rubelle be get exhaust , when I join she at the house door . 

 " at last ! " she say , with a shrug of her lean foreign shoulder . she lead the way into the inhabited side of the house , ascend the stair , and open with her key the door at the end of the passage , which communicate with the old Elizabethan room a door never previously use , in my time , at Blackwater Park . the room themselves I know well , have enter they myself on various occasion from the other side of the house . Mrs. Rubelle stop at the third door along the old gallery , hand I the key of it , with the key of the door of communication , and tell I I should find Miss Halcombe in that room . before I go in I think it desirable to make she understand that her attendance have cease . accordingly , I tell she in plain word that the charge of the sick lady henceforth devolve entirely on myself . 

 " I be glad to hear it , ma'am , " say Mrs. Rubelle . " I want to go very much . " 

 " do you leave to - day ? " I ask , to make sure of she . 

 " now that you have take charge , ma'am , I leave in half an hour 's time . Sir Percival have kindly place at my disposition the gardener , and the chaise , whenever I want they . I shall want they in half an hour 's time to go to the station . I be pack up in anticipation already . I wish you good - day , ma'am . " 

 she drop a brisk curtsey , and walk back along the gallery , hum a little tune , and keep time to it cheerfully with the nosegay in her hand . I be sincerely thankful to say that be the last I see of Mrs. Rubelle . 

 when I go into the room Miss Halcombe be asleep . I look at her anxiously , as she lie in the dismal , high , old - fashioned bed . she be certainly not in any respect alter for the bad since I have see she last . she have not be neglect , I be bind to admit , in any way that I could perceive . the room be dreary , and dusty , and dark , but the window   look on a solitary court - yard at the back of the house   be open to let in the fresh air , and all that could be do to make the place comfortable have be do . the whole cruelty of Sir Percival 's deception have fall on poor Lady Glyde . the only ill - usage which either he or Mrs. Rubelle have inflict on Miss Halcombe consist , so far as I could see , in the first offence of hide she away . 

 I steal back , leave the sick lady still peacefully asleep , to give the gardener instruction about bring the doctor . I beg the man , after he have take Mrs. Rubelle to the station , to drive round by Mr. Dawson 's , and leave a message in my name , ask he to call and see I . I know he would come on my account , and I know he would remain when he find Count Fosco have leave the house . 

 in due course of time the gardener return , and say that he have drive round by Mr. Dawson 's residence , after leave Mrs. Rubelle at the station . the doctor send I word that he be poorly in health himself , but that he would call , if possible , the next morning . 

 have deliver his message the gardener be about to withdraw , but I stop he to request that he would come back before dark , and sit up that night , in one of the empty bedroom , so as to be within call in case I want he . he understand readily enough my unwillingness to be leave alone all night in the most desolate part of that desolate house , and we arrange that he should come in between eight and nine . 

 he come punctually , and I find cause to be thankful that I have adopt the precaution of call he in . before midnight Sir Percival 's strange temper break out in the most violent and most alarming manner , and if the gardener have not be on the spot to pacify he on the instant , I be afraid to think what might have happen . 

 almost all the afternoon and evening he have be walk about the house and ground in an unsettled , excitable manner , have , in all probability , as I think , take an excessive quantity of wine at his solitary dinner . however that may be , I hear his voice call loudly and angrily in the new wing of the house , as I be take a turn backwards and forwards along the gallery the last thing at night . the gardener immediately run down to he , and I close the door of communication , to keep the alarm , if possible , from reach Miss Halcombe 's ear . it be full half an hour before the gardener come back . he declare that his master be quite out of his sens not through the excitement of drink , as I have suppose , but through a kind of panic or frenzy of mind , for which it be impossible to account . he have find Sir Percival walk backwards and forwards by himself in the hall , swearing , with every appearance of the most violent passion , that he would not stop another minute alone in such a dungeon as his own house , and that he would take the first stage of his journey immediately in the middle of the night . the gardener , on approach he , have be hunt out , with oath and threat , to get the horse and chaise ready instantly . in a quarter of an hour Sir Percival have join he in the yard , have jump into the chaise , and , lash the horse into a gallop , have drive himself away , with his face as pale as ash in the moonlight . the gardener have hear he shout and curse at the lodge - keeper to get up and open the gate have hear the wheel roll furiously on again in the still night , when the gate be unlocked and know no more . 

 the next day , or a day or two after , I forget which , the chaise be bring back from Knowlesbury , our near town , by the ostler at the old inn . Sir Percival have stop there , and have afterwards leave by the train for what destination the man could not tell . I never receive any further information , either from himself or from any one else , of Sir Percival 's proceeding , and I be not even aware , at this moment , whether he be in England or out of it . he and I have not meet since he drive away like an escape criminal from his own house , and it be my fervent hope and prayer that we may never meet again . 



 my own part of this sad family story be now draw to an end . 

 I have be inform that the particular of Miss Halcombe 's waking , and of what pass between we when she find I sit by her bedside , be not material to the purpose which be to be answer by the present narrative . it will be sufficient for I to say in this place , that she be not herself conscious of the mean adopt to remove she from the inhabit to the uninhabited part of the house . she be in a deep sleep at the time , whether naturally or artificially produce she could not say . in my absence at Torquay , and in the absence of all the resident servant except Margaret Porcher   who be perpetually eat , drinking , or sleeping , when she be not at work , the secret transfer of Miss Halcombe from one part of the house to the other be no doubt easily perform . Mrs. Rubelle   as I discover for myself , in look about the room   have provision , and all other necessary , together with the mean of heating water , broth , and so on , without kindle a fire , place at her disposal during the few day of her imprisonment with the sick lady . she have decline to answer the question which Miss Halcombe naturally put , but have not , in other respect , treat she with unkindness or neglect . the disgrace of lend herself to a vile deception be the only disgrace with which I can conscientiously charge Mrs. Rubelle . 

 I need write no particular   and I be relieve to know it   of the effect produce on Miss Halcombe by the news of Lady Glyde 's departure , or by the far more melancholy tiding which reach we only too soon afterwards at Blackwater Park . in both case I prepare her mind beforehand as gently and as carefully as possible , have the doctor 's advice to guide I , in the last case only , through Mr. Dawson 's be too unwell to come to the house for some day after I have send for he . it be a sad time , a time which it afflict I to think of or to write of now . the precious blessing of religious consolation which I endeavour to convey be long in reach Miss Halcombe 's heart , but I hope and believe they come home to she at last . I never leave she till her strength be restore . the train which take I away from that miserable house be the train which take she away also . we part very mournfully in London . I remain with a relative at Islington , and she go on to Mr. Fairlie 's house in Cumberland . 

 I have only a few line more to write before I close this painful statement . they be dictate by a sense of duty . 

 in the first place , I wish to record my own personal conviction that no blame whatever , in connection with the event which I have now relate , attache to Count Fosco . I be inform that a dreadful suspicion have be raise , and that some very serious construction be place upon his lordship 's conduct . my persuasion of the Count 's innocence remain , however , quite unshaken . if he assist Sir Percival in send I to Torquay , he assist under a delusion , for which , as a foreigner and a stranger , he be not to blame . if he be concern in bring Mrs. Rubelle to Blackwater Park , it be his misfortune and not his fault , when that foreign person be base enough to assist a deception plan and carry out by the master of the house . I protest , in the interest of morality , against blame be gratuitously and wantonly attach to the proceeding of the Count . 

 in the second place , I desire to express my regret at my own inability to remember the precise day on which Lady Glyde leave Blackwater Park for London . I be tell that it be of the last importance to ascertain the exact date of that lamentable journey , and I have anxiously tax my memory to recall it . the effort have be in vain . I can only remember now that it be towards the latter part of July . we all know the difficulty , after a lapse of time , of fix precisely on a past date unless it have be previously write down . that difficulty be greatly increase in my case by the alarming and confusing event which take place about the period of Lady Glyde 's departure . I heartily wish I have make a memorandum at the time . I heartily wish my memory of the date be as vivid as my memory of that poor lady 's face , when it look at I sorrowfully for the last time from the carriage window . 




 the STORY continue in several NARRATIVES 

 1 . the narrative of hester PINHORN , 
 COOK in the service of COUNT FOSCO 

  take down from her own statement 


 I be sorry to say that I have never learn to read or write . I have be a hard - work woman all my life , and have keep a good character . I know that it be a sin and wickedness to say the thing which be not , and I will truly beware of do so on this occasion . all that I know I will tell , and I humbly beg the gentleman who take this down to put my language right as he go on , and to make allowance for my be no scholar . 

 in this last summer I happen to be out of place   through no fault of my own , and I hear of a situation as plain cook , at Number five , Forest Road , St. John 's Wood . I take the place on trial . my master 's name be Fosco . my mistress be an english lady . he be Count and she be Countess . there be a girl to do housemaid 's work when I get there . she be not over - clean or tidy , but there be no harm in she . I and she be the only servant in the house . 

 our master and mistress come after we get in ; and as soon as they do come we be tell , downstair , that company be expect from the country . 

 the company be my mistress 's niece , and the back bedroom on the first floor be get ready for she . my mistress mention to I that Lady Glyde   that be her name   be in poor health , and that I must be particular in my cooking accordingly . she be to come that day , as well as I can remember but whatever you do , do not   trust my memory in the matter . I be sorry to say it be no use ask I about day of the month , and such - like . except sunday , half my time I take no heed of they , be a hard - work woman and no scholar . all I know be Lady Glyde come , and when she do come , a fine fright she give we all surely . I do not   know how master bring she to the house , be hard at work at the time . but he do bring she in the afternoon , I think , and the housemaid open the door to they , and show they into the parlour . before she have be long down in the kitchen again with I , we hear a hurry - skurry upstairs , and the parlour bell ring like mad , and my mistress 's voice call out for help . 

 we both run up , and there we see the lady lay on the sofa , with her face ghastly white , and her hand fast clench , and her head draw down to one side . she have be take with a sudden fright , my mistress say , and master he tell we she be in a fit of convulsion . I run out , know the neighbourhood a little well than the rest of they , to fetch the near doctor 's help . the near help be at Goodricke 's and Garth 's , who work together as partner , and have a good name and connection , as I have hear , all round St. John 's Wood . Mr. Goodricke be in , and he come back with I directly . 

 it be some time before he could make himself of much use . the poor unfortunate lady fall out of one fit into another , and go on so till she be quite weary out , and as helpless as a new - bear babe . we then get she to bed . Mr. Goodricke go away to his house for medicine , and come back again in a quarter of an hour or less . besides the medicine he bring a bit of hollow mahogany wood with he , shape like a kind of trumpet , and after wait a little while , he put one end over the lady 's heart and the other to his ear , and listen carefully . 

 when he have do he say to my mistress , who be in the room , " this be a very serious case , " he say , " I recommend you to write to Lady Glyde 's friend directly . " my mistress say to he , " be it heart - disease ? " and he say , " yes , heart - disease of a most dangerous kind . " he tell she exactly what he think be the matter , which I be not clever enough to understand . but I know this , he end by say that he be afraid neither his help nor any other doctor 's help be likely to be of much service . 

 my mistress take this ill news more quietly than my master . he be a big , fat , odd sort of elderly man , who keep bird and white mouse , and speak to they as if they be so many christian child . he seem terribly cut up by what have happen . " ah ! poor Lady Glyde ! poor dear Lady Glyde ! " he say , and go stalk about , wring his fat hand more like a play - actor than a gentleman . for one question my mistress ask the doctor about the lady 's chance of get round , he ask a good fifty at least . I declare he quite torment we all , and when he be quiet at last , out he go into the bit of back garden , pick trumpery little nosegay , and ask I to take they upstairs and make the sick - room look pretty with they . as if that do any good . I think he must have be , at time , a little soft in his head . but he be not a bad master he have a monstrous civil tongue of his own , and a jolly , easy , coax way with he . I like he a deal well than my mistress . she be a hard one , if ever there be a hard one yet . 

 towards night - time the lady rouse up a little . she have be so weary out , before that , by the convulsion , that she never stir hand or foot , or speak a word to anybody . she move in the bed now , and star about she at the room and we in it . she must have be a nice - look lady when well , with light hair , and blue eye and all that . her rest be trouble at night at least so I hear from my mistress , who sit up alone with she . I only go in once before go to bed to see if I could be of any use , and then she be talk to herself in a confused , ramble manner . she seem to want sadly to speak to somebody who be absent from she somewhere . I could not   catch the name the first time , and the second time master knock at the door , with his regular mouthful of question , and another of his trumpery nosegay . 

 when I go in early the next morning , the lady be clean wear out again , and lie in a kind of faint sleep . Mr. Goodricke bring his partner , Mr. Garth , with he to advise . they say she must not be disturb out of her rest on any account . they ask my mistress many question , at the other end of the room , about what the lady 's health have be in past time , and who have attend she , and whether she have ever suffer much and long together under distress of mind . I remember my mistress say " yes " to that last question . and Mr. Goodricke look at Mr. Garth , and shake his head ; and Mr. Garth look at Mr. Goodricke , and shake his head . they seem to think that the distress might have something to do with the mischief at the lady 's heart . she be but a frail thing to look at , poor creature ! very little strength at any time , I should say very little strength . 

 later on the same morning , when she wake , the lady take a sudden turn , and get seemingly a great deal well . I be not let in again to see she , no more be the housemaid , for the reason that she be not to be disturb by stranger . what I hear of her be well be through my master . he be in wonderful good spirit about the change , and look in at the kitchen window from the garden , with his great big curly - brim white hat on , to go out . 

 " Good Mrs. Cook , " say he , " Lady Glyde be well . my mind be more easy than it be , and I be go out to stretch my big leg with a sunny little summer walk . shall I order for you , shall I market for you , Mrs. Cook ? what be you make there ? a nice tart for dinner ? much crust , if you please much crisp crust , my dear , that melt and crumble delicious in the mouth . " that be his way . he be past sixty , and fond of pastry . just think of that ! 

 the doctor come again in the forenoon , and see for himself that Lady Glyde have wake up well . he forbid we to talk to she , or to let she talk to we , in case she be that way dispose , say she must be keep quiet before all thing , and encourage to sleep as much as possible . she do not seem to want to talk whenever I see she , except overnight , when I could not   make out what she be say she seem too much wear down . Mr. Goodricke be not nearly in such good spirit about she as master . he say nothing when he come downstairs , except that he would call again at five o'clock . 

 about that time   which be before master come home again   the bell ring hard from the bedroom , and my mistress run out into the landing , and call to I to go for Mr. Goodricke , and tell he the lady have faint . I get on my bonnet and shawl , when , as good luck would have it , the doctor himself come to the house for his promise visit . 

 I let he in , and go upstairs along with he . " Lady Glyde be just as usual , " say my mistress to he at the door ; ' she be awake , and look about she in a strange , forlorn manner , when I hear she give a sort of half cry , and she faint in a moment . " the doctor go up to the bed , and stoop down over the sick lady . he look very serious , all on a sudden , at the sight of she , and put his hand on her heart . 

 my mistress star hard in Mr. Goodricke 's face . " not dead ! " say she , whispering , and turn all of a tremble from head to foot . 

 " yes , " say the doctor , very quiet and grave . " dead . I be afraid it would happen suddenly when I examine her heart yesterday . " my mistress step back from the bedside while he be speak , and tremble and tremble again . " dead ! " she whisper to herself ; " dead so suddenly ! dead so soon ! what will the Count say ? " Mr. Goodricke advise she to go downstairs , and quiet herself a little . " you have be sit up all night , " say he , " and your nerve be shake . this person , " say he , mean I , " this person will stay in the room till I can send for the necessary assistance . " my mistress do as he tell she . " I must prepare the Count , " she say . " I must carefully prepare the Count . " and so she leave we , shake from head to foot , and go out . 

 " your master be a foreigner , " say Mr. Goodricke , when my mistress have leave we . " do he understand about register the death ? " " I can not   rightly tell , sir , " say I , " but I should think not . " the doctor consider a minute , and then say he , " I do not   usually do such thing , " say he , " but it may save the family trouble in this case if I register the death myself . I shall pass the district office in half an hour 's time , and I can easily look in . Mention , if you please , that I will do so . " " yes , sir , " say I , " with thank , I be sure , for your kindness in thinking of it . " " you do not   mind stay here till I can send you the proper person ? " say he . " no , sir , " say I ; " I will stay with the poor lady till then . I suppose nothing more could be do , sir , than be do ? " say I. " no , " say he , " nothing ; she must have suffer sadly before ever I see she the case be hopeless when I be call in . " " ah , dear I ! we all come to it , soon or later , do not   we , sir ? " say I. he give no answer to that he do not   seem to care about talk . he say , " good - day , " and go out . 

 I stop by the bedside from that time till the time when Mr. Goodricke send the person in , as he have promise . she be , by name , Jane Gould . I consider she to be a respectable - look woman . she make no remark , except to say that she understand what be want of she , and that she have wind a many of they in her time . 

 how master bear the news , when he first hear it , be more than I can tell , not have be present . when I do see he he look awfully overcome by it , to be sure . he sit quiet in a corner , with his fat hand hang over his thick knee , and his head down , and his eye look at nothing . he seem not so much sorry , as scared and daze like , by what have happen . my mistress manage all that be to be do about the funeral . it must have cost a sight of money the coffin , in particular , be most beautiful . the dead lady 's husband be away , as we hear , in foreign part . but my mistress   be her aunt   settle it with her friend in the country   Cumberland , I think   that she should be bury there , in the same grave along with her mother . everything be do handsomely , in respect of the funeral , I say again , and master go down to attend the burying in the country himself . he look grand in his deep mourning , with his big solemn face , and his slow walk , and his broad hatband that he do ! 

 in conclusion . I have to say , in answer to question put to I 

  1   that neither I nor my fellow - servant ever see my master give Lady Glyde any medicine himself . 

  2   that he be never , to my knowledge and belief , leave alone in the room with Lady Glyde . 

  3   that I be not able to say what cause the sudden fright , which my mistress inform I have seize the lady on her first come into the house . the cause be never explain , either to I or to my fellow - servant . 

 the above statement have be read over in my presence . I have nothing to add to it , or to take away from it . I say , on my oath as a christian woman , this be the truth . 

  sign   hester PINHORN , her    Mark . 



 2 . the narrative of the doctor 

 to the Registrar of the Sub - District in which the undermentioned death take place . I hereby certify that I attend Lady Glyde , age Twenty - one last birthday ; that I last see she on Thursday the 25th July 1850 ; that she die on the same day at no . 5 Forest Road , St. John 's Wood , and that the cause of her death be Aneurism . duration of disease not know . 

  sign   Alfred Goodricke . 

 Prof. Title . M.R.C.S. Eng . , L.S.A. Address , 12 Croydon Gardens 
 St. John 's Wood . 



 3 . the NARRATIVE of JANE GOULD 

 I be the person send in by Mr. Goodricke to do what be right and needful by the remain of a lady who have die at the house name in the certificate which precede this . I find the body in charge of the servant , Hester Pinhorn . I remain with it , and prepare it at the proper time for the grave . it be lay in the coffin in my presence , and I afterwards see the coffin screw down previous to its removal . when that have be do , and not before , I receive what be due to I and leave the house . I refer person who may wish to investigate my character to Mr. Goodricke . he will bear witness that I can be trust to tell the truth . 

  sign   JANE GOULD 



 4 . the narrative of the tombstone 


 Sacred to the Memory of Laura , Lady Glyde , wife of Sir Percival Glyde , Bart . , of Blackwater Park , Hampshire , and daughter of the late Philip Fairlie , Esq . , of Limmeridge House , in this parish . bear March 27th , 1829 ; married December 22nd , 1849 ; die July 25th , 1850 . 




 5 . the narrative of WALTER HARTRIGHT 

 early in the summer of 1850 I and my survive companion leave the wild and forest of Central America for home . arrive at the coast , we take ship there for England . the vessel be wreck in the Gulf of Mexico I be among the few save from the sea . it be my third escape from peril of death . death by disease , death by the Indians , death by drown all three have approach I ; all three have pass I by . 

 the survivor of the wreck be rescue by an american vessel bind for Liverpool . the ship reach her port on the thirteenth day of October 1850 . we land late in the afternoon , and I arrive in London the same night . 

 these page be not the record of my wandering and my danger away from home . the motif which lead I from my country and my friend to a new world of adventure and peril be know . from that self - impose exile I come back , as I have hop , pray , believe I should come back a change man . in the water of a new life I have temper my nature afresh . in the stern school of extremity and danger my will have learn to be strong , my heart to be resolute , my mind to rely on itself . I have go out to fly from my own future . I come back to face it , as a man should . 

 to face it with that inevitable suppression of myself which I know it would demand from I . I have part with the bad bitterness of the past , but not with my heart 's remembrance of the sorrow and the tenderness of that memorable time . I have not cease to feel the one irreparable disappointment of my life I have only learn to bear it . Laura Fairlie be in all my thought when the ship bear I away , and I look my last at England . Laura Fairlie be in all my thought when the ship bring I back , and the morning light show the friendly shore in view . 

 my pen trace the old letter as my heart go back to the old love . I write of she as Laura Fairlie still . it be hard to think of she , it be hard to speak of she , by her husband 's name . 

 there be no more word of explanation to add on my appearance for the second time in these page . this narrative , if I have the strength and the courage to write it , may now go on . 


 my first anxiety and first hope when the morning come centre in my mother and my sister . I feel the necessity of prepare they for the joy and surprise of my return , after an absence during which it have be impossible for they to receive any tiding of I for month past . early in the morning I send a letter to the Hampstead Cottage , and follow it myself in an hour 's time . 

 when the first meeting be over , when our quiet and composure of other day begin gradually to return to we , I see something in my mother 's face which tell I that a secret oppression lie heavy on her heart . there be more than love there be sorrow in the anxious eye that look on I so tenderly there be pity in the kind hand that slowly and fondly strengthen its hold on mine . we have no concealment from each other . she know how the hope of my life have be wreck she know why I have leave she . it be on my lip to ask as composedly as I could if any letter have come for I from Miss Halcombe , if there be any news of her sister that I might hear . but when I look in my mother 's face I lose courage to put the question even in that guard form . I could only say , doubtingly and restrainedly 

 " you have something to tell I . " 

 my sister , who have be sit opposite to we , rise suddenly without a word of explanation rise and leave the room . 

 my mother move close to I on the sofa and put her arm round my neck . those fond arm tremble the tear flow fast over the faithful love face . 

 " Walter ! " she whisper , " my own darling ! my heart be heavy for you . oh , my son ! my son ! try to remember that I be still leave ! " 

 my head sink on her bosom . she have say all in say those word . 

 it be the morning of the third day since my return the morning of the sixteenth of October . 

 I have remain with they at the cottage I have try hard not to embitter the happiness of my return to they as it be embitter to I . I have do all man could to rise after the shock , and accept my life resignedly to let my great sorrow come in tenderness to my heart , and not in despair . it be useless and hopeless . no tear soothe my ache eye , no relief come to I from my sister 's sympathy or my mother 's love . 

 on that third morning I open my heart to they . at last the word pass my lip which I have long to speak on the day when my mother tell I of her death . 

 " let I go away alone for a little while , " I say . " I shall bear it well when I have look once more at the place where I first see she when I have kneel and pray by the grave where they have lay she to rest . " 

 I depart on my journey my journey to the grave of Laura Fairlie . 

 it be a quiet autumn afternoon when I stop at the solitary station , and set forth alone on foot by the well - remember road . the wan sun be shin faintly through thin white cloud the air be warm and still the peacefulness of the lonely country be overshadow and sadden by the influence of the fall year . 

 I reach the moor I stand again on the brow of the hill I look on along the path and there be the familiar garden tree in the distance , the clear sweeping semicircle of the drive , the high white wall of Limmeridge House . the chance and change , the wandering and danger of month and month past , all shrank and shrivel to nothing in my mind . it be like yesterday since my foot have last trodden the fragrant heathy ground . I think I should see she come to meet I , with her little straw hat shade her face , her simple dress flutter in the air , and her well - fill sketch - book ready in her hand . 

 oh death , thou hast thy sting ! oh , grave , thou hast thy victory ! 

 I turn aside , and there below I in the glen be the lonesome grey church , the porch where I have wait for the coming of the woman in white , the hill encircle the quiet burial - ground , the brook bubble cold over its stony bed . there be the marble cross , fair and white , at the head of the tomb the tomb that now rise over mother and daughter alike . 

 I approach the grave . I cross once more the low stone stile , and bar my head as I touch the sacred ground . sacred to gentleness and goodness , sacred to reverence and grief . 

 I stop before the pedestal from which the cross rise . on one side of it , on the side near to I , the newly - cut inscription meet my eye the hard , clear , cruel black letter which tell the story of her life and death . I try to read they . I do read as far as the name . " sacred to the Memory of Laura " the kind blue eye dim with tear the fair head droop wearily the innocent parting word which implore I to leave she oh , for a happy last memory of she than this ; the memory I take away with I , the memory I bring back with I to her grave ! 

 a second time I try to read the inscription . I see at the end the date of her death , and above it 

 above it there be line on the marble there be a name among they which disturb my thought of she . I go round to the other side of the grave , where there be nothing to read , nothing of earthly vileness to force its way between her spirit and mine . 

 I kneel down by the tomb . I lay my hand , I lay my head on the broad white stone , and close my weary eye on the earth around , on the light above . I let she come back to I . oh , my love ! my love ! my heart may speak to you now ! it be yesterday again since we part yesterday , since your dear hand lie in mine yesterday , since my eye look their last on you . my love ! my love ! 

 Time have flow on , and silence have fall like thick night over its course . 

 the first sound that come after the heavenly peace rustle faintly like a pass breath of air over the grass of the burial - ground . I hear it near I slowly , until it come change to my ear come like footstep move onward then stop . 

 I look up . 

 the sunset be near at hand . the cloud have part the slanting light fall mellow over the hill . the last of the day be cold and clear and still in the quiet valley of the dead . 

 beyond I , in the burial - ground , stand together in the cold clearness of the low light , I see two woman . they be look towards the tomb , look towards I . 

 two . 

 they come a little on , and stop again . their veil be down , and hide their face from I . when they stop , one of they raise her veil . in the still evening light I see the face of Marian Halcombe . 

 change , change as if year have pass over it ! the eye large and wild , and look at I with a strange terror in they . the face wear and waste piteously . pain and fear and grief write on she as with a brand . 

 I take one step towards she from the grave . she never move she never speak . the veiled woman with she cry out faintly . I stop . the spring of my life fall low , and the shuddering of an unutterable dread creep over I from head to foot . 

 the woman with the veiled face move away from her companion , and come towards I slowly . leave by herself , stand by herself , Marian Halcombe speak . it be the voice that I remember the voice not change , like the frightened eye and the waste face . 

 " my dream ! my dream ! " I hear she say those word softly in the awful silence . she sink on her knee , and raise her clasp hand to heaven . " Father ! strengthen he . Father ! help he in his hour of need . " 

 the woman come on , slowly and silently come on . I look at she at she , and at none other , from that moment . 

 the voice that be pray for I falter and sink low then rise on a sudden , and call affrightedly , call despairingly to I to come away . 

 but the veiled woman have possession of I , body and soul . she stop on one side of the grave . we stand face to face with the tombstone between we . she be close to the inscription on the side of the pedestal . her gown touch the black letter . 

 the voice come near , and rise and rise more passionately still . " hide your face ! do not   look at she ! oh , for God 's sake , spare he " 

 the woman lift her veil . 


 " sacred to the Memory of Laura , Lady Glyde " 


 Laura , Lady Glyde , be stand by the inscription , and be look at I over the grave . 


  the Second Epoch of the Story close here . 




 the THIRD EPOCH 



 THE story continued BY WALTER HARTRIGHT . 


 I 

 I open a new page . I advance my narrative by one week . 

 the history of the interval which I thus pass over must remain unrecorded . my heart turn faint , my mind sink in darkness and confusion when I think of it . this must not be , if I who write be to guide , as I ought , you who read . this must not be , if the clue that lead through the winding of the story be to remain from end to end untangle in my hand . 

 a life suddenly change its whole purpose create afresh , its hope and fear , its struggle , its interest , and its sacrifice all turn at once and for ever into a new direction this be the prospect which now open before I , like the burst of view from a mountain 's top . I leave my narrative in the quiet shadow of Limmeridge church I resume it , one week later , in the stir and turmoil of a London street . 


 the street be in a populous and a poor neighbourhood . the ground floor of one of the house in it be occupy by a small newsvendor 's shop , and the first floor and the second be let as furnish lodging of the humble kind . 

 I have take those two floor in an assumed name . on the upper floor I live , with a room to work in , a room to sleep in . on the low floor , under the same assume name , two woman live , who be describe as my sister . I get my bread by draw and engrave on wood for the cheap periodical . my sister be suppose to help I by take in a little needle - work . our poor place of abode , our humble calling , our assumed relationship , and our assumed name , be all use alike as a means of hide we in the house - forest of London . we be number no long with the people whose life be open and know . I be an obscure , unnoticed man , without patron or friend to help I . Marian Halcombe be nothing now but my eld sister , who provide for our household want by the toil of her own hand . we two , in the estimation of other , be at once the dupe and the agent of a daring imposture . we be suppose to be the accomplice of mad Anne Catherick , who claim the name , the place , and the live personality of dead Lady Glyde . 

 that be our situation . that be the change aspect in which we three must appear , henceforth , in this narrative , for many and many a page to come . 

 in the eye of reason and of law , in the estimation of relative and friend , accord to every receive formality of civilised society , " Laura , Lady Glyde , " lie bury with her mother in Limmeridge churchyard . tear in her own lifetime from the list of the living , the daughter of Philip Fairlie and the wife of Percival Glyde might still exist for her sister , might still exist for I , but to all the world besides she be dead . dead to her uncle , who have renounce she ; dead to the servant of the house , who have fail to recognise she ; dead to the person in authority , who have transmit her fortune to her husband and her aunt ; dead to my mother and my sister , who believe I to be the dupe of an adventuress and the victim of a fraud ; socially , morally , legally dead . 

 and yet alive ! alive in poverty and in hiding . alive , with the poor drawing - master to fight her battle , and to win the way back for she to her place in the world of live being . 

 do no suspicion , excite by my own knowledge of Anne Catherick 's resemblance to she , cross my mind , when her face be first reveal to I ? not the shadow of a suspicion , from the moment when she lift her veil by the side of the inscription which record her death . 

 before the sun of that day have set , before the last glimpse of the home which be close against she have pass from our view , the farewell word I speak , when we part at Limmeridge House , have be recall by both of we repeat by I , recognise by she . " if ever the time come , when the devotion of my whole heart and soul and strength will give you a moment 's happiness , or spare you a moment 's sorrow , will you try to remember the poor drawing - master who have teach you ? " she , who now remember so little of the trouble and terror of a later time , remember those word , and lay her poor head innocently and trustingly on the bosom of the man who have speak they . in that moment , when she call I by my name , when she say , " they have try to make I forget everything , Walter ; but I remember Marian , and I remember you " in that moment , I , who have long since give she my love , give she my life , and thank God that it be mine to bestow on she . yes ! the time have come . from thousand on thousand of mile away through forest and wilderness , where companion strong than I have fall by my side , through peril of death thrice renew , and thrice escape , the Hand that lead man on the dark road to the future have lead I to meet that time . forlorn and disown , sorely try and sadly change her beauty fade , her mind cloud rob of her station in the world , of her place among living creature the devotion I have promise , the devotion of my whole heart and soul and strength , might be lay blamelessly now at those dear foot . in the right of her calamity , in the right of her friendlessness , she be mine at last ! mine to support , to protect , to cherish , to restore . mine to love and honour as father and brother both . mine to vindicate through all risk and all sacrifice through the hopeless struggle against Rank and Power , through the long fight with armed deceit and fortify success , through the waste of my reputation , through the loss of my friend , through the hazard of my life . 



 II 

 my position be define my motif be acknowledge . the story of Marian and the story of Laura must come next . 

 I shall relate both narrative , not in the word   often interrupt , often inevitably confuse   of the speaker themselves , but in the word of the brief , plain , studiously simple abstract which I commit to write for my own guidance , and for the guidance of my legal adviser . so the tangled web will be most speedily and most intelligibly unroll . 

 the story of Marian begin where the narrative of the housekeeper at Blackwater Park leave off . 


 on Lady Glyde 's departure from her husband 's house , the fact of that departure , and the necessary statement of the circumstance under which it have take place , be communicate to Miss Halcombe by the housekeeper . it be not till some day afterwards   how many day exactly , Mrs. Michelson , in the absence of any write memorandum on the subject , could not undertake to say   that a letter arrive from Madame Fosco announce Lady Glyde 's sudden death in Count Fosco 's house . the letter avoid mention date , and leave it to Mrs. Michelson 's discretion to break the news at once to Miss Halcombe , or to defer do so until that lady 's health should be more firmly establish . 

 have consult Mr. Dawson   who have be himself delay , by ill health , in resume his attendance at Blackwater Park , Mrs. Michelson , by the doctor 's advice , and in the doctor 's presence , communicate the news , either on the day when the letter be receive , or on the day after . it be not necessary to dwell here upon the effect which the intelligence of Lady Glyde 's sudden death produce on her sister . it be only useful to the present purpose to say that she be not able to travel for more than three week afterwards . at the end of that time she proceed to London accompany by the housekeeper . they part there Mrs. Michelson previously inform Miss Halcombe of her address , in case they might wish to communicate at a future period . 

 on part with the housekeeper Miss Halcombe go at once to the office of Messrs. Gilmore    Kyrle to consult with the latter gentleman in Mr. Gilmore 's absence . she mention to Mr. Kyrle what she have think it desirable to conceal from every one else   Mrs. Michelson include   her suspicion of the circumstance under which Lady Glyde be say to have meet her death . Mr. Kyrle , who have previously give friendly proof of his anxiety to serve Miss Halcombe , at once undertake to make such inquiry as the delicate and dangerous nature of the investigation propose to he would permit . 

 to exhaust this part of the subject before go far , it may be mention that Count Fosco offer every facility to Mr. Kyrle , on that gentleman 's state that he be send by Miss Halcombe to collect such particular as have not yet reach she of Lady Glyde 's decease . Mr. Kyrle be place in communication with the medical man , Mr. Goodricke , and with the two servant . in the absence of any mean of ascertain the exact date of Lady Glyde 's departure from Blackwater Park , the result of the doctor 's and the servant ' evidence , and of the volunteered statement of Count Fosco and his wife , be conclusive to the mind of Mr. Kyrle . he could only assume that the intensity of Miss Halcombe 's suffering , under the loss of her sister , have mislead her judgment in a most deplorable manner , and he write her word that the shocking suspicion to which she have allude in his presence be , in his opinion , destitute of the small fragment of foundation in truth . thus the investigation by Mr. Gilmore 's partner begin and end . 

 meanwhile , Miss Halcombe have return to Limmeridge House , and have there collect all the additional information which she be able to obtain . 

 Mr. Fairlie have receive his first intimation of his niece 's death from his sister , Madame Fosco , this letter also not contain any exact reference to date . he have sanction his sister 's proposal that the deceased lady should be lay in her mother 's grave in Limmeridge churchyard . Count Fosco have accompany the remain to Cumberland , and have attend the funeral at Limmeridge , which take place on the 30th of July . it be follow , as a mark of respect , by all the inhabitant of the village and the neighbourhood . on the next day the inscription   originally draw out , it be say , by the aunt of the deceased lady , and submit for approval to her brother , Mr. Fairlie   be engrave on one side of the monument over the tomb . 

 on the day of the funeral , and for one day after it , Count Fosco have be receive as a guest at Limmeridge House , but no interview have take place between Mr. Fairlie and himself , by the former gentleman 's desire . they have communicate by writing , and through this medium Count Fosco have make Mr. Fairlie acquaint with the detail of his niece 's last illness and death . the letter present this information add no new fact to the fact already know , but one very remarkable paragraph be contain in the postscript . it refer to Anne Catherick . 

 the substance of the paragraph in question be as follow 

 it first inform Mr. Fairlie that Anne Catherick   of whom he might hear full particular from Miss Halcombe when she reach Limmeridge   have be trace and recover in the neighbourhood of Blackwater Park , and have be for the second time place under the charge of the medical man from whose custody she have once escape . 

 this be the first part of the postscript . the second part warn Mr. Fairlie that Anne Catherick 's mental malady have be aggravate by her long freedom from control , and that the insane hatred and distrust of Sir Percival Glyde , which have be one of her most marked delusion in former time , still exist under a newly - acquire form . the unfortunate woman 's last idea in connection with Sir Percival be the idea of annoying and distress he , and of elevate herself , as she suppose , in the estimation of the patient and nurse , by assume the character of his deceased wife , the scheme of this personation have evidently occur to she after a steal interview which she have succeed in obtain with Lady Glyde , and at which she have observe the extraordinary accidental likeness between the deceased lady and herself . it be to the last degree improbable that she would succeed a second time in escape from the Asylum , but it be just possible she might find some mean of annoy the late Lady Glyde 's relative with letter , and in that case Mr. Fairlie be warn beforehand how to receive they . 

 the postscript , express in these term , be show to Miss Halcombe when she arrive at Limmeridge . there be also place in her possession the clothe Lady Glyde have wear , and the other effect she have bring with she to her aunt 's house . they have be carefully collect and send to Cumberland by Madame Fosco . 

 such be the posture of affair when Miss Halcombe reach Limmeridge in the early part of September . 

 shortly afterwards she be confine to her room by a relapse , her weaken physical energy give way under the severe mental affliction from which she be now suffer . on get strong again , in a month 's time , her suspicion of the circumstance describe as attend her sister 's death still remain unshaken . she have hear nothing in the interim of Sir Percival Glyde , but letter have reach she from Madame Fosco , make the most affectionate inquiry on the part of her husband and herself . instead of answer these letter , Miss Halcombe cause the house in St. John 's Wood , and the proceeding of its inmate , to be privately watch . 

 nothing doubtful be discover . the same result attend the next investigation , which be secretly institute on the subject of Mrs. Rubelle . she have arrive in London about six month before with her husband . they have come from Lyons , and they have take a house in the neighbourhood of Leicester Square , to be fit up as a boarding - house for foreigner , who be expect to visit England in large number to see the exhibition of 1851 . nothing be know against husband or wife in the neighbourhood . they be quiet people , and they have pay their way honestly up to the present time . the final inquiry relate to Sir Percival Glyde . he be settle in Paris , and live there quietly in a small circle of English and french friend . 

 foil at all point , but still not able to rest , Miss Halcombe next determine to visit the Asylum in which she then suppose Anne Catherick to be for the second time confine . she have feel a strong curiosity about the woman in former day , and she be now doubly interested first , in ascertain whether the report of Anne Catherick 's attempt personation of Lady Glyde be true , and secondly   if it prove to be true , in discover for herself what the poor creature 's real motif be for attempt the deceit . 

 although Count Fosco 's letter to Mr. Fairlie do not mention the address of the Asylum , that important omission cast no difficulty in Miss Halcombe 's way . when Mr. Hartright have meet Anne Catherick at Limmeridge , she have inform he of the locality in which the house be situate , and Miss Halcombe have note down the direction in her diary , with all the other particular of the interview exactly as she hear they from Mr. Hartright 's own lip . accordingly she look back at the entry and extract the address furnish herself with the Count 's letter to Mr. Fairlie as a species of credential which might be useful to she , and start by herself for the Asylum on the eleventh of October . 

 she pass the night of the eleventh in London . it have be her intention to sleep at the house inhabit by Lady Glyde 's old governess , but Mrs. Vesey 's agitation at the sight of her lose pupil 's near and dear friend be so distressing that Miss Halcombe considerately refrain from remain in her presence , and remove to a respectable boarding - house in the neighbourhood , recommend by Mrs. Vesey 's married sister . the next day she proceed to the Asylum , which be situate not far from London on the northern side of the metropolis . 

 she be immediately admit to see the proprietor . 

 at first he appear to be decidedly unwilling to let she communicate with his patient . but on she show he the postscript to Count Fosco 's letter on she remind he that she be the " Miss Halcombe " there refer to that she be a near relative of the deceased Lady Glyde and that she be therefore naturally interested , for family reason , in observe for herself the extent of Anne Catherick 's delusion in relation to her late sister the tone and manner of the owner of the Asylum alter , and he withdraw his objection . he probably feel that a continued refusal , under these circumstance , would not only be an act of discourtesy in itself , but would also imply that the proceeding in his establishment be not of a nature to bear investigation by respectable stranger . 

 Miss Halcombe 's own impression be that the owner of the Asylum have not be receive into the confidence of Sir Percival and the Count . his consent at all to let she visit his patient seem to afford one proof of this , and his readiness in make admission which could scarcely have escape the lip of an accomplice , certainly appear to furnish another . 

 for example , in the course of the introductory conversation which take place , he inform Miss Halcombe that Anne Catherick have be bring back to he with the necessary order and certificate by Count Fosco on the twenty - seventh of July the Count also produce a letter of explanation and instruction sign by Sir Percival Glyde . on receive his inmate again , the proprietor of the Asylum acknowledge that he have observe some curious personal change in she . such change no doubt be not without precedent in his experience of person mentally afflict . insane people be often at one time , outwardly as well as inwardly , unlike what they be at another the change from well to bad , or from bad to well , in the madness have a necessary tendency to produce alteration of appearance externally . he allow for these , and he allow also for the modification in the form of Anne Catherick 's delusion , which be reflect no doubt in her manner and expression . but he be still perplex at time by certain difference between his patient before she have escape and his patient since she have be bring back . those difference be too minute to be describe . he could not say of course that she be absolutely alter in height or shape or complexion , or in the colour of her hair and eye , or in the general form of her face the change be something that he feel more than something that he see . in short , the case have be a puzzle from the first , and one more perplexity be add to it now . 

 it can not be say that this conversation lead to the result of even partially prepare Miss Halcombe 's mind for what be to come . but it produce , nevertheless , a very serious effect upon she . she be so completely unnerved by it , that some little time elapse before she could summon composure enough to follow the proprietor of the Asylum to that part of the house in which the inmate be confine . 

 on inquiry , it turn out that the suppose Anne Catherick be then take exercise in the ground attach to the establishment . one of the nurse volunteer to conduct Miss Halcombe to the place , the proprietor of the Asylum remain in the house for a few minute to attend to a case which require his service , and then engage to join his visitor in the ground . 

 the nurse lead Miss Halcombe to a distant part of the property , which be prettily lay out , and after look about she a little , turn into a turf walk , shade by a shrubbery on either side . about half - way down this walk two woman be slowly approach . the nurse point to they and say , " there be Anne Catherick , ma'am , with the attendant who wait on she . the attendant will answer any question you wish to put . " with those word the nurse leave she to return to the duty of the house . 

 Miss Halcombe advance on her side , and the woman advance on theirs . when they be within a dozen pace of each other , one of the woman stop for an instant , look eagerly at the strange lady , shake off the nurse 's grasp on she , and the next moment rush into Miss Halcombe 's arm . in that moment Miss Halcombe recognise her sister recognise the dead - alive . 

 fortunately for the success of the measure take subsequently , no one be present at that moment but the nurse . she be a young woman , and she be so startled that she be at first quite incapable of interfere . when she be able to do so her whole service be require by Miss Halcombe , who have for the moment sink altogether in the effort to keep her own sens under the shock of the discovery . after wait a few minute in the fresh air and the cool shade , her natural energy and courage help she a little , and she become sufficiently mistress of herself to feel the necessity of recall her presence of mind for her unfortunate sister 's sake . 

 she obtain permission to speak alone with the patient , on condition that they both remain well within the nurse 's view . there be no time for question there be only time for Miss Halcombe to impress on the unhappy lady the necessity of control herself , and to assure she of immediate help and rescue if she do so . the prospect of escape from the Asylum by obedience to her sister 's direction be sufficient to quiet Lady Glyde , and to make she understand what be require of she . Miss Halcombe next return to the nurse , place all the gold she then have in her pocket   three sovereign   in the nurse 's hand , and ask when and where she could speak to she alone . 

 the woman be at first surprised and distrustful . but on Miss Halcombe 's declare that she only want to put some question which she be too much agitated to ask at that moment , and that she have no intention of mislead the nurse into any dereliction of duty , the woman take the money , and propose three o'clock on the next day as the time for the interview . she might then slip out for half an hour , after the patient have din , and she would meet the lady in a retired place , outside the high north wall which screen the ground of the house . Miss Halcombe have only time to assent , and to whisper to her sister that she should hear from she on the next day , when the proprietor of the Asylum join they . he notice his visitor 's agitation , which Miss Halcombe account for by say that her interview with Anne Catherick have a little startled she at first . she take her leave as soon after as possible that be to say , as soon as she could summon courage to force herself from the presence of her unfortunate sister . 

 a very little reflection , when the capacity to reflect return , convince she that any attempt to identify Lady Glyde and to rescue she by legal mean , would , even if successful , involve a delay that might be fatal to her sister 's intellect , which be shake already by the horror of the situation to which she have be consign . by the time Miss Halcombe have get back to London , she have determine to effect Lady Glyde 's escape privately , by mean of the nurse . 

 she go at once to her stockbroker , and sell out of the fund all the little property she possess , amount to rather less than seven hundred pound . determine , if necessary , to pay the price of her sister 's liberty with every farthing she have in the world , she repair the next day , have the whole sum about she in bank - note , to her appointment outside the Asylum wall . 

 the nurse be there . Miss Halcombe approach the subject cautiously by many preliminary question . she discover , among other particular , that the nurse who have in former time attend on the true Anne Catherick have be hold responsible   although she be not to blame for it   for the patient 's escape , and have lose her place in consequence . the same penalty , it be add , would attach to the person then speak to she , if the suppose Anne Catherick be miss a second time ; and , moreover , the nurse in this case have an especial interest in keep her place . she be engage to be marry , and she and her future husband be wait till they could save , together , between two and three hundred pound to start in business . the nurse 's wage be good , and she might succeed , by strict economy , in contribute her small share towards the sum require in two year ' time . 

 on this hint Miss Halcombe speak . she declare that the suppose Anne Catherick be nearly related to she , that she have be place in the Asylum under a fatal mistake , and that the nurse would be do a good and a christian action in be the mean of restore they to one another . before there be time to start a single objection , Miss Halcombe take four bank - note of a hundred pound each from her pocket - book , and offer they to the woman , as a compensation for the risk she be to run , and for the loss of her place . 

 the nurse hesitate , through sheer incredulity and surprise . Miss Halcombe press the point on she firmly . 

 " you will be do a good action , " she repeat ; " you will be help the most injured and unhappy woman alive . there be your marriage portion for a reward . bring she safely to I here , and I will put these four bank - note into your hand before I claim she . " 

 " will you give I a letter say those word , which I can show to my sweetheart when he ask how I get the money ? " inquire the woman . 

 " I will bring the letter with I , ready write and sign , " answer Miss Halcombe . 

 " then I will risk it , " say the nurse . 

 " when ? " 

 " to - morrow . " 

 it be hastily agree between they that Miss Halcombe should return early the next morning and wait out of sight among the tree always , however , keep near the quiet spot of ground under the north wall . the nurse could fix no time for her appearance , caution require that she should wait and be guide by circumstance . on that understanding they separate . 

 Miss Halcombe be at her place , with the promise letter and the promise bank - note , before ten the next morning . she wait more than an hour and a half . at the end of that time the nurse come quickly round the corner of the wall hold Lady Glyde by the arm . the moment they meet Miss Halcombe put the bank - note and the letter into her hand , and the sister be unite again . 

 the nurse have dress Lady Glyde , with excellent forethought , in a bonnet , veil , and shawl of her own . Miss Halcombe only detain she to suggest a mean of turn the pursuit in a false direction , when the escape be discover at the Asylum . she be to go back to the house , to mention in the hearing of the other nurse that Anne Catherick have be inquire latterly about the distance from London to Hampshire , to wait till the last moment , before discovery be inevitable , and then to give the alarm that Anne be miss . the suppose inquiry about Hampshire , when communicate to the owner of the Asylum , would lead he to imagine that his patient have return to Blackwater Park , under the influence of the delusion which make her persist in assert herself to be Lady Glyde , and the first pursuit would , in all probability , be turn in that direction . 

 the nurse consent to follow these suggestion , the more readily as they offer she the mean of secure herself against any bad consequence than the loss of her place , by remain in the Asylum , and so maintain the appearance of innocence , at least . she at once return to the house , and Miss Halcombe lose no time in take her sister back with she to London . they catch the afternoon train to Carlisle the same afternoon , and arrive at Limmeridge , without accident or difficulty of any kind , that night . 

 during the latter part of their journey they be alone in the carriage , and Miss Halcombe be able to collect such remembrance of the past as her sister 's confused and weakened memory be able to recall . the terrible story of the conspiracy so obtain be present in fragment , sadly incoherent in themselves , and widely detach from each other . imperfect as the revelation be , it must nevertheless be record here before this explanatory narrative close with the event of the next day at Limmeridge House . 


 Lady Glyde 's recollection of the event which follow her departure from Blackwater Park begin with her arrival at the London terminus of the South Western Railway . she have omit to make a memorandum beforehand of the day on which she take the journey . all hope of fix that important date by any evidence of her , or of Mrs. Michelson 's , must be give up for lost . 

 on the arrival of the train at the platform Lady Glyde find Count Fosco wait for she . he be at the carriage door as soon as the porter could open it . the train be unusually crowd , and there be great confusion in get the luggage . some person whom Count Fosco bring with he procure the luggage which belong to Lady Glyde . it be mark with her name . she drive away alone with the Count in a vehicle which she do not particularly notice at the time . 

 her first question , on leave the terminus , refer to Miss Halcombe . the Count inform she that Miss Halcombe have not yet go to Cumberland , after - consideration have cause he to doubt the prudence of she take so long a journey without some day ' previous rest . 

 Lady Glyde next inquire whether her sister be then stay in the Count 's house . her recollection of the answer be confused , her only distinct impression in relation to it be that the Count declare he be then take she to see Miss Halcombe . Lady Glyde 's experience of London be so limited that she could not tell , at the time , through what street they be drive . but they never leave the street , and they never pass any garden or tree . when the carriage stop , it stop in a small street behind a square a square in which there be shop , and public building , and many people . from these recollection   of which Lady Glyde be certain   it seem quite clear that Count Fosco do not take she to his own residence in the suburb of St. John 's Wood . 

 they enter the house , and go upstairs to a back room , either on the first or second floor . the luggage be carefully bring in . a female servant open the door , and a man with a dark beard , apparently a foreigner , meet they in the hall , and with great politeness show they the way upstairs . in answer to Lady Glyde 's inquiry , the Count assure she that Miss Halcombe be in the house , and that she should be immediately inform of her sister 's arrival . he and the foreigner then go away and leave she by herself in the room . it be poorly furnish as a sitting - room , and it look out on the back of house . 

 the place be remarkably quiet no footstep go up or down the stair she only hear in the room beneath she a dull , rumble sound of man 's voice talk . before she have be long leave alone the Count return , to explain that Miss Halcombe be then take rest , and could not be disturb for a little while . he be accompany into the room by a gentleman   an Englishman , whom he beg to present as a friend of his . 

 after this singular introduction in the course of which no name , to the good of Lady Glyde 's recollection , have be mention she be leave alone with the stranger . he be perfectly civil , but he startle and confuse she by some odd question about herself , and by look at she , while he ask they , in a strange manner . after remain a short time he go out , and a minute or two afterwards a second stranger also an Englishman come in . this person introduce himself as another friend of Count Fosco 's , and he , in his turn , look at she very oddly , and ask some curious question never , as well as she could remember , address she by name , and go out again , after a little while , like the first man . by this time she be so frightened about herself , and so uneasy about her sister , that she have thought of venture downstairs again , and claim the protection and assistance of the only woman she have see in the house the servant who answer the door . 

 just as she have rise from her chair , the Count come back into the room . 

 the moment he appear she ask anxiously how long the meeting between her sister and herself be to be still delay . at first he return an evasive answer , but on be press , he acknowledge , with great apparent reluctance , that Miss Halcombe be by no mean so well as he have hitherto represent she to be . his tone and manner , in make this reply , so alarmed Lady Glyde , or rather so painfully increase the uneasiness which she have feel in the company of the two stranger , that a sudden faintness overcome she , and she be oblige to ask for a glass of water . the Count call from the door for water , and for a bottle of smell - salt . both be bring in by the foreign - look man with the beard . the water , when Lady Glyde attempt to drink it , have so strange a taste that it increase her faintness , and she hastily take the bottle of salt from Count Fosco , and smell at it . her head become giddy on the instant . the Count catch the bottle as it drop out of her hand , and the last impression of which she be conscious be that he hold it to her nostril again . 

 from this point her recollection be find to be confuse , fragmentary , and difficult to reconcile with any reasonable probability . 

 her own impression be that she recover her sens later in the evening , that she then leave the house , that she go   as she have previously arrange to go , at Blackwater Park   to Mrs. Vesey 's that she drink tea there , and that she pass the night under Mrs. Vesey 's roof . she be totally unable to say how , or when , or in what company she leave the house to which Count Fosco have bring she . but she persist in assert that she have be to Mrs. Vesey 's , and still more extraordinary , that she have be help to undress and get to bed by Mrs. Rubelle ! she could not remember what the conversation be at Mrs. Vesey 's or whom she see there besides that lady , or why Mrs. Rubelle should have be present in the house to help she . 

 her recollection of what happen to she the next morning be still more vague and unreliable . 

 she have some dim idea of drive out   at what hour she could not say   with Count Fosco , and with Mrs. Rubelle again for a female attendant . but when , and why , she leave Mrs. Vesey she could not tell ; neither do she know what direction the carriage drive in , or where it set she down , or whether the Count and Mrs. Rubelle do or do not remain with she all the time she be out . at this point in her sad story there be a total blank . she have no impression of the faint kind to communicate no idea whether one day , or more than one day , have pass until she come to herself suddenly in a strange place , surround by woman who be all unknown to she . 

 this be the Asylum . here she first hear herself call by Anne Catherick 's name , and here , as a last remarkable circumstance in the story of the conspiracy , her own eye inform she that she have Anne Catherick 's clothe on . the nurse , on the first night in the Asylum , have show she the mark on each article of her underclothing as it be take off , and have say , not at all irritably or unkindly , " look at your own name on your own clothe , and do not   worry we all any more about be Lady Glyde . she be dead and bury , and you be alive and hearty . do look at your clothe now ! there it be , in good mark ink , and there you will find it on all your old thing , which we have keep in the house Anne Catherick , as plain as print ! " and there it be , when Miss Halcombe examine the linen her sister wear , on the night of their arrival at Limmeridge House . 


 these be the only recollection all of they uncertain , and some of they contradictory which could be extract from Lady Glyde by careful questioning on the journey to Cumberland . Miss Halcombe abstain from press she with any inquiry relate to event in the Asylum her mind be but too evidently unfit to bear the trial of revert to they . it be know , by the voluntary admission of the owner of the mad - house , that she be receive there on the twenty - seventh of July . from that date until the fifteenth of October   the day of her rescue   she have be under restraint , her identity with Anne Catherick systematically assert , and her sanity , from first to last , practically deny . faculty less delicately balanced , constitution less tenderly organise , must have suffer under such an ordeal as this . no man could have go through it and come out of it unchanged . 

 arrive at Limmeridge late on the evening of the fifteenth , Miss Halcombe wisely resolve not to attempt the assertion of Lady Glyde 's identity until the next day . 

 the first thing in the morning she go to Mr. Fairlie 's room , and use all possible caution and preparation beforehand , at last tell he in so many word what have happen . as soon as his first astonishment and alarm have subside , he angrily declare that Miss Halcombe have allow herself to be dupe by Anne Catherick . he refer she to Count Fosco 's letter , and to what she have herself tell he of the personal resemblance between Anne and his deceased niece , and he positively decline to admit to his presence , even for one minute only , a madwoman , whom it be an insult and an outrage to have bring into his house at all . 

 Miss Halcombe leave the room wait till the first heat of her indignation have pass away decide on reflection that Mr. Fairlie should see his niece in the interest of common humanity before he close his door on she as a stranger and thereupon , without a word of previous warning , take Lady Glyde with she to his room . the servant be post at the door to prevent their entrance , but Miss Halcombe insist on pass he , and make her way into Mr. Fairlie 's presence , lead her sister by the hand . 

 the scene that follow , though it only last for a few minute , be too painful to be describe Miss Halcombe herself shrink from refer to it . let it be enough to say that Mr. Fairlie declare , in the most positive term , that he do not recognise the woman who have be bring into his room that he see nothing in her face and manner to make he doubt for a moment that his niece lie bury in Limmeridge churchyard , and that he would call on the law to protect he if before the day be over she be not remove from the house . 

 take the very bad view of Mr. Fairlie 's selfishness , indolence , and habitual want of feeling , it be manifestly impossible to suppose that he be capable of such infamy as secretly recognise and openly disown his brother 's child . Miss Halcombe humanely and sensibly allow all due force to the influence of prejudice and alarm in prevent he from fairly exercise his perception , and account for what have happen in that way . but when she next put the servant to the test , and find that they too be , in every case , uncertain , to say the least of it , whether the lady present to they be their young mistress or Anne Catherick , of whose resemblance to she they have all hear , the sad conclusion be inevitable that the change produce in Lady Glyde 's face and manner by her imprisonment in the Asylum be far more serious than Miss Halcombe have at first suppose . the vile deception which have assert her death defied exposure even in the house where she be bear , and among the people with whom she have live . 

 in a less critical situation the effort need not have be give up as hopeless even yet . 

 for example , the maid , Fanny , who happen to be then absent from Limmeridge , be expect back in two day , and there would be a chance of gain her recognition to start with , see that she have be in much more constant communication with her mistress , and have be much more heartily attach to she than the other servant . again , Lady Glyde might have be privately keep in the house or in the village to wait until her health be a little recovered and her mind be a little steadied again . when her memory could be once more trust to serve she , she would naturally refer to person and event in the past with a certainty and a familiarity which no impostor could simulate , and so the fact of her identity , which her own appearance have fail to establish , might subsequently be prove , with time to help she , by the surer test of her own word . 

 but the circumstance under which she have regain her freedom render all recourse to such mean as these simply impracticable . the pursuit from the Asylum , divert to Hampshire for the time only , would infallibly next take the direction of Cumberland . the person appoint to seek the fugitive might arrive at Limmeridge House at a few hour ' notice , and in Mr. Fairlie 's present temper of mind they might count on the immediate exertion of his local influence and authority to assist they . the common consideration for Lady Glyde 's safety force on Miss Halcombe the necessity of resign the struggle to do her justice , and of remove she at once from the place of all other that be now most dangerous to she the neighbourhood of her own home . 

 an immediate return to London be the first and wise measure of security which suggest itself . in the great city all trace of they might be most speedily and most surely effaced . there be no preparation to make no farewell word of kindness to exchange with any one . on the afternoon of that memorable day of the sixteenth Miss Halcombe rouse her sister to a last exertion of courage , and without a live soul to wish they well at parting , the two take their way into the world alone , and turn their back for ever on Limmeridge House . 

 they have pass the hill above the churchyard , when Lady Glyde insist on turn back to look she last at her mother 's grave . Miss Halcombe try to shake her resolution , but , in this one instance , try in vain . she be immovable . her dim eye light with a sudden fire , and flash through the veil that hang over they her waste finger strengthen moment by moment round the friendly arm by which they have hold so listlessly till this time . I believe in my soul that the hand of God be point their way back to they , and that the most innocent and the most afflict of his creature be choose in that dread moment to see it . 

 they retrace their step to the burial - ground , and by that act seal the future of our three life . 



 III 

 this be the story of the past the story so far as we know it then . 

 two obvious conclusion present themselves to my mind after hear it . in the first place , I see darkly what the nature of the conspiracy have be , how chance have be watch , and how circumstance have be handle to ensure impunity to a daring and an intricate crime . while all detail be still a mystery to I , the vile manner in which the personal resemblance between the woman in white and Lady Glyde have be turn to account be clear beyond a doubt . it be plain that Anne Catherick have be introduce into Count Fosco 's house as Lady Glyde it be plain that Lady Glyde have take the dead woman 's place in the Asylum the substitution have be so manage as to make innocent people   the doctor and the two servant certainly , and the owner of the mad - house in all probability   accomplice in the crime . 

 the second conclusion come as the necessary consequence of the first . we three have no mercy to expect from Count Fosco and Sir Percival Glyde . the success of the conspiracy have bring with it a clear gain to those two man of thirty thousand pound twenty thousand to one , ten thousand to the other through his wife . they have that interest , as well as other interest , in ensure their impunity from exposure , and they would leave no stone unturne , no sacrifice unattempte , no treachery untried , to discover the place in which their victim be conceal , and to part she from the only friend she have in the world Marian Halcombe and myself . 

 the sense of this serious peril a peril which every day and every hour might bring nearer and near to we be the one influence that guide I in fix the place of our retreat . I choose it in the far east of London , where there be few idle people to lounge and look about they in the street . I choose it in a poor and a populous neighbourhood because the hard the struggle for existence among the man and woman about we , the less the risk of their have the time or take the pain to notice chance stranger who come among they . these be the great advantage I look to , but our locality be a gain to we also in another and a hardly less important respect . we could live cheaply by the daily work of my hand , and could save every farthing we possess to forward the purpose , the righteous purpose , of redress an infamous wrong which , from first to last , I now keep steadily in view . 

 in a week 's time Marian Halcombe and I have settle how the course of our new life should be direct . 

 there be no other lodger in the house , and we have the mean of go in and out without pass through the shop . I arrange , for the present at least , that neither Marian nor Laura should stir outside the door without my be with they , and that in my absence from home they should let no one into their room on any pretence whatever . this rule establish , I go to a friend whom I have know in former day a wood engraver in large practice to seek for employment , tell he , at the same time , that I have reason for wish to remain unknown . 

 he at once conclude that I be in debt , express his regret in the usual form , and then promise to do what he could to assist I . I leave his false impression undisturbed , and accept the work he have to give . he know that he could trust my experience and my industry . I have what he want , steadiness and facility , and though my earning be but small , they suffice for our necessity . as soon as we could feel certain of this , Marian Halcombe and I put together what we possess . she have between two and three hundred pound leave of her own property , and I have nearly as much remain from the purchase - money obtain by the sale of my drawing - master 's practice before I leave England . together we make up between we more than four hundred pound . I deposit this little fortune in a bank , to be keep for the expense of those secret inquiry and investigation which I be determined to set on foot , and to carry on by myself if I could find no one to help I . we calculate our weekly expenditure to the last farthing , and we never touch our little fund except in Laura 's interest and for Laura 's sake . 

 the house - work , which , if we have dare trust a stranger near we , would have be do by a servant , be take on the first day , take as her own right , by Marian Halcombe . " what a woman 's hand be fit for , " she say , " early and late , these hand of mine shall do . " they tremble as she hold they out . the waste arm tell their sad story of the past , as she turn up the sleeve of the poor plain dress that she wear for safety 's sake ; but the unquenchable spirit of the woman burn bright in she even yet . I see the big tear rise thick in her eye , and fall slowly over her cheek as she look at I . she dash they away with a touch of her old energy , and smile with a faint reflection of her old good spirit . " do not   doubt my courage , Walter , " she plead , " it be my weakness that cry , not I . the house - work shall conquer it if I can not . " and she keep her word the victory be win when we meet in the evening , and she sit down to rest . her large steady black eye look at I with a flash of their bright firmness of bygone day . " I be not quite break down yet , " she say . " I be worth trust with my share of the work . " before I could answer , she add in a whisper , " and worth trust with my share in the risk and the danger too . remember that , if the time come ! " 

 I do remember it when the time come . 


 as early as the end of October the daily course of our life have assume its settle direction , and we three be as completely isolate in our place of concealment as if the house we live in have be a desert island , and the great network of street and the thousand of our fellow - creature all round we the water of an illimitable sea . I could now reckon on some leisure time for consider what my future plan of action should be , and how I might arm myself most securely at the outset for the come struggle with Sir Percival and the Count . 

 I give up all hope of appeal to my recognition of Laura , or to Marian 's recognition of she , in proof of her identity . if we have love she less dearly , if the instinct implant in we by that love have not be far more certain than any exercise of reasoning , far keener than any process of observation , even we might have hesitate on first see she . 

 the outward change work by the suffering and the terror of the past have fearfully , almost hopelessly , strengthen the fatal resemblance between Anne Catherick and herself . in my narrative of event at the time of my residence in Limmeridge House , I have record , from my own observation of the two , how the likeness , strike as it be when view generally , fail in many important point of similarity when test in detail . in those former day , if they have both be see together side by side , no person could for a moment have mistake they one for the other as have happen often in the instance of twin . I could not say this now . the sorrow and suffering which I have once blame myself for associate even by a pass thought with the future of Laura Fairlie , had set their profane mark on the youth and beauty of her face ; and the fatal resemblance which I have once see and shudder at see , in idea only , be now a real and living resemblance which assert itself before my own eye . stranger , acquaintance , friend even who could not look at she as we look , if she have be show to they in the first day of her rescue from the Asylum , might have doubt if she be the Laura Fairlie they have once see , and doubt without blame . 

 the one remain chance , which I have at first thought might be trust to serve we the chance of appeal to her recollection of person and event with which no impostor could be familiar , be prove , by the sad test of our later experience , to be hopeless . every little caution that Marian and I practise towards she every little remedy we try , to strengthen and steady slowly the weaken , shake faculty , be a fresh protest in itself against the risk of turn her mind back on the troubled and the terrible past . 

 the only event of former day which we venture on encourage she to recall be the little trivial domestic event of that happy time at Limmeridge , when I first go there and teach she to draw . the day when I rouse those remembrance by show she the sketch of the summer - house which she have give I on the morning of our farewell , and which have never be separate from I since , be the birthday of our first hope . tenderly and gradually , the memory of the old walk and drive dawn upon she , and the poor weary pin eye look at Marian and at I with a new interest , with a falter thoughtfulness in they , which from that moment we cherish and keep alive . I buy she a little box of colour , and a sketch - book like the old sketch - book which I have see in her hand on the morning that we first meet . once again oh I , once again ! at spare hour save from my work , in the dull London light , in the poor London room , I sit by her side to guide the falter touch , to help the feeble hand . day by day I raise and raise the new interest till its place in the blank of her existence be at last assured till she could think of her drawing and talk of it , and patiently practise it by herself , with some faint reflection of the innocent pleasure in my encouragement , the grow enjoyment in her own progress , which belong to the lose life and the lose happiness of past day . 

 we help her mind slowly by this simple mean , we take she out between we to walk on fine day , in a quiet old City square near at hand , where there be nothing to confuse or alarm she we spar a few pound from the fund at the banker 's to get her wine , and the delicate strengthen food that she require we amuse she in the evening with child 's game at card , with scrap - book full of print which I borrow from the engraver who employ I by these , and other trifling attention like they , we compose she and steady she , and hop all thing , as cheerfully as we could from time and care , and love that never neglect and never despair of she . but to take she mercilessly from seclusion and repose to confront she with stranger , or with acquaintance who be little well than stranger to rouse the painful impression of her past life which we have so carefully hush to rest this , even in her own interest , we dare not do . whatever sacrifice it cost , whatever long , weary , heartbreaking delay it involve , the wrong that have be inflict on she , if mortal mean could grapple it , must be redress without her knowledge and without her help . 

 this resolution settle , it be next necessary to decide how the first risk should be venture , and what the first proceeding should be . 

 after consult with Marian , I resolve to begin by gather together as many fact as could be collect then to ask the advice of Mr. Kyrle   whom we know we could trust , and to ascertain from he , in the first instance , if the legal remedy lie fairly within our reach . I owe it to Laura 's interest not to stake her whole future on my own unaided exertion , so long as there be the faint prospect of strengthen our position by obtain reliable assistance of any kind . 

 the first source of information to which I apply be the journal keep at Blackwater Park by Marian Halcombe . there be passage in this diary relate to myself which she think it well that I should not see . accordingly , she read to I from the manuscript , and I take the note I want as she go on . we could only find time to pursue this occupation by sit up late at night . three night be devoted to the purpose , and be enough to put I in possession of all that Marian could tell . 

 my next proceeding be to gain as much additional evidence as I could procure from other people without exciting suspicion . I go myself to Mrs. Vesey to ascertain if Laura 's impression of have sleep there be correct or not . in this case , from consideration for Mrs. Vesey 's age and infirmity , and in all subsequent case of the same kind from consideration of caution , I keep our real position a secret , and be always careful to speak of Laura as " the late Lady Glyde . " 

 Mrs. Vesey 's answer to my inquiry only confirm the apprehension which I have previously feel . Laura have certainly write to say she would pass the night under the roof of her old friend but she have never be near the house . 

 her mind in this instance , and , as I fear , in other instance besides , confusedly present to her something which she have only intend to do in the false light of something which she have really do . the unconscious contradiction of herself be easy to account for in this way but it be likely to lead to serious result . it be a stumble on the threshold at start it be a flaw in the evidence which tell fatally against we . 

 when I next ask for the letter which Laura have write to Mrs. Vesey from Blackwater Park , it be give to I without the envelope , which have be throw into the wastepaper basket , and long since destroy . in the letter itself no date be mention not even the day of the week . it only contain these line : " Dearest Mrs. Vesey , I be in sad distress and anxiety , and I may come to your house to - morrow night , and ask for a bed . I can not   tell you what be the matter in this letter I write it in such fear of be find out that I can fix my mind on nothing . pray be at home to see I . I will give you a thousand kiss , and tell you everything . your affectionate Laura . " what help be there in those line ? none . 

 on return from Mrs. Vesey 's , I instruct Marian to write   observe the same caution which I practise myself   to Mrs. Michelson . she be to express , if she please , some general suspicion of Count Fosco 's conduct , and she be to ask the housekeeper to supply we with a plain statement of event , in the interest of truth . while we be wait for the answer , which reach we in a week 's time , I go to the doctor in St. John 's Wood , introduce myself as send by Miss Halcombe to collect , if possible , more particular of her sister 's last illness than Mr. Kyrle have find the time to procure . by Mr. Goodricke 's assistance , I obtain a copy of the certificate of death , and an interview with the woman   Jane Gould   who have be employ to prepare the body for the grave . through this person I also discover a mean of communicate with the servant , Hester Pinhorn . she have recently leave her place in consequence of a disagreement with her mistress , and she be lodge with some people in the neighbourhood whom Mrs. Gould know . in the manner here indicate I obtain the Narratives of the housekeeper , of the doctor , of Jane Gould , and of Hester Pinhorn , exactly as they be present in these page . 

 furnish with such additional evidence as these document afford , I consider myself to be sufficiently prepare for a consultation with Mr. Kyrle , and Marian write accordingly to mention my name to he , and to specify the day and hour at which I request to see he on private business . 

 there be time enough in the morning for I to take Laura out for her walk as usual , and to see she quietly settle at she draw afterwards . she look up at I with a new anxiety in her face as I rise to leave the room , and her finger begin to toy doubtfully , in the old way , with the brush and pencil on the table . 

 " you be not tired of I yet ? " she say . " you be not go away because you be tired of I ? I will try to do well I will try to get well . be you as fond of I , Walter as you use to be , now I be so pale and thin , and so slow in learn to draw ? " 

 she speak as a child might have speak , she show I her thought as a child might have show they . I wait a few minute long wait to tell she that she be dearer to I now than she have ever be in the past time . " try to get well again , " I say , encourage the new hope in the future which I see dawn in her mind , " try to get well again , for Marian 's sake and for mine . " 

 " yes , " she say to herself , return to her drawing . " I must try , because they be both so fond of I . " she suddenly look up again . " do not   be go long ! I can not   get on with my drawing , Walter , when you be not here to help I . " 

 " I shall soon be back , my darling soon be back to see how you be get on . " 

 my voice falter a little in spite of I . I force myself from the room . it be no time , then , for part with the self - control which might yet serve I in my need before the day be out . 

 as I open the door , I beckon to Marian to follow I to the stair . it be necessary to prepare she for a result which I feel might soon or later follow my show myself openly in the street . 

 " I shall , in all probability , be back in a few hour , " I say , " and you will take care , as usual , to let no one inside the door in my absence . but if anything happen " 

 " what can happen ? " she interpose quickly . " tell I plainly , Walter , if there be any danger , and I shall know how to meet it . " 

 " the only danger , " I reply , " be that Sir Percival Glyde may have be recall to London by the news of Laura 's escape . you be aware that he have I watch before I leave England , and that he probably know I by sight , although I do not   know he ? " 

 she lay her hand on my shoulder and look at I in anxious silence . I see she understand the serious risk that threaten we . 

 " it be not likely , " I say , " that I shall be see in London again so soon , either by Sir Percival himself or by the person in his employ . but it be barely possible that an accident may happen . in that case , you will not be alarmed if I fail to return to - night , and you will satisfy any inquiry of Laura 's with the good excuse that you can make for I ? if I find the least reason to suspect that I be watch , I will take good care that no spy follow I back to this house . do not   doubt my return , Marian , however it may be delay and fear nothing . " 

 " nothing ! " she answer firmly . " you shall not regret , Walter , that you have only a woman to help you . " she pause , and detain I for a moment long . " take care ! " she say , press my hand anxiously " take care ! " 

 I leave she , and set forth to pave the way for discovery the dark and doubtful way , which begin at the lawyer 's door . 



 IV 

 no circumstance of the slight importance happen on my way to the office of Messrs. Gilmore    Kyrle , in Chancery Lane . 

 while my card be be take in to Mr. Kyrle , a consideration occur to I which I deeply regret not have think of before . the information derive from Marian 's diary make it a matter of certainty that Count Fosco have open her first letter from Blackwater Park to Mr. Kyrle , and have , by mean of his wife , intercept the second . he be therefore well aware of the address of the office , and he would naturally infer that if Marian want advice and assistance , after Laura 's escape from the Asylum , she would apply once more to the experience of Mr. Kyrle . in this case the office in Chancery Lane be the very first place which he and Sir Percival would cause to be watch , and if the same person be choose for the purpose who have be employ to follow I , before my departure from England , the fact of my return would in all probability be ascertain on that very day . I have think , generally , of the chance of my be recognise in the street , but the special risk connect with the office have never occur to I until the present moment . it be too late now to repair this unfortunate error in judgment too late to wish that I have make arrangement for meet the lawyer in some place privately appoint beforehand . I could only resolve to be cautious on leave Chancery Lane , and not to go straight home again under any circumstance whatever . 

 after wait a few minute I be show into Mr. Kyrle 's private room . he be a pale , thin , quiet , self - possess man , with a very attentive eye , a very low voice , and a very undemonstrative manner not   as I judge   ready with his sympathy where stranger be concern , and not at all easy to disturb in his professional composure . a well man for my purpose could hardly have be find . if he commit himself to a decision at all , and if the decision be favourable , the strength of our case be as good as prove from that moment . 

 " before I enter on the business which bring I here , " I say , " I ought to warn you , Mr. Kyrle , that the short statement I can make of it may occupy some little time . " 

 " my time be at Miss Halcombe 's disposal , " he reply . " where any interest of her be concern , I represent my partner personally , as well as professionally . it be his request that I should do so , when he cease to take an active part in business . " 

 " may I inquire whether Mr. Gilmore be in England ? " 

 " he be not , he be live with his relative in Germany . his health have improve , but the period of his return be still uncertain . " 

 while we be exchange these few preliminary word , he have be search among the paper before he , and he now produce from they a seal letter . I think he be about to hand the letter to I , but , apparently change his mind , he place it by itself on the table , settle himself in his chair , and silently wait to hear what I have to say . 

 without waste a moment in prefatory word of any sort , I enter on my narrative , and put he in full possession of the event which have already be relate in these page . 

 Lawyer as he be to the very marrow of his bone , I startle he out of his professional composure . expression of incredulity and surprise , which he could not repress , interrupt I several time before I have do . I persevere , however , to the end , and as soon as I reach it , boldly ask the one important question 

 " what be your opinion , Mr. Kyrle ? " 

 he be too cautious to commit himself to an answer without take time to recover his self - possession first . 

 " before I give my opinion , " he say , " I must beg permission to clear the ground by a few question . " 

 he put the question sharp , suspicious , unbelieve question , which clearly show I , as they proceed , that he think I be the victim of a delusion , and that he might even have doubt , but for my introduction to he by Miss Halcombe , whether I be not attempt the perpetration of a cunningly - design fraud . 

 " do you believe that I have speak the truth , Mr. Kyrle ? " I ask , when he have do examine I . 

 " so far as your own conviction be concern , I be certain you have speak the truth , " he reply . " I have the high esteem for Miss Halcombe , and I have therefore every reason to respect a gentleman whose mediation she trust in a matter of this kind . I will even go far , if you like , and admit , for courtesy 's sake and for argument 's sake , that the identity of Lady Glyde as a live person be a proved fact to Miss Halcombe and yourself . but you come to I for a legal opinion . as a lawyer , and as a lawyer only , it be my duty to tell you , Mr. Hartright , that you have not the shadow of a case . " 

 " you put it strongly , Mr. Kyrle . " 

 " I will try to put it plainly as well . the evidence of Lady Glyde 's death be , on the face of it , clear and satisfactory . there be her aunt 's testimony to prove that she come to Count Fosco 's house , that she fall ill , and that she die . there be the testimony of the medical certificate to prove the death , and to show that it take place under natural circumstance . there be the fact of the funeral at Limmeridge , and there be the assertion of the inscription on the tomb . that be the case you want to overthrow . what evidence have you to support the declaration on your side that the person who die and be bury be not Lady Glyde ? let we run through the main point of your statement and see what they be worth . Miss Halcombe go to a certain private Asylum , and there see a certain female patient . it be know that a woman name Anne Catherick , and bear an extraordinary personal resemblance to Lady Glyde , escape from the asylum ; it be know that the person receive there last July be receive as Anne Catherick bring back ; it be know that the gentleman who bring she back warn Mr. Fairlie that it be part of her insanity to be bent on personate his dead niece ; and it be know that she do repeatedly declare herself in the Asylum   where no one believe she   to be Lady Glyde . these be all fact . what have you to set against they ? Miss Halcombe 's recognition of the woman , which recognition after - event invalidate or contradict . do Miss Halcombe assert her suppose sister 's identity to the owner of the Asylum , and take legal mean for rescue she ? no , she secretly bribe a nurse to let her escape . when the patient have be release in this doubtful manner , and be take to Mr. Fairlie , do he recognise she ? be he stagger for one instant in his belief of his niece 's death ? no . do the servant recognise she ? no . be she keep in the neighbourhood to assert her own identity , and to stand the test of further proceeding ? no , she be privately take to London . in the meantime you have recognise she also , but you be not a relative you be not even an old friend of the family . the servant contradict you , and Mr. Fairlie contradict Miss Halcombe , and the suppose Lady Glyde contradict herself . she declare she pass the night in London at a certain house . your own evidence show that she have never be near that house , and your own admission be that her condition of mind prevent you from produce she anywhere to submit to investigation , and to speak for herself . I pass over minor point of evidence on both side to save time , and I ask you , if this case be to go now into a court of law to go before a jury , bind to take fact as they reasonably appear where be your proof ? " 

 I be oblige to wait and collect myself before I could answer he . it be the first time the story of Laura and the story of Marian have be present to I from a stranger 's point of view the first time the terrible obstacle that lie across our path have be make to show themselves in their true character . 

 " there can be no doubt , " I say , " that the fact , as you have state they , appear to tell against we , but " 

 " but you think those fact can be explain away , " interpose Mr. Kyrle . " let I tell you the result of my experience on that point . when an english jury have to choose between a plain fact on the surface and a long explanation under the surface , it always take the fact in preference to the explanation . for example , Lady Glyde   I call the lady you represent by that name for argument 's sake   declare she have sleep at a certain house , and it be prove that she have not sleep at that house . you explain this circumstance by enter into the state of her mind , and deduce from it a metaphysical conclusion . I do not   say the conclusion be wrong I only say that the jury will take the fact of she contradict herself in preference to any reason for the contradiction that you can offer . " 

 " but be it not possible , " I urge , " by dint of patience and exertion , to discover additional evidence ? Miss Halcombe and I have a few hundred pound " 

 he look at I with a half - suppress pity , and shake his head . 

 " consider the subject , Mr. Hartright , from your own point of view , " he say . " if you be right about Sir Percival Glyde and Count Fosco   which I do not   admit , mind , every imaginable difficulty would be throw in the way of your get fresh evidence . every obstacle of litigation would be raise every point in the case would be systematically contest and by the time we have spend our thousand instead of our hundred , the final result would , in all probability , be against we . question of identity , where instance of personal resemblance be concern , be , in themselves , the hard of all question to settle the hard , even when they be free from the complication which beset the case we be now discuss . I really see no prospect of throw any light whatever on this extraordinary affair . even if the person bury in Limmeridge churchyard be not Lady Glyde , she be , in life , on your own showing , so like she , that we should gain nothing , if we apply for the necessary authority to have the body exhume . in short , there be no case , Mr. Hartright there be really no case . " 

 I be determined to believe that there be a case , and in that determination shift my ground , and appeal to he once more . 

 " be there not other proof that we might produce besides the proof of identity ? " I ask . 

 " not as you be situate , " he reply . " the simple and sure of all proof , the proof by comparison of date , be , as I understand , altogether out of your reach . if you could show a discrepancy between the date of the doctor 's certificate and the date of Lady Glyde 's journey to London , the matter would wear a totally different aspect , and I should be the first to say , let we go on . " 

 " that date may yet be recover , Mr. Kyrle . " 

 " on the day when it be recover , Mr. Hartright , you will have a case . if you have any prospect , at this moment , of get at it tell I , and we shall see if I can advise you . " 

 I consider . the housekeeper could not help we Laura could not help we Marian could not help we . in all probability , the only person in existence who know the date be Sir Percival and the Count . 

 " I can think of no mean of ascertain the date at present , " I say , " because I can think of no person who be sure to know it , but Count Fosco and Sir Percival Glyde . " 

 Mr. Kyrle 's calmly attentive face relaxed , for the first time , into a smile . 

 " with your opinion of the conduct of those two gentleman , " he say , " you do not   expect help in that quarter , I presume ? if they have combine to gain large sum of money by a conspiracy , they be not likely to confess it , at any rate . " 

 " they may be force to confess it , Mr. Kyrle . " 

 " by whom ? " 

 " by I . " 

 we both rise . he look I attentively in the face with more appearance of interest than he have show yet . I could see that I have perplex he a little . 

 " you be very determined , " he say . " you have , no doubt , a personal motive for proceeding , into which it be not my business to inquire . if a case can be produce in the future , I can only say , my good assistance be at your service . at the same time I must warn you , as the money question always enter into the law question , that I see little hope , even if you ultimately establish the fact of Lady Glyde 's be alive , of recover her fortune . the foreigner would probably leave the country before proceeding be commence , and Sir Percival 's embarrassment be numerous enough and press enough to transfer almost any sum of money he may possess from himself to his creditor . you be of course aware " 

 I stop he at that point . 

 " let I beg that we may not discuss Lady Glyde 's affair , " I say . " I have never know anything about they in former time , and I know nothing of they now except that her fortune be lose . you be right in assume that I have personal motif for stir in this matter . I wish those motif to be always as disintereste as they be at the present moment " 

 he try to interpose and explain . I be a little heated , I suppose , by feel that he have doubt I , and I go on bluntly , without wait to hear he . 

 " there shall be no money motive , " I say , " no idea of personal advantage in the service I mean to render to Lady Glyde . she have be cast out as a stranger from the house in which she be bear a lie which record her death have be write on her mother 's tomb and there be two man , alive and unpunished , who be responsible for it . that house shall open again to receive she in the presence of every soul who follow the false funeral to the grave that lie shall be publicly erase from the tombstone by the authority of the head of the family , and those two man shall answer for their crime to I , though the justice that sit in tribunal be powerless to pursue they . I have give my life to that purpose , and , alone as I stand , if God spar I , I will accomplish it . " 

 he draw back towards his table , and say nothing . his face show plainly that he think my delusion have get the well of my reason , and that he consider it totally useless to give I any more advice . 

 " we each keep our opinion , Mr. Kyrle , " I say , " and we must wait till the event of the future decide between we . in the meantime , I be much oblige to you for the attention you have give to my statement . you have show I that the legal remedy lie , in every sense of the word , beyond our mean . we can not produce the law proof , and we be not rich enough to pay the law expense . it be something gain to know that . " 

 I bow and walk to the door . he call I back and give I the letter which I have see he place on the table by itself at the beginning of our interview . 

 " this come by post a few day ago , " he say . " perhaps you will not mind deliver it ? pray tell Miss Halcombe , at the same time , that I sincerely regret be , thus far , unable to help she , except by advice , which will not be more welcome , I be afraid , to she than to you . " 

 I look at the letter while he be speak . it be address to " Miss Halcombe . care of Messrs. Gilmore    Kyrle , Chancery Lane . " the handwriting be quite unknown to I . 

 on leave the room I ask one last question . 

 " do you happen to know , " I say , " if Sir Percival Glyde be still in Paris ? " 

 " he have return to London , " reply Mr. Kyrle . " at least I hear so from his solicitor , whom I meet yesterday . " 

 after that answer I go out . 

 on leave the office the first precaution to be observe be to abstain from attract attention by stop to look about I . I walk towards one of the quiet of the large square on the north of Holborn , then suddenly stop and turn round at a place where a long stretch of pavement be leave behind I . 

 there be two man at the corner of the square who have stop also , and who be stand talk together . after a moment 's reflection I turn back so as to pass they . one move as I come near , and turn the corner lead from the square into the street . the other remain stationary . I look at he as I pass and instantly recognise one of the man who have watch I before I leave England . 

 if I have be free to follow my own instinct , I should probably have begin by speak to the man , and have end by knock he down . but I be bind to consider consequence . if I once place myself publicly in the wrong , I put the weapon at once into Sir Percival 's hand . there be no choice but to oppose cunning by cunning . I turn into the street down which the second man have disappear , and pass he , wait in a doorway . he be a stranger to I , and I be glad to make sure of his personal appearance in case of future annoyance . have do this , I again walk northward till I reach the New Road . there I turn aside to the west   have the man behind I all the time , and wait at a point where I know myself to be at some distance from a cab - stand , until a fast two - wheel cab , empty , should happen to pass I . one pass in a few minute . I jump in and tell the man to drive rapidly towards Hyde Park . there be no second fast cab for the spy behind I . I see they dart across to the other side of the road , to follow I by run , until a cab or a cab - stand come in their way . but I have the start of they , and when I stop the driver and get out , they be nowhere in sight . I cross Hyde Park and make sure , on the open ground , that I be free . when I at last turn my step homeward , it be not till many hour later not till after dark . 



 I find Marian wait for I alone in the little sitting - room . she have persuade Laura to go to rest , after first promise to show I she draw the moment I come in . the poor little dim faint sketch so trifle in itself , so touch in its association be prop up carefully on the table with two book , and be place where the faint light of the one candle we allow ourselves might fall on it to the good advantage . I sit down to look at the drawing , and to tell Marian , in whisper , what have happen . the partition which divide we from the next room be so thin that we could almost hear Laura 's breathing , and we might have disturb she if we have speak aloud . 

 Marian preserve her composure while I describe my interview with Mr. Kyrle . but her face become troubled when I speak next of the man who have follow I from the lawyer 's office , and when I tell she of the discovery of Sir Percival 's return . 

 " bad news , Walter , " she say , " the bad news you could bring . have you nothing more to tell I ? " 

 " I have something to give you , " I reply , hand she the note which Mr. Kyrle have confide to my care . 

 she look at the address and recognise the handwriting instantly . 

 " you know your correspondent ? " I say . 

 " too well , " she answer . " my correspondent be Count Fosco . " 

 with that reply she open the note . her face flush deeply while she read it her eye brighten with anger as she hand it to I to read in my turn . 

 the note contain these line 


 " impel by honourable admiration honourable to myself , honourable to you I write , magnificent Marian , in the interest of your tranquillity , to say two consoling word 

 " fear nothing ! 

 " exercise your fine natural sense and remain in retirement . dear and admirable woman , invite no dangerous publicity . resignation be sublime adopt it . the modest repose of home be eternally fresh enjoy it . the storm of life pass harmless over the valley of Seclusion dwell , dear lady , in the valley . 

 " do this and I authorise you to fear nothing . no new calamity shall lacerate your sensibility sensibility precious to I as my own . you shall not be molest , the fair companion of your retreat shall not be pursue . she have find a new asylum in your heart . priceless asylum ! I envy she and leave she there . 

 " one last word of affectionate warning , of paternal caution , and I tear myself from the charm of address you I close these fervent line . 

 " advance no far than you have go already , compromise no serious interest , threaten nobody . do not , I implore you , force I into action ME , the Man of Action when it be the cherished object of my ambition to be passive , to restrict the vast reach of my energy and my combination for your sake . if you have rash friend , moderate their deplorable ardour . if Mr. Hartright return to England , hold no communication with he . I walk on a path of my own , and Percival follow at my heel . on the day when Mr. Hartright cross that path , he be a lost man . " 



 the only signature to these line be the initial letter F , surround by a circle of intricate flourish . I throw the letter on the table with all the contempt that I feel for it . 

 " he be try to frighten you a sure sign that he be frightened himself , " I say . 

 she be too genuine a woman to treat the letter as I treat it . the insolent familiarity of the language be too much for her self - control . as she look at I across the table , her hand clench themselves in her lap , and the old quick fiery temper flame out again brightly in her cheek and her eye . 

 " Walter ! " she say , " if ever those two man be at your mercy , and if you be oblige to spare one of they , do not   let it be the Count . " 

 " I will keep this letter , Marian , to help my memory when the time come . " 

 she look at I attentively as I put the letter away in my pocket - book . 

 " when the time come ? " she repeat . " can you speak of the future as if you be certain of it ? certain after what you have hear in Mr. Kyrle 's office , after what have happen to you to - day ? " 

 " I do not   count the time from to - day , Marian . all I have do to - day be to ask another man to act for I . I count from to - morrow " 

 " why from to - morrow ? " 

 " because to - morrow I mean to act for myself . " 

 " how ? " 

 " I shall go to Blackwater by the first train , and return , I hope , at night . " 

 " to blackwater ! " 

 " yes . I have have time to think since I leave Mr. Kyrle . his opinion on one point confirm my own . we must persist to the last in hunt down the date of Laura 's journey . the one weak point in the conspiracy , and probably the one chance of prove that she be a live woman , centre in the discovery of that date . " 

 " you mean , " say Marian , " the discovery that Laura do not leave Blackwater Park till after the date of her death on the doctor 's certificate ? " 

 " certainly . " 

 " what make you think it might have be after ? Laura can tell we nothing of the time she be in London . " 

 " but the owner of the Asylum tell you that she be receive there on the twenty - seventh of July . I doubt Count Fosco 's ability to keep she in London , and to keep she insensible to all that be pass around she , more than one night . in that case , she must have start on the twenty - sixth , and must have come to London one day after the date of her own death on the doctor 's certificate . if we can prove that date , we prove our case against Sir Percival and the Count . " 

 " yes , yes I see ! but how be the proof to be obtain ? " 

 " Mrs. Michelson 's narrative have suggest to I two way of try to obtain it . one of they be to question the doctor , Mr. Dawson , who must know when he resume his attendance at Blackwater Park after Laura leave the house . the other be to make inquiry at the inn to which Sir Percival drive away by himself at night . we know that his departure follow Laura 's after the lapse of a few hour , and we may get at the date in that way . the attempt be at least worth making , and to - morrow I be determined it shall be make . " 

 " and suppose it fail I look at the bad now , Walter ; but I will look at the good if disappointment come to try we suppose no one can help you at blackwater ? " 

 " there be two man who can help I , and shall help I in London Sir Percival and the Count . innocent people may well forget the date but they be guilty , and they know it . if I fail everywhere else , I mean to force a confession out of one or both of they on my own term . " 

 all the woman flush up in Marian 's face as I speak . 

 " begin with the Count , " she whisper eagerly . " for my sake , begin with the Count . " 

 " we must begin , for Laura 's sake , where there be the good chance of success , " I reply . 

 the colour fade from her face again , and she shake her head sadly . 

 " yes , " she say , " you be right it be mean and miserable of I to say that . I try to be patient , Walter , and succeed well now than I do in happy time . but I have a little of my old temper still leave , and it will get the well of I when I think of the count ! " 

 " his turn will come , " I say . " but , remember , there be no weak place in his life that we know of yet . " I wait a little to let she recover her self - possession , and then speak the decisive word 

 " Marian ! there be a weak place we both know of in Sir Percival 's life " 

 " you mean the Secret ! " 

 " yes : the Secret . it be our only sure hold on he . I can force he from his position of security , I can drag he and his villainy into the face of day , by no other mean . whatever the Count may have do , Sir Percival have consent to the conspiracy against Laura from another motive besides the motive of gain . you hear he tell the Count that he believe his wife know enough to ruin he ? you hear he say that he be a lost man if the secret of Anne Catherick be know ? " 

 " yes ! yes ! I do . " 

 " well , Marian , when our other resource have fail we , I mean to know the secret . my old superstition cling to I , even yet . I say again the woman in white be a live influence in our three life . the end be appoint the end be draw we on and Anne Catherick , dead in her grave , point the way to it still ! " 



 V 

 the story of my first inquiry in Hampshire be soon tell . 

 my early departure from London enable I to reach Mr. Dawson 's house in the forenoon . our interview , so far as the object of my visit be concern , lead to no satisfactory result . 

 Mr. Dawson 's book certainly show when he have resume his attendance on Miss Halcombe at Blackwater Park , but it be not possible to calculate back from this date with any exactness , without such help from Mrs. Michelson as I know she be unable to afford . she could not say from memory   who , in similar case , ever can ?   how many day have elapse between the renewal of the doctor 's attendance on his patient and the previous departure of Lady Glyde . she be almost certain of have mention the circumstance of the departure to Miss Halcombe , on the day after it happen but then she be no more able to fix the date of the day on which this disclosure take place , than to fix the date of the day before , when Lady Glyde have leave for London . neither could she calculate , with any nearer approach to exactness , the time that have pass from the departure of her mistress , to the period when the undated letter from Madame Fosco arrive . lastly , as if to complete the series of difficulty , the doctor himself , have be ill at the time , have omit to make his usual entry of the day of the week and month when the gardener from Blackwater Park have call on he to deliver Mrs. Michelson 's message . 

 hopeless of obtain assistance from Mr. Dawson , I resolve to try next if I could establish the date of Sir Percival 's arrival at Knowlesbury . 

 it seem like a fatality ! when I reach Knowlesbury the inn be shut up , and bill be post on the wall . the speculation have be a bad one , as I be inform , ever since the time of the railway . the new hotel at the station have gradually absorb the business , and the old inn   which we know to be the inn at which Sir Percival have put up , have be close about two month since . the proprietor have leave the town with all his good and chattel , and where he have go I could not positively ascertain from any one . the four people of whom I inquire give I four different account of his plan and project when he leave Knowlesbury . 

 there be still some hour to spare before the last train leave for London , and I drive back again in a fly from the Knowlesbury station to Blackwater Park , with the purpose of question the gardener and the person who keep the lodge . if they , too , prove unable to assist I , my resource for the present be at an end , and I might return to town . 

 I dismiss the fly a mile distant from the park , and get my direction from the driver , proceed by myself to the house . 

 as I turn into the lane from the high - road , I see a man , with a carpet - bag , walk before I rapidly on the way to the lodge . he be a little man , dress in shabby black , and wear a remarkably large hat . I set he down   as well as it be possible to judge   for a lawyer 's clerk , and stop at once to widen the distance between we . he have not hear I , and he walk on out of sight , without look back . when I pass through the gate myself , a little while afterwards , he be not visible he have evidently go on to the house . 

 there be two woman in the lodge . one of they be old , the other I know at once , by Marian 's description of she , to be Margaret Porcher . 

 I ask first if Sir Percival be at the Park , and receive a reply in the negative , inquire next when he have leave it . neither of the woman could tell I more than that he have go away in the summer . I could extract nothing from Margaret Porcher but vacant smile and shaking of the head . the old woman be a little more intelligent , and I manage to lead she into speaking of the manner of Sir Percival 's departure , and of the alarm that it cause she . she remember her master call she out of bed , and remember his frightening she by swear but the date at which the occurrence happen be , as she honestly acknowledge , " quite beyond she . " 

 on leave the lodge I see the gardener at work not far off . when I first address he , he look at I rather distrustfully , but on my use Mrs. Michelson 's name , with a civil reference to himself , he enter into conversation readily enough . there be no need to describe what pass between we it end , as all my other attempt to discover the date have end . the gardener know that his master have drive away , at night , ' some time in July , the last fortnight or the last ten day in the month " and know no more . 

 while we be speak together I see the man in black , with the large hat , come out from the house , and stand at some little distance observe we . 

 certain suspicion of his errand at Blackwater Park have already cross my mind . they be now increase by the gardener 's inability   or unwillingness   to tell I who the man be , and I determine to clear the way before I , if possible , by speak to he . the plain question I could put as a stranger would be to inquire if the house be allow to be show to visitor . I walk up to the man at once , and accost he in those word . 

 his look and manner unmistakably betray that he know who I be , and that he want to irritate I into quarrel with he . his reply be insolent enough to have answer the purpose , if I have be less determined to control myself . as it be , I meet he with the most resolute politeness , apologise for my involuntary intrusion   which he call a " trespass , "   and leave the ground . it be exactly as I suspect . the recognition of I when I leave Mr. Kyrle 's office have be evidently communicate to Sir Percival Glyde , and the man in black have be send to the Park in anticipation of my making inquiry at the house or in the neighbourhood . if I have give he the least chance of lodge any sort of legal complaint against I , the interference of the local magistrate would no doubt have be turn to account as a clog on my proceeding , and a mean of separate I from Marian and Laura for some day at least . 

 I be prepared to be watch on the way from Blackwater Park to the station , exactly as I have be watch in London the day before . but I could not discover at the time , whether I be really follow on this occasion or not . the man in black might have have mean of track I at his disposal of which I be not aware , but I certainly see nothing of he , in his own person , either on the way to the station , or afterwards on my arrival at the London terminus in the evening . I reach home on foot , take the precaution , before I approach our own door , of walk round by the lonely street in the neighbourhood , and there stop and look back more than once over the open space behind I . I have first learn to use this stratagem against suspect treachery in the wild of Central America and now I be practise it again , with the same purpose and with even great caution , in the heart of civilised London ! 

 nothing have happen to alarm Marian during my absence . she ask eagerly what success I have meet with . when I tell she she could not conceal her surprise at the indifference with which I speak of the failure of my investigation thus far . 

 the truth be , that the ill - success of my inquiry have in no sense daunt I . I have pursue they as a matter of duty , and I have expect nothing from they . in the state of my mind at that time , it be almost a relief to I to know that the struggle be now narrow to a trial of strength between myself and Sir Percival Glyde . the vindictive motive have mingle itself all along with my other and well motif , and I confess it be a satisfaction to I to feel that the sure way , the only way left , of serve Laura 's cause , be to fasten my hold firmly on the villain who have marry she . 

 while I acknowledge that I be not strong enough to keep my motif above the reach of this instinct of revenge , I can honestly say something in my own favour on the other side . no base speculation on the future relation of Laura and myself , and on the private and personal concession which I might force from Sir Percival if I once have he at my mercy , ever enter my mind . I never say to myself , " if I do succeed , it shall be one result of my success that I put it out of her husband 's power to take she from I again . " I could not look at she and think of the future with such thought as those . the sad sight of the change in she from her former self , make the one interest of my love an interest of tenderness and compassion which her father or her brother might have feel , and which I feel , God know , in my inmost heart . all my hope look no far on now than to the day of her recovery . there , till she be strong again and happy again there , till she could look at I as she have once look , and speak to I as she have once speak the future of my happy thought and my dearest wish end . 

 these word be write under no prompting of idle self - contemplation . passage in this narrative be soon to come which will set the mind of other in judgment on my conduct . it be right that the good and the bad of I should be fairly balanced before that time . 


 on the morning after my return from Hampshire I take marian upstairs into my working - room , and there lay before she the plan that I have mature thus far , for master the one assailable point in the life of Sir Percival Glyde . 

 the way to the Secret lie through the mystery , hitherto impenetrable to all of we , of the woman in white . the approach to that in its turn might be gain by obtain the assistance of Anne Catherick 's mother , and the only ascertainable mean of prevail on Mrs. Catherick to act or to speak in the matter depend on the chance of my discovering local particular and family particular first of all from Mrs. Clements . after think the subject over carefully , I feel certain that I could only begin the new inquiry by place myself in communication with the faithful friend and protectress of Anne Catherick . 

 the first difficulty then be to find Mrs. Clements . 

 I be indebted to Marian 's quick perception for meet this necessity at once by the good and simplest mean . she propose to write to the farm near Limmeridge   Todd 's Corner , to inquire whether Mrs. Clements have communicate with Mrs. Todd during the past few month . how Mrs. Clements have be separate from Anne it be impossible for we to say , but that separation once effect , it would certainly occur to Mrs. Clements to inquire after the miss woman in the neighbourhood of all other to which she be know to be most attach the neighbourhood of Limmeridge . I see directly that Marian 's proposal offer we a prospect of success , and she write to Mrs. Todd accordingly by that day 's post . 

 while we be wait for the reply , I make myself master of all the information Marian could afford on the subject of Sir Percival 's family , and of his early life . she could only speak on these topic from hearsay , but she be reasonably certain of the truth of what little she have to tell . 

 Sir Percival be an only child . his father , Sir Felix Glyde , have suffer from his birth under a painful and incurable deformity , and have shun all society from his early year . his sole happiness be in the enjoyment of music , and he have marry a lady with taste similar to his own , who be say to be a most accomplished musician . he inherit the Blackwater property while still a young man . neither he nor his wife after take possession , make advance of any sort towards the society of the neighbourhood , and no one endeavour to tempt they into abandon their reserve , with the one disastrous exception of the rector of the parish . 

 the rector be the bad of all innocent mischief - maker an over - zealous man . he have hear that Sir Felix have leave College with the character of be little well than a revolutionist in politic and an infidel in religion , and he arrive conscientiously at the conclusion that it be his bounden duty to summon the lord of the manor to hear sound view enunciate in the parish church . Sir Felix fiercely resent the clergyman 's well - mean but ill - direct interference , insult he so grossly and so publicly , that the family in the neighbourhood send letter of indignant remonstrance to the Park , and even the tenant of the Blackwater property express their opinion as strongly as they dare . the baronet , who have no country taste of any kind , and no attachment to the estate or to any one live on it , declare that society at Blackwater should never have a second chance of annoy he , and leave the place from that moment . 

 after a short residence in London he and his wife depart for the continent , and never return to England again . they live part of the time in France and part in Germany always keep themselves in the strict retirement which the morbid sense of his own personal deformity have make a necessity to Sir Felix . their son , Percival , have be bear abroad , and have be educate there by private tutor . his mother be the first of his parent whom he lose . his father have die a few year after she , either in 1825 or 1826 . Sir Percival have be in England , as a young man , once or twice before that period , but his acquaintance with the late Mr. Fairlie do not begin till after the time of his father 's death . they soon become very intimate , although Sir Percival be seldom , or never , at Limmeridge House in those day . Mr. Frederick Fairlie might have meet he once or twice in Mr. Philip Fairlie 's company , but he could have know little of he at that or at any other time . Sir Percival 's only intimate friend in the Fairlie family have be Laura 's father . 

 these be all the particular that I could gain from Marian . they suggest nothing which be useful to my present purpose , but I note they down carefully , in the event of their proving to be of importance at any future period . 

 Mrs. Todd 's reply   address , by our own wish , to a post - office at some distance from we   have arrive at its destination when I go to apply for it . the chance , which have be all against we hitherto , turn from this moment in our favour . Mrs. Todd 's letter contain the first item of information of which we be in search . 

 Mrs. Clements , it appear , have   as we have conjecture   write to Todd 's Corner , ask pardon in the first place for the abrupt manner in which she and Anne have leave their friend at the farm - house   on the morning after I have meet the woman in white in Limmeridge churchyard , and then inform Mrs. Todd of Anne 's disappearance , and entreat that she would cause inquiry to be make in the neighbourhood , on the chance that the lost woman might have stray back to Limmeridge . in make this request , Mrs. Clements have be careful to add to it the address at which she might always be hear of , and that address Mrs. Todd now transmit to Marian . it be in London , and within half an hour 's walk of our own lodging . 

 in the word of the proverb , I be resolve not to let the grass grow under my foot . the next morning I set forth to seek an interview with Mrs. Clements . this be my first step forward in the investigation . the story of the desperate attempt to which I now stand committed begin here . 



 VI 

 the address communicate by Mrs. Todd take I to a lodging - house situate in a respectable street near the Gray 's Inn Road . 

 when I knock the door be open by Mrs. Clements herself . she do not appear to remember I , and ask what my business be . I recall to she our meeting in Limmeridge churchyard at the close of my interview there with the woman in white , take special care to remind she that I be the person who assist Anne Catherick   as Anne have herself declare   to escape the pursuit from the Asylum . this be my only claim to the confidence of Mrs. Clements . she remember the circumstance the moment I speak of it , and ask I into the parlour , in the great anxiety to know if I have bring she any news of Anne . 

 it be impossible for I to tell she the whole truth without , at the same time , enter into particular on the subject of the conspiracy , which it would have be dangerous to confide to a stranger . I could only abstain most carefully from raise any false hope , and then explain that the object of my visit be to discover the person who be really responsible for Anne 's disappearance . I even add , so as to exonerate myself from any after - reproach of my own conscience , that I entertain not the least hope of be able to trace she that I believe we should never see she alive again and that my main interest in the affair be to bring to punishment two man whom I suspect to be concern in lure she away , and at whose hand I and some dear friend of mine have suffer a grievous wrong . with this explanation I leave it to Mrs. Clements to say whether our interest in the matter   whatever difference there might be in the motif which actuate we   be not the same , and whether she feel any reluctance to forward my object by give I such information on the subject of my inquiry as she happen to possess . 

 the poor woman be at first too much confused and agitated to understand thoroughly what I say to she . she could only reply that I be welcome to anything she could tell I in return for the kindness I have show to Anne ; but as she be not very quick and ready , at the good of time , in talk to stranger , she would beg I to put she in the right way , and to say where I wish she to begin . 

 know by experience that the plainest narrative attainable from person who be not accustomed to arrange their idea , be the narrative which go far enough back at the beginning to avoid all impediment of retrospection in its course , I ask Mrs. Clements to tell I first what have happen after she have leave Limmeridge , and so , by watchful questioning , carry she on from point to point , till we reach the period of Anne 's disappearance . 

 the substance of the information which I thus obtain be as follow : 

 on leave the farm at Todd 's Corner , Mrs. Clements and Anne have travel that day as far as Derby , and have remain there a week on Anne 's account . they have then go on to London , and have live in the lodging occupy by Mrs. Clements at that time for a month or more , when circumstance connect with the house and the landlord have oblige they to change their quarter . Anne 's terror of be discover in London or its neighbourhood , whenever they venture to walk out , have gradually communicate itself to Mrs. Clements , and she have determine on remove to one of the most out - of - the - way place in England to the town of Grimsby in Lincolnshire , where her deceased husband have pass all his early life . his relative be respectable people settle in the town they have always treat Mrs. Clements with great kindness , and she think it impossible to do well than go there and take the advice of her husband 's friend . Anne would not hear of return to her mother at Welmingham , because she have be remove to the Asylum from that place , and because Sir Percival would be certain to go back there and find she again . there be serious weight in this objection , and Mrs. Clements feel that it be not to be easily remove . 

 at Grimsby the first serious symptom of illness have show themselves in Anne . they appear soon after the news of Lady Glyde 's marriage have be make public in the newspaper , and have reach she through that medium . 

 the medical man who be send for to attend the sick woman discover at once that she be suffer from a serious affection of the heart . the illness last long , leave she very weak , and return at interval , though with mitigated severity , again and again . they remain at Grimsby , in consequence , during the first half of the new year , and there they might probably have stay much long , but for the sudden resolution which Anne take at this time to venture back to Hampshire , for the purpose of obtain a private interview with Lady Glyde . 

 Mrs. Clements do all in her power to oppose the execution of this hazardous and unaccountable project . no explanation of her motif be offer by Anne , except that she believe the day of her death be not far off , and that she have something on her mind which must be communicate to Lady Glyde , at any risk , in secret . her resolution to accomplish this purpose be so firmly settle that she declare her intention of go to Hampshire by herself if Mrs. Clements feel any unwillingness to go with she . the doctor , on be consult , be of opinion that serious opposition to her wish would , in all probability , produce another and perhaps a fatal fit of illness , and Mrs. Clements , under this advice , yield to necessity , and once more , with sad foreboding of trouble and danger to come , allow Anne Catherick to have her own way . 

 on the journey from London to Hampshire Mrs. Clements discover that one of their fellow - passenger be well acquainted with the neighbourhood of blackwater , and could give she all the information she need on the subject of locality . in this way she find out that the only place they could go to , which be not dangerously near to Sir Percival 's residence , be a large village call Sandon . the distance here from Blackwater Park be between three and four mile and that distance , and back again , Anne have walk on each occasion when she have appear in the neighbourhood of the lake . 

 for the few day during which they be at Sandon without be discover they have live a little away from the village , in the cottage of a decent widow - woman who have a bedroom to let , and whose discreet silence Mrs. Clements have do she good to secure , for the first week at least . she have also try hard to induce Anne to be content with writing to Lady Glyde , in the first instance ; but the failure of the warning contain in the anonymous letter send to Limmeridge have make Anne resolute to speak this time , and obstinate in the determination to go on her errand alone . 

 Mrs. Clements , nevertheless , follow she privately on each occasion when she go to the lake , without , however , venture near enough to the boat - house to be witness of what take place there . when Anne return for the last time from the dangerous neighbourhood , the fatigue of walking , day after day , distance which be far too great for her strength , add to the exhausting effect of the agitation from which she have suffer , produce the result which Mrs. Clements have dread all along . the old pain over the heart and the other symptom of the illness at Grimsby return , and Anne be confine to her bed in the cottage . 

 in this emergency the first necessity , as Mrs. Clements know by experience , be to endeavour to quiet Anne 's anxiety of mind , and for this purpose the good woman go herself the next day to the lake , to try if she could find Lady Glyde   who would be sure , as Anne say , to take her daily walk to the boat - house , and prevail on she to come back privately to the cottage near Sandon . on reach the outskirt of the plantation Mrs. Clements encounter , not Lady Glyde , but a tall , stout , elderly gentleman , with a book in his hand in other word , Count Fosco . 

 the Count , after look at she very attentively for a moment , ask if she expect to see any one in that place , and add , before she could reply , that he be wait there with a message from Lady Glyde , but that he be not quite certain whether the person then before he answer the description of the person with whom he be desire to communicate . 

 upon this Mrs. Clements at once confide her errand to he , and entreat that he would help to allay Anne 's anxiety by trust his message to she . the Count most readily and kindly comply with her request . the message , he say , be a very important one . Lady Glyde entreat Anne and her good friend to return immediately to London , as she feel certain that Sir Percival would discover they if they remain any long in the neighbourhood of Blackwater . she be herself go to London in a short time , and if Mrs. Clements and Anne would go there first , and would let she know what their address be , they should hear from she and see she in a fortnight or less . the Count add that he have already attempt to give a friendly warning to Anne herself , but that she have be too much startle by see that he be a stranger to let he approach and speak to she . 

 to this Mrs. Clements reply , in the great alarm and distress , that she ask nothing well than to take Anne safely to London , but that there be no present hope of remove she from the dangerous neighbourhood , as she lie ill in her bed at that moment . the Count inquire if Mrs. Clements have send for medical advice , and hear that she have hitherto hesitate to do so , from the fear of make their position publicly know in the village , inform she that he be himself a medical man , and that he would go back with she if she please , and see what could be do for Anne . Mrs. Clements   feel a natural confidence in the Count , as a person trust with a secret message from Lady Glyde   gratefully accept the offer , and they go back together to the cottage . 

 Anne be asleep when they get there . the Count start at the sight of she   evidently from astonishment at her resemblance to Lady Glyde . poor Mrs. Clements suppose that he be only shock to see how ill she be . he would not allow she to be awaken he be content with put question to Mrs. Clements about her symptom , with look at she , and with lightly touch her pulse . Sandon be a large enough place to have a grocer 's and druggist 's shop in it , and thither the Count go to write his prescription and to get the medicine make up . he bring it back himself , and tell Mrs. Clements that the medicine be a powerful stimulant , and that it would certainly give Anne strength to get up and bear the fatigue of a journey to London of only a few hour . the remedy be to be administer at state time on that day and on the day after . on the third day she would be well enough to travel , and he arrange to meet Mrs. Clements at the Blackwater station , and to see they off by the midday train . if they do not appear he would assume that Anne be bad , and would proceed at once to the cottage . 

 as event turn out , no such emergency as this occur . 

 this medicine have an extraordinary effect on Anne , and the good result of it be help by the assurance Mrs. Clements could now give she that she would soon see Lady Glyde in London . at the appoint day and time   when they have not be quite so long as a week in Hampshire altogether , they arrive at the station . the Count be wait there for they , and be talk to an elderly lady , who appear to be go to travel by the train to London also . he most kindly assist they , and put they into the carriage himself , beg Mrs. Clements not to forget to send her address to Lady Glyde . the elderly lady do not travel in the same compartment , and they do not notice what become of she on reach the London terminus . Mrs. Clements secure respectable lodging in a quiet neighbourhood , and then write , as she have engage to do , to inform Lady Glyde of the address . 

 a little more than a fortnight pass , and no answer come . 

 at the end of that time a lady   the same elderly lady whom they have see at the station   call in a cab , and say that she come from Lady Glyde , who be then at an hotel in London , and who wish to see Mrs. Clements , for the purpose of arrange a future interview with Anne . Mrs. Clements express her willingness   Anne be present at the time , and entreat she to do so   to forward the object in view , especially as she be not require to be away from the house for more than half an hour at the most . she and the elderly lady   clearly Madame Fosco   then leave in the cab . the lady stop the cab , after it have drive some distance , at a shop before they get to the hotel , and beg Mrs. Clements to wait for she for a few minute while she make a purchase that have be forget . she never appear again . 

 after wait some time Mrs. Clements become alarmed , and order the cabman to drive back to her lodging . when she get there , after an absence of rather more than half an hour , Anne be go . 

 the only information to be obtain from the people of the house be derive from the servant who wait on the lodger . she have open the door to a boy from the street , who have leave a letter for " the young woman who live on the second floor "   the part of the house which Mrs. Clements occupy . the servant have deliver the letter , have then go downstairs , and five minute afterwards have observe Anne open the front door and go out , dress in her bonnet and shawl . she have probably take the letter with she , for it be not to be find , and it be therefore impossible to tell what inducement have be offer to make she leave the house . it must have be a strong one , for she would never stir out alone in London of her own accord . if Mrs. Clements have not know this by experience nothing would have induce she to go away in the cab , even for so short a time as half an hour only . 

 as soon as she could collect her thought , the first idea that naturally occur to Mrs. Clements be to go and make inquiry at the Asylum , to which she dread that Anne have be take back . 

 she go there the next day , have be inform of the locality in which the house be situate by Anne herself . the answer she receive   her application have in all probability be make a day or two before the false Anne Catherick have really be consign to safe keeping in the Asylum   be , that no such person have be bring back there . she have then write to Mrs. Catherick at Welmingham to know if she have see or hear anything of her daughter , and have receive an answer in the negative . after that reply have reach she , she be at the end of her resource , and perfectly ignorant where else to inquire or what else to do . from that time to this she have remain in total ignorance of the cause of Anne 's disappearance and of the end of Anne 's story . 



 VII 

 thus far the information which I have receive from Mrs. Clements though it establish fact of which I have not previously be aware be of a preliminary character only . 

 it be clear that the series of deception which have remove Anne Catherick to London , and separate she from Mrs. Clements , have be accomplish solely by Count Fosco and the Countess , and the question whether any part of the conduct of husband or wife have be of a kind to place either of they within reach of the law might be well worthy of future consideration . but the purpose I have now in view lead I in another direction than this . the immediate object of my visit to Mrs. Clements be to make some approach at least to the discovery of Sir Percival 's secret , and she have say nothing as yet which advance I on my way to that important end . I feel the necessity of try to awaken her recollection of other time , person , and event than those on which her memory have hitherto be employ , and when I next speak I speak with that object indirectly in view . 

 " I wish I could be of any help to you in this sad calamity , " I say . " all I can do be to feel heartily for your distress . if Anne have be your own child , Mrs. Clements , you could have show she no truer kindness you could have make no readier sacrifice for her sake . " 

 " there be no great merit in that , sir , " say Mrs. Clements simply . " the poor thing be as good as my own child to I . I nurse she from a baby , sir , bring she up by hand and a hard job it be to rear she . it would not   go to my heart so to lose she if I have not   make her first short clothe and teach she to walk . I always say she be send to console I for never have chick or child of my own . and now she be lose the old time keep come back to my mind , and even at my age I can not   help cry about she I can not   indeed , sir ! " 

 I wait a little to give Mrs. Clements time to compose herself . be the light that I have be look for so long glimmering on I far off , as yet in the good woman 's recollection of Anne 's early life ? 

 " do you know Mrs. Catherick before Anne be bear ? " I ask . 

 " not very long , sir not above four month . we see a great deal of each other in that time , but we be never very friendly together . " 

 her voice be steady as she make that reply . painful as many of her recollection might be , I observe that it be unconsciously a relief to her mind to revert to the dimly - see trouble of the past , after dwell so long on the vivid sorrow of the present . 

 " be you and Mrs. Catherick neighbour ? " I inquire , lead her memory on as encouragingly as I could . 

 " yes , sir neighbour at Old Welmingham . " 

 " OLD Welmingham ? there be two place of that name , then , in Hampshire ? " 

 " well , sir , there use to be in those day well than three - and - twenty year ago . they build a new town about two mile off , convenient to the river and Old Welmingham , which be never much more than a village , get in time to be desert . the new town be the place they call Welmingham now but the old parish church be the parish church still . it stand by itself , with the house pull down or go to ruin all round it . I have   live to see sad change . it be a pleasant , pretty place in my time . " 

 " do you live there before your marriage , Mrs. Clements ? " 

 " no , sir I be a Norfolk woman . it be not   the place my husband belong to either . he be from Grimsby , as I tell you , and he serve his apprenticeship there . but have friend down south , and hearing of an opening , he get into business at Southampton . it be in a small way , but he make enough for a plain man to retire on , and settle at Old Welmingham . I go there with he when he marry I . we be neither of we young , but we live very happy together happy than our neighbour , Mr. Catherick , live along with his wife when they come to Old Welmingham a year or two afterwards . " 

 " be your husband acquaint with they before that ? " 

 " with Catherick , sir not with his wife . she be a stranger to both of we . some gentleman have make interest for Catherick , and he get the situation of clerk at Welmingham church , which be the reason of his come to settle in our neighbourhood . he bring his newly - marry wife along with he , and we hear in course of time she have be lady's - maid in a family that live at Varneck Hall , near Southampton . Catherick have find it a hard matter to get she to marry he , in consequence of she hold herself uncommonly high . he have ask and ask , and give the thing up at last , see she be so contrary about it . when he have give it up she turn contrary just the other way , and come to he of her own accord , without rhyme or reason seemingly . my poor husband always say that be the time to have give she a lesson . but Catherick be too fond of she to do anything of the sort he never check she either before they be married or after . he be a quick man in his feeling , let they carry he a deal too far , now in one way and now in another , and he would have spoil a well wife than Mrs. Catherick if a well have marry he . I do not   like to speak ill of any one , sir , but she be a heartless woman , with a terrible will of her own fond of foolish admiration and fine clothe , and not care to show so much as decent outward respect to Catherick , kindly as he always treat she . my husband say he think thing would turn out badly when they first come to live near we , and his word prove true . before they have be quite four month in our neighbourhood there be a dreadful scandal and a miserable break - up in their household . both of they be in fault I be afraid both of they be equally in fault . " 

 " you mean both husband and wife ? " 

 " oh , no , sir ! I do not   mean Catherick he be only to be pity . I mean his wife and the person " 

 " and the person who cause the scandal ? " 

 " yes , sir . a gentleman bear and bring up , who ought to have set a well example . you know he , sir and my poor dear Anne know he only too well . " 

 " Sir Percival Glyde ? " 

 " yes , Sir Percival Glyde . " 

 my heart beat fast I think I have my hand on the clue . how little I know then of the winding of the labyrinth which be still to mislead I ! 

 " do Sir Percival live in your neighbourhood at that time ? " I ask . 

 " no , sir . he come among we as a stranger . his father have die not long before in foreign part . I remember he be in mourning . he put up at the little inn on the river   they have pull it down since that time , where gentleman use to go to fish . he be not   much notice when he first come it be a common thing enough for gentleman to travel from all part of England to fish in our river . " 

 " do he make his appearance in the village before Anne be bear ? " 

 " yes , sir . Anne be bear in the June month of eighteen hundred and twenty - seven and I think he come at the end of April or the beginning of May . " 

 " come as a stranger to all of you ? a stranger to Mrs. Catherick as well as to the rest of the neighbour ? " 

 " so we think at first , sir . but when the scandal break out , nobody believe they be stranger . I remember how it happen as well as if it be yesterday . Catherick come into our garden one night , and wake we by throw up a handful of gravel from the walk at our window . I hear he beg my husband , for the Lord 's sake , to come down and speak to he . they be a long time together talk in the porch . when my husband come back upstairs he be all of a tremble . he sit down on the side of the bed and he say to I , ' Lizzie ! I always tell you that woman be a bad one I always say she would end ill , and I be afraid in my own mind that the end have come already . Catherick have find a lot of lace handkerchief , and two fine ring , and a new gold watch and chain , hide away in his wife 's drawer thing that nobody but a bear lady ought ever to have and his wife will not   say how she come by they . ' ' do he think she steal they ? ' say I. ' no , ' say he , ' stealing would be bad enough . but it be bad than that , she be have no chance of steal such thing as those , and she be not a woman to take they if she have . they be gift , Lizzie there be her own initial engrave inside the watch and Catherick have see she talk privately , and carry on as no married woman should , with that gentleman in mourning , Sir Percival Glyde . do not   you say anything about it I have   quiet Catherick for to - night . I have   tell he to keep his tongue to himself , and his eye and his ear open , and to wait a day or two , till he can be quite certain . ' ' I believe you be both of you wrong , ' say I. ' it be not in nature , comfortable and respectable as she be here , that Mrs. Catherick should take up with a chance strange like Sir Percival Glyde . ' ' ay , but be he a stranger to she ? ' say my husband . ' you forget how Catherick 's wife come to marry he . she go to he of her own accord , after say no over and over again when he ask she . there have be wicked woman before her time , Lizzie , who have use honest man who love they as a means of save their character , and I be sorely afraid this Mrs. Catherick be as wicked as the bad of they . we shall see , ' say my husband , ' we shall soon see . ' and only two day afterwards we do see . " 

 Mrs. Clements wait for a moment before she go on . even in that moment , I begin to doubt whether the clue that I think I have find be really lead I to the central mystery of the labyrinth after all . be this common , too common , story of a man 's treachery and a woman 's frailty the key to a secret which have be the lifelong terror of Sir Percival Glyde ? 

 " well , sir , Catherick take my husband 's advice and wait , " Mrs. Clements continue . " and as I tell you , he have not   long to wait . on the second day he find his wife and Sir Percival whisper together quite familiar , close under the vestry of the church . I suppose they think the neighbourhood of the vestry be the last place in the world where anybody would think of look after they , but , however that may be , there they be . Sir Percival , be seemingly surprised and confound , defend himself in such a guilty way that poor Catherick   whose quick temper I have tell you of already   fall into a kind of frenzy at his own disgrace , and strike Sir Percival . he be no match   and I be sorry to say it   for the man who have wrong he , and he be beat in the cruel manner , before the neighbour , who have come to the place on hear the disturbance , could run in to part they . all this happen towards evening , and before nightfall , when my husband go to Catherick 's house , he be go , nobody know where . no live soul in the village ever see he again . he know too well , by that time , what his wife 's vile reason have be for marry he , and he feel his misery and disgrace , especially after what have happen to he with Sir Percival , too keenly . the clergyman of the parish put an advertisement in the paper beg he to come back , and say that he should not lose his situation or his friend . but Catherick have too much pride and spirit , as some people say too much feeling , as I think , sir to face his neighbour again , and try to live down the memory of his disgrace . my husband hear from he when he have leave England , and hear a second time , when he be settle and do well in America . he be alive there now , as far as I know , but none of we in the old country his wicked wife least of all be ever likely to set eye on he again . " 

 " what become of Sir Percival ? " I inquire . " do he stay in the neighbourhood ? " 

 " not he , sir . the place be too hot to hold he . he be hear at high word with Mrs. Catherick the same night when the scandal break out , and the next morning he take himself off . " 

 " and Mrs. Catherick ? surely she never remain in the village among the people who know of her disgrace ? " 

 " she do , sir . she be hard enough and heartless enough to set the opinion of all her neighbour at flat defiance . she declare to everybody , from the clergyman downward , that she be the victim of a dreadful mistake , and that all the scandal - monger in the place should not drive she out of it , as if she be a guilty woman . all through my time she live at Old Welmingham , and after my time , when the new town be build , and the respectable neighbour begin move to it , she move too , as if she be determined to live among they and scandalise they to the very last . there she be now , and there she will stop , in defiance of the good of they , to her die day . " 

 " but how have she live through all these year ? " I ask . " be her husband able and willing to help she ? " 

 " both able and willing , sir , " say Mrs. Clements . " in the second letter he write to my good man , he say she have bear his name , and live in his home , and , wicked as she be , she must not starve like a beggar in the street . he could afford to make she some small allowance , and she might draw for it quarterly at a place in London . " 

 " do she accept the allowance ? " 

 " not a farthing of it , sir . she say she would never be beholden to Catherick for bit or drop , if she live to be a hundred . and she have keep her word ever since . when my poor dear husband die , and leave all to I , Catherick 's letter be put in my possession with the other thing , and I tell she to let I know if she be ever in want . ' I will let all England know I be in want , ' she say , ' before I tell Catherick , or any friend of Catherick 's . take that for your answer , and give it to HIM for an answer , if he ever write again . ' " 

 " do you suppose that she have money of her own ? " 

 " very little , if any , sir . it be say , and say truly , I be afraid , that her mean of living come privately from Sir Percival Glyde . " 


 after that last reply I wait a little , to reconsider what I have hear . if I unreservedly accept the story so far , it be now plain that no approach , direct or indirect , to the Secret have yet be reveal to I , and that the pursuit of my object have end again in leave I face to face with the most palpable and the most disheartening failure . 

 but there be one point in the narrative which make I doubt the propriety of accept it unreservedly , and which suggest the idea of something hide below the surface . 

 I could not account to myself for the circumstance of the clerk 's guilty wife voluntarily live out all her after - existence on the scene of her disgrace . the woman 's own report statement that she have take this strange course as a practical assertion of her innocence do not satisfy I . it seem , to my mind , more natural and more probable to assume that she be not so completely a free agent in this matter as she have herself assert . in that case , who be the likeli person to possess the power of compel she to remain at Welmingham ? the person unquestionably from whom she derive the mean of living . she have refuse assistance from her husband , she have no adequate resource of her own , she be a friendless , degraded woman from what source should she derive help but from the source at which report point Sir Percival Glyde ? 

 reasoning on these assumption , and always bear in mind the one certain fact to guide I , that Mrs. Catherick be in possession of the Secret , I easily understand that it be Sir Percival 's interest to keep she at Welmingham , because her character in that place be certain to isolate she from all communication with female neighbour , and to allow she no opportunity of talk incautiously in moment of free intercourse with inquisitive bosom friend . but what be the mystery to be conceal ? not Sir Percival 's infamous connection with Mrs. Catherick 's disgrace , for the neighbour be the very people who know of it not the suspicion that he be Anne 's father , for Welmingham be the place in which that suspicion must inevitably exist . if I accept the guilty appearance describe to I as unreservedly as other have accept they , if I draw from they the same superficial conclusion which Mr. Catherick and all his neighbour have draw , where be the suggestion , in all that I have hear , of a dangerous secret between Sir Percival and Mrs. Catherick , which have be keep hide from that time to this ? 

 and yet , in those steal meeting , in those familiar whispering between the clerk 's wife and " the gentleman in mourning , " the clue to discovery exist beyond a doubt . 

 be it possible that appearance in this case have point one way while the truth lie all the while unsuspected in another direction ? could Mrs. Catherick 's assertion , that she be the victim of a dreadful mistake , by any possibility be true ? or , assume it to be false , could the conclusion which associate Sir Percival with her guilt have be found in some inconceivable error ? have Sir Percival , by any chance , court the suspicion that be wrong for the sake of divert from himself some other suspicion that be right ? here if I could find it here be the approach to the secret , hide deep under the surface of the apparently unpromising story which I have just hear . 


 my next question be now direct to the one object of ascertain whether Mr. Catherick have or have not arrive truly at the conviction of his wife 's misconduct . the answer I receive from Mrs. Clements leave I in no doubt whatever on that point . Mrs. Catherick have , on the clear evidence , compromise her reputation , while a single woman , with some person unknown , and have marry to save her character . it have be positively ascertain , by calculation of time and place into which I need not enter particularly , that the daughter who bear her husband 's name be not her husband 's child . 

 the next object of inquiry , whether it be equally certain that Sir Percival must have be the father of Anne , be beset by far great difficulty . I be in no position to try the probability on one side or on the other in this instance by any well test than the test of personal resemblance . 

 " I suppose you often see Sir Percival when he be in your village ? " I say . 

 " yes , sir , very often , " reply Mrs. Clements . 

 " do you ever observe that Anne be like he ? " 

 " she be not at all like he , sir . " 

 " be she like her mother , then ? " 

 " not like her mother either , sir . Mrs. Catherick be dark , and full in the face . " 

 not like her mother and not like she   suppose   father . I know that the test by personal resemblance be not to be implicitly trust , but , on the other hand , it be not to be altogether reject on that account . be it possible to strengthen the evidence by discover any conclusive fact in relation to the life of Mrs. Catherick and Sir Percival before they either of they appear at Old Welmingham ? when I ask my next question I put they with this view . 

 " when Sir Percival first arrive in your neighbourhood , " I say , " do you hear where he have come from last ? " 

 " no , sir . some say from Blackwater Park , and some say from Scotland but nobody know . " 

 " be Mrs. Catherick live in service at Varneck Hall immediately before her marriage ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " and have she be long in her place ? " 

 " three or four year , sir ; I be not quite certain which . " 

 " do you ever hear the name of the gentleman to whom Varneck Hall belong at that time ? " 

 " yes , sir . his name be Major Donthorne . " 

 " do Mr. Catherick , or do any one else you know , ever hear that Sir Percival be a friend of Major Donthorne 's , or ever see Sir Percival in the neighbourhood of Varneck Hall ? " 

 " Catherick never do , sir , that I can remember nor any one else either , that I know of . " 

 I note down Major Donthorne 's name and address , on the chance that he might still be alive , and that it might be useful at some future time to apply to he . meanwhile , the impression on my mind be now decidedly adverse to the opinion that Sir Percival be Anne 's father , and decidedly favourable to the conclusion that the secret of his steal interview with Mrs. Catherick be entirely unconnected with the disgrace which the woman have inflict on her husband 's good name . I could think of no further inquiry which I might make to strengthen this impression I could only encourage Mrs. Clements to speak next of Anne 's early day , and watch for any chance - suggestion which might in this way offer itself to I . 

 " I have not hear yet , " I say , " how the poor child , bear in all this sin and misery , come to be trust , Mrs. Clements , to your care . " 

 " there be nobody else , sir , to take the little helpless creature in hand , " reply Mrs. Clements . " the wicked mother seem to hate it as if the poor baby be in fault ! from the day it be bear . my heart be heavy for the child , and I make the offer to bring it up as tenderly as if it be my own . " 

 " do Anne remain entirely under your care from that time ? " 

 " not quite entirely , sir . Mrs. Catherick have her whim and fancy about it at time , and use now and then to lay claim to the child , as if she want to spite I for bring it up . but these fit of hers never last for long . poor little Anne be always return to I , and be always glad to get back though she lead but a gloomy life in my house , have no playmate , like other child , to brighten she up . our long separation be when her mother take she to Limmeridge . just at that time I lose my husband , and I feel it be as well , in that miserable affliction , that Anne should not be in the house . she be between ten and eleven year old then , slow at her lesson , poor soul , and not so cheerful as other child but as pretty a little girl to look at as you would wish to see . I wait at home till her mother bring she back , and then I make the offer to take she with I to London the truth be , sir , that I could not find it in my heart to stop at Old Welmingham after my husband 's death , the place be so changed and so dismal to I . " 

 " and do Mrs. Catherick consent to your proposal ? " 

 " no , sir . she come back from the north hard and bitterer than ever . folk do say that she have be oblige to ask Sir Percival 's leave to go , to begin with ; and that she only go to nurse her die sister at Limmeridge because the poor woman be report to have save money the truth be that she hardly leave enough to bury she . these thing may have sour Mrs. Catherick likely enough , but however that may be , she would not   hear of my take the child away . she seem to like distress we both by part we . all I could do be to give Anne my direction , and to tell she privately , if she be ever in trouble , to come to I . but year pass before she be free to come . I never see she again , poor soul , till the night she escape from the mad - house . " 

 " you know , Mrs. Clements , why Sir Percival Glyde shut she up ? " 

 " I only know what Anne herself tell I , sir . the poor thing use to ramble and wander about it sadly . she say her mother have get some secret of Sir Percival 's to keep , and have let it out to she long after I leave Hampshire and when Sir Percival find she know it , he shut she up . but she never could say what it be when I ask she . all she could tell I be , that her mother might be the ruin and destruction of Sir Percival if she choose . Mrs. Catherick may have let out just as much as that , and no more . I be next to certain I should have hear the whole truth from Anne , if she have really know it as she pretend to do , and as she very likely fancy she do , poor soul . " 

 this idea have more than once occur to my own mind . I have already tell Marian that I doubt whether Laura be really on the point of make any important discovery when she and Anne Catherick be disturb by Count Fosco at the boat - house . it be perfectly in character with Anne 's mental affliction that she should assume an absolute knowledge of the secret on no well ground than vague suspicion , derive from hint which her mother have incautiously let drop in her presence . Sir Percival 's guilty distrust would , in that case , infallibly inspire he with the false idea that Anne know all from her mother , just as it have afterwards fix in his mind the equally false suspicion that his wife know all from Anne . 

 the time be pass , the morning be wear away . it be doubtful , if I stay long , whether I should hear anything more from Mrs. Clements that would be at all useful to my purpose . I have already discover those local and family particular , in relation to Mrs. Catherick , of which I have be in search , and I have arrive at certain conclusion , entirely new to I , which might immensely assist in direct the course of my future proceeding . I rise to take my leave , and to thank Mrs. Clements for the friendly readiness she have show in afford I information . 

 " I be afraid you must have think I very inquisitive , " I say . " I have trouble you with more question than many people would have care to answer . " 

 " you be heartily welcome , sir , to anything I can tell you , " answer Mrs. Clements . she stop and look at I wistfully . " but I do wish , " say the poor woman , " you could have tell I a little more about Anne , sir . I think I see something in your face when you come in which look as if you could . you can not   think how hard it be not even to know whether she be live or dead . I could bear it well if I be only certain . you say you never expect we should see she alive again . do you know , sir do you know for truth that it have please God to take she ? " 

 I be not proof against this appeal , it would have be unspeakably mean and cruel of I if I have resist it . 

 " I be afraid there be no doubt of the truth , " I answer gently ; " I have the certainty in my own mind that her trouble in this world be over . " 

 the poor woman drop into her chair and hide her face from I . " oh , sir , " she say , " how do you know it ? who can have tell you ? " 

 " no one have tell I , Mrs. Clements . but I have reason for feel sure of it reason which I promise you shall know as soon as I can safely explain they . I be certain she be not neglect in her last moment I be certain the heart complaint from which she suffer so sadly be the true cause of her death . you shall feel as sure of this as I do , soon you shall know , before long , that she be bury in a quiet country churchyard in a pretty , peaceful place , which you might have choose for her yourself . " 

 " dead ! " say Mrs. Clements , " dead so young , and I be leave to hear it ! I make her first short frock . I teach she to walk . the first time she ever say Mother she say it to I and now I be leave and Anne be take ! do you say , sir , " say the poor woman , remove the handkerchief from her face , and look up at I for the first time , " do you say that she have be nicely bury ? be it the sort of funeral she might have have if she have really be my own child ? " 

 I assure she that it be . she seem to take an inexplicable pride in my answer to find a comfort in it which no other and high consideration could afford . " it would have break my heart , " she say simply , " if Anne have not be nicely bury but how do you know it , sir ? who tell you ? " I once more entreat she to wait until I could speak to she unreservedly . " you be sure to see I again , " I say , " for I have a favour to ask when you be a little more composed perhaps in a day or two . " 

 " do not   keep it wait , sir , on my account , " say Mrs. Clements . " never mind my cry if I can be of use . if you have anything on your mind to say to I , sir , please to say it now . " 

 " I only wish to ask you one last question , " I say . " I only want to know Mrs. Catherick 's address at Welmingham . " 

 my request so startle Mrs. Clements , that , for the moment , even the tiding of Anne 's death seem to be drive from her mind . her tear suddenly cease to flow , and she sit look at I in blank amazement . 

 " for the Lord 's sake , sir ! " she say , " what do you want with Mrs. Catherick ! " 

 " I want this , Mrs. Clements , " I reply , " I want to know the secret of those private meeting of hers with Sir Percival Glyde . there be something more in what you have tell I of that woman 's past conduct , and of that man 's past relation with she , than you or any of your neighbour ever suspect . there be a secret we none of we know between those two , and I be go to Mrs. Catherick with the resolution to find it out . " 

 " think twice about it , sir ! " say Mrs. Clements , rise in her earnestness and lay her hand on my arm . " she be an awful woman you do not   know she as I do . think twice about it . " 

 " I be sure your warning be kindly mean , Mrs. Clements . but I be determined to see the woman , whatever come of it . " 

 Mrs. Clements look I anxiously in the face . 

 " I see your mind be make up , sir , " she say . " I will give you the address . " 

 I write it down in my pocket - book and then take her hand to say farewell . 

 " you shall hear from I soon , " I say ; " you shall know all that I have promise to tell you . " 

 Mrs. Clements sigh and shake her head doubtfully . 

 " an old woman 's advice be sometimes worth take , sir , " she say . " think twice before you go to Welmingham . " 



 VIII 

 when I reach home again after my interview with Mrs. Clements , I be strike by the appearance of a change in Laura . 

 the unvarying gentleness and patience which long misfortune have try so cruelly and have never conquer yet , seem now to have suddenly fail she . insensible to all Marian 's attempt to soothe and amuse she , she sit , with her neglect drawing push away on the table , her eye resolutely cast down , her finger twin and untwine themselves restlessly in her lap . Marian rise when I come in , with a silent distress in her face , wait for a moment to see if Laura would look up at my approach , whisper to I , " try if you can rouse she , " and leave the room . 

 I sit down in the vacant chair gently unclasp the poor , worn , restless finger , and take both her hand in mine . 

 " what be you think of , Laura ? tell I , my darling try and tell I what it be . " 

 she struggle with herself , and raise her eye to mine . " I can not   feel happy , " she say , " I can not   help think " she stop , bent forward a little , and lay her head on my shoulder , with a terrible mute helplessness that strike I to the heart . 

 " try to tell I , " I repeat gently ; " try to tell I why you be not happy . " 

 " I be so useless I be such a burden on both of you , " she answer , with a weary , hopeless sigh . " you work and get money , Walter , and Marian help you . why be there nothing I can do ? you will end in like marian well than you like I you will , because I be so helpless ! oh , do not , do not , do not   treat I like a child ! " 

 I raise her head , and smooth away the tangled hair that fall over her face , and kiss she my poor , faded flower ! my lost , afflict sister ! " you shall help we , Laura , " I say , " you shall begin , my darling , to - day . " 

 she look at I with a feverish eagerness , with a breathless interest , that make I tremble for the new life of hope which I have call into be by those few word . 

 I rise , and set her drawing material in order , and place they near she again . 

 " you know that I work and get money by draw , " I say . " now you have take such pain , now you be so much improve , you shall begin to work and get money too . try to finish this little sketch as nicely and prettily as you can . when it be do I will take it away with I , and the same person will buy it who buy all that I do . you shall keep your own earning in your own purse , and Marian shall come to you to help we , as often as she come to I . think how useful you be go to make yourself to both of we , and you will soon be as happy , Laura , as the day be long . " 

 her face grow eager , and brighten into a smile . in the moment while it last , in the moment when she again take up the pencil that have be lay aside , she almost look like the Laura of past day . 

 I have rightly interpret the first sign of a new growth and strength in her mind , unconsciously express themselves in the notice she have take of the occupation which fill her sister 's life and mine . marian   when I tell she what have pass   saw , as I see , that she be long to assume her own little position of importance , to raise herself in her own estimation and in ours and , from that day , we tenderly help the new ambition which give promise of the hopeful , happy future , that might now not be far off . her drawing , as she finish they , or try to finish they , be place in my hand . Marian take they from I and hide they carefully , and I set aside a little weekly tribute from my earning , to be offer to she as the price pay by stranger for the poor , faint , valueless sketch , of which I be the only purchaser . it be hard sometimes to maintain our innocent deception , when she proudly bring out her purse to contribute her share towards the expense , and wonder with serious interest , whether I or she have earn the most that week . I have all those hide drawing in my possession still they be my treasure beyond price the dear remembrance that I love to keep alive the friend in past adversity that my heart will never part from , my tenderness never forget . 

 be I trifle , here , with the necessity of my task ? be I look forward to the happy time which my narrative have not yet reach ? yes . back again back to the day of doubt and dread , when the spirit within I struggle hard for its life , in the icy stillness of perpetual suspense . I have pause and rest for a while on my forward course . it be not , perhaps , time waste , if the friend who read these page have pause and rest too . 


 I take the first opportunity I could find of speak to Marian in private , and of communicate to she the result of the inquiry which I have make that morning . she seem to share the opinion on the subject of my propose journey to Welmingham , which Mrs. Clements have already express to I . 

 " surely , Walter , " she say , " you hardly know enough yet to give you any hope of claim Mrs. Catherick 's confidence ? be it wise to proceed to these extremity , before you have really exhaust all safe and simple mean of attain your object ? when you tell I that Sir Percival and the Count be the only two people in existence who know the exact date of Laura 's journey , you forget , and I forget , that there be a third person who must surely know it I mean Mrs. Rubelle . would it not be far easy , and far less dangerous , to insist on a confession from she , than to force it from Sir Percival ? " 

 " it might be easy , " I reply , " but we be not aware of the full extent of Mrs. Rubelle 's connivance and interest in the conspiracy , and we be therefore not certain that the date have be impress on her mind , as it have be assuredly impressed on the mind of Sir Percival and the Count . it be too late , now , to waste the time on Mrs. Rubelle , which may be all - important to the discovery of the one assailable point in Sir Percival 's life . be you think a little too seriously , Marian , of the risk I may run in return to Hampshire ? be you begin to doubt whether Sir Percival Glyde may not in the end be more than a match for I ? " 

 " he will not be more than your match , " she reply decidedly , " because he will not be help in resist you by the impenetrable wickedness of the Count . " 

 " what have lead you to that conclusion ? " I reply , in some surprise . 

 " my own knowledge of Sir Percival 's obstinacy and impatience of the Count 's control , " she answer . " I believe he will insist on meet you single - handed just as he insist at first on act for himself at Blackwater Park . the time for suspect the Count 's interference will be the time when you have Sir Percival at your mercy . his own interest will then be directly threaten , and he will act , Walter , to terrible purpose in his own defence . " 

 " we may deprive he of his weapon beforehand , " I say . " some of the particular I have hear from Mrs. Clements may yet be turn to account against he , and other mean of strengthen the case may be at our disposal . there be passage in Mrs. Michelson 's narrative which show that the Count find it necessary to place himself in communication with Mr. Fairlie , and there may be circumstance which compromise he in that proceeding . while I be away , Marian , write to Mr. Fairlie and say that you want an answer describe exactly what pass between the Count and himself , and inform you also of any particular that may have come to his knowledge at the same time in connection with his niece . tell he that the statement you request will , soon or later , be insist on , if he show any reluctance to furnish you with it of his own accord . " 

 " the letter shall be write , Walter . but be you really determined to go to Welmingham ? " 

 " absolutely determined . I will devote the next two day to earn what we want for the week to come , and on the third day I go to Hampshire . " 

 when the third day come I be ready for my journey . 

 as it be possible that I might be absent for some little time , I arrange with Marian that we be to correspond every day of course address each other by assume name , for caution 's sake . as long as I hear from she regularly , I should assume that nothing be wrong . but if the morning come and bring I no letter , my return to London would take place , as a matter of course , by the first train . I contrive to reconcile Laura to my departure by tell she that I be go to the country to find new purchaser for her drawing and for mine , and I leave she occupy and happy . Marian follow I downstairs to the street door . 

 " remember what anxious heart you leave here , " she whisper , as we stand together in the passage . " remember all the hope that hang on your safe return . if strange thing happen to you on this journey if you and Sir Percival meet " 

 " what make you think we shall meet ? " I ask . 

 " I do not   know I have fear and fancy that I can not account for . Laugh at they , Walter , if you like but , for God 's sake , keep your temper if you come in contact with that man ! " 

 " never fear , Marian ! I answer for my self - control . " 

 with those word we part . 

 I walk briskly to the station . there be a glow of hope in I . there be a grow conviction in my mind that my journey this time would not be take in vain . it be a fine , clear , cold morning . my nerve be firmly string , and I feel all the strength of my resolution stir in I vigorously from head to foot . 

 as I cross the railway platform , and look right and leave among the people congregate on it , to search for any face among they that I know , the doubt occur to I whether it might not have be to my advantage if I have adopt a disguise before set out for Hampshire . but there be something so repellent to I in the idea something so meanly like the common herd of spy and informer in the mere act of adopt a disguise that I dismiss the question from consideration almost as soon as it have rise in my mind . even as a mere matter of expediency the proceeding be doubtful in the extreme . if I try the experiment at home the landlord of the house would soon or later discover I , and would have his suspicion arouse immediately . if I try it away from home the same person might see I , by the commonest accident , with the disguise and without it , and I should in that way be invite the notice and distrust which it be my most pressing interest to avoid . in my own character I have act thus far and in my own character I be resolve to continue to the end . 

 the train leave I at Welmingham early in the afternoon . 


 be there any wilderness of sand in the desert of Arabia , be there any prospect of desolation among the ruin of Palestine , which can rival the repel effect on the eye , and the depressing influence on the mind , of an english country town in the first stage of its existence , and in the transition state of its prosperity ? I ask myself that question as I pass through the clean desolation , the neat ugliness , the prim torpor of the street of Welmingham . and the tradesman who star after I from their lonely shop the tree that droop helpless in their arid exile of unfinished crescent and square the dead house - carcass that wait in vain for the vivifying human element to animate they with the breath of life every creature that I see , every object that I pass , seem to answer with one accord : the desert of Arabia be innocent of our civilised desolation the ruin of Palestine be incapable of our modern gloom ! 

 I inquire my way to the quarter of the town in which Mrs. Catherick live , and on reach it find myself in a square of small house , one story high . there be a bare little plot of grass in the middle , protect by a cheap wire fence . an elderly nursemaid and two child be stand in a corner of the enclosure , look at a lean goat tethered to the grass . two foot - passenger be talk together on one side of the pavement before the house , and an idle little boy be lead an idle little dog along by a string on the other . I hear the dull tinkling of a piano at a distance , accompany by the intermittent knocking of a hammer nearer at hand . these be all the sight and sound of life that encounter I when I enter the square . 

 I walk at once to the door of Number Thirteen the number of Mrs. Catherick 's house and knock , without wait to consider beforehand how I might well present myself when I get in . the first necessity be to see Mrs. Catherick . I could then judge , from my own observation , of the safe and easy manner of approach the object of my visit . 

 the door be open by a melancholy middle - aged woman servant . I give she my card , and ask if I could see Mrs. Catherick . the card be take into the front parlour , and the servant return with a message request I to mention what my business be . 

 " say , if you please , that my business relate to Mrs. Catherick 's daughter , " I reply . this be the good pretext I could think of , on the spur of the moment , to account for my visit . 

 the servant again retire to the parlour , again return , and this time beg I , with a look of gloomy amazement , to walk in . 

 I enter a little room , with a flaring paper of the large pattern on the wall . chair , table , cheffonier , and sofa , all gleam with the glutinous brightness of cheap upholstery . on the large table , in the middle of the room , stand a smart Bible , place exactly in the centre on a red and yellow woollen mat and at the side of the table near to the window , with a little knitting - basket on her lap , and a wheezing , blear - eyed old spaniel crouch at her foot , there sit an elderly woman , wear a black net cap and a black silk gown , and have slate - colour mitten on her hand . her iron - grey hair hang in heavy band on either side of her face her dark eye look straight forward , with a hard , defiant , implacable stare . she have full square cheek , a long , firm chin , and thick , sensual , colourless lip . her figure be stout and sturdy , and her manner aggressively self - possess . this be Mrs. Catherick . 

 " you have come to speak to I about my daughter , " she say , before I could utter a word on my side . " be so good as to mention what you have to say . " 

 the tone of her voice be as hard , as defiant , as implacable as the expression of her eye . she point to a chair , and look I all over attentively , from head to foot , as I sit down in it . I see that my only chance with this woman be to speak to she in her own tone , and to meet she , at the outset of our interview , on her own ground . 

 " you be aware , " I say , " that your daughter have be lose ? " 

 " I be perfectly aware of it . " 

 " have you feel any apprehension that the misfortune of her loss might be follow by the misfortune of her death ? " 

 " yes . have you come here to tell I she be dead ? " 

 " I have . " 

 " why ? " 

 she put that extraordinary question without the slight change in her voice , her face , or her manner . she could not have appear more perfectly unconcerned if I have tell she of the death of the goat in the enclosure outside . 

 " why ? " I repeat . " do you ask why I come here to tell you of your daughter 's death ? " 

 " yes . what interest have you in I , or in she ? how do you come to know anything about my daughter ? " 

 " in this way . I meet she on the night when she escape from the Asylum , and I assist she in reach a place of safety . " 

 " you do very wrong . " 

 " I be sorry to hear her mother say so . " 

 " her mother do say so . how do you know she be dead ? " 

 " I be not at liberty to say how I know it but I do know it . " 

 " be you at liberty to say how you find out my address ? " 

 " certainly . I get your address from Mrs. Clements . " 

 " Mrs. Clements be a foolish woman . do she tell you to come here ? " 

 " she do not . " 

 " then , I ask you again , why do you come ? " 

 as she be determined to have her answer , I give it to she in the plain possible form . 

 " I come , " I say , " because I think Anne Catherick 's mother might have some natural interest in know whether she be alive or dead . " 

 " just so , " say Mrs. Catherick , with additional self - possession . " have you no other motive ? " 

 I hesitate . the right answer to that question be not easy to find at a moment 's notice . 

 " if you have no other motive , " she go on , deliberately take off her slate - colour mitten , and roll they up , " I have only to thank you for your visit , and to say that I will not detain you here any long . your information would be more satisfactory if you be willing to explain how you become possessed of it . however , it justify I , I suppose , in go into mourning . there be not much alteration necessary in my dress , as you see . when I have change my mitten , I shall be all in black . " 

 she search in the pocket of her gown , draw out a pair of black lace mitten , put they on with the stony and steady composure , and then quietly cross her hand in her lap . 

 " I wish you good morning , " she say . 

 the cool contempt of her manner irritate I into directly avow that the purpose of my visit have not be answer yet . 

 " I have another motive in come here , " I say . 

 " ah ! I think so , " remark Mrs. Catherick . 

 " your daughter 's death " 

 " what do she die of ? " 

 " of disease of the heart . " 

 " yes . go on . " 

 " your daughter 's death have be make the pretext for inflict serious injury on a person who be very dear to I . two man have be concern , to my certain knowledge , in do that wrong . one of they be Sir Percival Glyde . " 

 " indeed ! " 

 I look attentively to see if she flinch at the sudden mention of that name . not a muscle of she stir the hard , defiant , implacable stare in her eye never waver for an instant . 

 " you may wonder , " I go on , " how the event of your daughter 's death can have be make the mean of inflict injury on another person . " 

 " no , " say Mrs. Catherick ; " I do not   wonder at all . this appear to be your affair . you be interested in my affair . I be not interested in your . " 

 " you may ask , then , " I persist , " why I mention the matter in your presence . " 

 " yes , I do ask that . " 

 " I mention it because I be determined to bring Sir Percival Glyde to account for the wickedness he have commit . " 

 " what have I to do with your determination ? " 

 " you shall hear . there be certain event in Sir Percival 's past life which it be necessary for my purpose to be fully acquaint with . you know they and for that reason I come to you . " 

 " what event do you mean ? " 

 " event that occur at Old Welmingham when your husband be parish - clerk at that place , and before the time when your daughter be bear . " 

 I have reach the woman at last through the barrier of impenetrable reserve that she have try to set up between we . I see her temper smoulder in her eye as plainly as I see her hand grow restless , then unclasp themselves , and begin mechanically smooth her dress over her knee . 

 " what do you know of those event ? " she ask . 

 " all that Mrs. Clements could tell I , " I answer . 

 there be a momentary flush on her firm square face , a momentary stillness in her restless hand , which seem to betoken a come outburst of anger that might throw she off her guard . but no she master the rise irritation , lean back in her chair , cross her arm on her broad bosom , and with a smile of grim sarcasm on her thick lip , look at I as steadily as ever . 

 " ah ! I begin to understand it all now , " she say , her tame and disciplined anger only express itself in the elaborate mockery of her tone and manner . " you have get a grudge of your own against Sir Percival Glyde , and I must help you to wreak it . I must tell you this , that , and the other about Sir Percival and myself , must I ? yes , indeed ? you have be pry into my private affair . you think you have find a lost woman to deal with , who live here on sufferance , and who will do anything you ask for fear you may injure she in the opinion of the town' - people . I see through you and your precious speculation I do ! and it amuse I . ha ! ha ! " 

 she stop for a moment , her arm tighten over her bosom , and she laugh to herself a hard , harsh , angry laugh . 

 " you do not   know how I have live in this place , and what I have do in this place , Mr. What's - your - name , " she go on . " I will tell you , before I ring the bell and have you show out . I come here a wronged woman I come here rob of my character and determine to claim it back . I have   be year and year about it and I have claim it back . I have match the respectable people fairly and openly on their own ground . if they say anything against I now they must say it in secret they can not   say it , they dare not   say it , openly . I stand high enough in this town to be out of your reach . the CLERGYMAN BOWS to I . aha ! you do not   bargain for that when you come here . go to the church and inquire about I you will find Mrs. Catherick have she sit like the rest of they , and pay the rent on the day it be due . go to the town - hall . there be a petition lie there a petition of the respectable inhabitant against allow a circus to come and perform here and corrupt our moral yes ! our moral . I sign that petition this morning . go to the bookseller 's shop . the clergyman 's Wednesday evening Lectures on Justification by Faith be publish there by subscription I be down on the list . the doctor 's wife only put a shilling in the plate at our last charity sermon I put half - a - crown . Mr. Churchwarden Soward hold the plate , and bow to I . ten year ago he tell Pigrum the chemist I ought to be whip out of the town at the cart 's tail . be your mother alive ? have she get a well Bible on her table than I have get on mine ? do she stand well with her trade - people than I do with mine ? have she always live within her income ? I have always live within mine . ah ! there be the clergyman come along the square . look , Mr. What's - your - name look , if you please ! " 

 she start up with the activity of a young woman , go to the window , wait till the clergyman pass , and bow to he solemnly . the clergyman ceremoniously raise his hat , and walk on . Mrs. Catherick return to her chair , and look at I with a grimmer sarcasm than ever . 

 " there ! " she say . " what do you think of that for a woman with a lost character ? how do your speculation look now ? " 

 the singular manner in which she have choose to assert herself , the extraordinary practical vindication of her position in the town which she have just offer , have so perplex I that I listen to she in silent surprise . I be not the less resolve , however , to make another effort to throw she off her guard . if the woman 's fierce temper once get beyond her control , and once flame out on I , she might yet say the word which would put the clue in my hand . 

 " how do your speculation look now ? " she repeat . 

 " exactly as it look when I first come in , " I answer . " I do not   doubt the position you have gain in the town , and I do not   wish to assail it even if I could . I come here because Sir Percival Glyde be , to my certain knowledge , your enemy , as well as mine . if I have a grudge against he , you have a grudge against he too . you may deny it if you like , you may distrust I as much as you please , you may be as angry as you will but , of all the woman in England , you , if you have any sense of injury , be the woman who ought to help I to crush that man . " 

 " crush he for yourself , " she say ; " then come back here , and see what I say to you . " 

 she speak those word as she have not speak yet , quickly , fiercely , vindictively . I have stir in its lair the serpent - hatred of year , but only for a moment . like a lurking reptile it leap up at I as she eagerly bent forward towards the place in which I be sit . like a lurking reptile it drop out of sight again as she instantly resume her former position in the chair . 

 " you will not   trust I ? " I say . 

 " no . " 

 " you be afraid ? " 

 " do I look as if I be ? " 

 " you be afraid of Sir Percival Glyde ? " 

 " be I ? " 

 her colour be rise , and her hand be at work again smooth her gown . I press the point far and far home , I go on without allow she a moment of delay . 

 " Sir Percival have a high position in the world , " I say ; " it would be no wonder if you be afraid of he . Sir Percival be a powerful man , a baronet , the possessor of a fine estate , the descendant of a great family " 

 she amaze I beyond expression by suddenly burst out laugh . 

 " yes , " she repeat , in tone of the bitter , steady contempt . " a baronet , the possessor of a fine estate , the descendant of a great family . yes , indeed ! a great family especially by the mother 's side . " 

 there be no time to reflect on the word that have just escape she , there be only time to feel that they be well worth think over the moment I leave the house . 

 " I be not here to dispute with you about family question , " I say . " I know nothing of Sir Percival 's mother " 

 " and you know as little of Sir Percival himself , " she interpose sharply . 

 " I advise you not to be too sure of that , " I rejoin . " I know some thing about he , and I suspect many more . " 

 " what do you suspect ? " 

 " I will tell you what I don't suspect . I don't suspect he of be Anne 's father . " 

 she start to her foot , and come close up to I with a look of fury . 

 " how dare you talk to I about Anne 's father ! how dare you say who be her father , or who be not ! " she break out , her face quiver , her voice tremble with passion . 

 " the secret between you and Sir Percival be not that secret , " I persist . " the mystery which darken Sir Percival 's life be not bear with your daughter 's birth , and have not die with your daughter 's death . " 

 she draw back a step . " go ! " she say , and point sternly to the door . 

 " there be no thought of the child in your heart or in his , " I go on , determined to press she back to her last defence . " there be no bond of guilty love between you and he when you hold those steal meeting , when your husband find you whisper together under the vestry of the church . " 

 her point hand instantly drop to her side , and the deep flush of anger fade from her face while I speak . I see the change pass over she I see that hard , firm , fearless , self - possess woman quail under a terror which her utmost resolution be not strong enough to resist when I say those five last word , " the vestry of the church . " 

 for a minute or more we stand look at each other in silence . I speak first . 

 " do you still refuse to trust I ? " I ask . 

 she could not call the colour that have leave it back to her face , but she have steady her voice , she have recover the defiant self - possession of her manner when she answer I . 

 " I do refuse , " she say . 

 " do you still tell I to go ? " 

 " yes . go and never come back . " 

 I walk to the door , wait a moment before I open it , and turn round to look at she again . 

 " I may have news to bring you of Sir Percival which you do not   expect , " I say , " and in that case I shall come back . " 

 " there be no news of Sir Percival that I do not   expect , except " 

 she stop , her pale face darken , and she steal back with a quiet , stealthy , cat - like step to her chair . 

 " except the news of his death , " she say , sit down again , with the mockery of a smile just hover on her cruel lip , and the furtive light of hatred lurk deep in her steady eye . 

 as I open the door of the room to go out , she look round at I quickly . the cruel smile slowly widen her lip she eye I , with a strange stealthy interest , from head to foot an unutterable expectation show itself wickedly all over her face . be she speculate , in the secrecy of her own heart , on my youth and strength , on the force of my sense of injury and the limit of my self - control , and be she consider the length to which they might carry I , if Sir Percival and I ever chance to meet ? the bare doubt that it might be so drive I from her presence , and silence even the common form of farewell on my lip . without a word more , on my side or on her , I leave the room . 

 as I open the outer door , I see the same clergyman who have already pass the house once , about to pass it again , on his way back through the square . I wait on the door - step to let he go by , and look round , as I do so , at the parlour window . 

 Mrs. Catherick have hear his footstep approach , in the silence of that lonely place , and she be on her foot at the window again , wait for he . not all the strength of all the terrible passion I have rouse in that woman 's heart , could loosen her desperate hold on the one fragment of social consideration which year of resolute effort have just drag within her grasp . there she be again , not a minute after I have leave she , place purposely in a position which make it a matter of common courtesy on the part of the clergyman to bow to she for a second time . he raise his hat once more . I see the hard ghastly face behind the window soften , and light up with gratified pride I see the head with the grim black cap bend ceremoniously in return . the clergyman have bow to she , and in my presence , twice in one day ! 



 IX 

 I leave the house , feel that Mrs. Catherick have help I a step forward , in spite of herself . before I have reach the turning which lead out of the square , my attention be suddenly arouse by the sound of a closing door behind I . 

 I look round , and see an undersized man in black on the door - step of a house , which , as well as I could judge , stand next to Mrs. Catherick 's place of abode next to it , on the side near to I . the man do not hesitate a moment about the direction he should take . he advance rapidly towards the turning at which I have stop . I recognise he as the lawyer 's clerk , who have precede I in my visit to Blackwater Park , and who have try to pick a quarrel with I , when I ask he if I could see the house . 

 I wait where I be , to ascertain whether his object be to come to close quarter and speak on this occasion . to my surprise he pass on rapidly , without say a word , without even look up in my face as he go by . this be such a complete inversion of the course of proceeding which I have every reason to expect on his part , that my curiosity , or rather my suspicion , be arouse , and I determine on my side to keep he cautiously in view , and to discover what the business might be in which he be now employ . without care whether he see I or not , I walk after he . he never look back , and he lead I straight through the street to the railway station . 

 the train be on the point of starting , and two or three passenger who be late be cluster round the small opening through which the ticket be issue . I join they , and distinctly hear the lawyer 's clerk demand a ticket for the Blackwater station . I satisfy myself that he have actually leave by the train before I come away . 

 there be only one interpretation that I could place on what I have just see and hear . I have unquestionably observe the man leave a house which closely adjoin Mrs. Catherick 's residence . he have be probably place there , by Sir Percival 's direction , as a lodger , in anticipation of my inquiry lead I , soon or later , to communicate with Mrs. Catherick . he have doubtless see I go in and come out , and he have hurry away by the first train to make his report at Blackwater Park , to which place Sir Percival would naturally betake himself   know what he evidently know of my movement , in order to be ready on the spot , if I return to Hampshire . before many day be over , there seem every likelihood now that he and I might meet . 

 whatever result event might be destine to produce , I resolve to pursue my own course , straight to the end in view , without stop or turn aside for Sir Percival or for any one . the great responsibility which weigh on I heavily in London the responsibility of so guide my slight action as to prevent they from lead accidentally to the discovery of Laura 's place of refuge be remove , now that I be in Hampshire . I could go and come as I please at Welmingham , and if I chance to fail in observe any necessary precaution , the immediate result , at least , would affect no one but myself . 

 when I leave the station the winter evening be begin to close in . there be little hope of continue my inquiry after dark to any useful purpose in a neighbourhood that be strange to I . accordingly , I make my way to the near hotel , and order my dinner and my bed . this do , I write to Marian , to tell she that I be safe and well , and that I have fair prospect of success . I have direct she , on leave home , to address the first letter she write to I   the letter I expect to receive the next morning   to " the Post - Office , Welmingham , " and I now beg she to send her second day 's letter to the same address . 

 I could easily receive it by write to the postmaster if I happen to be away from the town when it arrive . 

 the coffee - room of the hotel , as it grow late in the evening , become a perfect solitude . I be leave to reflect on what I have accomplish that afternoon as uninterruptedly as if the house have be my own . before I retire to rest I have attentively think over my extraordinary interview with Mrs. Catherick from begin to end , and have verify at my leisure the conclusion which I have hastily draw in the early part of the day . 

 the vestry of Old Welmingham church be the starting - point from which my mind slowly work its way back through all that I have hear Mrs. Catherick say , and through all I have see Mrs. Catherick do . 

 at the time when the neighbourhood of the vestry be first refer to in my presence by Mrs. Clements , I have think it the strange and most unaccountable of all place for Sir Percival to select for a clandestine meeting with the clerk 's wife . influence by this impression , and by no other , I have mention " the vestry of the church " before Mrs. Catherick on pure speculation it represent one of the minor peculiarity of the story which occur to I while I be speak . I be prepare for she answer I confusedly or angrily , but the blank terror that seize she when I say the word take I completely by surprise . I have long before associate Sir Percival 's secret with the concealment of a serious crime which Mrs. Catherick know of , but I have go no far than this . now the woman 's paroxysm of terror associate the crime , either directly or indirectly , with the vestry , and convince I that she have be more than the mere witness of it she be also the accomplice , beyond a doubt . 

 what have be the nature of the crime ? surely there be a contemptible side to it , as well as a dangerous side , or Mrs. Catherick would not have repeat my own word , refer to Sir Percival 's rank and power , with such marked disdain as she have certainly display . it be a contemptible crime then and a dangerous crime , and she have share in it , and it be associate with the vestry of the church . 

 the next consideration to be dispose of lead I a step far from this point . 

 Mrs. Catherick 's undisguised contempt for Sir Percival plainly extend to his mother as well . she have refer with the bitter sarcasm to the great family he have descend from " especially by the mother 's side . " what do this mean ? 

 there appear to be only two explanation of it . either his mother 's birth have be low , or his mother 's reputation be damage by some hide flaw with which Mrs. Catherick and Sir Percival be both privately acquaint ? I could only put the first explanation to the test by look at the register of her marriage , and so ascertain her maiden name and her parentage as a preliminary to further inquiry . 

 on the other hand , if the second case suppose be the true one , what have be the flaw in her reputation ? remember the account which Marian have give I of Sir Percival 's father and mother , and of the suspiciously unsocial seclude life they have both lead , I now ask myself whether it might not be possible that his mother have never be marry at all . here again the register might , by offer write evidence of the marriage , prove to I , at any rate , that this doubt have no foundation in truth . but where be the register to be find ? at this point I take up the conclusion which I have previously form , and the same mental process which have discover the locality of the conceal crime , now lodge the register also in the vestry of Old Welmingham church . 

 these be the result of my interview with Mrs. Catherick these be the various consideration , all steadily converge to one point , which decide the course of my proceeding on the next day . 


 the morning be cloudy and lower , but no rain fall . I leave my bag at the hotel to wait there till I call for it , and , after inquire the way , set forth on foot for Old Welmingham church . 

 it be a walk of rather more than two mile , the ground rise slowly all the way . 

 on the high point stand the church an ancient , weather - beat building , with heavy buttress at its side , and a clumsy square tower in front . the vestry at the back be build out from the church , and seem to be of the same age . round the building at interval appear the remain of the village which Mrs. Clements have describe to I as her husband 's place of abode in former year , and which the principal inhabitant have long since desert for the new town . some of the empty house have be dismantle to their outer wall , some have be leave to decay with time , and some be still inhabit by person evidently of the poor class . it be a dreary scene , and yet , in the bad aspect of its ruin , not so dreary as the modern town that I have just leave . here there be the brown , breezy sweep of surround field for the eye to repose on here the tree , leafless as they be , still vary the monotony of the prospect , and help the mind to look forward to summer - time and shade . 

 as I move away from the back of the church , and pass some of the dismantle cottage in search of a person who might direct I to the clerk , I see two man saunter out after I from behind a wall . the tall of the two a stout muscular man in the dress of a gamekeeper be a stranger to I . the other be one of the man who have follow I in London on the day when I leave Mr. Kyrle 's office . I have take particular notice of he at the time ; and I feel sure that I be not mistake in identify the fellow on this occasion . 

 neither he nor his companion attempt to speak to I , and both keep themselves at a respectful distance , but the motive of their presence in the neighbourhood of the church be plainly apparent . it be exactly as I have suppose Sir Percival be already prepare for I . my visit to Mrs. Catherick have be report to he the evening before , and those two man have be place on the look - out near the church in anticipation of my appearance at Old Welmingham . if I have want any further proof that my investigation have take the right direction at last , the plan now adopt for watch I would have supply it . 

 I walk on away from the church till I reach one of the inhabited house , with a patch of kitchen garden attach to it on which a labourer be at work . he direct I to the clerk 's abode , a cottage at some little distance off , stand by itself on the outskirt of the forsaken village . the clerk be indoor , and be just put on his greatcoat . he be a cheerful , familiar , loudly - talkative old man , with a very poor opinion   as I soon discover   of the place in which he live , and a happy sense of superiority to his neighbour in virtue of the great personal distinction of have once be in London . 

 " it be well you come so early , sir , " say the old man , when I have mention the object of my visit . " I should have be away in ten minute more . parish business , sir , and a goodish long trot before it be all do for a man at my age . but , bless you , I be strong on my leg still ! as long as a man do not   give at his leg , there be a deal of work leave in he . do not   you think so yourself , sir ? " 

 he take his key down while he be talk from a hook behind the fireplace , and lock his cottage door behind we . 

 " nobody at home to keep house for I , " say the clerk , with a cheerful sense of perfect freedom from all family encumbrance . " my wife 's in the churchyard there , and my child be all married . a wretched place this , be not   it , sir ? but the parish be a large one every man could not   get through the business as I do . it be learn do it , and I have   have my share , and a little more . I can talk the Queen 's English   God bless the Queen ! , and that be more than most of the people about here can do . you be from London , I suppose , sir ? I have   be in London a matter of five - and - twenty year ago . what be the news there now , if you please ? " 

 chatter on in this way , he lead I back to the vestry . I look about to see if the two spy be still in sight . they be not visible anywhere . after have discover my application to the clerk , they have probably conceal themselves where they could watch my next proceeding in perfect freedom . 

 the vestry door be of stout old oak , stud with strong nail , and the clerk put his large heavy key into the lock with the air of a man who know that he have a difficulty to encounter , and who be not quite certain of creditably conquer it . 

 " I be oblige to bring you this way , sir , " he say , " because the door from the vestry to the church be bolt on the vestry side . we might have get in through the church otherwise . this be a perverse lock , if ever there be one yet . it be big enough for a prison - door it be be hamper over and over again , and it ought to be change for a new one . I have   mention that to the churchwarden fifty time over at least he be always say , ' I will see about it ' and he never do see . ah , it be a sort of lose corner , this place . not like London be it , sir ? bless you , we be all asleep here ! we do not   march with the time . " 

 after some twisting and turning of the key , the heavy lock yield , and he open the door . 

 the vestry be large than I should have suppose it to be , judge from the outside only . it be a dim , mouldy , melancholy old room , with a low , rafter ceiling . round two side of it , the side near to the interior of the church , run heavy wooden press , worm - eat and gap with age . hooked to the inner corner of one of these press hang several surplice , all bulge out at their low end in an irreverent - look bundle of limp drapery . below the surplice , on the floor , stand three packing - case , with the lid half off , half on , and the straw profusely burst out of their crack and crevice in every direction . behind they , in a corner , be a litter of dusty paper , some large and roll up like architect ' plan , some loosely string together on file like bill or letter . the room have once be light by a small side window , but this have be bricke up , and a lantern skylight be now substitute for it . the atmosphere of the place be heavy and mouldy , be render additionally oppressive by the closing of the door which lead into the church . this door also be compose of solid oak , and be bolt at the top and bottom on the vestry side . 

 " we might be tidy , might not   we , sir ? " say the cheerful clerk ; " but when you be in a lost corner of a place like this , what be you to do ? why , look here now , just look at these packing - case . there they have   be , for a year or more , ready to go down to London there they be , litter the place , and there they will stop as long as the nail hold they together . I will tell you what , sir , as I say before , this be not London . we be all asleep here . bless you , we do not   march with the time ! " 

 " what be there in the packing - case ? " I ask . 

 " bit of old wood carving from the pulpit , and panel from the chancel , and image from the organ - loft , " say the clerk . " portrait of the twelve apostle in wood , and not a whole nose among them . all break , and worm - eat , and crumble to dust at the edge . as brittle as crockery , sir , and as old as the church , if not old . " 

 " and why be they go to London ? to be repair ? " 

 " that be it , sir , to be repair , and where they be past repair , to be copy in sound wood . but , bless you , the money fall short , and there they be , wait for new subscription , and nobody to subscribe . it be all do a year ago , sir . six gentleman din together about it , at the hotel in the new town . they make speech , and pass resolution , and put their name down , and print off thousand of prospectus . beautiful prospectus , sir , all flourish over with Gothic device in red ink , say it be a disgrace not to restore the church and repair the famous carving , and so on . there be the prospectus that could not   be distribute , and the architect 's plan and estimate , and the whole correspondence which set everybody at loggerhead and end in a dispute , all down together in that corner , behind the packing - case . the money dribble in a little at first but what can you expect out of London ? there be just enough , you know , to pack the broken carving , and get the estimate , and pay the printer 's bill , and after that there be not   a halfpenny leave . there the thing be , as I say before . we have nowhere else to put they nobody in the new town care about accommodate we we be in a lost corner and this be an untidy vestry and who be to help it ? that be what I want to know . " 

 my anxiety to examine the register do not dispose I to offer much encouragement to the old man 's talkativeness . I agree with he that nobody could help the untidiness of the vestry , and then suggest that we should proceed to our business without more delay . 

 " ay , ay , the marriage - register , to be sure , " say the clerk , take a little bunch of key from his pocket . " how far do you want to look back , sir ? " 

 Marian have inform I of Sir Percival 's age at the time when we have speak together of his marriage engagement with Laura . she have then describe he as be forty - five year old . calculate back from this , and make due allowance for the year that have pass since I have gain my information , I find that he must have be bear in eighteen hundred and four , and that I might safely start on my search through the register from that date . 

 " I want to begin with the year eighteen hundred and four , " I say . 

 " which way after that , sir ? " ask the clerk . " Forwards to our time or backwards away from we ? " 

 " backwards from eighteen hundred and four . " 

 he open the door of one of the press the press from the side of which the surplice be hang and produce a large volume bind in greasy brown leather . I be strike by the insecurity of the place in which the register be keep . the door of the press be warp and crack with age , and the lock be of the small and commonest kind . I could have force it easily with the walking - stick I carry in my hand . 

 " be that consider a sufficiently secure place for the register ? " I inquire . " surely a book of such importance as this ought to be protect by a well lock , and keep carefully in an iron safe ? " 

 " well , now , that be curious ! " say the clerk , shut up the book again , just after he have open it , and smack his hand cheerfully on the cover . " those be the very word my old master be always say year and year ago , when I be a lad . ' why be not   the register '   mean this register here , under my hand   ' why be not   it keep in an iron safe ? ' if I have   hear he say that once , I have   hear he say it a hundred time . he be the solicitor in those day , sir , who have the appointment of vestry - clerk to this church . a fine hearty old gentleman , and the most particular man breathing . as long as he live he keep a copy of this book in his office at Knowlesbury , and have it post up regular , from time to time , to correspond with the fresh entry here . you would hardly think it , but he have his own appoint day , once or twice in every quarter , for rid over to this church on his old white pony , to check the copy , by the register , with his own eye and hand . ' how do I know ? '   he use to say   ' how do I know that the register in this vestry may not be steal or destroy ? why be not   it keep in an iron safe ? why can not   I make other people as careful as I be myself ? some of these day there will be an accident happen , and when the register 's lose , then the parish will find out the value of my copy . ' he use to take his pinch of snuff after that , and look about he as bold as a lord . ah ! the like of he for do business be not   easy to find now . you may go to London and not match he , even there . which year do you say , sir ? eighteen hundred and what ? " 

 " eighteen hundred and four , " I reply , mentally resolve to give the old man no more opportunity of talk , until my examination of the register be over . 

 the clerk put on his spectacle , and turn over the leaf of the register , carefully wet his finger and thumb at every third page . " there it be , sir , " say he , with another cheerful smack on the open volume . " there be the year you want . " 

 as I be ignorant of the month in which Sir Percival be bear , I begin my backward search with the early part of the year . the register - book be of the old - fashioned kind , the entry be all make on blank page in manuscript , and the division which separate they be indicate by ink line draw across the page at the close of each entry . 

 I reach the beginning of the year eighteen hundred and four without encounter the marriage , and then travel back through December eighteen hundred and three through November and October through 

 no ! not through September also . under the heading of that month in the year I find the marriage . 

 I look carefully at the entry . it be at the bottom of a page , and be for want of room compress into a small space than that occupy by the marriage above . the marriage immediately before it be impressed on my attention by the circumstance of the bridegroom 's christian name be the same as my own . the entry immediately follow it   on the top of the next page   be noticeable in another way from the large space it occupy , the record in this case register the marriage of two brother at the same time . the register of the marriage of Sir Felix Glyde be in no respect remarkable except for the narrowness of the space into which it be compress at the bottom of the page . the information about his wife be the usual information give in such case . she be describe as " Cecilia Jane Elster , of Park - View Cottages , Knowlesbury , only daughter of the late Patrick Elster , Esq . , formerly of Bath . " 

 I note down these particular in my pocket - book , feel as I do so both doubtful and dishearten about my next proceeding . the Secret which I have believe until this moment to be within my grasp seem now far from my reach than ever . 

 what suggestion of any mystery unexplained have arise out of my visit to the vestry ? I see no suggestion anywhere . what progress have I make towards discover the suspect stain on the reputation of Sir Percival 's mother ? the one fact I have ascertain vindicate her reputation . fresh doubt , fresh difficulty , fresh delay begin to open before I in interminable prospect . what be I to do next ? the one immediate resource leave to I appear to be this . I might institute inquiry about " Miss Elster of Knowlesbury , " on the chance of advance towards the main object of my investigation , by first discover the secret of Mrs. Catherick 's contempt for Sir Percival 's mother . 

 " have you find what you want , sir ? " say the clerk , as I close the register - book . 

 " yes , " I reply , " but I have some inquiry still to make . I suppose the clergyman who officiate here in the year eighteen hundred and three be no long alive ? " 

 " no , no , sir , he be dead three or four year before I come here , and that be as long ago as the year twenty - seven . I get this place , sir , " persist my talkative old friend , " through the clerk before I leave it . they say he be drive out of house and home by his wife and she be live still down in the new town there . I do not   know the right of the story myself all I know be I get the place . Mr. Wansborough get it for I the son of my old master that I be tell you of . he be a free , pleasant gentleman as ever live rid to the hound , keep his pointer and all that . he be vestry - clerk here now as his father be before he . " 

 " do you not tell I your former master live at Knowlesbury ? " I ask , call to mind the long story about the precise gentleman of the old school with which my talkative friend have weary I before he open the register - book . 

 " yes , to be sure , sir , " reply the clerk . " Old Mr. Wansborough live at Knowlesbury , and young Mr. Wansborough live there too . " 

 " you say just now he be vestry - clerk , like his father before he . I be not quite sure that I know what a vestry - clerk be . " 

 " do not   you indeed , sir ? and you come from London too ! every parish church , you know , have a vestry - clerk and a parish - clerk . the parish - clerk be a man like I   except that I have   get a deal more learning than most of they though I do not   boast of it . the vestry - clerk be a sort of an appointment that the lawyer get , and if there be any business to be do for the vestry , why there they be to do it . it be just the same in London . every parish church there have get its vestry - clerk and you may take my word for it he be sure to be a lawyer . " 

 " then young Mr. Wansborough be a lawyer , I suppose ? " 

 " of course he be , sir ! a lawyer in High Street , Knowlesbury the old office that his father have before he . the number of time I have   sweep those office out , and see the old gentleman come trot in to business on his white pony , look right and leave all down the street and nod to everybody ! bless you , he be a popular character ! he would have do in London ! " 

 " how far be it to Knowlesbury from this place ? " 

 " a long stretch , sir , " say the clerk , with that exaggerated idea of distance , and that vivid perception of difficulty in get from place to place , which be peculiar to all country people . " Nigh on five mile , I can tell you ! " 

 it be still early in the forenoon . there be plenty of time for a walk to Knowlesbury and back again to Welmingham ; and there be no person probably in the town who be fitter to assist my inquiry about the character and position of Sir Percival 's mother before her marriage than the local solicitor . resolve to go at once to Knowlesbury on foot , I lead the way out of the vestry . 

 " thank you kindly , sir , " say the clerk , as I slip my little present into his hand . " be you really go to walk all the way to Knowlesbury and back ? well ! you be strong on your leg , too and what a blessing that be , be not   it ? there be the road , you can not   miss it . I wish I be go your way it be pleasant to meet with gentleman from London in a lost corner like this . one hear the news . wish you good - morning , sir , and thank you kindly once more . " 

 we part . as I leave the church behind I I look back , and there be the two man again on the road below , with a third in their company , that third person be the short man in black whom I have trace to the railway the evening before . 

 the three stand talk together for a little while , then separate . the man in black go away by himself towards Welmingham the other two remain together , evidently wait to follow I as soon as I walk on . 

 I proceed on my way without let the fellow see that I take any special notice of they . they cause I no conscious irritation of feeling at that moment on the contrary , they rather revive my sink hope . in the surprise of discover the evidence of the marriage , I have forget the inference I have draw on first perceive the man in the neighbourhood of the vestry . their reappearance remind I that Sir Percival have anticipate my visit to Old Welmingham church as the next result of my interview with Mrs. Catherick otherwise he would never have place his spy there to wait for I . smoothly and fairly as appearance look in the vestry , there be something wrong beneath they there be something in the register - book , for aught I know , that I have not discover yet . 



 X 

 once out of sight of the church , I press forward briskly on my way to Knowlesbury . 

 the road be , for the most part , straight and level . whenever I look back over it I see the two spy steadily follow I . for the great part of the way they keep at a safe distance behind . but once or twice they quicken their pace , as if with the purpose of overtake I , then stop , consult together , and fall back again to their former position . they have some special object evidently in view , and they seem to be hesitate or differ about the good mean of accomplish it . I could not guess exactly what their design might be , but I feel serious doubt of reach Knowlesbury without some mischance happen to I on the way . these doubt be realise . 

 I have just enter on a lonely part of the road , with a sharp turn at some distance ahead , and have just conclude   calculate by time   that I must be get near to the town , when I suddenly hear the step of the man close behind I . 

 before I could look round , one of they   the man by whom I have be follow in London   pass rapidly on my left side and hustle I with his shoulder . I have be more irritated by the manner in which he and his companion have dog my step all the way from Old Welmingham than I be myself aware of , and I unfortunately push the fellow away smartly with my open hand . he instantly shout for help . his companion , the tall man in the gamekeeper 's clothe , spring to my right side , and the next moment the two scoundrel hold I pinion between they in the middle of the road . 

 the conviction that a trap have be lay for I , and the vexation of know that I have fall into it , fortunately restrain I from make my position still bad by an unavaile struggle with two man , one of whom would , in all probability , have be more than a match for I single - handed . I repress the first natural movement by which I have attempt to shake they off , and look about to see if there be any person near to whom I could appeal . 

 a labourer be at work in an adjoining field who must have witness all that have pass . I call to he to follow we to the town . he shake his head with stolid obstinacy , and walk away in the direction of a cottage which stand back from the high - road . at the same time the man who hold I between they declare their intention of charge I with an assault . I be cool enough and wise enough now to make no opposition . " drop your hold of my arm , " I say , " and I will go with you to the town . " the man in the gamekeeper 's dress roughly refuse . but the short man be sharp enough to look to consequence , and not to let his companion commit himself by unnecessary violence . he make a sign to the other , and I walk on between they with my arm free . 

 we reach the turning in the road , and there , close before we , be the suburb of Knowlesbury . one of the local policeman be walk along the path by the roadside . the man at once appeal to he . he reply that the magistrate be then sit at the town - hall , and recommend that we should appear before he immediately . 

 we go on to the town - hall . the clerk make out a formal summon , and the charge be prefer against I , with the customary exaggeration and the customary perversion of the truth on such occasion . the magistrate   an ill - temper man , with a sour enjoyment in the exercise of his own power   inquire if any one on or near the road have witness the assault , and , greatly to my surprise , the complainant admit the presence of the labourer in the field . I be enlighten , however , as to the object of the admission by the magistrate 's next word . he remand I at once for the production of the witness , express , at the same time , his willingness to take bail for my reappearance if I could produce one responsible surety to offer it . if I have be know in the town he would have liberate I on my own recognisance , but as I be a total stranger it be necessary that I should find responsible bail . 

 the whole object of the stratagem be now disclose to I . it have be so manage as to make a remand necessary in a town where I be a perfect stranger , and where I could not hope to get my liberty on bail . the remand merely extend over three day , until the next sitting of the magistrate . but in that time , while I be in confinement , Sir Percival might use any mean he please to embarrass my future proceeding perhaps to screen himself from detection altogether without the slight fear of any hindrance on my part . at the end of the three day the charge would , no doubt , be withdraw , and the attendance of the witness would be perfectly useless . 

 my indignation , I may almost say , my despair , at this mischievous check to all further progress so base and trifle in itself , and yet so disheartening and so serious in its probable result quite unfit I at first to reflect on the good mean of extricate myself from the dilemma in which I now stand . I have the folly to call for write material , and to think of privately communicate my real position to the magistrate . the hopelessness and the imprudence of this proceeding fail to strike I before I have actually write the opening line of the letter . it be not till I have push the paper away not till , I be ashamed to say , I have almost allow the vexation of my helpless position to conquer I that a course of action suddenly occur to my mind , which Sir Percival have probably not anticipate , and which might set I free again in a few hour . I determine to communicate the situation in which I be place to Mr. Dawson , of Oak Lodge . 

 I have visit this gentleman 's house , it may be remember , at the time of my first inquiry in the Blackwater Park neighbourhood , and I have present to he a letter of introduction from Miss Halcombe , in which she recommend I to his friendly attention in the strong term . I now write , refer to this letter , and to what I have previously tell Mr. Dawson of the delicate and dangerous nature of my inquiry . I have not reveal to he the truth about Laura , have merely describe my errand as be of the utmost importance to private family interest with which Miss Halcombe be concern . use the same caution still , I now account for my presence at Knowlesbury in the same manner , and I put it to the doctor to say whether the trust repose in I by a lady whom he well know , and the hospitality I have myself receive in his house , justify I or not in ask he to come to my assistance in a place where I be quite friendless . 

 I obtain permission to hire a messenger to drive away at once with my letter in a conveyance which might be use to bring the doctor back immediately . Oak Lodge be on the Knowlesbury side of Blackwater . the man declare he could drive there in forty minute , and could bring Mr. Dawson back in forty more . I direct he to follow the doctor wherever he might happen to be , if he be not at home , and then sit down to wait for the result with all the patience and all the hope that I could summon to help I . 

 it be not quite half - past one when the messenger depart . before half - past three he return , and bring the doctor with he . Mr. Dawson 's kindness , and the delicacy with which he treat his prompt assistance quite as a matter of course , almost overpower I . the bail require be offer , and accept immediately . before four o'clock , on that afternoon , I be shake hand warmly with the good old doctor a free man again in the street of Knowlesbury . 

 Mr. Dawson hospitably invite I to go back with he to Oak Lodge , and take up my quarter there for the night . I could only reply that my time be not my own , and I could only ask he to let I pay my visit in a few day , when I might repeat my thank , and offer to he all the explanation which I feel to be only his due , but which I be not then in a position to make . we part with friendly assurance on both side , and I turn my step at once to Mr. Wansborough 's office in the High Street . 

 Time be now of the last importance . 

 the news of my be free on bail would reach Sir Percival , to an absolute certainty , before night . if the next few hour do not put I in a position to justify his bad fear , and to hold he helpless at my mercy , I might lose every inch of the ground I have gain , never to recover it again . the unscrupulous nature of the man , the local influence he possess , the desperate peril of exposure with which my blindfold inquiry threaten he all warn I to press on to positive discovery , without the useless waste of a single minute . I have find time to think while I be wait for Mr. Dawson 's arrival , and I have well employ it . certain portion of the conversation of the talkative old clerk , which have weary I at the time , now recur to my memory with a new significance , and a suspicion cross my mind darkly which have not occur to I while I be in the vestry . on my way to Knowlesbury , I have only propose to apply to Mr. Wansborough for information on the subject of Sir Percival 's mother . my object now be to examine the duplicate register of Old Welmingham Church . 

 Mr. Wansborough be in his office when I inquire for he . 

 he be a jovial , red - faced , easy - look man more like a country squire than a lawyer and he seem to be both surprised and amuse by my application . he have hear of his father 's copy of the register , but have not even see it himself . it have never be inquire after , and it be no doubt in the strong room among other paper that have not be disturb since his father 's death . it be a pity   Mr. Wansborough say   that the old gentleman be not alive to hear his precious copy ask for at last . he would have ride his favourite hobby hard than ever now . how have I come to hear of the copy ? be it through anybody in the town ? 

 I parry the question as well as I could . it be impossible at this stage of the investigation to be too cautious , and it be just as well not to let Mr. Wansborough know prematurely that I have already examine the original register . I describe myself , therefore , as pursue a family inquiry , to the object of which every possible saving of time be of great importance . I be anxious to send certain particular to London by that day 's post , and one look at the duplicate register   pay , of course , the necessary fee   might supply what I require , and save I a further journey to Old Welmingham . I add that , in the event of my subsequently require a copy of the original register , I should make application to Mr. Wansborough 's office to furnish I with the document . 

 after this explanation no objection be make to produce the copy . a clerk be send to the strong room , and after some delay return with the volume . it be of exactly the same size as the volume in the vestry , the only difference be that the copy be more smartly bind . I take it with I to an unoccupied desk . my hand be tremble my head be burn hot I feel the necessity of conceal my agitation as well as I could from the person about I in the room , before I venture on open the book . 

 on the blank page at the beginning , to which I first turn , be trace some line in faded ink . they contain these word 

 " Copy of the Marriage Register of Welmingham Parish Church . execute under my order , and afterwards compare , entry by entry , with the original , by myself .   sign   Robert Wansborough , vestry - clerk . " below this note there be a line add , in another handwriting , as follow : " extend from the first of January , 1800 , to the thirtieth of June , 1815 . " 

 I turn to the month of September , eighteen hundred and three . I find the marriage of the man whose christian name be the same as my own . I find the double register of the marriage of the two brother . and between these entry , at the bottom of the page ? 

 nothing ! not a vestige of the entry which record the marriage of Sir Felix Glyde and Cecilia Jane Elster in the register of the church ! 

 my heart give a great bound , and throb as if it would stifle I . I look again I be afraid to believe the evidence of my own eye . no ! not a doubt . the marriage be not there . the entry on the copy occupy exactly the same place on the page as the entry in the original . the last entry on one page record the marriage of the man with my christian name . below it there be a blank space a space evidently leave because it be too narrow to contain the entry of the marriage of the two brother , which in the copy , as in the original , occupy the top of the next page . that space tell the whole story ! there it must have remain in the church register from eighteen hundred and three   when the marriage have be solemnise and the copy have be make   to eighteen hundred and twenty - seven , when Sir Percival appear at Old Welmingham . here , at Knowlesbury , be the chance of commit the forgery show to I in the copy , and there , at Old Welmingham , be the forgery commit in the register of the church . 

 my head turn giddy I hold by the desk to keep myself from fall . of all the suspicion which have strike I in relation to that desperate man , not one have be near the truth . 

 the idea that he be not Sir Percival Glyde at all , that he have no more claim to the baronetcy and to Blackwater Park than the poor labourer who work on the estate , have never once occur to my mind . at one time I have think he might be Anne Catherick 's father at another time I have think he might have be Anne Catherick 's husband the offence of which he be really guilty have be , from first to last , beyond the wide reach of my imagination . 

 the paltry mean by which the fraud have be effect , the magnitude and daring of the crime that it represent , the horror of the consequence involve in its discovery , overwhelm I . who could wonder now at the brute - restlessness of the wretch 's life at his desperate alternation between abject duplicity and reckless violence at the madness of guilty distrust which have make he imprison Anne Catherick in the Asylum , and have give he over to the vile conspiracy against his wife , on the bare suspicion that the one and the other know his terrible secret ? the disclosure of that secret might , in past year , have hang he might now transport he for life . the disclosure of that secret , even if the sufferer by his deception spar he the penalty of the law , would deprive he at one blow of the name , the rank , the estate , the whole social existence that he have usurp . this be the Secret , and it be mine ! a word from I , and house , land , baronetcy , be go from he for ever a word from I , and he be drive out into the world , a nameless , penniless , friendless outcast ! the man 's whole future hang on my lip and he know it by this time as certainly as I do ! 

 that last thought steady I . interest far more precious than my own depend on the caution which must now guide my slight action . there be no possible treachery which Sir Percival might not attempt against I . in the danger and desperation of his position he would be stagger by no risk , he would recoil at no crime he would literally hesitate at nothing to save himself . 

 I consider for a minute . my first necessity be to secure positive evidence in writing of the discovery that I have just make , and in the event of any personal misadventure happen to I , to place that evidence beyond Sir Percival 's reach . the copy of the register be sure to be safe in Mr. Wansborough 's strong room . but the position of the original in the vestry be , as I have see with my own eye , anything but secure . 

 in this emergency I resolve to return to the church , to apply again to the clerk , and to take the necessary extract from the register before I sleep that night . I be not then aware that a legally - certify copy be necessary , and that no document merely draw out by myself could claim the proper importance as a proof . I be not aware of this , and my determination to keep my present proceeding a secret prevent I from ask any question which might have procure the necessary information . my one anxiety be the anxiety to get back to Old Welmingham . I make the good excuse I could for the discomposure in my face and manner which Mr. Wansborough have already notice , lay the necessary fee on his table , arrange that I should write to he in a day or two , and leave the office , with my head in a whirl and my blood throb through my vein at fever heat . 

 it be just get dark . the idea occur to I that I might be follow again and attack on the high - road . 

 my walking - stick be a light one , of little or no use for purpose of defence . I stop before leave Knowlesbury and buy a stout country cudgel , short , and heavy at the head . with this homely weapon , if any one man try to stop I I be a match for he . if more than one attack I I could trust to my heel . in my school - day I have be a noted runner , and I have not want for practice since in the later time of my experience in Central America . 

 I start from the town at a brisk pace , and keep the middle of the road . 

 a small misty rain be fall , and it be impossible for the first half of the way to make sure whether I be follow or not . but at the last half of my journey , when I suppose myself to be about two mile from the church , I see a man run by I in the rain , and then hear the gate of a field by the roadside shut to sharply . I keep straight on , with my cudgel ready in my hand , my ear on the alert , and my eye strain to see through the mist and the darkness . before I have advance a hundred yard there be a rustling in the hedge on my right , and three man spring out into the road . 

 I draw aside on the instant to the footpath . the two foremost man be carry beyond I before they could check themselves . the third be as quick as lightning . he stop , half turn , and strike at I with his stick . the blow be aim at hazard , and be not a severe one . it fall on my left shoulder . I return it heavily on his head . he stagger back and jostle his two companion just as they be both rush at I . this circumstance give I a moment 's start . I slip by they , and take to the middle of the road again at the top of my speed . 

 the two unhurt man pursue I . they be both good runner the road be smooth and level , and for the first five minute or more I be conscious that I do not gain on they . it be perilous work to run for long in the darkness . I could barely see the dim black line of the hedge on either side , and any chance obstacle in the road would have throw I down to a certainty . Ere long I feel the ground change it descend from the level at a turn , and then rise again beyond . downhill the man rather gain on I , but uphill I begin to distance they . the rapid , regular thump of their foot grow fainter on my ear , and I calculate by the sound that I be far enough in advance to take to the field with a good chance of their pass I in the darkness . diverge to the footpath , I make for the first break that I could guess at , rather than see , in the hedge . it prove to be a closed gate . I vault over , and find myself in a field , keep across it steadily with my back to the road . I hear the man pass the gate , still run , then in a minute more hear one of they call to the other to come back . it be no matter what they do now , I be out of their sight and out of their hearing . I keep straight across the field , and when I have reach the farth extremity of it , wait there for a minute to recover my breath . 

 it be impossible to venture back to the road , but I be determine nevertheless to get to Old Welmingham that evening . 

 neither moon nor star appear to guide I . I only know that I have keep the wind and rain at my back on leave Knowlesbury , and if I now keep they at my back still , I might at least be certain of not advance altogether in the wrong direction . 

 proceed on this plan , I cross the country meet with no bad obstacle than hedge , ditch , and thicket , which every now and then oblige I to alter my course for a little while until I find myself on a hill - side , with the ground slop away steeply before I . I descend to the bottom of the hollow , squeeze my way through a hedge , and get out into a lane . have turn to the right on leave the road , I now turn to the left , on the chance of regain the line from which I have wander . after follow the muddy winding of the lane for ten minute or more , I see a cottage with a light in one of the window . the garden gate be open to the lane , and I go in at once to inquire my way . 

 before I could knock at the door it be suddenly open , and a man come run out with a lighted lantern in his hand . he stop and hold it up at the sight of I . we both start as we see each other . my wandering have lead I round the outskirt of the village , and have bring I out at the low end of it . I be back at Old Welmingham , and the man with the lantern be no other than my acquaintance of the morning , the parish clerk . 

 his manner appear to have alter strangely in the interval since I have last see he . he look suspicious and confuse his ruddy cheek be deeply flushed and his first word , when he speak , be quite unintelligible to I . 

 " where be the key ? " he ask . " have you take they ? " 

 " what key ? " I repeat . " I have this moment come from Knowlesbury . what key do you mean ? " 

 " the key of the vestry . Lord save we and help we ! what shall I do ? the key be go ! do you hear ? " cry the old man , shake the lantern at I in his agitation , " the key be go ! " 

 " how ? when ? who can have take they ? " 

 " I do not   know , " say the clerk , star about he wildly in the darkness . " I have   only just get back . I tell you I have a long day 's work this morning I lock the door and shut the window down it be open now , the window 's open . look ! somebody have get in there and take the key . " 

 he turn to the casement window to show I that it be wide open . the door of the lantern come loose from its fastening as he sway it round , and the wind blow the candle out instantly . 

 " get another light , " I say , " and let we both go to the vestry together . quick ! quick ! " 

 I hurry he into the house . the treachery that I have every reason to expect , the treachery that might deprive I of every advantage I have gain , be at that moment , perhaps , in process of accomplishment . my impatience to reach the church be so great that I could not remain inactive in the cottage while the clerk light the lantern again . I walk out , down the garden path , into the lane . 

 before I have advance ten pace a man approach I from the direction lead to the church . he speak respectfully as we meet . I could not see his face , but judge by his voice only , he be a perfect stranger to I . 

 " I beg your pardon , Sir Percival " he begin . 

 I stop he before he could say more . 

 " the darkness mislead you , " I say . " I be not Sir Percival . " 

 the man draw back directly . 

 " I think it be my master , " he mutter , in a confused , doubtful way . 

 " you expect to meet your master here ? " 

 " I be tell to wait in the lane . " 

 with that answer he retrace his step . I look back at the cottage and see the clerk come out , with the lantern light once more . I take the old man 's arm to help he on the more quickly . we hasten along the lane , and pass the person who have accost I . as well as I could see by the light of the lantern , he be a servant out of livery . 

 " who be that ? " whisper the clerk . " do he know anything about the key ? " 

 " we will not   wait to ask he , " I reply . " we will go on to the vestry first . " 

 the church be not visible , even by daytime , until the end of the lane be reach . as we mount the rise ground which lead to the building from that point , one of the village child a boy come close up to we , attract by the light we carry , and recognise the clerk . 

 " I say , measter , " say the boy , pull officiously at the clerk 's coat , " there be summun up yander in the church . I heerd un lock the door on hisself I heerd un strike a loight wi ' a match . " 

 the clerk tremble and lean against I heavily . 

 " Come ! come ! " I say encouragingly . " we be not too late . we will catch the man , whoever he be . keep the lantern , and follow I as fast as you can . " 

 I mount the hill rapidly . the dark mass of the church - tower be the first object I discern dimly against the night sky . as I turn aside to get round to the vestry , I hear heavy footstep close to I . the servant have ascend to the church after we . " I do not   mean any harm , " he say , when I turn round on he , " I be only look for my master . " the tone in which he speak betray unmistakable fear . I take no notice of he and go on . 

 the instant I turn the corner and come in view of the vestry , I see the lantern - skylight on the roof brilliantly light up from within . it shine out with dazzle brightness against the murky , starless sky . 

 I hurry through the churchyard to the door . 

 as I get near there be a strange smell steal out on the damp night air . I hear a snapping noise inside I see the light above grow brighter and brighter a pane of the glass crack I run to the door and put my hand on it . the vestry be on fire ! 

 before I could move , before I could draw my breath after that discovery , I be horror - strike by a heavy thump against the door from the inside . I hear the key work violently in the lock I hear a man 's voice behind the door , raise to a dreadful shrillness , scream for help . 

 the servant who have follow I stagger back shuddering , and drop to his knee . " oh , my God ! " he say , " it be Sir Percival ! " 

 as the word pass his lip the clerk join we , and at the same moment there be another and a last grating turn of the key in the lock . 

 " the Lord have mercy on his soul ! " say the old man . " he be doom and dead . he have hamper the lock . " 

 I rush to the door . the one absorb purpose that have fill all my thought , that have control all my action , for week and week past , vanish in an instant from my mind . all remembrance of the heartless injury the man 's crime have inflict of the love , the innocence , the happiness he have pitilessly lay waste of the oath I have swear in my own heart to summon he to the terrible reckoning that he deserve pass from my memory like a dream . I remember nothing but the horror of his situation . I feel nothing but the natural human impulse to save he from a frightful death . 

 " try the other door ! " I shout . " try the door into the church ! the lock 's hamper . you be a dead man if you waste another moment on it . " 

 there have be no renewed cry for help when the key be turn for the last time . there be no sound now of any kind , to give token that he be still alive . I hear nothing but the quicken crackle of the flame , and the sharp snap of the glass in the skylight above . 

 I look round at my two companion . the servant have rise to his foot he have take the lantern , and be hold it up vacantly at the door . Terror seem to have strike he with downright idiocy he wait at my heel , he follow I about when I move like a dog . the clerk sit crouch up on one of the tombstone , shivering , and moan to himself . the one moment in which I look at they be enough to show I that they be both helpless . 

 hardly know what I do , act desperately on the first impulse that occur to I , I seize the servant and push he against the vestry wall . " stoop ! " I say , " and hold by the stone . I be go to climb over you to the roof I be go to break the skylight , and give he some air ! " 

 the man tremble from head to foot , but he hold firm . I get on his back , with my cudgel in my mouth , seize the parapet with both hand , and be instantly on the roof . in the frantic hurry and agitation of the moment , it never strike I that I might let out the flame instead of let in the air . I strike at the skylight , and batter in the crack , loosen glass at a blow . the fire leap out like a wild beast from its lair . if the wind have not chance , in the position I occupy , to set it away from I , my exertion might have end then and there . I crouch on the roof as the smoke pour out above I with the flame . the gleam and flash of the light show I the servant 's face star up vacantly under the wall the clerk rise to his foot on the tombstone , wring his hand in despair and the scanty population of the village , haggard man and terrified woman , cluster beyond in the churchyard all appear and disappear , in the red of the dreadful glare , in the black of the choke smoke . and the man beneath my foot ! the man , suffocating , burning , die so near we all , so utterly beyond our reach ! 

 the thought half madden I . I lower myself from the roof , by my hand , and drop to the ground . 

 " the key of the church ! " I shout to the clerk . " we must try it that way we may save he yet if we can burst open the inner door . " 

 " no , no , no ! " cry the old man . " no hope ! the church key and the vestry key be on the same ring both inside there ! oh , sir , he be past save he be dust and ash by this time ! " 

 " they will see the fire from the town , " say a voice from among the man behind I . " there be a ingine in the town . they will save the church . " 

 I call to that man he have his wit about he I call to he to come and speak to I . it would be a quarter of an hour at least before the town engine could reach we . the horror of remain inactive all that time be more than I could face . in defiance of my own reason I persuade myself that the doomed and lose wretch in the vestry might still be lie senseless on the floor , might not be dead yet . if we break open the door , might we save he ? I know the strength of the heavy lock I know the thickness of the nailed oak I know the hopelessness of assail the one and the other by ordinary mean . but surely there be beam still leave in the dismantle cottage near the church ? what if we get one , and use it as a battering - ram against the door ? 

 the thought leap through I like the fire leap out of the shattered skylight . I appeal to the man who have speak first of the fire - engine in the town . " have you get your pickax handy ? " yes , they have . " and a hatchet , and a saw , and a bit of rope ? " yes ! yes ! yes ! I run down among the villager , with the lantern in my hand . " five shilling apiece to every man who help I ! " they start into life at the word . that ravenous second hunger of poverty the hunger for money rouse they into tumult and activity in a moment . " two of you for more lantern , if you have they ! two of you for the pickax and the tool ! the rest after I to find the beam ! " they cheer with shrill starveling voice they cheer . the woman and the child flee back on either side . we rush in a body down the churchyard path to the first empty cottage . not a man be leave behind but the clerk the poor old clerk stand on the flat tombstone sob and wail over the church . the servant be still at my heel his white , helpless , panic - stricken face be close over my shoulder as we push into the cottage . there be rafter from the tear - down floor above , lie loose on the ground but they be too light . a beam run across over our head , but not out of reach of our arm and our pickax a beam fast at each end in the ruin wall , with ceiling and floor all rip away , and a great gap in the roof above , open to the sky . we attack the beam at both end at once . God ! how it hold how the brick and mortar of the wall resist we ! we strike , and tug , and tore . the beam give at one end it come down with a lump of brickwork after it . there be a scream from the woman all huddle in the doorway to look at we a shout from the man two of they down but not hurt . another tug all together and the beam be loose at both end . we raise it , and give the word to clear the doorway . now for the work ! now for the rush at the door ! there be the fire stream into the sky , stream brighter than ever to light we ! Steady along the churchyard path steady with the beam for a rush at the door . one , two , three and off . out ring the cheering again , irrepressibly . we have shake it already , the hinge must give if the lock will not . another run with the beam ! one , two , three and off . it be loose ! the stealthy fire dart at we through the crevice all round it . another , and a last rush ! the door fall in with a crash . a great hush of awe , a stillness of breathless expectation , possess every live soul of we . we look for the body . the scorch heat on our face drive we back : we see nothing above , below , all through the room , we see nothing but a sheet of living fire . 


 " where be he ? " whisper the servant , star vacantly at the flame . 

 " he be dust and ash , " say the clerk . " and the book be dust and ash and oh , sir ! the church will be dust and ash soon . " 

 those be the only two who speak . when they be silent again , nothing stir in the stillness but the bubble and the crackle of the flame . 

 Hark ! 

 a harsh rattle sound in the distance then the hollow beat of horse ' hoof at full gallop then the low roar , the all - predominant tumult of hundred of human voice clamour and shout together . the engine at last . 

 the people about I all turn from the fire , and run eagerly to the brow of the hill . the old clerk try to go with the rest , but his strength be exhaust . I see he hold by one of the tombstone . " save the church ! " he cry out faintly , as if the fireman could hear he already . 

 save the church ! 

 the only man who never move be the servant . there he stand , his eye still fasten on the flame in a changeless , vacant stare . I speak to he , I shake he by the arm . he be past rousing . he only whisper once more , " where be he ? " 

 in ten minute the engine be in position , the well at the back of the church be feed it , and the hose be carry to the doorway of the vestry . if help have be want from I I could not have afford it now . my energy of will be go my strength be exhaust the turmoil of my thought be fearfully and suddenly still , now I know that he be dead . 

 I stand useless and helpless look , look , look into the burn room . 

 I see the fire slowly conquer . the brightness of the glare fade the steam rise in white cloud , and the smoulder heap of ember show red and black through it on the floor . there be a pause then an advance all together of the fireman and the police which block up the doorway then a consultation in low voice and then two man be detach from the rest , and send out of the churchyard through the crowd . the crowd draw back on either side in dead silence to let they pass . 

 after a while a great shudder run through the people , and the live lane widen slowly . the man come back along it with a door from one of the empty house . they carry it to the vestry and go in . the police close again round the doorway , and man steal out from among the crowd by two and three and stand behind they to be the first to see . other wait near to be the first to hear . woman and child be among these last . 

 the tiding from the vestry begin to flow out among the crowd they drop slowly from mouth to mouth till they reach the place where I be stand . I hear the question and answer repeat again and again in low , eager tone all round I . 

 " have they find he ? " " yes . " " where ? " " against the door , on his face . " " which door ? " " the door that go into the church . his head be against it he be down on his face . " " be his face burn ? " " no . " " yes , it be . " " no , scorch , not burn he lie on his face , I tell you . " " who be he ? a lord , they say . " " no , not a lord . SIR Something ; Sir mean Knight . " " and Baronight , too . " " no . " " yes , it do . " " what do he want in there ? " " no good , you may depend on it . " " do he do it on purpose ? " " burn himself on purpose ! " " I do not   mean himself , I mean the vestry . " " be he dreadful to look at ? " " dreadful ! " " not about the face , though ? " " no , no , not so much about the face . do not   anybody know he ? " " there be a man say he do . " " who ? " " a servant , they say . but he be strike stupid - like , and the police do not   believe he . " " do not   anybody else know who it be ? " " hush ! " 

 the loud , clear voice of a man in authority silence the low hum of talk all round I in an instant . 

 " where be the gentleman who try to save he ? " say the voice . 

 " here , sir here he be ! " dozen of eager face press about I dozen of eager arm part the crowd . the man in authority come up to I with a lantern in his hand . 

 " this way , sir , if you please , " he say quietly . 

 I be unable to speak to he , I be unable to resist he when he take my arm . I try to say that I have never see the dead man in his lifetime that there be no hope of identify he by mean of a stranger like I . but the word fail on my lip . I be faint , and silent , and helpless . 

 " do you know he , sir ? " 

 I be stand inside a circle of man . three of they opposite to I be hold lantern low down to the ground . their eye , and the eye of all the rest , be fix silently and expectantly on my face . I know what be at my foot I know why they be hold the lantern so low to the ground . 

 " can you identify he , sir ? " 

 my eye drop slowly . at first I see nothing under they but a coarse canvas cloth . the dripping of the rain on it be audible in the dreadful silence . I look up , along the cloth , and there at the end , stark and grim and black , in the yellow light there be his dead face . 

 so , for the first and last time , I see he . so the Visitation of God rule it that he and I should meet . 



 XI 

 the inquest be hurry for certain local reason which weigh with the coroner and the town authority . it be hold on the afternoon of the next day . I be necessarily one among the witness summon to assist the object of the investigation . 

 my first proceeding in the morning be to go to the post - office , and inquire for the letter which I expect from Marian . no change of circumstance , however extraordinary , could affect the one great anxiety which weigh on my mind while I be away from London . the morning 's letter , which be the only assurance I could receive that no misfortune have happen in my absence , be still the absorbing interest with which my day begin . 

 to my relief , the letter from Marian be at the office wait for I . 

 nothing have happen they be both as safe and as well as when I have leave they . Laura send her love , and beg that I would let she know of my return a day beforehand . her sister add , in explanation of this message , that she have save " nearly a sovereign " out of her own private purse , and that she have claim the privilege of order the dinner and give the dinner which be to celebrate the day of my return . I read these little domestic confidence in the bright morning with the terrible recollection of what have happen the evening before vivid in my memory . the necessity of spar Laura any sudden knowledge of the truth be the first consideration which the letter suggest to I . I write at once to Marian to tell she what I have tell in these page present the tiding as gradually and gently as I could , and warn she not to let any such thing as a newspaper fall in Laura 's way while I be absent . in the case of any other woman , less courageous and less reliable , I might have hesitate before I venture on unreservedly disclose the whole truth . but I owe it to Marian to be faithful to my past experience of she , and to trust she as I trust herself . 

 my letter be necessarily a long one . it occupy I until the time come for proceed to the inquest . 

 the object of the legal inquiry be necessarily beset by peculiar complication and difficulty . besides the investigation into the manner in which the deceased have meet his death , there be serious question to be settle relate to the cause of the fire , to the abstraction of the key , and to the presence of a stranger in the vestry at the time when the flame break out . even the identification of the dead man have not yet be accomplish . the helpless condition of the servant have make the police distrustful of his asserted recognition of his master . they have send to Knowlesbury overnight to secure the attendance of witness who be well acquainted with the personal appearance of Sir Percival Glyde , and they have communicate , the first thing in the morning , with Blackwater Park . these precaution enable the coroner and jury to settle the question of identity , and to confirm the correctness of the servant 's assertion ; the evidence offer by competent witness , and by the discovery of certain fact , be subsequently strengthen by an examination of the dead man 's watch . the crest and the name of Sir Percival Glyde be engrave inside it . 

 the next inquiry relate to the fire . 

 the servant and I , and the boy who have hear the light strike in the vestry , be the first witness call . the boy give his evidence clearly enough , but the servant 's mind have not yet recover the shock inflict on it he be plainly incapable of assist the object of the inquiry , and he be desire to stand down . 

 to my own relief , my examination be not a long one . I have not know the deceased I have never see he I be not aware of his presence at Old Welmingham and I have not be in the vestry at the finding of the body . all I could prove be that I have stop at the clerk 's cottage to ask my way that I have hear from he of the loss of the key that I have accompany he to the church to render what help I could that I have see the fire that I have hear some person unknown , inside the vestry , try vainly to unlock the door and that I have do what I could , from motif of humanity , to save the man . other witness , who have be acquaint with the deceased , be ask if they could explain the mystery of his presume abstraction of the key , and his presence in the burn room . but the coroner seem to take it for grant , naturally enough , that I , as a total stranger in the neighbourhood , and a total stranger to Sir Percival Glyde , could not be in a position to offer any evidence on these two point . 

 the course that I be myself bind to take , when my formal examination have close , seem clear to I . I do not feel call on to volunteer any statement of my own private conviction ; in the first place , because my do so could serve no practical purpose , now that all proof in support of any surmise of mine be burn with the burn register ; in the second place , because I could not have intelligibly state my opinion my unsupported opinion without disclose the whole story of the conspiracy , and produce beyond a doubt the same unsatisfactory effect an the mind of the coroner and the jury , which I have already produce on the mind of Mr. Kyrle . 

 in these page , however , and after the time that have now elapse , no such caution and restraint as be here describe need fetter the free expression of my opinion . I will state briefly , before my pen occupy itself with other event , how my own conviction lead I to account for the abstraction of the key , for the outbreak of the fire , and for the death of the man . 

 the news of my be free on bail drive Sir Percival , as I believe , to his last resource . the attempt attack on the road be one of those resource , and the suppression of all practical proof of his crime , by destroy the page of the register on which the forgery have be commit , be the other , and the sure of the two . if I could produce no extract from the original book to compare with the certify copy at Knowlesbury , I could produce no positive evidence , and could threaten he with no fatal exposure . all that be necessary to the attainment of his end be , that he should get into the vestry unperceive , that he should tear out the page in the register , and that he should leave the vestry again as privately as he have enter it . 

 on this supposition , it be easy to understand why he wait until nightfall before he make the attempt , and why he take advantage of the clerk 's absence to possess himself of the key . necessity would oblige he to strike a light to find his way to the right register , and common caution would suggest his lock the door on the inside in case of intrusion on the part of any inquisitive stranger , or on my part , if I happen to be in the neighbourhood at the time . 

 I can not believe that it be any part of his intention to make the destruction of the register appear to be the result of accident , by purposely set the vestry on fire . the bare chance that prompt assistance might arrive , and that the book might , by the remotest possibility , be save , would have be enough , on a moment 's consideration , to dismiss any idea of this sort from his mind . remember the quantity of combustible object in the vestry the straw , the paper , the packing - case , the dry wood , the old worm - eat press all the probability , in my estimation , point to the fire as the result of an accident with his match or his light . 

 his first impulse , under these circumstance , be doubtless to try to extinguish the flame , and fail in that , his second impulse   ignorant as he be of the state of the lock   have be to attempt to escape by the door which have give he entrance . when I have call to he , the flame must have reach across the door lead into the church , on either side of which the press extend , and close to which the other combustible object be place . in all probability , the smoke and flame   confine as they be to the room   have be too much for he when he try to escape by the inner door . he must have drop in his death - swoon he must have sink in the place where he be find just as I get on the roof to break the skylight window . even if we have be able , afterwards , to get into the church , and to burst open the door from that side , the delay must have be fatal . he would have be past saving , long past saving , by that time . we should only have give the flame free ingress into the church the church , which be now preserve , but which , in that event , would have share the fate of the vestry . there be no doubt in my mind , there can be no doubt in the mind of any one , that he be a dead man before ever we get to the empty cottage , and work with might and main to tear down the beam . 

 this be the near approach that any theory of mine can make towards account for a result which be visible matter of fact . as I have describe they , so event pass to we outside . as I have relate it , so his body be find . 



 the inquest be adjourn over one day no explanation that the eye of the law could recognise have be discover thus far to account for the mysterious circumstance of the case . 

 it be arrange that more witness should be summon , and that the London solicitor of the deceased should be invite to attend . a medical man be also charge with the duty of report on the mental condition of the servant , which appear at present to debar he from give any evidence of the least importance . he could only declare , in a daze way , that he have be order , on the night of the fire , to wait in the lane , and that he know nothing else , except that the decease be certainly his master . 

 my own impression be , that he have be first use   without any guilty knowledge on his own part   to ascertain the fact of the clerk 's absence from home on the previous day , and that he have be afterwards order to wait near the church   but out of sight of the vestry   to assist his master , in the event of my escape the attack on the road , and of a collision occur between Sir Percival and myself . it be necessary to add , that the man 's own testimony be never obtain to confirm this view . the medical report of he declare that what little mental faculty he possess be seriously shake ; nothing satisfactory be extract from he at the adjourned inquest , and for aught I know to the contrary , he may never have recover to this day . 

 I return to the hotel at Welmingham so jade in body and mind , so weakened and depress by all that I have go through , as to be quite unfit to endure the local gossip about the inqu , and to answer the trivial question that the talker address to I in the coffee - room . I withdraw from my scanty dinner to my cheap garret - chamber to secure myself a little quiet , and to think undisturbed of Laura and Marian . 

 if I have be a rich man I would have go back to London , and would have comfort myself with a sight of the two dear face again that night . but I be bind to appear , if call on , at the adjourn inquest , and doubly bind to answer my bail before the magistrate at Knowlesbury . our slender resource have suffer already , and the doubtful future more doubtful than ever now make I dread decrease our mean unnecessarily by allow myself an indulgence even at the small cost of a double railway journey in the carriage of the second class . 

 the next day the day immediately follow the inquest be leave at my own disposal . I begin the morning by again apply at the post - office for my regular report from Marian . it be wait for I as before , and it be write throughout in good spirit . I read the letter thankfully , and then set forth with my mind at ease for the day to go to Old Welmingham , and to view the scene of the fire by the morning light . 

 what change meet I when I get there ! 

 through all the way of our unintelligible world the trivial and the terrible walk hand in hand together . the irony of circumstance hold no mortal catastrophe in respect . when I reach the church , the trample condition of the burial - ground be the only serious trace leave to tell of the fire and the death . a rough hoarding of board have be knock up before the vestry doorway . rude caricature be scrawl on it already , and the village child be fight and shout for the possession of the good peep - hole to see through . on the spot where I have hear the cry for help from the burn room , on the spot where the panic - stricken servant have drop on his knee , a fussy flock of poultry be now scramble for the first choice of worm after the rain ; and on the ground at my foot , where the door and its dreadful burden have be lay , a workman 's dinner be wait for he , tie up in a yellow basin , and his faithful cur in charge be yelp at I for come near the food . the old clerk , look idly at the slow commencement of the repair , have only one interest that he could talk about now the interest of escape all blame for his own part on account of the accident that have happen . one of the village woman , whose white wild face I remember the picture of terror when we pull down the beam , be giggle with another woman , the picture of inanity , over an old washing - tub . there be nothing serious in mortality ! Solomon in all his glory be Solomon with the element of the contemptible lurking in every fold of his robe and in every corner of his palace . 

 as I leave the place , my thought turn , not for the first time , to the complete overthrow that all present hope of establish Laura 's identity have now suffer through Sir Percival 's death . he be go and with he the chance be go which have be the one object of all my labour and all my hope . 

 could I look at my failure from no truer point of view than this ? 

 suppose he have live , would that change of circumstance have alter the result ? could I have make my discovery a marketable commodity , even for Laura 's sake , after I have find out that robbery of the right of other be the essence of Sir Percival 's crime ? could I have offer the price of MY silence for his confession of the conspiracy , when the effect of that silence must have be to keep the right heir from the estate , and the right owner from the name ? impossible ! if Sir Percival have live , the discovery , from which   in my ignorance of the true nature of the Secret   I have hop so much , could not have be mine to suppress or to make public , as I think well , for the vindication of Laura 's right . in common honesty and common honour I must have go at once to the stranger whose birthright have be usurped I must have renounce the victory at the moment when it be mine by place my discovery unreservedly in that stranger 's hand and I must have face afresh all the difficulty which stand between I and the one object of my life , exactly as I be resolve in my heart of heart to face they now ! 

 I return to Welmingham with my mind compose , feel more sure of myself and my resolution than I have feel yet . 

 on my way to the hotel I pass the end of the square in which Mrs. Catherick live . should I go back to the house , and make another attempt to see she . no . that news of Sir Percival 's death , which be the last news she ever expect to hear , must have reach her hour since . all the proceeding at the inquest have be report in the local paper that morning there be nothing I could tell she which she do not know already . my interest in make her speak have slacken . I remember the furtive hatred in her face when she say , " there be no news of Sir Percival that I do not   expect except the news of his death . " I remember the stealthy interest in her eye when they settle on I at part , after she have speak those word . some instinct , deep in my heart , which I feel to be a true one , make the prospect of again enter her presence repulsive to I I turn away from the square , and go straight back to the hotel . 

 some hour later , while I be rest in the coffee - room , a letter be place in my hand by the waiter . it be address to I by name , and I find on inquiry that it have be leave at the bar by a woman just as it be near dusk , and just before the gas be light . she have say nothing , and she have go away again before there be time to speak to she , or even to notice who she be . 

 I open the letter . it be neither date nor sign , and the handwriting be palpably disguise . before I have read the first sentence , however , I know who my correspondent be Mrs. Catherick . 

 the letter run as follow I copy it exactly , word for word : 




 the story continue by MRS . CATHERICK 

 SIR , you have not come back , as you say you would . no matter I know the news , and I write to tell you so . do you see anything particular in my face when you leave I ? I be wonder , in my own mind , whether the day of his downfall have come at last , and whether you be the choose instrument for work it . you be , and you have work it . 

 you be weak enough , as I have hear , to try and save his life . if you have succeed , I should have look upon you as my enemy . now you have fail , I hold you as my friend . your inquiry frighten he into the vestry by night your inquiry , without your privity and against your will , have serve the hatred and wreak the vengeance of three - and - twenty year . thank you , sir , in spite of yourself . 

 I owe something to the man who have do this . how can I pay my debt ? if I be a young woman still I might say , " come , put your arm round my waist , and kiss I , if you like . " I should have be fond enough of you even to go that length , and you would have accept my invitation you would , sir , twenty year ago ! but I be an old woman now . well ! I can satisfy your curiosity , and pay my debt in that way . you had a great curiosity to know certain private affair of mine when you come to see I private affair which all your sharpness could not look into without my help private affair which you have not discover , even now . you shall discover they your curiosity shall be satisfied . I will take any trouble to please you , my estimable young friend ! 

 you be a little boy , I suppose , in the year twenty - seven ? I be a handsome young woman at that time , live at Old Welmingham . I have a contemptible fool for a husband . I have also the honour of be acquaint   never mind how   with a certain gentleman   never mind whom . I shall not call he by his name . why should I ? it be not his own . he never have a name : you know that , by this time , as well as I do . 

 it will be more to the purpose to tell you how he work himself into my good grace . I be bear with the taste of a lady , and he gratify they in other word , he admire I , and he make I present . no woman can resist admiration and present especially present , provide they happen to be just the thing she want . he be sharp enough to know that most man be . naturally he want something in return all man do . and what do you think be the something ? the mere trifle . nothing but the key of the vestry , and the key of the press inside it , when my husband 's back be turn . of course he lie when I ask he why he wish I to get he the key in that private way . he might have save himself the trouble I do not   believe he . but I like my present , and I want more . so I get he the key , without my husband 's knowledge , and I watch he , without his own knowledge . once , twice , four time I watch he , and the fourth time I find he out . 

 I be never over - scrupulous where other people 's affair be concern , and I be not over - scrupulous about his add one to the marriage in the register on his own account . 

 of course I know it be wrong , but it do no harm to I , which be one good reason for not make a fuss about it . and I have not get a gold watch and chain , which be another , still well and he have promise I one from London only the day before , which be a third , good of all . if I have know what the law consider the crime to be , and how the law punish it , I should have take proper care of myself , and have expose he then and there . but I know nothing , and I long for the gold watch . all the condition I insist on be that he should take I into his confidence and tell I everything . I be as curious about his affair then as you be about mine now . he grant my condition why , you will see presently . 

 this , put in short , be what I hear from he . he do not willingly tell I all that I tell you here . I draw some of it from he by persuasion and some of it by question . I be determined to have all the truth , and I believe I get it . 

 he know no more than any one else of what the state of thing really be between his father and mother till after his mother 's death . then his father confess it , and promise to do what he could for his son . he die have do nothing not have even make a will . the son   who can blame he ?   wisely provide for himself . he come to England at once , and take possession of the property . there be no one to suspect he , and no one to say he nay . his father and mother have always live as man and wife none of the few people who be acquaint with they ever suppose they to be anything else . the right person to claim the property   if the truth have be know   be a distant relation , who have no idea of ever get it , and who be away at sea when his father die . he have no difficulty so far he take possession , as a matter of course . but he could not borrow money on the property as a matter of course . there be two thing want of he before he could do this . one be a certificate of his birth , and the other be a certificate of his parent ' marriage . the certificate of his birth be easily get he be bear abroad , and the certificate be there in due form . the other matter be a difficulty , and that difficulty bring he to Old Welmingham . 

 but for one consideration he might have go to Knowlesbury instead . 

 his mother have be live there just before she meet with his father live under her maiden name , the truth be that she be really a married woman , marry in Ireland , where her husband have ill - use she , and have afterwards go off with some other person . I give you this fact on good authority Sir Felix mention it to his son as the reason why he have not marry . you may wonder why the son , know that his parent have meet each other at Knowlesbury , do not play his first trick with the register of that church , where it might have be fairly presume his father and mother be marry . the reason be that the clergyman who do duty at Knowlesbury church , in the year eighteen hundred and three   when , accord to his birth certificate , his father and mother ought to have be marry , be alive still when he take possession of the property in the New Year of eighteen hundred and twenty - seven . this awkward circumstance force he to extend his inquiry to our neighbourhood . there no such danger exist , the former clergyman at our church have be dead for some year . 

 Old Welmingham suit his purpose as well as Knowlesbury . his father have remove his mother from Knowlesbury , and have live with she at a cottage on the river , a little distance from our village . People who have know his solitary way when he be single do not wonder at his solitary way when he be suppose to be marry . if he have not be a hideous creature to look at , his retired life with the lady might have raise suspicion ; but , as thing be , his hide his ugliness and his deformity in the strict privacy surprised nobody . he live in our neighbourhood till he come in possession of the Park . after three or four and twenty year have pass , who be to say   the clergyman be dead   that his marriage have not be as private as the rest of his life , and that it have not take place at Old Welmingham church ? 

 so , as I tell you , the son find our neighbourhood the sure place he could choose to set thing right secretly in his own interest . it may surprise you to hear that what he really do to the marriage register be do on the spur of the moment do on second thought . 

 his first notion be only to tear the leaf out   in the right year and month , to destroy it privately , to go back to London , and to tell the lawyer to get he the necessary certificate of his father 's marriage , innocently refer they of course to the date on the leaf that be go . nobody could say his father and mother have not be marry after that , and whether , under the circumstance , they would stretch a point or not about lend he the money   he think they would , he have his answer ready at all event , if a question be ever raise about his right to the name and the estate . 

 but when he come to look privately at the register for himself , he find at the bottom of one of the page for the year eighteen hundred and three a blank space leave , seemingly through there be no room to make a long entry there , which be make instead at the top of the next page . the sight of this chance alter all his plan . it be an opportunity he have never hop for , or thought of and he take it you know how . the blank space , to have exactly tally with his birth certificate , ought to have occur in the July part of the register . it occur in the September part instead . however , in this case , if suspicious question be ask , the answer be not hard to find . he have only to describe himself as a seven month ' child . 

 I be fool enough , when he tell I his story , to feel some interest and some pity for he which be just what he calculate on , as you will see . I think he hardly use . it be not his fault that his father and mother be not marry , and it be not his father 's and mother 's fault either . a more scrupulous woman than I be a woman who have not set her heart on a gold watch and chain would have find some excuse for he . at all event , I hold my tongue , and help to screen what he be about . 

 he be some time get the ink the right colour   mix it over and over again in pot and bottle of mine , and some time afterwards in practise the handwriting . but he succeed in the end , and make an honest woman of his mother after she be dead in her grave ! so far , I do not   deny that he behave honourably enough to myself . he give I my watch and chain , and spar no expense in buy they ; both be of superior workmanship , and very expensive . I have get they still the watch go beautifully . 

 you say the other day that Mrs. Clements have tell you everything she know . in that case there be no need for I to write about the trumpery scandal by which I be the sufferer the innocent sufferer , I positively assert . you must know as well as I do what the notion be which my husband take into his head when he find I and my fine - gentleman acquaintance meet each other privately and talk secret together . but what you do not   know be how it end between that same gentleman and myself . you shall read and see how he behave to I . 

 the first word I say to he , when I see the turn thing have take , be , " do I justice clear my character of a stain on it which you know I do not   deserve . I do not   want you to make a clean breast of it to my husband only tell he , on your word of honour as a gentleman , that he be wrong , and that I be not to blame in the way he think I be . do I that justice , at least , after all I have do for you . " he flatly refuse , in so many word . he tell I plainly that it be his interest to let my husband and all my neighbour believe the falsehood because , as long as they do so they be quite certain never to suspect the truth . I have a spirit of my own , and I tell he they should know the truth from my lip . his reply be short , and to the point . if I speak , I be a lost woman , as certainly as he be a lost man . 

 yes ! it have come to that . he have deceive I about the risk I run in help he . he have practise on my ignorance , he have tempt I with his gift , he have interest I with his story and the result of it be that he make I his accomplice . he own this coolly , and he end by tell I , for the first time , what the frightful punishment really be for his offence , and for any one who help he to commit it . in those day the law be not so tender - hearted as I hear it be now . murderer be not the only people liable to be hang , and woman convict be not treat like lady in undeserved distress . I confess he frighten I the mean impostor ! the cowardly blackguard ! do you understand now how I hat he ? do you understand why I be take all this trouble thankfully take it to gratify the curiosity of the meritorious young gentleman who hunt he down ? 

 well , to go on . he be hardly fool enough to drive I to downright desperation . I be not the sort of woman whom it be quite safe to hunt into a corner he know that , and wisely quiet I with proposal for the future . 

 I deserve some reward   he be kind enough to say   for the service I have do he , and some compensation   he be so obliging as to add   for what I have suffer . he be quite willing generous scoundrel ! to make I a handsome yearly allowance , payable quarterly , on two condition . first , I be to hold my tongue in my own interest as well as in his . secondly , I be not to stir away from Welmingham without first let he know , and wait till I have obtain his permission . in my own neighbourhood , no virtuous female friend would tempt I into dangerous gossiping at the tea - table . in my own neighbourhood , he would always know where to find I . a hard condition , that second one but I accept it . 

 what else be I to do ? I be leave helpless , with the prospect of a come incumbrance in the shape of a child . what else be I to do ? cast myself on the mercy of my runaway idiot of a husband who have raise the scandal against I ? I would have die first . besides , the allowance be a handsome one . I have a well income , a well house over my head , well carpet on my floor , than half the woman who turn up the white of their eye at the sight of I . the dress of Virtue , in our part , be cotton print . I have silk . 

 so I accept the condition he offer I , and make the good of they , and fight my battle with my respectable neighbour on their own ground , and win it in course of time as you see yourself . how I keep his Secret   and mine   through all the year that have pass from that time to this , and whether my late daughter , Anne , ever really creep into my confidence , and get the keeping of the Secret too be question , I dare say , to which you be curious to find an answer . well ! my gratitude refuse you nothing . I will turn to a fresh page and give you the answer immediately . but you must excuse one thing you must excuse my beginning , Mr. Hartright , with an expression of surprise at the interest which you appear to have feel in my late daughter . it be quite unaccountable to I . if that interest make you anxious for any particular of her early life , I must refer you to Mrs. Clements , who know more of the subject than I do . pray understand that I do not profess to have be at all overfond of my late daughter . she be a worry to I from first to last , with the additional disadvantage of be always weak in the head . you like candour , and I hope this satisfy you . 

 there be no need to trouble you with many personal particular relate to those past time . it will be enough to say that I observe the term of the bargain on my side , and that I enjoy my comfortable income in return , pay quarterly . 

 now and then I get away and change the scene for a short time , always ask leave of my lord and master first , and generally get it . he be not , as I have already tell you , fool enough to drive I too hard , and he could reasonably rely on my hold my tongue for my own sake , if not for his . one of my long trip away from home be the trip I take to Limmeridge to nurse a half - sister there , who be die . she be report to have save money , and I think it as well   in case any accident happen to stop my allowance   to look after my own interest in that direction . as thing turn out , however , my pain be all throw away , and I get nothing , because nothing be to be have . 

 I have take Anne to the north with I , have my whim and fancy , occasionally , about my child , and get , at such time , jealous of Mrs. Clements ' influence over she . I never like Mrs. Clements . she be a poor , empty - headed , spiritless woman what you call a bear drudge and I be now and then not averse to plague she by take Anne away . not know what else to do with my girl while I be nurse in Cumberland , I put she to school at Limmeridge . the lady of the manor , Mrs. Fairlie   a remarkably plain - look woman , who have entrap one of the handsome man in England into marry she , amuse I wonderfully by take a violent fancy to my girl . the consequence be , she learn nothing at school , and be pet and spoil at Limmeridge House . among other whim and fancy which they teach she there , they put some nonsense into her head about always wear white . hat white and like colour myself , I determine to take the nonsense out of her head as soon as we get home again . 

 strange to say , my daughter resolutely resist I . when she have get a notion once fix in her mind she be , like other half - witted people , as obstinate as a mule in keep it . we quarrel finely , and Mrs. Clements , not like to see it , I suppose , offer to take Anne away to live in London with she . I should have say yes , if Mrs. Clements have not side with my daughter about she dress herself in white . but be determine she should not dress herself in white , and dislike Mrs. Clements more than ever for take part against I , I say no , and mean no , and stick to no . the consequence be , my daughter remain with I , and the consequence of that , in its turn , be the first serious quarrel that happen about the Secret . 

 the circumstance take place long after the time I have just be write of . I have be settle for year in the new town , and be steadily live down my bad character and slowly gain ground among the respectable inhabitant . it help I forward greatly towards this object to have my daughter with I . her harmlessness and her fancy for dress in white excite a certain amount of sympathy . I leave off oppose her favourite whim on that account , because some of the sympathy be sure , in course of time , to fall to my share . some of it do fall . I date my get a choice of the two good sitting to let in the church from that time , and I date the clergyman 's first bow from my get the sitting . 

 well , be settle in this way , I receive a letter one morning from that highly bear gentleman   now deceased   in answer to one of mine , warn he , accord to agreement , of my wishing to leave the town for a little change of air and scene . 

 the ruffianly side of he must have be uppermost , I suppose , when he get my letter , for he write back , refuse I in such abominably insolent language , that I lose all command over myself , and abuse he , in my daughter 's presence , as " a low impostor whom I could ruin for life if I choose to open my lip and let out his Secret . " I say no more about he than that , be bring to my sens as soon as those word have escape I by the sight of my daughter 's face look eagerly and curiously at mine . I instantly order she out of the room until I have compose myself again . 

 my sensation be not pleasant , I can tell you , when I come to reflect on my own folly . Anne have be more than usually crazy and queer that year , and when I think of the chance there might be of she repeat my word in the town , and mention his name in connection with they , if inquisitive people get hold of she , I be finely terrified at the possible consequence . my bad fear for myself , my bad dread of what he might do , lead I no far than this . I be quite unprepared for what really do happen only the next day . 

 on that next day , without any warning to I to expect he , he come to the house . 

 his first word , and the tone in which he speak they , surly as it be , show I plainly enough that he have repent already of his insolent answer to my application , and that he have come in a mighty bad temper to try and set matter right again before it be too late . see my daughter in the room with I   I have be afraid to let she out of my sight after what have happen the day before   he order she away . they neither of they like each other , and he vent the ill - temper on she which he be afraid to show to I . 

 " leave we , " he say , look at she over his shoulder . she look back over her shoulder and wait as if she do not   care to go . " do you hear ? " he roar out , " leave the room . " " speak to I civilly , " say she , get red in the face . " turn the idiot out , " say he , look my way . she have always have crazy notion of her own about her dignity , and that word " idiot " upset she in a moment . before I could interfere she step up to he in a fine passion . " beg my pardon , directly , " say she , " or I will make it the bad for you . I will let out your Secret . I can ruin you for life if I choose to open my lip . " my own word ! repeat exactly from what I have say the day before repeat , in his presence , as if they have come from herself . he sit speechless , as white as the paper I be write on , while I push she out of the room . when he recover himself 

 no ! I be too respectable a woman to mention what he say when he recover himself . my pen be the pen of a member of the rector 's congregation , and a subscriber to the " Wednesday Lectures on Justification by Faith " how can you expect I to employ it in write bad language ? suppose , for yourself , the rag , swear frenzy of the low ruffian in England , and let we get on together , as fast as may be , to the way in which it all end . 

 it end , as you probably guess by this time , in his insisting on secure his own safety by shut she up . 

 I try to set thing right . I tell he that she have merely repeat , like a parrot , the word she have hear I say and that she know no particular whatever , because I have mention none . I explain that she have affect , out of crazy spite against he , to know what she really do not know that she only want to threaten he and aggravate he for speak to she as he have just speak and that my unlucky word give she just the chance of do mischief of which she be in search . I refer he to other queer way of her , and to his own experience of the vagary of half - witte people it be all to no purpose he would not believe I on my oath he be absolutely certain I have betray the whole secret . in short , he would hear of nothing but shut she up . 

 under these circumstance , I do my duty as a mother . " no pauper asylum , " I say , " I will not   have she put in a pauper asylum . a private Establishment , if you please . I have my feeling as a mother , and my character to preserve in the town , and I will submit to nothing but a private Establishment , of the sort which my genteel neighbour would choose for afflicted relative of their own . " those be my word . it be gratify to I to reflect that I do my duty . though never overfond of my late daughter , I have a proper pride about she . no pauper stain thank to my firmness and resolution ever rest on MY child . 

 have carry my point   which I do the more easily , in consequence of the facility offer by private Asylums , I could not refuse to admit that there be certain advantage gain by shut she up . in the first place , she be take excellent care of be treat   as I take care to mention in the town   on the footing of a lady . in the second place , she be keep away from Welmingham , where she might have set people suspect and inquire , by repeat my own incautious word . 

 the only drawback of put she under restraint be a very slight one . we merely turn her empty boast about know the Secret into a fix delusion . have first speak in sheer crazy spitefulness against the man who have offend she , she be cunning enough to see that she have seriously frighten he , and sharp enough afterwards to discover that he be concern in shut she up . the consequence be she flame out into a perfect frenzy of passion against he , go to the Asylum , and the first word she say to the nurse , after they have quiet she , be , that she be put in confinement for know his secret , and that she mean to open her lip and ruin he , when the right time come . 

 she may have say the same thing to you , when you thoughtlessly assist her escape . she certainly say it   as I hear last summer   to the unfortunate woman who marry our sweet - temper , nameless gentleman lately deceased . if either you , or that unlucky lady , have question my daughter closely , and have insist on she explain what she really mean , you would have find she lose all her self - importance suddenly , and get vacant , and restless , and confuse you would have discover that I be write nothing here but the plain truth . she know that there be a Secret she know who be connect with it she know who would suffer by its be know and beyond that , whatever air of importance she may have give herself , whatever crazy boasting she may have indulge in with stranger , she never to her die day know more . 

 have I satisfy your curiosity ? I have take pain enough to satisfy it at any rate . there be really nothing else I have to tell you about myself or my daughter . my bad responsibility , so far as she be concern , be all over when she be secure in the Asylum . I have a form of letter relate to the circumstance under which she be shut up , give I to write , in answer to one Miss Halcombe , who be curious in the matter , and who must have hear plenty of lie about I from a certain tongue well accustom to the telling of the same . and I do what I could afterwards to trace my runaway daughter , and prevent she from do mischief by make inquiry myself in the neighbourhood where she be falsely report to have be see . but these , and other trifle like they , be of little or no interest to you after what you have hear already . 

 so far , I have write in the friendly possible spirit . but I can not close this letter without add a word here of serious remonstrance and reproof , address to yourself . 

 in the course of your personal interview with I , you audaciously refer to my late daughter 's parentage on the father 's side , as if that parentage be a matter of doubt . this be highly improper and very ungentlemanlike on your part ! if we see each other again , remember , if you please , that I will allow no liberty to be take with my reputation , and that the moral atmosphere of Welmingham   to use a favourite expression of my friend the rector 's   must not be taint by loose conversation of any kind . if you allow yourself to doubt that my husband be Anne 's father , you personally insult I in the gross manner . if you have feel , and if you still continue to feel , an unhallowed curiosity on this subject , I recommend you , in your own interest , to check it at once , and for ever . on this side of the grave , Mr. Hartright , whatever may happen on the other , that curiosity will never be gratify . 

 perhaps , after what I have just say , you will see the necessity of write I an apology . do so , and I will willingly receive it . I will , afterwards , if your wish point to a second interview with I , go a step far , and receive you . my circumstance only enable I to invite you to tea not that they be at all alter for the bad by what have happen . I have always live , as I think I tell you , well within my income , and I have save enough , in the last twenty year , to make I quite comfortable for the rest of my life . it be not my intention to leave Welmingham . there be one or two little advantage which I have still to gain in the town . the clergyman bow to I as you see . he be marry , and his wife be not quite so civil . I propose to join the Dorcas Society , and I mean to make the clergyman 's wife bow to I next . 

 if you favour I with your company , pray understand that the conversation must be entirely on general subject . any attempt reference to this letter will be quite useless I be determined not to acknowledge have write it . the evidence have be destroy in the fire , I know , but I think it desirable to err on the side of caution , nevertheless . 

 on this account no name be mention here , nor be any signature attach to these line : the handwriting be disguise throughout , and I mean to deliver the letter myself , under circumstance which will prevent all fear of its be trace to my house . you can have no possible cause to complain of these precaution , see that they do not affect the information I here communicate , in consideration of the special indulgence which you have deserve at my hand . my hour for tea be half - past five , and my buttered toast wait for nobody . 




 the story continued BY WALTER HARTRIGHT 



 I 

 my first impulse , after read Mrs. Catherick 's extraordinary narrative , be to destroy it . the hardened shameless depravity of the whole composition , from begin to end the atrocious perversity of mind which persistently associate I with a calamity for which I be in no sense answerable , and with a death which I have risk my life in try to avert so disgusted I , that I be on the point of tear the letter , when a consideration suggest itself which warn I to wait a little before I destroy it . 

 this consideration be entirely unconnected with Sir Percival . the information communicate to I , so far as it concern he , do little more than confirm the conclusion at which I have already arrive . 

 he have commit his offence , as I have suppose he to have commit it , and the absence of all reference , on Mrs. Catherick 's part , to the duplicate register at Knowlesbury , strengthen my previous conviction that the existence of the book , and the risk of detection which it imply , must have be necessarily unknown to Sir Percival . my interest in the question of the forgery be now at an end , and my only object in keep the letter be to make it of some future service in clear up the last mystery that still remain to baffle I the parentage of Anne Catherick on the father 's side . there be one or two sentence drop in her mother 's narrative , which it might be useful to refer to again , when matter of more immediate importance allow I leisure to search for the missing evidence . I do not despair of still find that evidence , and I have lose none of my anxiety to discover it , for I have lose none of my interest in trace the father of the poor creature who now lay at rest in Mrs. Fairlie 's grave . 

 accordingly , I seal up the letter and put it away carefully in my pocket - book , to be refer to again when the time come . 

 the next day be my last in Hampshire . when I have appear again before the magistrate at Knowlesbury , and when I have attend at the adjourn inquest , I should be free to return to London by the afternoon or the evening train . 

 my first errand in the morning be , as usual , to the post - office . the letter from Marian be there , but I think when it be hand to I that it feel unusually light . I anxiously open the envelope . there be nothing inside but a small strip of paper fold in two . the few blot hurriedly - write line which be trace on it contain these word : 

 " come back as soon as you can . I have be oblige to move . come to Gower 's Walk , Fulham   number five . I will be on the look - out for you . do not   be alarmed about we , we be both safe and well . but come back . marian . " 

 the news which those line contain news which I instantly associate with some attempt treachery on the part of Count Fosco fairly overwhelm I . I stand breathless with the paper crumple up in my hand . what have happen ? what subtle wickedness have the Count plan and execute in my absence ? a night have pass since Marian 's note be write hour must elapse still before I could get back to they some new disaster might have happen already of which I be ignorant . and here , mile and mile away from they , here I must remain held , doubly hold , at the disposal of the law ! 

 I hardly know to what forgetfulness of my obligation anxiety and alarm might not have tempt I , but for the quieting influence of my faith in Marian . my absolute reliance on she be the one earthly consideration which help I to restrain myself , and give I courage to wait . the inquest be the first of the impediment in the way of my freedom of action . I attend it at the appoint time , the legal formality require my presence in the room , but as it turn out , not call on I to repeat my evidence . this useless delay be a hard trial , although I do my good to quiet my impatience by follow the course of the proceeding as closely as I could . 

 the London solicitor of the deceased   Mr. Merriman   be among the person present . but he be quite unable to assist the object of the inquiry . he could only say that he be inexpressibly shock and astonish , and that he could throw no light whatever on the mysterious circumstance of the case . at interval during the adjourned investigation , he suggest question which the Coroner put , but which lead to no result . after a patient inquiry , which last nearly three hour , and which exhaust every available source of information , the jury pronounce the customary verdict in case of sudden death by accident . they add to the formal decision a statement , that there have be no evidence to show how the key have be abstract , how the fire have be cause , or what the purpose be for which the deceased have enter the vestry . this act close the proceeding . the legal representative of the dead man be leave to provide for the necessity of the interment , and the witness be free to retire . 

 resolve not to lose a minute in get to Knowlesbury , I pay my bill at the hotel , and hire a fly to take I to the town . a gentleman who hear I give the order , and who see that I be go alone , inform I that he live in the neighbourhood of Knowlesbury , and ask if I would have any objection to his get home by share the fly with I . I accept his proposal as a matter of course . 

 our conversation during the drive be naturally occupy by the one absorb subject of local interest . 

 my new acquaintance have some knowledge of the late Sir Percival 's solicitor , and he and Mr. Merriman have be discuss the state of the deceased gentleman 's affair and the succession to the property . Sir Percival 's embarrassment be so well know all over the county that his solicitor could only make a virtue of necessity and plainly acknowledge they . he have die without leave a will , and he have no personal property to bequeath , even if he have make one , the whole fortune which he have derive from his wife have be swallow up by his creditor . the heir to the estate   Sir Percival have leave no issue   be a son of Sir Felix Glyde 's first cousin , an officer in command of an East Indiaman . he would find his unexpected inheritance sadly encumber , but the property would recover with time , and , if " the captain " be careful , he might be a rich man yet before he die . 

 absorb as I be in the one idea of get to London , this information   which event prove to be perfectly correct   have an interest of its own to attract my attention . I think it justify I in keep secret my discovery of Sir Percival 's fraud . the heir , whose right he have usurp , be the heir who would now have the estate . the income from it , for the last three - and - twenty year , which should properly have be his , and which the dead man have squander to the last farthing , be go beyond recall . if I speak , my speaking would confer advantage on no one . if I keep the secret , my silence conceal the character of the man who have cheat Laura into marry he . for her sake , I wish to conceal it for her sake , still , I tell this story under feigned name . 

 I part with my chance companion at Knowlesbury , and go at once to the town - hall . as I have anticipate , no one be present to prosecute the case against I the necessary formality be observe , and I be discharge . on leave the court a letter from Mr. Dawson be put into my hand . it inform I that he be absent on professional duty , and it reiterate the offer I have already receive from he of any assistance which I might require at his hand . I write back , warmly acknowledge my obligation to his kindness , and apologise for not express my thank personally , in consequence of my immediate recall on press business to town . 

 half an hour later I be speed back to London by the express train . 



 II 

 it be between nine and ten o'clock before I reach Fulham , and find my way to Gower 's Walk . 

 both Laura and Marian come to the door to let I in . I think we have hardly know how close the tie be which bind we three together , until the evening come which unite we again . we meet as if we have be part for month instead of for a few day only . Marian 's face be sadly wear and anxious . I see who have know all the danger and borne all the trouble in my absence the moment I look at she . Laura 's bright look and well spirit tell I how carefully she have be spar all knowledge of the dreadful death at Welmingham , and of the true reason of our change of abode . 

 the stir of the removal seem to have cheer and interested she . she only speak of it as a happy thought of Marian 's to surprise I on my return with a change from the close , noisy street to the pleasant neighbourhood of tree and field and the river . she be full of project for the future of the drawing she be to finish of the purchaser I have find in the country who be to buy they of the shilling and sixpence she have save , till her purse be so heavy that she proudly ask I to weigh it in my own hand . the change for the well which have be work in she during the few day of my absence be a surprise to I for which I be quite unprepared and for all the unspeakable happiness of see it , I be indebted to Marian 's courage and to Marian 's love . 

 when Laura have leave we , and when we could speak to one another without restraint , I try to give some expression to the gratitude and the admiration which fill my heart . but the generous creature would not wait to hear I . that sublime self - forgetfulness of woman , which yield so much and ask so little , turn all her thought from herself to I . 

 " I have only a moment leave before post - time , " she say , " or I should have write less abruptly . you look worn and weary , Walter . I be afraid my letter must have seriously alarm you ? " 

 " only at first , " I reply . " my mind be quiet , Marian , by my trust in you . be I right in attribute this sudden change of place to some threaten annoyance on the part of Count Fosco ? " 

 " perfectly right , " she say . " I see he yesterday , and bad than that , Walter I speak to he . " 

 " speak to he ? do he know where we live ? do he come to the house ? " 

 " he do . to the house but not upstairs . Laura never see he Laura suspect nothing . I will tell you how it happen : the danger , I believe and hope , be over now . yesterday , I be in the sitting - room , at our old lodging . Laura be draw at the table , and I be walk about and set thing to right . I pass the window , and as I pass it , look out into the street . there , on the opposite side of the way , I see the Count , with a man talk to he " 

 " do he notice you at the window ? " 

 " no at least , I think not . I be too violently startled to be quite sure . " 

 " who be the other man ? a stranger ? " 

 " not a stranger , Walter . as soon as I could draw my breath again , I recognise he . he be the owner of the Lunatic Asylum . " 

 " be the Count point out the house to he ? " 

 " no , they be talk together as if they have accidentally meet in the street . I remain at the window look at they from behind the curtain . if I have turn round , and if Laura have see my face at that moment thank God , she be absorb over her drawing ! they soon part . the man from the Asylum go one way , and the Count the other . I begin to hope they be in the street by chance , till I see the Count come back , stop opposite to we again , take out his card - case and pencil , write something , and then cross the road to the shop below we . I run past Laura before she could see I , and say I have forget something upstairs . as soon as I be out of the room I go down to the first landing and wait I be determined to stop he if he try to come upstairs . he make no such attempt . the girl from the shop come through the door into the passage , with his card in her hand a large gilt card with his name , and a coronet above it , and these line underneath in pencil : ' Dear lady '   yes ! the villain could address I in that way still   ' dear lady , one word , I implore you , on a matter serious to we both . ' if one can think at all , in serious difficulty , one think quick . I feel directly that it might be a fatal mistake to leave myself and to leave you in the dark , where such a man as the Count be concern . I feel that the doubt of what he might do , in your absence , would be ten time more try to I if I decline to see he than if I consent . ' ask the gentleman to wait in the shop , ' I say . ' I will be with he in a moment . ' I run upstairs for my bonnet , be determine not to let he speak to I indoor . I know his deep ringing voice , and I be afraid Laura might hear it , even in the shop . in less than a minute I be down again in the passage , and have open the door into the street . he come round to meet I from the shop . there he be in deep mourning , with his smooth bow and his deadly smile , and some idle boy and woman near he , star at his great size , his fine black clothe , and his large cane with the gold knob to it . all the horrible time at Blackwater come back to I the moment I set eye on he . all the old loathing creep and crawl through I , when he take off his hat with a flourish and speak to I , as if we have part on the friendly term hardly a day since . " 

 " you remember what he say ? " 

 " I can not   repeat it , Walter . you shall know directly what he say about you -but I can not   repeat what he say to I . it be bad than the polite insolence of his letter . my hand tingle to strike he , as if I have be a man ! I only keep they quiet by tear his card to piece under my shawl . without say a word on my side , I walk away from the house   for fear of Laura see we , and he follow , protest softly all the way . in the first by - street I turn , and ask he what he want with I . he want two thing . first , if I have no objection , to express his sentiment . I decline to hear they . secondly , to repeat the warning in his letter . I ask , what occasion there be for repeat it . he bow and smile , and say he would explain . the explanation exactly confirm the fear I express before you leave we . I tell you , if you remember , that Sir Percival would be too headstrong to take his friend 's advice where you be concern , and that there be no danger to be dread from the Count till his own interest be threaten , and he be rouse into act for himself ? " 

 " I recollect , Marian . " 

 " well , so it have really turn out . the Count offer his advice , but it be refuse . Sir Percival would only take counsel of his own violence , his own obstinacy , and his own hatred of you . the Count let he have his way , first privately ascertain , in case of his own interest be threaten next , where we live . you be follow , Walter , on return here , after your first journey to Hampshire , by the lawyer 's man for some distance from the railway , and by the Count himself to the door of the house . how he contrive to escape be see by you he do not tell I , but he find we out on that occasion , and in that way . have make the discovery , he take no advantage of it till the news reach he of Sir Percival 's death , and then , as I tell you , he act for himself , because he believe you would next proceed against the dead man 's partner in the conspiracy . he at once make his arrangement to meet the owner of the Asylum in London , and to take he to the place where his runaway patient be hide , believe that the result , whichever way they end , would be to involve you in interminable legal dispute and difficulty , and to tie your hand for all purpose of offence , so far as he be concern . that be his purpose , on his own confession to I . the only consideration which make he hesitate , at the last moment " 

 " yes ? " 

 " it be hard to acknowledge it , Walter , and yet I must . I be the only consideration . no word can say how degraded I feel in my own estimation when I think of it , but the one weak point in that man 's iron character be the horrible admiration he feel for I . I have try , for the sake of my own self - respect , to disbelieve it as long as I could ; but his look , his action , force on I the shameful conviction of the truth . the eye of that monster of wickedness moisten while he be speak to I they do , Walter ! he declare that at the moment of point out the house to the doctor , he think of my misery if I be separate from Laura , of my responsibility if I be call on to answer for effect her escape , and he risk the bad that you could do to he , the second time , for my sake . all he ask be that I would remember the sacrifice , and restrain your rashness , in my own interest interest which he might never be able to consult again . I make no such bargain with he I would have die first . but believe he or not , whether it be true or false that he send the doctor away with an excuse , one thing be certain , I see the man leave he without so much as a glance at our window , or even at our side of the way . " 

 " I believe it , Marian . the good man be not consistent in good why should the bad man be consistent in evil ? at the same time , I suspect he of merely attempt to frighten you , by threaten what he can not really do . I doubt his power of annoy we , by mean of the owner of the Asylum , now that Sir Percival be dead , and Mrs. Catherick be free from all control . but let I hear more . what do the Count say of I ? " 

 " he speak last of you . his eye brighten and harden , and his manner change to what I remember it in past time to that mixture of pitiless resolution and mountebank mockery which make it so impossible to fathom he . ' warn Mr. Hartright ! ' he say in his lofty manner . ' he have a man of brain to deal with , a man who snap his big finger at the law and convention of society , when he measure himself with I . if my lamented friend have take my advice , the business of the inquest would have be with the body of Mr. Hartright . but my lamented friend be obstinate . see ! I mourn his loss inwardly in my soul , outwardly on my hat . this trivial crape express sensibility which I summon Mr. Hartright to respect . they may be transform to immeasurable enmity if he venture to disturb they . let he be content with what he have get with what I leave unmoleste , for your sake , to he and to you . say to he   with my compliment , if he stir I , he have Fosco to deal with . in the English of the Popular Tongue , I inform he fosco stick at nothing . dear lady , good morning . ' his cold grey eye settle on my face he take off his hat solemnly bow , bare - headed and leave I . " 

 " without return ? without say more last word ? " 

 " he turn at the corner of the street , and wave his hand , and then strike it theatrically on his breast . I lose sight of he after that . he disappear in the opposite direction to our house , and I run back to Laura . before I be indoor again , I have make up my mind that we must go . the house   especially in your absence   be a place of danger instead of a place of safety , now that the Count have discover it . if I could have feel certain of your return , I should have risk wait till you come back . but I be certain of nothing , and I act at once on my own impulse . you have speak , before leave we , of move into a quieter neighbourhood and purer air , for the sake of Laura 's health . I have only to remind she of that , and to suggest surprising you and save you trouble by manage the move in your absence , to make she quite as anxious for the change as I be . she help I to pack up your thing , and she have arrange they all for you in your new working - room here . " 

 " what make you think of come to this place ? " 

 " my ignorance of other locality in the neighbourhood of London . I feel the necessity of get as far away as possible from our old lodging , and I know something of Fulham , because I have once be at school there . I despatch a messenger with a note , on the chance that the school might still be in existence . it be in existence the daughter of my old mistress be carry it on for she , and they engage this place from the instruction I have send . it be just post - time when the messenger return to I with the address of the house . we move after dark we come here quite unobserved . have I do right , Walter ? have I justify your trust in I ? " 

 I answer she warmly and gratefully , as I really feel . but the anxious look still remain on her face while I be speak , and the first question she ask , when I have do , relate to Count Fosco . 

 I see that she be think of he now with a changed mind . no fresh outbreak of anger against he , no new appeal to I to hasten the day of reckoning escape she . her conviction that the man 's hateful admiration of herself be really sincere , seem to have increase a hundredfold her distrust of his unfathomable cunning , her inborn dread of the wicked energy and vigilance of all his faculty . her voice fall low , her manner be hesitate , her eye search into mine with an eager fear when she ask I what I think of his message , and what I mean to do next after hear it . 

 " not many week have pass , Marian , " I answer , ' since my interview with Mr. Kyrle . when he and I part , the last word I say to he about Laura be these : ' her uncle 's house shall open to receive she , in the presence of every soul who follow the false funeral to the grave ; the lie that record her death shall be publicly erase from the tombstone by the authority of the head of the family , and the two man who have wrong she shall answer for their crime to I , though the justice that sit in tribunal be powerless to pursue they . ' one of those man be beyond mortal reach . the other remain , and my resolution remain . " 

 her eye light up her colour rise . she say nothing , but I see all her sympathy gather to mine in her face . 

 " I do not   disguise from myself , or from you , " I go on , " that the prospect before we be more than doubtful . the risk we have run already be , it may be , trifle compare with the risk that threaten we in the future , but the venture shall be try , Marian , for all that . I be not rash enough to measure myself against such a man as the Count before I be well prepared for he . I have learn patience I can wait my time . let he believe that his message have produce its effect let he know nothing of we , and hear nothing of we let we give he full time to feel secure his own boastful nature , unless I seriously mistake he , will hasten that result . this be one reason for waiting , but there be another more important still . my position , Marian , towards you and towards Laura ought to be a strong one than it be now before I try our last chance . " 

 she lean near to I , with a look of surprise . 

 " how can it be strong ? " she ask . 

 " I will tell you , " I reply , " when the time come . it have not come yet it may never come at all . I may be silent about it to Laura for ever I must be silent now , even to you , till I see for myself that I can harmlessly and honourably speak . let we leave that subject . there be another which have more pressing claim on our attention . you have keep Laura , mercifully keep she , in ignorance of her husband 's death " 

 " oh , Walter , surely it must be long yet before we tell she of it ? " 

 " no , Marian . well that you should reveal it to she now , than that accident , which no one can guard against , should reveal it to she at some future time . spare she all the detail break it to her very tenderly , but tell she that he be dead . " 

 " you have a reason , Walter , for wish she to know of her husband 's death besides the reason you have just mention ? " 

 " I have . " 

 " a reason connect with that subject which must not be mention between we yet ? which may never be mention to Laura at all ? " 

 she dwelt on the last word meaningly . when I answer she in the affirmative , I dwelt on they too . 

 her face grow pale . for a while she look at I with a sad , hesitate interest . an unaccustomed tenderness tremble in her dark eye and soften her firm lip , as she glance aside at the empty chair in which the dear companion of all our joy and sorrow have be sit . 

 " I think I understand , " she say . " I think I owe it to she and to you , Walter , to tell she of her husband 's death . " 

 she sigh , and hold my hand fast for a moment then drop it abruptly , and leave the room . on the next day Laura know that his death have release she , and that the error and the calamity of her life lie bury in his tomb . 


 his name be mention among we no more . Thenceforward , we shrink from the slight approach to the subject of his death , and in the same scrupulous manner , Marian and I avoid all further reference to that other subject , which , by her consent and mine , be not to be mention between we yet . it be not the less present in our mind it be rather keep alive in they by the restraint which we have impose on ourselves . we both watch Laura more anxiously than ever , sometimes wait and hop , sometimes wait and fear , till the time come . 

 by degree we return to our accustomed way of life . I resume the daily work , which have be suspend during my absence in Hampshire . our new lodging cost we more than the small and less convenient room which we have leave , and the claim thus imply on my increase exertion be strengthen by the doubtfulness of our future prospect . emergency might yet happen which would exhaust our little fund at the banker 's , and the work of my hand might be , ultimately , all we have to look to for support . more permanent and more lucrative employment than have yet be offer to I be a necessity of our position a necessity for which I now diligently set myself to provide . 

 it must not be suppose that the interval of rest and seclusion of which I be now write , entirely suspend , on my part , all pursuit of the one absorb purpose with which my thought and action be associate in these page . that purpose be , for month and month yet , never to relax its claim on I . the slow ripening of it still leave I a measure of precaution to take , an obligation of gratitude to perform , and a doubtful question to solve . 

 the measure of precaution relate , necessarily , to the Count . it be of the last importance to ascertain , if possible , whether his plan commit he to remain in England or , in other word , to remain within my reach . I contrive to set this doubt at rest by very simple mean . his address in St. John 's Wood be know to I , I inquire in the neighbourhood , and have find out the agent who have the disposal of the furnished house in which he live , I ask if number five , Forest Road , be likely to be let within a reasonable time . the reply be in the negative . I be inform that the foreign gentleman then reside in the house have renew his term of occupation for another six month , and would remain in possession until the end of June in the following year . we be then at the beginning of December only . I leave the agent with my mind relieve from all present fear of the Count 's escape I . 

 the obligation I have to perform take I once more into the presence of Mrs. Clements . I have promise to return , and to confide to she those particular relate to the death and burial of Anne Catherick which I have be oblige to withhold at our first interview . change as circumstance now be , there be no hindrance to my trust the good woman with as much of the story of the conspiracy as it be necessary to tell . I have every reason that sympathy and friendly feeling could suggest to urge on I the speedy performance of my promise , and I do conscientiously and carefully perform it . there be no need to burden these page with any statement of what pass at the interview . it will be more to the purpose to say , that the interview itself necessarily bring to my mind the one doubtful question still remain to be solve the question of Anne Catherick 's parentage on the father 's side . 

 a multitude of small consideration in connection with this subject trifle enough in themselves , but strikingly important when mass together have latterly lead my mind to a conclusion which I resolve to verify . I obtain Marian 's permission to write to Major Donthorne , of Varneck Hall   where Mrs. Catherick have live in service for some year previous to her marriage , to ask he certain question . I make the inquiry in Marian 's name , and describe they as relate to matter of personal history in her family , which might explain and excuse my application . when I write the letter I have no certain knowledge that Major Donthorne be still alive I despatch it on the chance that he might be live , and able and willing to reply . 

 after a lapse of two day proof come , in the shape of a letter , that the Major be live , and that he be ready to help we . 

 the idea in my mind when I write to he , and the nature of my inquiry will be easily infer from his reply . his letter answer my question by communicate these important fact 

 in the first place , " the late Sir Percival Glyde , of Blackwater Park , " have never set foot in Varneck Hall . the deceased gentleman be a total stranger to Major Donthorne , and to all his family . 

 in the second place , " the late Mr. Philip Fairlie , of Limmeridge House , " have be , in his young day , the intimate friend and constant guest of Major Donthorne . have refresh his memory by look back to old letter and other paper , the Major be in a position to say positively that Mr. Philip Fairlie be stay at Varneck Hall in the month of August , eighteen hundred and twenty - six , and that he remain there for the shooting during the month of September and part of October follow . he then leave , to the good of the Major 's belief , for Scotland , and do not return to Varneck Hall till after a lapse of time , when he reappear in the character of a newly - marry man . 

 take by itself , this statement be , perhaps , of little positive value , but take in connection with certain fact , every one of which either Marian or I know to be true , it suggest one plain conclusion that be , to our mind , irresistible . 

 Knowing , now , that Mr. Philip Fairlie have be at Varneck Hall in the autumn of eighteen hundred and twenty - six , and that Mrs. Catherick have be live there in service at the same time , we know also first , that Anne have be bear in June , eighteen hundred and twenty - seven ; secondly , that she have always present an extraordinary personal resemblance to Laura ; and , thirdly , that Laura herself be strikingly like her father . Mr. Philip Fairlie have be one of the notoriously handsome man of his time . in disposition entirely unlike his brother Frederick , he be the spoilt darling of society , especially of the woman an easy , light - hearte , impulsive , affectionate man generous to a fault constitutionally lax in his principle , and notoriously thoughtless of moral obligation where woman be concern . such be the fact we know such be the character of the man . surely the plain inference that follow need no pointing out ? 

 Read by the new light which have now break upon I , even Mrs. Catherick 's letter , in despite of herself , render its mite of assistance towards strengthen the conclusion at which I have arrive . she have describe Mrs. Fairlie   in write to I   as " plain - look , " and as have " entrap the handsome man in England into marry she . " both assertion be gratuitously make , and both be false . jealous dislike   which , in such a woman as Mrs. Catherick , would express itself in petty malice rather than not express itself at all   appear to I to be the only assignable cause for the peculiar insolence of her reference to Mrs. Fairlie , under circumstance which do not necessitate any reference at all . 

 the mention here of Mrs. Fairlie 's name naturally suggest one other question . do she ever suspect whose child the little girl bring to she at Limmeridge might be ? 

 Marian 's testimony be positive on this point . Mrs. Fairlie 's letter to her husband , which have be read to I in former day the letter describe Anne 's resemblance to Laura , and acknowledge her affectionate interest in the little stranger have be write , beyond all question , in perfect innocence of heart . it even seem doubtful , on consideration , whether Mr. Philip Fairlie himself have be near than his wife to any suspicion of the truth . the disgracefully deceitful circumstance under which Mrs. Catherick have marry , the purpose of concealment which the marriage be intend to answer , might well keep she silent for caution 's sake , perhaps for her own pride 's sake also , even assume that she have the mean , in his absence , of communicate with the father of her unborn child . 

 as this surmise float through my mind , there rise on my memory the remembrance of the Scripture denunciation which we have all thought of in our time with wonder and with awe : " the sin of the father shall be visit on the child . " but for the fatal resemblance between the two daughter of one father , the conspiracy of which Anne have be the innocent instrument and Laura the innocent victim could never have be plan . with what unerring and terrible directness the long chain of circumstance lead down from the thoughtless wrong commit by the father to the heartless injury inflict on the child ! 

 these thought come to I , and other with they , which draw my mind away to the little Cumberland churchyard where Anne Catherick now lie bury . I think of the bygone day when I have meet she by Mrs. Fairlie 's grave , and meet she for the last time . I think of her poor helpless hand beat on the tombstone , and her weary , yearn word , murmur to the dead remain of her protectress and her friend : " oh , if I could die , and be hide and at rest with you ! " little more than a year have pass since she breathe that wish ; and how inscrutably , how awfully , it have be fulfil ! the word she have speak to Laura by the shore of the lake , the very word have now come true . " oh , if I could only be bury with your mother ! if I could only wake at her side when the angel 's trumpet sound and the graf give up their dead at the resurrection ! " through what mortal crime and horror , through what darkest winding of the way down to death the lose creature have wander in God 's lead to the last home that , live , she never hop to reach ! in that sacred rest I leave she in that dread companionship let she remain undisturbed . 


 so the ghostly figure which have haunt these page , as it haunt my life , go down into the impenetrable gloom . like a shadow she first come to I in the loneliness of the night . like a shadow she pass away in the loneliness of the dead . 



 III 

 four month elapse . April come the month of spring the month of change . 

 the course of time have flow through the interval since the winter peacefully and happily in our new home . I have turn my long leisure to good account , have largely increase my source of employment , and have place our mean of subsistence on surer ground . free from the suspense and the anxiety which have try she so sorely and hang over her so long , Marian 's spirit rally , and her natural energy of character begin to assert itself again , with something , if not all , of the freedom and the vigour of former time . 

 more pliable under change than her sister , Laura show more plainly the progress make by the heal influence of her new life . the worn and waste look which have prematurely age her face be fast leave it , and the expression which have be the first of its charm in past day be the first of its beauty that now return . my close observation of she detect but one serious result of the conspiracy which have once threaten her reason and her life . her memory of event , from the period of she leave Blackwater Park to the period of our meeting in the burial - ground of Limmeridge Church , be lose beyond all hope of recovery . at the slight reference to that time she change and tremble still , her word become confused , her memory wander and lose itself as helplessly as ever . here , and here only , the trace of the past lie deep too deep to be efface . 

 in all else she be now so far on the way to recovery that , on her good and bright day , she sometimes look and speak like the Laura of old time . the happy change work its natural result in we both . from their long slumber , on her side and on mine , those imperishable memory of our past life in Cumberland now awake , which be one and all alike , the memory of our love . 

 gradually and insensibly our daily relation towards each other become constrain . the fond word which I have speak to she so naturally , in the day of her sorrow and her suffering , falter strangely on my lip . in the time when my dread of lose she be most present to my mind , I have always kiss she when she leave I at night and when she meet I in the morning . the kiss seem now to have drop between we to be lose out of our life . our hand begin to tremble again when they meet . we hardly ever look long at one another out of Marian 's presence . the talk often flag between we when we be alone . when I touch she by accident I feel my heart beat fast , as it use to beat at Limmeridge House I see the lovely answer flush glowing again in her cheek , as if we be back among the Cumberland Hills in our past character of master and pupil once more . she have long interval of silence and thoughtfulness , and deny she have be think when Marian ask she the question . I surprise myself one day neglect my work to dream over the little water - colour portrait of she which I have take in the summer - house where we first meet just as I use to neglect Mr. Fairlie 's drawing to dream over the same likeness when it be newly finish in the bygone time . change as all the circumstance now be , our position towards each other in the golden day of our first companionship seem to be revive with the revival of our love . it be as if Time have drift we back on the wreck of our early hope to the old familiar shore ! 

 to any other woman I could have speak the decisive word which I still hesitate to speak to she . the utter helplessness of her position her friendless dependence on all the forbear gentleness that I could show she my fear of touch too soon some secret sensitiveness in she which my instinct as a man might not have be fine enough to discover these consideration , and other like they , keep I self - distrustfully silent . and yet I know that the restraint on both side must be end , that the relation in which we stand towards one another must be alter in some settle manner for the future , and that it rest with I , in the first instance , to recognise the necessity for a change . 

 the more I think of our position , the hard the attempt to alter it appear , while the domestic condition on which we three have be live together since the winter remain undisturbed . I can not account for the capricious state of mind in which this feeling originate , but the idea nevertheless possess I that some previous change of place and circumstance , some sudden break in the quiet monotony of our life , so manage as to vary the home aspect under which we have be accustom to see each other , might prepare the way for I to speak , and might make it easy and less embarrassing for Laura and Marian to hear . 

 with this purpose in view , I say , one morning , that I think we have all earn a little holiday and a change of scene . after some consideration , it be decide that we should go for a fortnight to the sea - side . 

 on the next day we leave Fulham for a quiet town on the south coast . at that early season of the year we be the only visitor in the place . the cliff , the beach , and the walk inland be all in the solitary condition which be most welcome to we . the air be mild the prospect over hill and wood and down be beautifully vary by the shift April light and shade , and the restless sea leapt under our window , as if it feel , like the land , the glow and freshness of spring . 

 I owe it to Marian to consult she before I speak to Laura , and to be guide afterwards by her advice . 

 on the third day from our arrival I find a fit opportunity of speak to she alone . the moment we look at one another , her quick instinct detect the thought in my mind before I could give it expression . with her customary energy and directness she speak at once , and speak first . 

 " you be think of that subject which be mention between we on the evening of your return from Hampshire , " she say . " I have be expect you to allude to it for some time past . there must be a change in our little household , Walter , we can not go on much long as we be now . I see it as plainly as you do as plainly as Laura see it , though she say nothing . how strangely the old time in Cumberland seem to have come back ! you and I be together again , and the one subject of interest between we be Laura once more . I could almost fancy that this room be the summer - house at Limmeridge , and that those wave beyond we be beat on our sea - shore . " 

 " I be guide by your advice in those past day , " I say , " and now , Marian , with reliance tenfold great I will be guide by it again . " 

 she answer by press my hand . I see that she be deeply touch by my reference to the past . we sit together near the window , and while I speak and she listen , we look at the glory of the sunlight shin on the majesty of the sea . 

 " whatever come of this confidence between we , " I say , " whether it end happily or sorrowfully for I , Laura 's interest will still be the interest of my life . when we leave this place , on whatever term we leave it , my determination to wrest from Count Fosco the confession which I fail to obtain from his accomplice , go back with I to London , as certainly as I go back myself . neither you nor I can tell how that man may turn on I , if I bring he to bay ; we only know , by his own word and action , that he be capable of strike at I through Laura , without a moment 's hesitation , or a moment 's remorse . in our present position I have no claim on she which society sanction , which the law allow , to strengthen I in resist he , and in protect she . this place I at a serious disadvantage . if I be to fight our cause with the Count , strong in the consciousness of Laura 's safety , I must fight it for my Wife . do you agree to that , Marian , so far ? " 

 " to every word of it , " she answer . 

 " I will not plead out of my own heart , " I go on ; " I will not appeal to the love which have survive all change and all shock I will rest my only vindication of myself for thinking of she , and speak of she as my wife , on what I have just say . if the chance of force a confession from the Count be , as I believe it to be , the last chance leave of publicly establish the fact of Laura 's existence , the least selfish reason that I can advance for our marriage be recognise by we both . but I may be wrong in my conviction other mean of achieve our purpose may be in our power , which be less uncertain and less dangerous . I have search anxiously , in my own mind , for those mean , and I have not find they . have you ? " 

 " no . I have think about it too , and think in vain . " 

 " in all likelihood , " I continue , " the same question have occur to you , in consider this difficult subject , which have occur to I . ought we to return with she to Limmeridge , now that she be like herself again , and trust to the recognition of she by the people of the village , or by the child at the school ? ought we to appeal to the practical test of her handwriting ? suppose we do so . suppose the recognition of she obtain , and the identity of the handwriting establish . would success in both those case do more than supply an excellent foundation for a trial in a court of law ? would the recognition and the handwriting prove her identity to Mr. Fairlie and take she back to Limmeridge House , against the evidence of her aunt , against the evidence of the medical certificate , against the fact of the funeral and the fact of the inscription on the tomb ? no ! we could only hope to succeed in throw a serious doubt on the assertion of her death , a doubt which nothing short of a legal inquiry can settle . I will assume that we possess   what we have certainly not get   money enough to carry this inquiry on through all its stage . I will assume that Mr. Fairlie 's prejudice might be reason away that the false testimony of the Count and his wife , and all the rest of the false testimony , might be confute that the recognition could not possibly be ascribe to a mistake between Laura and Anne Catherick , or the handwriting be declare by our enemy to be a clever fraud all these be assumption which , more or less , set plain probability at defiance ; but let they pass and let we ask ourselves what would be the first consequence or the first question put to Laura herself on the subject of the conspiracy . we know only too well what the consequence would be , for we know that she have never recover her memory of what happen to she in London . examine she privately , or examine she publicly , she be utterly incapable of assist the assertion of her own case . if you do not   see this , Marian , as plainly as I see it , we will go to Limmeridge and try the experiment to - morrow . " 

 " I do see it , Walter . even if we have the mean of pay all the law expense , even if we succeed in the end , the delay would be unendurable , the perpetual suspense , after what we have suffer already , would be heartbreaking . you be right about the hopelessness of go to Limmeridge . I wish I could feel sure that you be right also in determine to try that last chance with the Count . be it a chance at all ? " 

 " beyond a doubt , yes . it be the chance of recover the lost date of Laura 's journey to London . without return to the reason I give you some time since , I be still as firmly persuade as ever that there be a discrepancy between the date of that journey and the date on the certificate of death . there lie the weak point of the whole conspiracy it crumble to piece if we attack it in that way , and the mean of attack it be in possession of the Count . if I succeed in wrest they from he , the object of your life and mine be fulfil . if I fail , the wrong that Laura have suffer will , in this world , never be redress . " 

 " do you fear failure yourself , Walter ? " 

 " I dare not anticipate success , and for that very reason , Marian , I speak openly and plainly as I have speak now . in my heart and my conscience I can say it , Laura 's hope for the future be at their low ebb . I know that her fortune be go I know that the last chance of restore she to her place in the world lie at the mercy of her bad enemy , of a man who be now absolutely unassailable , and who may remain unassailable to the end . with every worldly advantage go from she , with all prospect of recover her rank and station more than doubtful , with no clear future before she than the future which her husband can provide , the poor drawing - master may harmlessly open his heart at last . in the day of her prosperity , Marian , I be only the teacher who guide her hand I ask for it , in her adversity , as the hand of my wife ! " 

 Marian 's eye meet mine affectionately I could say no more . my heart be full , my lip be tremble . in spite of myself I be in danger of appeal to her pity . I get up to leave the room . she rise at the same moment , lay her hand gently on my shoulder , and stop I . 

 " Walter ! " she say , " I once part you both , for your good and for her . wait here , my brother ! wait , my dearest , good friend , till Laura come , and tell you what I have do now ! " 

 for the first time since the farewell morning at Limmeridge she touch my forehead with her lip . a tear drop on my face as she kiss I . she turn quickly , point to the chair from which I have rise , and leave the room . 

 I sit down alone at the window to wait through the crisis of my life . my mind in that breathless interval feel like a total blank . I be conscious of nothing but a painful intensity of all familiar perception . the sun grow blind bright , the white sea bird chase each other far beyond I seem to be flit before my face , the mellow murmur of the wave on the beach be like thunder in my ear . 

 the door open , and Laura come in alone . so she have enter the breakfast - room at Limmeridge House on the morning when we part . slowly and falteringly , in sorrow and in hesitation , she have once approach I . now she come with the haste of happiness in her foot , with the light of happiness radiant in her face . of their own accord those dear arm clasp themselves round I , of their own accord the sweet lip come to meet mine . " my darling ! " she whisper , " we may own we love each other now ? " her head nestle with a tender contentedness on my bosom . " oh , " she say innocently , " I be so happy at last ! " 


 ten day later we be happy still . we be marry . 



 IV 

 the course of this narrative , steadily flow on , bear I away from the morning - time of our married life , and carry I forward to the end . 

 in a fortnight more we three be back in London , and the shadow be steal over we of the struggle to come . 

 Marian and I be careful to keep Laura in ignorance of the cause that have hurry we back the necessity of make sure of the Count . it be now the beginning of May , and his term of occupation at the house in Forest Road expire in June . if he renew it   and I have reason , shortly to be mention , for anticipate that he would , I might be certain of his not escape I . but if by any chance he disappoint my expectation and leave the country , then I have no time to lose in arm myself to meet he as I good might . 

 in the first fulness of my new happiness , there have be moment when my resolution falter moment when I be tempt to be safely content , now that the dear aspiration of my life be fulfil in the possession of Laura 's love . for the first time I think faint - heartedly of the greatness of the risk , of the adverse chance array against I , of the fair promise of our new life , and of the peril in which I might place the happiness which we have so hardly earn . yes ! let I own it honestly . for a brief time I wander , in the sweet guiding of love , far from the purpose to which I have be true under sterner discipline and in dark day . innocently Laura have tempt I aside from the hard path innocently she be destine to lead I back again . 

 at time , dream of the terrible past still disconnectedly recall to she , in the mystery of sleep , the event of which her wake memory have lose all trace . one night   barely two week after our marriage , when I be watch she at rest , I see the tear come slowly through her closed eyelid , I hear the faint murmuring word escape she which tell I that her spirit be back again on the fatal journey from Blackwater Park . that unconscious appeal , so touching and so awful in the sacredness of her sleep , run through I like fire . the next day be the day we come back to London the day when my resolution return to I with tenfold strength . 

 the first necessity be to know something of the man . thus far , the true story of his life be an impenetrable mystery to I . 

 I begin with such scanty source of information as be at my own disposal . the important narrative write by Mr. Frederick Fairlie   which Marian have obtain by follow the direction I have give to she in the winter   prove to be of no service to the special object with which I now look at it . while read it I reconsider the disclosure reveal to I by Mrs. Clements of the series of deception which have bring Anne Catherick to London , and which have there devote she to the interest of the conspiracy . here , again , the Count have not openly commit himself here , again , he be , to all practical purpose , out of my reach . 

 I next return to Marian 's journal at Blackwater Park . at my request she read to I again a passage which refer to her past curiosity about the Count , and to the few particular which she have discover relate to he . 

 the passage to which I allude occur in that part of her journal which delineate his character and his personal appearance . she describe he as " not have cross the frontier of his native country for year past " as " anxious to know if any italian gentleman be settle in the near town to Blackwater Park " as " receive letter with all sort of odd stamp on they , and one with a large official - look seal on it . " she be inclined to consider that his long absence from his native country may be account for by assume that he be a political exile . but she be , on the other hand , unable to reconcile this idea with the reception of the letter from abroad bear " the large official - look seal " letter from the continent address to political exile be usually the last to court attention from foreign post - office in that way . 

 the consideration thus present to I in the diary , join to certain surmise of my own that grow out of they , suggest a conclusion which I wonder I have not arrive at before . I now say to myself what Laura have once say to Marian at Blackwater Park , what Madame Fosco have overhear by listen at the door the Count be a spy ! 

 Laura have apply the word to he at hazard , in natural anger at his proceeding towards herself . I apply it to he with the deliberate conviction that his vocation in life be the vocation of a spy . on this assumption , the reason for his extraordinary stay in England so long after the object of the conspiracy have be gain , became , to my mind , quite intelligible . 

 the year of which I be now write be the year of the famous Crystal Palace Exhibition in Hyde Park . foreigner in unusually large number have arrive already , and be still arrive in England . man be among we by hundred whom the ceaseless distrustfulness of their government have follow privately , by mean of appoint agent , to our shore . my surmise do not for a moment class a man of the Count 's ability and social position with the ordinary rank and file of foreign spy . I suspect he of hold a position of authority , of be entrust by the government which he secretly serve with the organisation and management of agent specially employ in this country , both man and woman , and I believe Mrs. Rubelle , who have be so opportunely find to act as nurse at Blackwater Park , to be , in all probability , one of the number . 

 assume that this idea of mine have a foundation in truth , the position of the Count might prove to be more assailable than I have hitherto venture to hope . to whom could I apply to know something more of the man 's history and of the man himself than I know now ? 

 in this emergency it naturally occur to my mind that a countryman of his own , on whom I could rely , might be the fit person to help I . the first man whom I think of under these circumstance be also the only italian with whom I be intimately acquaint my quaint little friend , Professor Pesca . 


 the professor have be so long absent from these page that he have run some risk of be forget altogether . 

 it be the necessary law of such a story as mine that the person concern in it only appear when the course of event take they up they come and go , not by favour of my personal partiality , but by right of their direct connection with the circumstance to be detail . for this reason , not Pesca alone , but my mother and sister as well , have be leave far in the background of the narrative . my visit to the Hampstead cottage , my mother 's belief in the denial of Laura 's identity which the conspiracy have accomplish , my vain effort to overcome the prejudice on her part and on my sister 's to which , in their jealous affection for I , they both continue to adhere , the painful necessity which that prejudice impose on I of conceal my marriage from they till they have learn to do justice to my wife all these little domestic occurrence have be leave unrecorded because they be not essential to the main interest of the story . it be nothing that they add to my anxiety and embitter my disappointment the steady march of event have inexorably pass they by . 

 for the same reason I have say nothing here of the consolation that I find in Pesca 's brotherly affection for I , when I see he again after the sudden cessation of my residence at Limmeridge House . I have not record the fidelity with which my warm - hearted little friend follow I to the place of embarkation when I sail for Central America , or the noisy transport of joy with which he receive I when we next meet in London . if I have feel justify in accept the offer of service which he make to I on my return , he would have appear again long ere this . but , though I know that his honour and his courage be to be implicitly rely on , I be not so sure that his discretion be to be trust , and , for that reason only , I follow the course of all my inquiry alone . it will now be sufficiently understand that Pesca be not separate from all connection with I and my interest , although he have hitherto be separate from all connection with the progress of this narrative . he be as true and as ready a friend of mine still as ever he have be in his life . 


 before I summon Pesca to my assistance it be necessary to see for myself what sort of man I have to deal with . up to this time I have never once set eye on Count Fosco . 

 three day after my return with Laura and Marian to London , I set forth alone for Forest Road , St. John 's Wood , between ten and eleven o'clock in the morning . it be a fine day I have some hour to spare and I think it likely , if I wait a little for he , that the Count might be tempt out . I have no great reason to fear the chance of his recognise I in the daytime , for the only occasion when I have be see by he be the occasion on which he have follow I home at night . 

 no one appear at the window in the front of the house . I walk down a turning which run past the side of it , and look over the low garden wall . one of the back window on the low floor be throw up and a net be stretch across the opening . I see nobody , but I hear , in the room , first a shrill whistling and singing of bird , then the deep ringing voice which Marian 's description have make familiar to I . " come out on my little finger , my pret - pret - prettie ! " cry the voice . " come out and hop upstairs ! one , two , three and up ! three , two , one and down ! one , two , three twit - twit - twit - tweet ! " the Count be exercise his canary as he use to exercise they in Marian 's time at Blackwater Park . 

 I wait a little while , and the singing and the whistling cease . " come , kiss I , my prettie ! " say the deep voice . there be a responsive twittering and chirp a low , oily laugh a silence of a minute or so , and then I hear the opening of the house door . I turn and retrace my step . the magnificent melody of the Prayer in Rossini 's Moses , sing in a sonorous bass voice , rise grandly through the suburban silence of the place . the front garden gate open and close . the Count have come out . 

 he cross the road and walk towards the western boundary of the Regent 's Park . I keep on my own side of the way , a little behind he , and walk in that direction also . 

 Marian have prepare I for his high stature , his monstrous corpulence , and his ostentatious mourning garment , but not for the horrible freshness and cheerfulness and vitality of the man . he carry his sixty year as if they have be few than forty . he saunter along , wear his hat a little on one side , with a light jaunty step , swing his big stick , hum to himself , look up from time to time at the house and garden on either side of he with superb , smile patronage . if a stranger have be tell that the whole neighbourhood belong to he , that stranger would not have be surprised to hear it . he never look back , he pay no apparent attention to I , no apparent attention to any one who pass he on his own side of the road , except now and then , when he smile and smirk , with an easy paternal good humour , at the nursery - maid and the child whom he meet . in this way he lead I on , till we reach a colony of shop outside the western terrace of the Park . 

 here he stop at a pastrycook 's , go in   probably to give an order , and come out again immediately with a tart in his hand . an Italian be grind an organ before the shop , and a miserable little shrivelled monkey be sit on the instrument . the Count stop , bit a piece for himself out of the tart , and gravely hand the rest to the monkey . " my poor little man ! " he say , with grotesque tenderness , " you look hungry . in the sacred name of humanity , I offer you some lunch ! " the organ - grinder piteously put in his claim to a penny from the benevolent stranger . the Count shrug his shoulder contemptuously , and pass on . 

 we reach the street and the well class of shop between the New Road and Oxford Street . the Count stop again and enter a small optician 's shop , with an inscription in the window announce that repair be neatly execute inside . he come out again with an opera - glass in his hand , walk a few pace on , and stop to look at a bill of the opera place outside a music - seller 's shop . he read the bill attentively , consider a moment , and then hail an empty cab as it pass he . " Opera Box - office , " he say to the man , and be drive away . 

 I cross the road , and look at the bill in my turn . the performance announce be Lucrezia Borgia , and it be to take place that evening . the opera - glass in the Count 's hand , his careful reading of the bill , and his direction to the cabman , all suggest that he propose make one of the audience . I have the mean of get an admission for myself and a friend to the pit by apply to one of the scene - painter attach to the theatre , with whom I have be well acquaint in past time . there be a chance at least that the Count might be easily visible among the audience to I and to any one with I , and in this case I have the mean of ascertain whether Pesca know his countryman or not that very night . 

 this consideration at once decide the disposal of my evening . I procure the ticket , leave a note at the Professor 's lodging on the way . at a quarter to eight I call to take he with I to the theatre . my little friend be in a state of the high excitement , with a festive flower in his button - hole , and the large opera - glass I ever see hug up under his arm . 

 " be you ready ? " I ask . 

 " right - all - right , " say Pesca . 

 we start for the theatre . 



 V 

 the last note of the introduction to the opera be be play , and the seat in the pit be all fill , when Pesca and I reach the theatre . 

 there be plenty of room , however , in the passage that run round the pit precisely the position well calculate to answer the purpose for which I be attend the performance . I go first to the barrier separate we from the stall , and look for the Count in that part of the theatre . he be not there . return along the passage , on the left - hand side from the stage , and look about I attentively , I discover he in the pit . he occupy an excellent place , some twelve or fourteen seat from the end of a bench , within three row of the stall . I place myself exactly on a line with he . Pesca stand by my side . the Professor be not yet aware of the purpose for which I have bring he to the theatre , and he be rather surprised that we do not move near to the stage . 

 the curtain rise , and the opera begin . 

 throughout the whole of the first act we remain in our position the Count , absorb by the orchestra and the stage , never cast so much as a chance glance at we . not a note of Donizetti 's delicious music be lose on he . there he sit , high above his neighbour , smile , and nod his great head enjoyingly from time to time . when the people near he applaud the close of an air   as an english audience in such circumstance always will applaud , without the least consideration for the orchestral movement which immediately follow it , he look round at they with an expression of compassionate remonstrance , and hold up one hand with a gesture of polite entreaty . at the more refined passage of the singing , at the more delicate phase of the music , which pass unapplauded by other , his fat hand , adorn with perfectly - fitting black kid glove , softly pat each other , in token of the cultivate appreciation of a musical man . at such time , his oily murmur of approval , " Bravo ! Bra - a - a - a ! " hum through the silence , like the purring of a great cat . his immediate neighbour on either side hearty , ruddy - face people from the country , bask amazedly in the sunshine of fashionable London see and hear he , begin to follow his lead . many a burst of applause from the pit that night start from the soft , comfortable patting of the black - gloved hand . the man 's voracious vanity devour this imply tribute to his local and critical supremacy with an appearance of the high relish . smile ripple continuously over his fat face . he look about he , at the pause in the music , serenely satisfied with himself and his fellow - creature . " yes ! yes ! these barbarous english people be learn something from I . here , there , and everywhere , I Fosco be an influence that be feel , a man who sit supreme ! " if ever face speak , his face speak then , and that be its language . 

 the curtain fall on the first act , and the audience rise to look about they . this be the time I have wait for the time to try if Pesca know he . 

 he rise with the rest , and survey the occupant of the box grandly with his opera - glass . at first his back be towards we , but he turn round in time , to our side of the theatre , and look at the box above we , use his glass for a few minute then remove it , but still continue to look up . this be the moment I choose , when his full face be in view , for direct Pesca 's attention to he . 

 " do you know that man ? " I ask . 

 " which man , my friend ? " 

 " the tall , fat man , stand there , with his face towards we . " 

 Pesca raise himself on tiptoe , and look at the Count . 

 " no , " say the Professor . " the big fat man be a stranger to I . be he famous ? why do you point he out ? " 

 " because I have particular reason for wish to know something of he . he be a countryman of yours his name be Count Fosco . do you know that name ? " 

 " not I , Walter . neither the name nor the man be know to I . " 

 " be you quite sure you do not   recognise he ? look again look carefully . I will tell you why I be so anxious about it when we leave the theatre . stop ! let I help you up here , where you can see he well . " 

 I help the little man to perch himself on the edge of the raise dais upon which the pit - seat be all place . his small stature be no hindrance to he here he could see over the head of the lady who be seat near the outermost part of the bench . 

 a slim , light - haired man stand by we , whom I have not notice before a man with a scar on his left cheek look attentively at Pesca as I help he up , and then look still more attentively , follow the direction of Pesca 's eye , at the Count . our conversation might have reach his ear , and might , as it strike I , have rouse his curiosity . 

 meanwhile , Pesca fix his eye earnestly on the broad , full , smile face turn a little upward , exactly opposite to he . 

 " no , " he say , " I have never set my two eye on that big fat man before in all my life . " 

 as he speak the Count look downwards towards the box behind we on the pit tier . 

 the eye of the two Italians meet . 

 the instant before I have be perfectly satisfied , from his own reiterated assertion , that Pesca do not know the Count . the instant afterwards I be equally certain that the Count know Pesca ! 

 know he , and more surprising still fear he as well ! there be no mistake the change that pass over the villain 's face . the leaden hue that alter his yellow complexion in a moment , the sudden rigidity of all his feature , the furtive scrutiny of his cold grey eye , the motionless stillness of he from head to foot tell their own tale . a mortal dread have master he body and soul and his own recognition of Pesca be the cause of it ! 

 the slim man with the scar on his cheek be still close by we . he have apparently draw his inference from the effect produce on the Count by the sight of Pesca as I have draw mine . he be a mild , gentlemanlike man , look like a foreigner , and his interest in our proceeding be not express in anything approach to an offensive manner . 

 for my own part I be so startled by the change in the Count 's face , so astounded at the entirely unexpected turn which event have take , that I know neither what to say or do next . Pesca rouse I by step back to his former place at my side and speak first . 

 " how the fat man stare ! " he exclaim . " be it at I ? be I famous ? how can he know I when I do not   know he ? " 

 I keep my eye still on the Count . I see he move for the first time when Pesca move , so as not to lose sight of the little man in the low position in which he now stand . I be curious to see what would happen if Pesca 's attention under these circumstance be withdraw from he , and I accordingly ask the Professor if he recognise any of his pupil that evening among the lady in the box . Pesca immediately raise the large opera - glass to his eye , and move it slowly all round the upper part of the theatre , search for his pupil with the most conscientious scrutiny . 

 the moment he show himself to be thus engage the Count turn round , slip past the person who occupy seat on the farth side of he from where we stand , and disappear in the middle passage down the centre of the pit . I catch Pesca by the arm , and to his inexpressible astonishment , hurry he round with I to the back of the pit to intercept the count before he could get to the door . somewhat to my surprise , the slim man hasten out before we , avoid a stoppage cause by some people on our side of the pit leave their place , by which Pesca and myself be delay . when we reach the lobby the Count have disappear , and the foreigner with the scar be go too . 

 " come home , " I say ; " come home , Pesca to your lodging . I must speak to you in private I must speak directly . " 

 " my - soul - bless - my - soul ! " cry the Professor , in a state of the extreme bewilderment . " what on earth be the matter ? " 

 I walk on rapidly without answer . the circumstance under which the Count have leave the theatre suggest to I that his extraordinary anxiety to escape Pesca might carry he to further extremity still . he might escape I , too , by leave London . I doubt the future if I allow he so much as a day 's freedom to act as he please . and I doubt that foreign stranger , who have get the start of we , and whom I suspect of intentionally follow he out . 

 with this double distrust in my mind , I be not long in make Pesca understand what I want . as soon as we two be alone in his room , I increase his confusion and amazement a hundredfold by tell he what my purpose be as plainly and unreservedly as I have acknowledge it here . 

 " my friend , what can I do ? " cry the Professor , piteously appeal to I with both hand . " deuce - what - the - deuce ! how can I help you , Walter , when I do not   know the man ? " 

 " he know you he be afraid of you he have leave the theatre to escape you . Pesca ! there must be a reason for this . look back into your own life before you come to England . you leave Italy , as you have tell I yourself , for political reason . you have never mention those reason to I , and I do not   inquire into they now . I only ask you to consult your own recollection , and to say if they suggest no past cause for the terror which the first sight of you produce in that man . " 

 to my unutterable surprise , these word , harmless as they appear to I , produce the same astounding effect on Pesca which the sight of Pesca have produce on the Count . the rosy face of my little friend whiten in an instant , and he draw back from I slowly , tremble from head to foot . 

 " Walter ! " he say . " you do not   know what you ask . " 

 he speak in a whisper he look at I as if I have suddenly reveal to he some hide danger to both of we . in less than one minute of time he be so altered from the easy , lively , quaint little man of all my past experience , that if I have meet he in the street , change as I see he now , I should most certainly not have know he again . 

 " forgive I , if I have unintentionally pain and shock you , " I reply . " remember the cruel wrong my wife have suffer at Count Fosco 's hand . remember that the wrong can never be redress , unless the mean be in my power of force he to do her justice . I speak in her interest , Pesca I ask you again to forgive I I can say no more . " 

 I rise to go . he stop I before I reach the door . 

 " wait , " he say . " you have shake I from head to foot . you do not   know how I leave my country , and why I leave my country . let I compose myself , let I think , if I can . " 

 I return to my chair . he walk up and down the room , talk to himself incoherently in his own language . after several turn backwards and forwards , he suddenly come up to I , and lay his little hand with a strange tenderness and solemnity on my breast . 

 " on your heart and soul , Walter , " he say , " be there no other way to get to that man but the chance - way through I ? " 

 " there be no other way , " I answer . 

 he leave I again , open the door of the room and look out cautiously into the passage , close it once more , and come back . 

 " you win your right over I , Walter , " he say , " on the day when you save my life . it be your from that moment , when you please to take it . take it now . yes ! I mean what I say . my next word , as true as the good God be above we , will put my life into your hand . " 

 the trembling earnestness with which he utter this extraordinary warning , carry with it , to my mind , the conviction that he speak the truth . 

 " mind this ! " he go on , shake his hand at I in the vehemence of his agitation . " I hold no thread , in my own mind , between that man Fosco , and the past time which I call back to I for your sake . if you find the thread , keep it to yourself tell I nothing on my knee I beg and pray , let I be ignorant , let I be innocent , let I be blind to all the future as I be now ! " 

 he say a few word more , hesitatingly and disconnectedly , then stop again . 

 I see that the effort of express himself in English , on an occasion too serious to permit he the use of the quaint turn and phrase of his ordinary vocabulary , be painfully increase the difficulty he have feel from the first in speak to I at all . have learn to read and understand his native language   though not to speak it , in the early day of our intimate companionship , I now suggest to he that he should express himself in Italian , while I use English in put any question which might be necessary to my enlightenment . he accept the proposal . in his smooth - flow language , speak with a vehement agitation which betray itself in the perpetual work of his feature , in the wildness and the suddenness of his foreign gesticulation , but never in the raising of his voice , I now hear the word which arm I to meet the last struggle , that be leave for this story to record . 3 

  3   it be only right to mention here , that I repeat Pesco 's statement to I with the careful suppression and alteration which the serious nature of the subject and my own sense of duty to my friend demand . my first and last concealment from the reader be those which caution render absolutely necessary in this portion of the narrative . 

 " you know nothing of my motive for leave Italy , " he begin , " except that it be for political reason . if I have be drive to this country by the persecution of my government , I should not have keep those reason a secret from you or from any one . I have conceal they because no government authority have pronounce the sentence of my exile . you have hear , Walter , of the political society that be hide in every great city on the continent of Europe ? to one of those society I belong in Italy and belong still in England . when I come to this country , I come by the direction of my chief . I be over - zealous in my young time I run the risk of compromise myself and other . for those reason I be order to emigrate to England and to wait . I emigrate I have wait I wait still . to - morrow I may be call away ten year hence I may be call away . it be all one to I I be here , I support myself by teaching , and I wait . I violate no oath   you shall hear why presently   in make my confidence complete by tell you the name of the society to which I belong . all I do be to put my life in your hand . if what I say to you now be ever know by other to have pass my lip , as certainly as we two sit here , I be a dead man . " 

 he whisper the next word in my ear . I keep the secret which he thus communicate . the society to which he belong will be sufficiently individualise for the purpose of these page , if I call it " the Brotherhood , " on the few occasion when any reference to the subject will be need in this place . 

 " the object of the Brotherhood , " Pesca go on , " be , briefly , the object of other political society of the same sort the destruction of tyranny and the assertion of the right of the people . the principle of the Brotherhood be two . so long as a man 's life be useful , or even harmless only , he have the right to enjoy it . but , if his life inflict injury on the well - being of his fellow - man , from that moment he forfeit the right , and it be not only no crime , but a positive merit , to deprive he of it . it be not for I to say in what frightful circumstance of oppression and suffer this society take its rise . it be not for you to say you Englishmen , who have conquer your freedom so long ago , that you have conveniently forget what blood you shed , and what extremity you proceed to in the conquering it be not for you to say how far the bad of all exasperation may , or may not , carry the maddened man of an enslaved nation . the iron that have enter into our soul have go too deep for you to find it . leave the refugee alone ! laugh at he , distrust he , open your eye in wonder at that secret self which smoulder in he , sometimes under the everyday respectability and tranquillity of a man like I sometimes under the grind poverty , the fierce squalor , of man less lucky , less pliable , less patient than I be but judge we not ! in the time of your first Charles you might have do we justice the long luxury of your own freedom have make you incapable of do we justice now . " 

 all the deep feeling of his nature seem to force themselves to the surface in those word all his heart be pour out to I for the first time in our life but still his voice never rise , still his dread of the terrible revelation he be make to I never leave he . 

 " so far , " he resume , " you think the society like other society . its object   in your english opinion   be anarchy and revolution . it take the life of a bad king or a bad minister , as if the one and the other be dangerous wild beast to be shoot at the first opportunity . I grant you this . but the law of the Brotherhood be the law of no other political society on the face of the earth . the member be not know to one another . there be a president in Italy ; there be president abroad . each of these have his secretary . the president and the secretary know the member , but the member , among themselves , be all stranger , until their chief see fit , in the political necessity of the time , or in the private necessity of the society , to make they know to each other . with such a safeguard as this there be no oath among we on admittance . we be identify with the Brotherhood by a secret mark , which we all bear , which last while our life last . we be tell to go about our ordinary business , and to report ourselves to the president , or the secretary , four time a year , in the event of our service be require . we be warn , if we betray the Brotherhood , or if we injure it by serve other interest , that we die by the principle of the Brotherhood die by the hand of a stranger who may be send from the other end of the world to strike the blow or by the hand of our own bosom - friend , who may have be a member unknown to we through all the year of our intimacy . sometimes the death be delay sometimes it follow close on the treachery . it be our first business to know how to wait our second business to know how to obey when the word be speak . some of we may wait our life through , and may not be want . some of we may be call to the work , or to the preparation for the work , the very day of our admission . I myself the little , easy , cheerful man you know , who , of his own accord , would hardly lift up his handkerchief to strike down the fly that buzz about his face I , in my young time , under provocation so dreadful that I will not tell you of it , enter the Brotherhood by an impulse , as I might have kill myself by an impulse . I must remain in it now it have get I , whatever I may think of it in my well circumstance and my cooler manhood , to my die day . while I be still in Italy I be choose secretary , and all the member of that time , who be bring face to face with my president , be bring face to face also with I . " 

 I begin to understand he I see the end towards which his extraordinary disclosure be now tend . he wait a moment , watch I earnestly watch till he have evidently guess what be pass in my mind before he resume . 

 " you have draw your own conclusion already , " he say . " I see it in your face . tell I nothing keep I out of the secret of your thought . let I make my one last sacrifice of myself , for your sake , and then have do with this subject , never to return to it again . " 

 he sign to I not to answer he rise remove his coat and roll up the shirt - sleeve on his left arm . 

 " I promise you that this confidence should be complete , " he whisper , speak close at my ear , with his eye look watchfully at the door . " whatever come of it you shall not reproach I with have hide anything from you which it be necessary to your interest to know . I have say that the Brotherhood identify its member by a mark that last for life . see the place , and the mark on it for yourself . " 

 he raise his bare arm , and show I , high on the upper part of it and in the inner side , a brand deeply burn in the flesh and stain of a bright blood - red colour . I abstain from describe the device which the brand represent . it will be sufficient to say that it be circular in form , and so small that it would have be completely cover by a shill coin . 

 " a man who have this mark , brand in this place , " he say , cover his arm again , " be a member of the Brotherhood . a man who have be false to the Brotherhood be discover soon or later by the chief who know he president or secretary , as the case may be . and a man discover by the chief be dead . no HUMAN law can protect HIM . remember what you have see and hear draw what conclusion you like act as you please . but , in the name of God , whatever you discover , whatever you do , tell I nothing ! let I remain free from a responsibility which it horrify I to think of which I know , in my conscience , be not my responsibility now . for the last time I say it on my honour as a gentleman , on my oath as a Christian , if the man you point out at the Opera know I , he be so altered , or so disguised , that I do not know he . I be ignorant of his proceeding or his purpose in England . I never see he , I never hear the name he go by , to my knowledge , before to - night . I say no more . leave I a little , Walter . I be overpower by what have happen I be shake by what I have say . let I try to be like myself again when we meet next . " 

 he drop into a chair , and turn away from I , hide his face in his hand . I gently open the door so as not to disturb he , and speak my few parting word in low tone , which he might hear or not , as he please . 

 " I will keep the memory of to - night in my heart of heart , " I say . " you shall never repent the trust you have repose in I . may I come to you to - morrow ? may I come as early as nine o'clock ? " 

 " yes , Walter , " he reply , look up at I kindly , and speak in English once more , as if his one anxiety now be to get back to our former relation towards each other . " come to my little bit of breakfast before I go my way among the pupil that I teach . " 

 " good - night , Pesca . " 

 " good - night , my friend . " 



 VI 

 my first conviction as soon as I find myself outside the house , be that no alternative be leave I but to act at once on the information I have receive to make sure of the Count that night , or to risk the loss , if I only delay till the morning , of Laura 's last chance . I look at my watch it be ten o'clock . 

 not the shadow of a doubt cross my mind of the purpose for which the Count have leave the theatre . his escape from we , that evening , be beyond all question the preliminary only to his escape from London . the mark of the Brotherhood be on his arm I feel as certain of it as if he have show I the brand ; and the betrayal of the Brotherhood be on his conscience I have see it in his recognition of Pesca . 

 it be easy to understand why that recognition have not be mutual . a man of the Count 's character would never risk the terrible consequence of turn spy without look to his personal security quite as carefully as he look to his golden reward . the shaven face , which I have point out at the Opera , might have be cover by a beard in Pesca 's time his dark brown hair might be a wig his name be evidently a false one . the accident of time might have help he as well his immense corpulence might have come with his later year . there be every reason why Pesca should not have know he again every reason also why he should have know Pesca , whose singular personal appearance make a marked man of he , go where he might . 

 I have say that I feel certain of the purpose in the Count 's mind when he escape we at the theatre . how could I doubt it , when I see , with my own eye , that he believe himself , in spite of the change in his appearance , to have be recognise by Pesca , and to be therefore in danger of his life ? if I could get speech of he that night , if I could show he that I , too know of the mortal peril in which he stand , what result would follow ? plainly this . one of we must be master of the situation one of we must inevitably be at the mercy of the other . 

 I owe it to myself to consider the chance against I before I confront they . I owe it to my wife to do all that lie in my power to lessen the risk . 

 the chance against I want no reckoning up they be all merge in one . if the count discover , by my own avowal , that the direct way to his safety lie through my life , he be probably the last man in existence who would shrink from throw I off my guard and take that way , when he have I alone within his reach . the only mean of defence against he on which I could at all rely to lessen the risk , present themselves , after a little careful thinking , clearly enough . before I make any personal acknowledgment of my discovery in his presence , I must place the discovery itself where it would be ready for instant use against he , and safe from any attempt at suppression on his part . if I lay the mine under his foot before I approach he , and if I leave instruction with a third person to fire it on the expiration of a certain time , unless direction to the contrary be previously receive under my own hand , or from my own lip in that event the Count 's security be absolutely dependent upon mine , and I might hold the vantage ground over he securely , even in his own house . 

 this idea occur to I when I be close to the new lodging which we have take on return from the sea - side . I go in without disturb any one , by the help of my key . a light be in the hall , and I steal up with it to my workroom to make my preparation , and absolutely to commit myself to an interview with the Count , before either Laura or Marian could have the slight suspicion of what I intend to do . 

 a letter address to Pesca represent the sure measure of precaution which it be now possible for I to take . I write as follow 

 " the man whom I point out to you at the Opera be a member of the Brotherhood , and have be false to his trust . put both these assertion to the test instantly . you know the name he go by in England . his address be no . 5 Forest Road , St. John 's Wood . on the love you once bear I , use the power entrust to you without mercy and without delay against that man . I have risk all and lose all and the forfeit of my failure have be pay with my life . " 

 I sign and date these line , enclose they in an envelope , and seal it up . on the outside I write this direction : " keep the enclosure unopened until nine o'clock to - morrow morning . if you do not hear from I , or see I , before that time , break the seal when the clock strike , and read the content . " I add my initial , and protect the whole by enclose it in a second seal envelope , address to Pesca at his lodging . 

 nothing remain to be do after this but to find the mean of send my letter to its destination immediately . I should then have accomplish all that lay in my power . if anything happen to I in the Count 's house , I have now provide for his answer it with his life . 

 that the mean of prevent his escape , under any circumstance whatever , be at Pesca 's disposal , if he choose to exert they , I do not for an instant doubt . the extraordinary anxiety which he have express to remain unenlightened as to the Count 's identity or , in other word , to be leave uncertain enough about fact to justify he to his own conscience in remain passive betray plainly that the mean of exercise the terrible justice of the Brotherhood be ready to his hand , although , as a naturally humane man , he have shrink from plainly say as much in my presence . the deadly certainty with which the vengeance of foreign political society can hunt down a traitor to the cause , hide himself where he may , have be too often exemplified , even in my superficial experience , to allow of any doubt . consider the subject only as a reader of newspaper , case recur to my memory , both in London and in Paris , of foreigner find stab in the street , whose assassin could never be trace of body and part of body throw into the Thames and the Seine , by hand that could never be discover of death by secret violence which could only be account for in one way . I have disguise nothing relate to myself in these page , and I do not disguise here that I believe I have write Count Fosco 's death - warrant , if the fatal emergency happen which authorise Pesca to open my enclosure . 

 I leave my room to go down to the ground floor of the house , and speak to the landlord about find I a messenger . he happen to be ascend the stair at the time , and we meet on the landing . his son , a quick lad , be the messenger he propose to I on hear what I want . we have the boy upstairs , and I give he his direction . he be to take the letter in a cab , to put it into Professor Pesca 's own hand , and to bring I back a line of acknowledgment from that gentleman return in the cab , and keep it at the door for my use . it be then nearly half - past ten . I calculate that the boy might be back in twenty minute , and that I might drive to St. John 's Wood , on his return , in twenty minute more . 

 when the lad have depart on his errand I return to my own room for a little while , to put certain paper in order , so that they might be easily find in case of the bad . the key of the old - fashioned bureau in which the paper be keep I seal up , and leave it on my table , with Marian 's name write on the outside of the little packet . this do , I go downstairs to the sitting - room , in which I expect to find Laura and Marian await my return from the Opera . I feel my hand tremble for the first time when I lay it on the lock of the door . 

 no one be in the room but Marian . she be read , and she look at her watch , in surprise , when I come in . 

 " how early you be back ! " she say . " you must have come away before the Opera be over . " 

 " yes , " I reply , " neither Pesca nor I wait for the end . where be Laura ? " 

 " she have one of her bad headache this evening , and I advise she to go to bed when we have do tea . " 

 I leave the room again on the pretext of wish to see whether Laura be asleep . Marian 's quick eye be begin to look inquiringly at my face Marian 's quick instinct be begin to discover that I have something weigh on my mind . 

 when I enter the bedchamber , and softly approach the bedside by the dim flicker of the night - lamp , my wife be asleep . 

 we have not be marry quite a month yet . if my heart be heavy , if my resolution for a moment falter again , when I look at her face turn faithfully to my pillow in her sleep when I see her hand rest open on the coverlid , as if it be wait unconsciously for mine surely there be some excuse for I ? I only allow myself a few minute to kneel down at the bedside , and to look close at she so close that her breath , as it come and go , flutter on my face . I only touch her hand and her cheek with my lip at part . she stir in her sleep and murmur my name , but without wake . I linger for an instant at the door to look at she again . " God bless and keep you , my darling ! " I whisper , and leave she . 

 Marian be at the stairhead wait for I . she have a fold slip of paper in her hand . 

 " the landlord 's son have bring this for you , " she say . " he have get a cab at the door he say you order he to keep it at your disposal . " 

 " quite right , Marian . I want the cab I be go out again . " 

 I descend the stair as I speak , and look into the sitting - room to read the slip of paper by the light on the table . it contain these two sentence in Pesca 's handwriting 

 " your letter be receive . if I do not   see you before the time you mention , I will break the seal when the clock strike . " 

 I place the paper in my pocket - book , and make for the door . Marian meet I on the threshold , and push I back into the room , where the candle - light fall full on my face . she hold I by both hand , and her eye fasten searchingly on mine . 

 " I see ! " she say , in a low eager whisper . " you be try the last chance to - night . " 

 " yes , the last chance and the good , " I whisper back . 

 " not alone ! oh , Walter , for God 's sake , not alone ! let I go with you . do not   refuse I because I be only a woman . I must go ! I will go ! I will wait outside in the cab ! " 

 it be my turn now to hold she . she try to break away from I and get down first to the door . 

 " if you want to help I , " I say , ' stop here and sleep in my wife 's room to - night . only let I go away with my mind easy about Laura , and I answer for everything else . come , Marian , give I a kiss , and show that you have the courage to wait till I come back . " 

 I dare not allow her time to say a word more . she try to hold I again . I unclasp her hand , and be out of the room in a moment . the boy below hear I on the stair , and open the hall - door . I jump into the cab before the driver could get off the box . " Forest Road , St. John 's Wood , " I call to he through the front window . " double fare if you get there in a quarter of an hour . " " I will do it , sir . " I look at my watch . eleven o'clock . not a minute to lose . 

 the rapid motion of the cab , the sense that every instant now be bring I near to the Count , the conviction that I be embark at last , without let or hindrance , on my hazardous enterprise , heat I into such a fever of excitement that I shout to the man to go fast and fast . as we leave the street , and cross St. John 's Wood Road , my impatience so completely overpower I that I stand up in the cab and stretch my head out of the window , to see the end of the journey before we reach it . just as a church clock in the distance strike the quarter past , we turn into the Forest Road . I stop the driver a little away from the Count 's house , pay and dismiss he , and walk on to the door . 

 as I approach the garden gate , I see another person advance towards it also from the direction opposite to mine . we meet under the gas lamp in the road , and look at each other . I instantly recognise the light - haired foreigner with the scar on his cheek , and I think he recognise I . he say nothing , and instead of stop at the house , as I do , he slowly walk on . be he in the Forest Road by accident ? or have he follow the Count home from the Opera ? 

 I do not pursue those question . after wait a little till the foreigner have slowly pass out of sight , I ring the gate bell . it be then twenty minute past eleven late enough to make it quite easy for the Count to get rid of I by the excuse that he be in bed . 

 the only way of provide against this contingency be to send in my name without ask any preliminary question , and to let he know , at the same time , that I have a serious motive for wish to see he at that late hour . accordingly , while I be wait , I take out my card and write under my name " on important business . " the maid - servant answer the door while I be write the last word in pencil , and ask I distrustfully what I " pleased to want . " 

 " be so good as to take that to your master , " I reply , give she the card . 

 I see , by the girl 's hesitation of manner , that if I have ask for the Count in the first instance she would only have follow her instruction by tell I he be not at home . she be stagger by the confidence with which I give she the card . after star at I , in great perturbation , she go back into the house with my message , close the door , and leave I to wait in the garden . 

 in a minute or so she reappear . " her master 's compliment , and would I be so obliging as to say what my business be ? " " take my compliment back , " I reply , " and say that the business can not be mention to any one but your master . " she leave I again , again return , and this time ask I to walk in . 

 I follow she at once . in another moment I be inside the Count 's house . 



 VII 

 there be no lamp in the hall , but by the dim light of the kitchen candle , which the girl have bring upstairs with she , I see an elderly lady steal noiselessly out of a back room on the ground floor . she cast one viperish look at I as I enter the hall , but say nothing , and go slowly upstairs without return my bow . my familiarity with Marian 's journal sufficiently assure I that the elderly lady be Madame Fosco . 

 the servant lead I to the room which the Countess have just leave . I enter it , and find myself face to face with the Count . 

 he be still in his evening dress , except his coat , which he have throw across a chair . his shirt - sleeve be turn up at the wrist , but no high . a carpet - bag be on one side of he , and a box on the other . book , paper , and article of wear apparel be scatter about the room . on a table , at one side of the door , stand the cage , so well know to I by description , which contain his white mouse . the canary and the cockatoo be probably in some other room . he be seat before the box , pack it , when I go in , and rise with some paper in his hand to receive I . his face still betray plain trace of the shock that have overwhelm he at the Opera . his fat cheek hang loose , his cold grey eye be furtively vigilant , his voice , look , and manner be all sharply suspicious alike , as he advance a step to meet I , and request , with distant civility , that I would take a chair . 

 " you come here on business , sir ? " he say . " I be at a loss to know what that business can possibly be . " 

 the unconcealed curiosity , with which he look hard in my face while he speak , convince I that I have pass unnoticed by he at the Opera . he have see Pesca first , and from that moment till he leave the theatre he have evidently see nothing else . my name would necessarily suggest to he that I have not come into his house with other than a hostile purpose towards himself , but he appear to be utterly ignorant thus far of the real nature of my errand . 

 " I be fortunate in find you here to - night , " I say . " you seem to be on the point of take a journey ? " 

 " be your business connect with my journey ? " 

 " in some degree . " 

 " in what degree ? do you know where I be go to ? " 

 " no . I only know why you be leave London . " 

 he slip by I with the quickness of thought , lock the door , and put the key in his pocket . 

 " you and I , Mr. Hartright , be excellently well acquainted with one another by reputation , " he say . " do it , by any chance , occur to you when you come to this house that I be not the sort of man you could trifle with ? " 

 " it do occur to I , " I reply . " and I have not come to trifle with you . I be here on a matter of life and death , and if that door which you have lock be open at this moment , nothing you could say or do would induce I to pass through it . " 

 I walk far into the room , and stand opposite to he on the rug before the fireplace . he draw a chair in front of the door , and sit down on it , with his left arm rest on the table . the cage with the white mouse be close to he , and the little creature scamper out of their sleep - place as his heavy arm shake the table , and peer at he through the gap in the smartly paint wire . 

 " on a matter of life and death , " he repeat to himself . " those word be more serious , perhaps , than you think . what do you mean ? " 

 " what I say . " 

 the perspiration break out thickly on his broad forehead . his left hand steal over the edge of the table . there be a drawer in it , with a lock , and the key be in the lock . his finger and thumb close over the key , but do not turn it . 

 " so you know why I be leave London ? " he go on . " tell I the reason , if you please . " he turn the key , and unlock the drawer as he speak . 

 " I can do well than that , " I reply . " I can show you the reason , if you like . " 

 " how can you show it ? " 

 " you have get your coat off , " I say . " roll up the shirt - sleeve on your left arm , and you will see it there . " 

 the same livid leaden change pass over his face which I have see pass over it at the theatre . the deadly glitter in his eye shine steady and straight into mine . he say nothing . but his left hand slowly open the table - drawer , and softly slip into it . the harsh grating noise of something heavy that he be move unseen to I sound for a moment , then cease . the silence that follow be so intense that the faint tick nibble of the white mouse at their wire be distinctly audible where I stand . 

 my life hang by a thread , and I know it . at that final moment I think with his mind , I feel with his finger I be as certain as if I have see it of what he keep hide from I in the drawer . 

 " wait a little , " I say . " you have get the door lock you see I do not   move you see my hand be empty . wait a little . I have something more to say . " 

 " you have say enough , " he reply , with a sudden composure so unnatural and so ghastly that it try my nerve as no outbreak of violence could have try they . " I want one moment for my own thought , if you please . do you guess what I be think about ? " 

 " perhaps I do . " 

 " I be think , " he remark quietly , " whether I shall add to the disorder in this room by scatter your brain about the fireplace . " 

 if I have move at that moment , I see in his face that he would have do it . 

 " I advise you to read two line of writing which I have about I , " I rejoin , " before you finally decide that question . " 

 the proposal appear to excite his curiosity . he nod his head . I take Pesca 's acknowledgment of the receipt of my letter out of my pocket - book , hand it to he at arm 's length , and return to my former position in front of the fireplace . 

 he read the line aloud : " your letter be receive . if I do not   hear from you before the time you mention , I will break the seal when the clock strike . " 

 another man in his position would have need some explanation of those word the Count feel no such necessity . one reading of the note show he the precaution that I have take as plainly as if he have be present at the time when I adopt it . the expression of his face change on the instant , and his hand come out of the drawer empty . 

 " I do not   lock up my drawer , Mr. Hartright , " he say , " and I do not   say that I may not scatter your brain about the fireplace yet . but I be a just man even to my enemy , and I will acknowledge beforehand that they be cleverer brain than I think they . come to the point , sir ! you want something of I ? " 

 " I do , and I mean to have it . " 

 " on condition ? " 

 " on no condition . " 

 his hand drop into the drawer again . 

 " Bah ! we be travel in a circle , " he say , " and those clever brain of your be in danger again . your tone be deplorably imprudent , sir moderate it on the spot ! the risk of shoot you on the place where you stand be less to I than the risk of let you out of this house , except on condition that I dictate and approve . you have not get my lamented friend to deal with now you be face to face with Fosco ! if the life of twenty Mr. Hartrights be the step - stone to my safety , over all those stone I would go , sustain by my sublime indifference , self - balanced by my impenetrable calm . respect I , if you love your own life ! I summon you to answer three question before you open your lip again . hear they they be necessary to this interview . answer they they be necessary to I . " he hold up one finger of his right hand . " first question ! " he say . " you come here possess of information which may be true or may be false where do you get it ? " 

 " I decline to tell you . " 

 " no matter I shall find out . if that information be true mind I say , with the whole force of my resolution , if you be make your market of it here by treachery of your own or by treachery of some other man . I note that circumstance for future use in my memory , which forget nothing , and proceed . " he hold up another finger . " second question ! those line you invite I to read be without signature . who write they ? " 

 " a man whom I have every reason to depend on , and whom you have every reason to fear . " 

 my answer reach he to some purpose . his left hand tremble audibly in the drawer . 

 " how long do you give I , " he ask , put his third question in a quieter tone , " before the clock strike and the seal be break ? " 

 " time enough for you to come to my term , " I reply . 

 " give I a plainer answer , Mr. Hartright . what hour be the clock to strike ? " 

 " Nine , to - morrow morning . " 

 " Nine , to - morrow morning ? yes , yes your trap be lay for I before I can get my passport regulated and leave London . it be not early , I suppose ? we will see about that presently I can keep you hostage here , and bargain with you to send for your letter before I let you go . in the meantime , be so good next as to mention your term . " 

 " you shall hear they . they be simple , and soon state . you know whose interest I represent in come here ? " 

 he smile with the most supreme composure , and carelessly wave his right hand . 

 " I consent to hazard a guess , " he say jeeringly . " a lady 's interest , of course ! " 

 " my wife 's interest . " 

 he look at I with the first honest expression that have cross his face in my presence an expression of blank amazement . I could see that I sink in his estimation as a dangerous man from that moment . he shut up the drawer at once , fold his arm over his breast , and listen to I with a smile of satirical attention . 

 " you be well enough aware , " I go on , " of the course which my inquiry have take for many month past , to know that any attempt denial of plain fact will be quite useless in my presence . you be guilty of an infamous conspiracy ! and the gain of a fortune of ten thousand pound be your motive for it . " 

 he say nothing . but his face become overcloud suddenly by a lower anxiety . 

 " keep your gain , " I say .   his face lighten again immediately , and his eye open on I in wide and wide astonishment .   " I be not here to disgrace myself by bargaining for money which have pass through your hand , and which have be the price of a vile crime . 

 " gently , Mr. Hartright . your moral clap - trap have an excellent effect in England keep they for yourself and your own countryman , if you please . the ten thousand pound be a legacy leave to my excellent wife by the late Mr. Fairlie . place the affair on those ground , and I will discuss it if you like . to a man of my sentiment , however , the subject be deplorably sordid . I prefer to pass it over . I invite you to resume the discussion of your term . what do you demand ? " 

 " in the first place , I demand a full confession of the conspiracy , write and sign in my presence by yourself . " 

 he raise his finger again . " one ! " he say , check I off with the steady attention of a practical man . 

 " in the second place , I demand a plain proof , which do not depend on your personal asseveration , of the date at which my wife leave Blackwater Park and travel to London . " 

 " so ! so ! you can lay your finger , I see , on the weak place , " he remark composedly . " any more ? " 

 " at present , no more . " 

 " good ! you have mention your term , now listen to mine . the responsibility to myself of admit what you be pleased to call the ' conspiracy ' be less , perhaps , upon the whole , than the responsibility of lay you dead on that hearthrug . let we say that I meet your proposal on my own condition . the statement you demand of I shall be write , and the plain proof shall be produce . you call a letter from my late lamented friend inform I of the day and hour of his wife 's arrival in London , write , sign , and date by himself , a proof , I suppose ? I can give you this . I can also send you to the man of whom I hire the carriage to fetch my visitor from the railway , on the day when she arrive his order - book may help you to your date , even if his coachman who drive I prove to be of no use . these thing I can do , and will do , on condition . I recite they . first condition ! Madame Fosco and I leave this house when and how we please , without interference of any kind on your part . second condition ! you wait here , in company with I , to see my agent , who be come at seven o'clock in the morning to regulate my affair . you give my agent a write order to the man who have get your sealed letter to resign his possession of it . you wait here till my agent place that letter unopened in my hand , and you then allow I one clear half - hour to leave the house after which you resume your own freedom of action and go where you please . third condition ! you give I the satisfaction of a gentleman for your intrusion into my private affair , and for the language you have allow yourself to use to I at this conference . the time and place , abroad , to be fix in a letter from my hand when I be safe on the continent , and that letter to contain a strip of paper measure accurately the length of my sword . those be my term . inform I if you accept they yes or no . " 


 the extraordinary mixture of prompt decision , far - sight cunning , and mountebank bravado in this speech , stagger I for a moment and only for a moment . the one question to consider be , whether I be justify or not in possess myself of the mean of establish Laura 's identity at the cost of allow the scoundrel who have rob she of it to escape I with impunity . I know that the motive of secure the just recognition of my wife in the birthplace from which she have be drive out as an impostor , and of publicly erase the lie that still profane her mother 's tombstone , be far purer , in its freedom from all taint of evil passion , than the vindictive motive which have mingle itself with my purpose from the first . and yet I can not honestly say that my own moral conviction be strong enough to decide the struggle in I by themselves . they be help by my remembrance of Sir Percival 's death . how awfully , at the last moment , have the working of the retribution there be snatch from my feeble hand ! what right have I to decide , in my poor mortal ignorance of the future , that this man , too , must escape with impunity because he escape I ? I think of these thing perhaps with the superstition inherent in my nature , perhaps with a sense worthy of I than superstition . it be hard , when I have fasten my hold on he at last , to loosen it again of my own accord but I force myself to make the sacrifice . in plainer word , I determine to be guide by the one high motive of which I be certain , the motive of serve the cause of Laura and the cause of Truth . 


 " I accept your condition , " I say . " with one reservation on my part . " 

 " what reservation may that be ? " he ask . 

 " it refer to the sealed letter , " I answer . " I require you to destroy it unopened in my presence as soon as it be place in your hand . " 

 my object in make this stipulation be simply to prevent he from carry away write evidence of the nature of my communication with Pesca . the fact of my communication he would necessarily discover , when I give the address to his agent in the morning . but he could make no use of it on his own unsupported testimony even if he really venture to try the experiment which need excite in I the slight apprehension on Pesca 's account . 

 " I grant your reservation , " he reply , after consider the question gravely for a minute or two . " it be not worth dispute the letter shall be destroy when it come into my hand . " 

 he rise , as he speak , from the chair in which he have be sit opposite to I up to this time . with one effort he appear to free his mind from the whole pressure on it of the interview between we thus far . " Ouf ! " he cry , stretch his arm luxuriously , " the skirmish be hot while it last . take a seat , Mr. Hartright . we meet as mortal enemy hereafter let we , like gallant gentleman , exchange polite attention in the meantime . permit I to take the liberty of call for my wife . " 

 he unlock and open the door . " eleanor ! " he call out in his deep voice . the lady of the viperish face come in " Madame Fosco Mr. Hartright , " say the Count , introduce we with easy dignity . " my angel , " he go on , address his wife , " will your labour of pack up allow you time to make I some nice strong coffee ? I have write business to transact with Mr. Hartright and I require the full possession of my intelligence to do justice to myself . " 

 Madame Fosco bow her head twice once sternly to I , once submissively to her husband , and glide out of the room . 

 the Count walk to a writing - table near the window , open his desk , and take from it several quire of paper and a bundle of quill pen . he scatter the pen about the table , so that they might lie ready in all direction to be take up when want , and then cut the paper into a heap of narrow slip , of the form use by professional writer for the press . " I shall make this a remarkable document , " he say , look at I over his shoulder . " habit of literary composition be perfectly familiar to I . one of the rare of all the intellectual accomplishment that a man can possess be the grand faculty of arrange his idea . immense privilege ! I possess it . do you ? " 

 he march backwards and forwards in the room , until the coffee appear , hum to himself , and mark the place at which obstacle occur in the arrangement of his idea , by strike his forehead from time to time with the palm of his hand . the enormous audacity with which he seize on the situation in which I place he , and make it the pedestal on which his vanity mount for the one cherish purpose of self - display , master my astonishment by main force . sincerely as I loathe the man , the prodigious strength of his character , even in its most trivial aspect , impress I in spite of myself . 

 the coffee be bring in by Madame Fosco . he kiss her hand in grateful acknowledgment , and escort she to the door ; return , pour out a cup of coffee for himself , and take it to the writing - table . 

 " may I offer you some coffee , Mr. Hartright ? " he say , before he sit down . 

 I decline . 

 " what ! you think I shall poison you ? " he say gaily . " the english intellect be sound , so far as it go , " he continue , seat himself at the table ; " but it have one grave defect it be always cautious in the wrong place . " 

 he dip his pen in the ink , place the first slip of paper before he with a thump of his hand on the desk , clear his throat , and begin . he write with great noise and rapidity , in so large and bold a hand , and with such wide space between the line , that he reach the bottom of the slip in not more than two minute certainly from the time when he start at the top . each slip as he finish it be page , and toss over his shoulder out of his way on the floor . when his first pen be wear out , that go over his shoulder too , and he pounce on a second from the supply scatter about the table . slip after slip , by dozen , by fifty , by hundred , fly over his shoulder on either side of he till he have snow himself up in paper all round his chair . hour after hour pass and there I sit watch , there he sit write . he never stop , except to sip his coffee , and when that be exhaust , to smack his forehead from time to time . one o'clock strike , two , three , four and still the slip fly about all round he ; still the untiring pen scrap its way ceaselessly from top to bottom of the page , still the white chaos of paper rise higher and high all round his chair . at four o'clock I hear a sudden splutter of the pen , indicative of the flourish with which he sign his name . " Bravo ! " he cry , spring to his foot with the activity of a young man , and look I straight in the face with a smile of superb triumph . 

 " do , Mr. Hartright ! " he announce with a self - renovate thump of his fist on his broad breast . " do , to my own profound satisfaction to your profound astonishment , when you read what I have write . the subject be exhaust : the man Fosco be not . I proceed to the arrangement of my slip to the revision of my slip to the reading of my slip address emphatically to your private ear . four o'clock have just strike . good ! arrangement , revision , reading , from four to five . short snooze of restoration for myself from five to six . final preparation from six to seven . affair of agent and seal letter from seven to eight . at eight , en route . behold the programme ! " 

 he sit down cross - legged on the floor among his paper , string they together with a bodkin and a piece of string revise they , write all the title and honour by which he be personally distinguish at the head of the first page , and then read the manuscript to I with loud theatrical emphasis and profuse theatrical gesticulation . the reader will have an opportunity , ere long , of form his own opinion of the document . it will be sufficient to mention here that it answer my purpose . 

 he next write I the address of the person from whom he have hire the fly , and hand I Sir Percival 's letter . it be date from Hampshire on the 25th of July , and it announce the journey of " Lady Glyde " to London on the 26th . thus , on the very day   the 25th   when the doctor 's certificate declare that she have die in St. John 's Wood , she be alive , by Sir Percival 's own showing , at Blackwater and , on the day after , she be to take a journey ! when the proof of that journey be obtain from the flyman , the evidence would be complete . 

 " a quarter - past five , " say the Count , look at his watch . " time for my restorative snooze . I personally resemble Napoleon the Great , as you may have remark , Mr. Hartright I also resemble that immortal man in my power of command sleep at will . excuse I one moment . I will summon Madame Fosco , to keep you from feel dull . " 

 know as well as he do , that he be summon Madame Fosco to ensure my not leave the house while he be asleep , I make no reply , and occupy myself in tie up the paper which he have place in my possession . 

 the lady come in , cool , pale , and venomous as ever . " Amuse Mr. Hartright , my angel , " say the Count . he place a chair for she , kiss her hand for the second time , withdraw to a sofa , and , in three minute , be as peacefully and happily asleep as the most virtuous man in existence . 

 Madame Fosco take a book from the table , sit down , and look at I , with the steady vindictive malice of a woman who never forgot and never forgave . 

 " I have be listen to your conversation with my husband , " she say . " if I have be in his place I would have lay you dead on the hearthrug . " 

 with those word she open her book , and never look at I or speak to I from that time till the time when her husband wake . 

 he open his eye and rise from the sofa , accurately to an hour from the time when he have go to sleep . 

 " I feel infinitely refresh , " he remark . " Eleanor , my good wife , be you all ready upstairs ? that be well . my little packing here can be complete in ten minute my travel - dress assume in ten minute more . what remain before the agent come ? " he look about the room , and notice the cage with his white mouse in it . " ah ! " he cry piteously , " a last laceration of my sympathy still remain . my innocent pet ! my little cherished child ! what be I to do with they ? for the present we be settle nowhere ; for the present we travel incessantly the less baggage we carry the well for ourselves . my cockatoo , my canary , and my little mouse who will cherish they when their good Papa be go ? " 

 he walk about the room deep in thought . he have not be at all troubled about write his confession , but he be visibly perplexed and distressed about the far more important question of the disposal of his pet . after long consideration he suddenly sit down again at the writing - table . 

 " an idea ! " he exclaim . " I will offer my canary and my cockatoo to this vast Metropolis my agent shall present they in my name to the Zoological Gardens of London . the document that describe they shall be draw out on the spot . " 

 he begin to write , repeat the word as they flow from his pen . 

 " number one . cockatoo of transcendent plumage : attraction , of himself , to all visitor of taste . number two . canary of unrivalled vivacity and intelligence : worthy of the garden of Eden , worthy also of the garden in the Regent 's Park . homage to British Zoology . offer by Fosco . " 

 the pen splutter again , and the flourish be attach to his signature . 

 " Count ! you have not include the mouse , " say Madame Fosco 

 he leave the table , take her hand , and place it on his heart . 

 " all human resolution , Eleanor , " he say solemnly , " have its limit . my limit be inscribe on that document . I can not part with my white mouse . bear with I , my angel , and remove they to their travel cage upstairs . " 

 " admirable tenderness ! " say Madame Fosco , admire her husband , with a last viperish look in my direction . she take up the cage carefully , and leave the room . 

 the Count look at his watch . in spite of his resolute assumption of composure , he be get anxious for the agent 's arrival . the candle have long since be extinguish , and the sunlight of the new morning pour into the room . it be not till five minute past seven that the gate bell rang , and the agent make his appearance . he be a foreigner with a dark beard . 

 " Mr. Hartright Monsieur Rubelle , " say the Count , introduce we . he take the agent   a foreign spy , in every line of his face , if ever there be one yet   into a corner of the room , whisper some direction to he , and then leave we together . " Monsieur Rubelle , " as soon as we be alone , suggest with great politeness that I should favour he with his instruction . I write two line to Pesca , authorise he to deliver my seal letter " to the bearer , " direct the note , and hand it to Monsieur Rubelle . 

 the agent wait with I till his employer return , equip in travel costume . the Count examine the address of my letter before he dismiss the agent . " I think so ! " he say , turn on I with a dark look , and alter again in his manner from that moment . 

 he complete his packing , and then sit consult a travel map , make entry in his pocket - book , and look every now and then impatiently at his watch . not another word , address to myself , pass his lip . the near approach of the hour for his departure , and the proof he have see of the communication establish between Pesca and myself , have plainly recall his whole attention to the measure that be necessary for secure his escape . 

 a little before eight o'clock , Monsieur Rubelle come back with my unopened letter in his hand . the Count look carefully at the superscription and the seal , light a candle , and burn the letter . " I perform my promise , " he say , " but this matter , Mr. Hartright , shall not end here . " 

 the agent have keep at the door the cab in which he have return . he and the maid - servant now busy themselves in remove the luggage . Madame Fosco come downstairs , thickly veil , with the travel cage of the white mouse in her hand . she neither speak to I nor look towards I . her husband escort she to the cab . " follow I as far as the passage , " he whisper in my ear ; " I may want to speak to you at the last moment . " 

 I go out to the door , the agent stand below I in the front garden . the Count come back alone , and draw I a few step inside the passage . 

 " remember the third condition ! " he whisper . " you shall hear from I , Mr. Hartright I may claim from you the satisfaction of a gentleman soon than you think for . " he catch my hand before I be aware of he , and wring it hard then turn to the door , stop , and come back to I again . 

 " one word more , " he say confidentially . " when I last see Miss Halcombe , she look thin and ill . I be anxious about that admirable woman . take care of she , sir ! with my hand on my heart , I solemnly implore you , take care of Miss Halcombe ! " 

 those be the last word he say to I before he squeeze his huge body into the cab and drive off . 

 the agent and I wait at the door a few moment look after he . while we be stand together , a second cab appear from a turning a little way down the road . it follow the direction previously take by the Count 's cab , and as it pass the house and the open garden gate , a person inside look at we out of the window . the stranger at the Opera again ! the foreigner with a scar on his left cheek . 


 " you wait here with I , sir , for half an hour more ! " say Monsieur Rubelle . 

 " I do . " 

 we return to the sitting - room . I be in no humour to speak to the agent , or to allow he to speak to I . I take out the paper which the Count have place in my hand , and read the terrible story of the conspiracy tell by the man who have plan and perpetrate it . 




 the story continue BY ISIDOR , OTTAVIO , BALDASSARE fosco 

  Count of the Holy Roman Empire , Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Brazen Crown , Perpetual Arch - Master of the Rosicrucian Masons of Mesopotamia ; attach   in Honorary Capacities   to Societies Musical , Societies Medical , Societies Philosophical , and Societies General Benevolent , throughout Europe ; etc . etc . etc . 


 the count 's narrative 

 in the summer of eighteen hundred and fifty I arrive in England , charge with a delicate political mission from abroad . confidential person be semi - officially connect with I , whose exertion I be authorise to direct , Monsieur and Madame Rubelle be among the number . some week of spare time be at my disposal , before I enter on my function by establish myself in the suburb of London . Curiosity may stop here to ask for some explanation of those function on my part . I entirely sympathise with the request . I also regret that diplomatic reserve forbid I to comply with it . 

 I arrange to pass the preliminary period of repose , to which I have just refer , in the superb mansion of my late lamented friend , Sir Percival Glyde . he arrive from the continent with his wife . I arrive from the continent with mine . England be the land of domestic happiness how appropriately we enter it under these domestic circumstance ! 

 the bond of friendship which unite Percival and myself be strengthen , on this occasion , by a touching similarity in the pecuniary position on his side and on mine . we both want money . immense necessity ! universal want ! be there a civilised human being who do not feel for we ? how insensible must that man be ! or how rich ! 

 I enter into no sordid particular , in discuss this part of the subject . my mind recoil from they . with a roman austerity , I show my empty purse and Percival 's to the shrink public gaze . let we allow the deplorable fact to assert itself , once for all , in that manner , and pass on . 

 we be receive at the mansion by the magnificent creature who be inscribe on my heart as " Marian , " who be know in the colder atmosphere of society as " Miss Halcombe . " 

 just Heaven ! with what inconceivable rapidity I learn to adore that woman . at sixty , I worship she with the volcanic ardour of eighteen . all the gold of my rich nature be pour hopelessly at her foot . my wife poor angel ! my wife , who adore I , get nothing but the shilling and the penny . such be the World , such man , such love . what be we   I ask   but puppet in a show - box ? oh , omnipotent Destiny , pull our string gently ! dance we mercifully off our miserable little stage ! 

 the precede line , rightly understand , express an entire system of philosophy . it be mine . 

 I resume . 


 the domestic position at the commencement of our residence at Blackwater Park have be draw with amazing accuracy , with profound mental insight , by the hand of marian herself .   pass I the intoxicate familiarity of mention this sublime creature by her christian name .   accurate knowledge of the content of her journal to which I obtain access by clandestine mean , unspeakably precious to I in the remembrance warn my eager pen from topic which this essentially exhaustive woman have already make she own . 

 the interest interest , breathless and immense ! with which I be here concern , begin with the deplorable calamity of Marian 's illness . 

 the situation at this period be emphatically a serious one . large sum of money , due at a certain time , be want by Percival   I say nothing of the modicum equally necessary to myself , and the one source to look to for supply they be the fortune of his wife , of which not one farthe be at his disposal until her death . bad so far , and bad still far on . my lamented friend have private trouble of his own , into which the delicacy of my disinterested attachment to he forbid I from inquire too curiously . I know nothing but that a woman , name Anne Catherick , be hide in the neighbourhood , that she be in communication with Lady Glyde , and that the disclosure of a secret , which would be the certain ruin of Percival , might be the result . he have tell I himself that he be a lost man , unless his wife be silence , and unless Anne Catherick be find . if he be a lost man , what would become of our pecuniary interest ? courageous as I be by nature , I absolutely tremble at the idea ! 

 the whole force of my intelligence be now direct to the finding of Anne Catherick . our money affair , important as they be , admit of delay but the necessity of discover the woman admit of none . I only know she by description , as present an extraordinary personal resemblance to Lady Glyde . the statement of this curious fact intend merely to assist I in identify the person of whom we be in search when couple with the additional information that Anne Catherick have escape from a mad - house , start the first immense conception in my mind , which subsequently lead to such amazing result . that conception involve nothing less than the complete transformation of two separate identity . Lady Glyde and Anne Catherick be to change name , place , and destiny , the one with the other the prodigious consequence contemplate by the change be the gain of thirty thousand pound , and the eternal preservation of Sir Percival 's secret . 

 my instinct   which seldom err   suggest to I , on review the circumstance , that our invisible Anne would , soon or later , return to the boat - house at the Blackwater lake . there I post myself , previously mention to Mrs. Michelson , the housekeeper , that I might be find when want , immerse in study , in that solitary place . it be my rule never to make unnecessary mystery , and never to set people suspect I for want of a little seasonable candour on my part . Mrs. Michelson believe in I from first to last . this ladylike person   widow of a protestant priest   overflow with faith . touch by such superfluity of simple confidence in a woman of her mature year , I open the ample reservoir of my nature and absorb it all . 

 I be reward for post myself sentinel at the lake by the appearance not of Anne Catherick herself , but of the person in charge of she . this individual also overflow with simple faith , which I absorb in myself , as in the case already mention . I leave she to describe the circumstance   if she have not do so already   under which she introduce I to the object of her maternal care . when I first see Anne Catherick she be asleep . I be electrify by the likeness between this unhappy woman and Lady Glyde . the detail of the grand scheme which have suggest themselves in outline only , up to that period , occur to I , in all their masterly combination , at the sight of the sleep face . at the same time , my heart , always accessible to tender influence , dissolve in tear at the spectacle of suffering before I . I instantly set myself to impart relief . in other word , I provide the necessary stimulant for strengthen Anne Catherick to perform the journey to London . 


 the good year of my life have be pass in the ardent study of medical and chemical science . Chemistry especially have always have irresistible attraction for I from the enormous , the illimitable power which the knowledge of it confer . chemist I assert it emphatically might sway , if they please , the destiny of humanity . let I explain this before I go far . 

 mind , they say , rule the world . but what rule the mind ? the body   follow I closely here   lie at the mercy of the most omnipotent of all potentate the Chemist . give I fosco chemistry ; and when Shakespeare have conceive Hamlet , and sit down to execute the conception with a few grain of powder drop into his daily food , I will reduce his mind , by the action of his body , till his pen pour out the most abject drivel that have ever degrade paper . under similar circumstance , revive I the illustrious Newton . I guarantee that when he see the apple fall he shall eat it , instead of discover the principle of gravitation . Nero 's dinner shall transform Nero into the mild of man before he have do digest it , and the morning draught of Alexander the great shall make Alexander run for his life at the first sight of the enemy the same afternoon . on my sacred word of honour it be lucky for Society that modern chemist be , by incomprehensible good fortune , the most harmless of mankind . the mass be worthy father of family , who keep shop . the few be philosopher besotte with admiration for the sound of their own lecturing voice , visionary who waste their life on fantastic impossibility , or quack whose ambition soar no higher than our corn . thus Society escape , and the illimitable power of Chemistry remain the slave of the most superficial and the most insignificant end . 

 why this outburst ? why this wither eloquence ? 

 because my conduct have be misrepresent , because my motif have be misunderstood . it have be assume that I use my vast chemical resource against Anne Catherick , and that I would have use they if I could against the magnificent marian herself . odious insinuation both ! all my interest be concern   as will be see presently   in the preservation of Anne Catherick 's life . all my anxiety be concentrate on Marian 's rescue from the hand of the licensed imbecile who attend she , and who find my advice confirm from first to last by the physician from London . on two occasion only both equally harmless to the individual on whom I practise do I summon to myself the assistance of chemical knowledge . on the first of the two , after follow Marian to the inn at Blackwater   studying , behind a convenient waggon which hide I from she , the poetry of motion , as embody in her walk , I avail myself of the service of my invaluable wife , to copy one and to intercept the other of two letter which my adore enemy have entrust to a discard maid . in this case , the letter be in the bosom of the girl 's dress , Madame Fosco could only open they , read they , perform her instruction , seal they , and put they back again by scientific assistance which assistance I render in a half - ounce bottle . the second occasion , when the same mean be employ , be the occasion   to which I shall soon refer   of Lady Glyde 's arrival in London . never at any other time be I indebted to my art as distinguish from myself . to all other emergency and complication my natural capacity for grappling , single - handed , with circumstance , be invariably equal . I affirm the all - pervade intelligence of that capacity . at the expense of the Chemist I vindicate the Man . 

 respect this outburst of generous indignation . it have inexpressibly relieve I . en route ! let we proceed . 


 have suggest to Mrs. Clement   or Clements , I be not sure which   that the good method of keep Anne out of Percival 's reach be to remove she to London have find that my proposal be eagerly receive , and have appoint a day to meet the traveller at the station and to see they leave it , I be at liberty to return to the house and to confront the difficulty which still remain to be meet . 

 my first proceeding be to avail myself of the sublime devotion of my wife . I have arrange with Mrs. Clements that she should communicate her London address , in Anne 's interest , to Lady Glyde . but this be not enough . design person in my absence might shake the simple confidence of Mrs. Clements , and she might not write after all . who could I find capable of travel to London by the train she travel by , and of privately see her home ? I ask myself this question . the conjugal part of I immediately answer Madame Fosco . 

 after decide on my wife 's mission to London , I arrange that the journey should serve a double purpose . a nurse for the suffer Marian , equally devoted to the patient and to myself , be a necessity of my position . one of the most eminently confidential and capable woman in existence be by good fortune at my disposal . I refer to that respectable matron , Madame Rubelle , to whom I address a letter , at her residence in London , by the hand of my wife . 

 on the appoint day Mrs. Clements and Anne Catherick meet I at the station . I politely see they off , I politely see Madame Fosco off by the same train . the last thing at night my wife return to Blackwater , have follow her instruction with the most unimpeachable accuracy . she be accompany by Madame Rubelle , and she bring I the London address of Mrs. Clements . after - event prove this last precaution to have be unnecessary . Mrs. Clements punctually inform Lady Glyde of her place of abode . with a wary eye on future emergency , I keep the letter . 

 the same day I have a brief interview with the doctor , at which I protest , in the sacred interest of humanity , against his treatment of Marian 's case . he be insolent , as all ignorant people be . I show no resentment , I defer quarrel with he till it be necessary to quarrel to some purpose . my next proceeding be to leave Blackwater myself . I have my London residence to take in anticipation of come event . I have also a little business of the domestic sort to transact with Mr. Frederick Fairlie . I find the house I want in St. John 's Wood . I find Mr. Fairlie at Limmeridge , Cumberland . 

 my own private familiarity with the nature of Marian 's correspondence have previously inform I that she have write to Mr. Fairlie , proposing , as a relief to Lady Glyde 's matrimonial embarrassment , to take she on a visit to her uncle in Cumberland . this letter I have wisely allow to reach its destination , feel at the time that it could do no harm , and might do good . I now present myself before Mr. Fairlie to support Marian 's own proposal with certain modification which , happily for the success of my plan , be render really inevitable by her illness . it be necessary that Lady Glyde should leave Blackwater alone , by her uncle 's invitation , and that she should rest a night on the journey at her aunt 's house   the house I have in St. John 's Wood   by her uncle 's express advice . to achieve these result , and to secure a note of invitation which could be show to Lady Glyde , be the object of my visit to Mr. Fairlie . when I have mention that this gentleman be equally feeble in mind and body , and that I let loose the whole force of my character on he , I have say enough . I come , see , and conquer Fairlie . 

 on my return to Blackwater Park   with the letter of invitation   I find that the doctor 's imbecile treatment of Marian 's case have lead to the most alarming result . the fever have turn to typhus . Lady Glyde , on the day of my return , try to force herself into the room to nurse her sister . she and I have no affinity of sympathy she have commit the unpardonable outrage on my sensibility of call I a spy she be a stumble - block in my way and in Percival 's but , for all that , my magnanimity forbid I to put she in danger of infection with my own hand . at the same time I offer no hindrance to she put herself in danger . if she have succeed in do so , the intricate knot which I be slowly and patiently operate on might perhaps have be cut by circumstance . as it be , the doctor interfere and she be keep out of the room . 

 I have myself previously recommend send for advice to London . this course have be now take . the physician , on his arrival , confirm my view of the case . the crisis be serious . but we have hope of our charming patient on the fifth day from the appearance of the typhus . I be only once absent from Blackwater at this time when I go to London by the morning train to make the final arrangement at my house in St. John 's Wood , to assure myself by private inquiry that Mrs. Clements have not move , and to settle one or two little preliminary matter with the husband of Madame Rubelle . I return at night . five day afterwards the physician pronounce our interesting Marian to be out of all danger , and to be in need of nothing but careful nursing . this be the time I have wait for . now that medical attendance be no long indispensable , I play the first move in the game by assert myself against the doctor . he be one among many witness in my way whom it be necessary to remove . a lively altercation between we   in which Percival , previously instruct by I , refuse to interfere   serve the purpose in view . I descend on the miserable man in an irresistible avalanche of indignation , and sweep he from the house . 

 the servant be the next encumbrance to get rid of . again I instruct Percival   whose moral courage require perpetual stimulant , and Mrs. Michelson be amazed , one day , by hear from her master that the establishment be to be break up . we clear the house of all the servant but one , who be keep for domestic purpose , and whose lumpish stupidity we could trust to make no embarrassing discovery . when they be go , nothing remain but to relieve ourselves of Mrs. Michelson a result which be easily achieve by send this amiable lady to find lodging for her mistress at the sea - side . 

 the circumstance be now exactly what they be require to be . Lady Glyde be confine to her room by nervous illness , and the lumpish housemaid   I forget her name   be shut up there at night in attendance on her mistress . marian , though fast recovering , still keep she bed , with Mrs. Rubelle for nurse . no other living creature but my wife , myself , and Percival be in the house . with all the chance thus in our favour I confront the next emergency , and play the second move in the game . 

 the object of the second move be to induce Lady Glyde to leave Blackwater unaccompanie by her sister . unless we could persuade she that Marian have go on to Cumberland first , there be no chance of remove she , of her own free will , from the house . to produce this necessary operation in her mind , we conceal our interesting invalid in one of the uninhabited bedroom at Blackwater . at the dead of night Madame Fosco , Madame Rubelle , and myself   Percival not be cool enough to be trust   accomplish the concealment . the scene be picturesque , mysterious , dramatic in the high degree . by my direction the bed have be make , in the morning , on a strong movable framework of wood . we have only to lift the framework gently at the head and foot , and to transport our patient where we please , without disturb herself or her bed . no chemical assistance be need or use in this case . our interesting Marian lie in the deep repose of convalescence . we place the candle and open the door beforehand . I , in right of my great personal strength , take the head of the framework my wife and Madame Rubelle take the foot . I bear my share of that inestimably precious burden with a manly tenderness , with a fatherly care . where be the modern Rembrandt who could depict our midnight procession ? Alas for the Arts ! alas for this most pictorial of subject ! the modern Rembrandt be nowhere to be find . 

 the next morning my wife and I start for London , leave Marian seclude , in the uninhabited middle of the house , under care of Madame Rubelle , who kindly consent to imprison herself with her patient for two or three day . before take our departure I give Percival Mr. Fairlie 's letter of invitation to his niece   instruct she to sleep on the journey to Cumberland at her aunt 's house , with direction to show it to Lady Glyde on hear from I . I also obtain from he the address of the Asylum in which Anne Catherick have be confine , and a letter to the proprietor , announce to that gentleman the return of his runaway patient to medical care . 

 I have arrange , at my last visit to the metropolis , to have our modest domestic establishment ready to receive we when we arrive in London by the early train . in consequence of this wise precaution , we be enable that same day to play the third move in the game the get possession of Anne Catherick . 

 date be of importance here . I combine in myself the opposite characteristic of a Man of Sentiment and a Man of Business . I have all the date at my finger ' end . 

 on Wednesday , the 24th of July 1850 , I send my wife in a cab to clear Mrs. Clements out of the way , in the first place . a suppose message from Lady Glyde in London be sufficient to obtain this result . Mrs. Clements be take away in the cab , and be leave in the cab , while my wife   on pretence of purchase something at a shop   give she the slip , and return to receive her expect visitor at our house in St. John 's Wood . it be hardly necessary to add that the visitor have be describe to the servant as " Lady Glyde . " 

 in the meanwhile I have follow in another cab , with a note for Anne Catherick , merely mention that Lady Glyde intend to keep Mrs. Clements to spend the day with she , and that she be to join they under care of the good gentleman wait outside , who have already save she from discovery in Hampshire by Sir Percival . the " good gentleman " send in this note by a street boy , and pause for result a door or two far on . at the moment when Anne appear at the house door and close it this excellent man have the cab door open ready for she , absorb she into the vehicle , and drive off . 

  pass I , here , one exclamation in parenthesis . how interesting this be ! 

 on the way to Forest Road my companion show no fear . I can be paternal no man more so when I please , and I be intensely paternal on this occasion . what title I have to her confidence ! I have compound the medicine which have do she good I have warn she of her danger from Sir Percival . perhaps I trust too implicitly to these title perhaps I underrate the keenness of the low instinct in person of weak intellect it be certain that I neglect to prepare she sufficiently for a disappointment on enter my house . when I take she into the drawing - room when she see no one present but Madame Fosco , who be a stranger to she she exhibit the most violent agitation ; if she have scented danger in the air , as a dog scent the presence of some creature unseen , her alarm could not have display itself more suddenly and more causelessly . I interpose in vain . the fear from which she be suffer I might have soothe , but the serious heart - disease , under which she labour , be beyond the reach of all moral palliative . to my unspeakable horror she be seize with convulsion a shock to the system , in her condition , which might have lay she dead at any moment at our foot . 

 the near doctor be send for , and be tell that " Lady Glyde " require his immediate service . to my infinite relief , he be a capable man . I represent my visitor to he as a person of weak intellect , and subject to delusion , and I arrange that no nurse but my wife should watch in the sick - room . the unhappy woman be too ill , however , to cause any anxiety about what she might say . the one dread which now oppress I be the dread that the false Lady Glyde might die before the true Lady Glyde arrive in London . 

 I have write a note in the morning to Madame Rubelle , tell she to join I at her husband 's house on the evening of Friday the 26th , with another note to Percival , warn he to show his wife her uncle 's letter of invitation , to assert that Marian have go on before she , and to despatch she to town by the midday train , on the 26th , also . on reflection I have feel the necessity , in Anne Catherick 's state of health , of precipitate event , and of have Lady Glyde at my disposal early than I have originally contemplate . what fresh direction , in the terrible uncertainty of my position , could I now issue ? I could do nothing but trust to chance and the doctor . my emotion express themselves in pathetic apostrophe , which I be just self - possess enough to couple , in the hearing of other people , with the name of " Lady Glyde . " in all other respect Fosco , on that memorable day , be Fosco shroud in total eclipse . 

 she pass a bad night , she awake wear out , but later in the day she revive amazingly . my elastic spirit revive with she . I could receive no answer from Percival and Madame Rubelle till the morning of the next day , the 26th . in anticipation of their follow my direction , which , accident apart , I know they would do , I go to secure a fly to fetch Lady Glyde from the railway , direct it to be at my house on the 26th , at two o'clock . after see the order enter in the book , I go on to arrange matter with Monsieur Rubelle . I also procure the service of two gentleman who could furnish I with the necessary certificate of lunacy . one of they I know personally the other be know to Monsieur Rubelle . both be man whose vigorous mind soar superior to narrow scruple both be labour under temporary embarrassment both believe in I . 

 it be past five o'clock in the afternoon before I return from the performance of these duty . when I get back Anne Catherick be dead . dead on the 25th , and Lady Glyde be not to arrive in London till the 26th ! 

 I be stun . meditate on that . Fosco stun ! 

 it be too late to retrace our step . before my return the doctor have officiously undertake to save I all trouble by register the death , on the date when it happen , with his own hand . my grand scheme , unassailable hitherto , have its weak place now no effort on my part could alter the fatal event of the 25th . I turn manfully to the future . Percival 's interest and mine be still at stake , nothing be leave but to play the game through to the end . I recall my impenetrable calm and play it . 

 on the morning of the 26th Percival 's letter reach I , announce his wife 's arrival by the midday train . Madame Rubelle also write to say she would follow in the evening . I start in the fly , leave the false Lady Glyde dead in the house , to receive the true Lady Glyde on her arrival by the railway at three o'clock . hide under the seat of the carriage , I carry with I all the clothe Anne Catherick have wear on come into my house they be destine to assist the resurrection of the woman who be dead in the person of the woman who be live . what a situation ! I suggest it to the rise romance writer of England . I offer it , as totally new , to the wear - out dramatist of France . 

 Lady Glyde be at the station . there be great crowding and confusion , and more delay than I like   in case any of her friend have happen to be on the spot , in reclaim her luggage . her first question , as we drive off , implore I to tell her news of her sister . I invent news of the most pacifying kind , assure she that she be about to see her sister at my house . my house , on this occasion only , be in the neighbourhood of Leicester Square , and be in the occupation of Monsieur Rubelle , who receive we in the hall . 

 I take my visitor upstairs into a back room , the two medical gentleman be there in wait on the floor beneath to see the patient , and to give I their certificate . after quiet Lady Glyde by the necessary assurance about her sister , I introduce my friend separately to her presence . they perform the formality of the occasion briefly , intelligently , conscientiously . I enter the room again as soon as they have leave it , and at once precipitate event by a reference of the alarming kind to " Miss Halcombe 's " state of health . 

 result follow as I have anticipate . Lady Glyde become frightened , and turn faint . for the second time , and the last , I call Science to my assistance . a medicated glass of water and a medicated bottle of smell - salt relieve she of all further embarrassment and alarm . additional application later in the evening procure she the inestimable blessing of a good night 's rest . Madame Rubelle arrive in time to preside at Lady Glyde 's toilet . her own clothe be take away from she at night , and Anne Catherick 's be put on she in the morning , with the strict regard to propriety , by the matronly hand of the good Rubelle . throughout the day I keep our patient in a state of partially - suspend consciousness , until the dexterous assistance of my medical friend enable I to procure the necessary order rather early than I have venture to hope . that evening   the evening of the 27th   Madame Rubelle and I take our revived " Anne Catherick " to the Asylum . she be receive with great surprise , but without suspicion , thank to the order and certificate , to Percival 's letter , to the likeness , to the clothe , and to the patient 's own confused mental condition at the time . I return at once to assist Madame Fosco in the preparation for the burial of the false " Lady Glyde , " have the clothe and luggage of the true " Lady Glyde " in my possession . they be afterwards send to Cumberland by the conveyance which be use for the funeral . I attend the funeral , with become dignity , attire in the deep mourning . 


 my narrative of these remarkable event , write under equally remarkable circumstance , close here . the minor precaution which I observe in communicate with Limmeridge House be already know , so be the magnificent success of my enterprise , so be the solid pecuniary result which follow it . I have to assert , with the whole force of my conviction , that the one weak place in my scheme would never have be find out if the one weak place in my heart have not be discover first . nothing but my fatal admiration for Marian restrain I from step in to my own rescue when she effect her sister 's escape . I run the risk , and trust in the complete destruction of Lady Glyde 's identity . if either Marian or Mr. Hartright attempt to assert that identity , they would publicly expose themselves to the imputation of sustain a rank deception , they would be distrust and discredit accordingly , and they would therefore be powerless to place my interest or Percival 's secret in jeopardy . I commit one error in trust myself to such a blindfold calculation of chance as this . I commit another when Percival have pay the penalty of his own obstinacy and violence , by grant Lady Glyde a second reprieve from the mad - house , and allow Mr. Hartright a second chance of escape I . in brief , Fosco , at this serious crisis , be untrue to himself . deplorable and uncharacteristic fault ! behold the cause , in my heart behold , in the image of Marian Halcombe , the first and last weakness of Fosco 's life ! 

 at the ripe age of sixty , I make this unparalleled confession . youth ! I invoke your sympathy . Maidens ! I claim your tear . 

 a word more , and the attention of the reader   concentrate breathlessly on myself   shall be release . 

 my own mental insight inform I that three inevitable question will be ask here by person of inquire mind . they shall be state they shall be answer . 

 first question . what be the secret of Madame Fosco 's unhesitate devotion of herself to the fulfilment of my bold wish , to the furtherance of my deep plan ? I might answer this by simply refer to my own character , and by ask , in my turn , where , in the history of the world , have a man of my order ever be find without a woman in the background self - immolate on the altar of his life ? but I remember that I be write in England , I remember that I be marry in England , and I ask if a woman 's marriage obligation in this country provide for her private opinion of her husband 's principle ? no ! they charge she unreservedly to love , honour , and obey he . that be exactly what my wife have do . I stand here on a supreme moral elevation , and I loftily assert her accurate performance of her conjugal duty . Silence , Calumny ! your sympathy , Wives of England , for Madame Fosco ! 

 second question . if Anne Catherick have not die when she do , what should I have do ? I should , in that case , have assist wear - out nature in find permanent repose . I should have open the door of the Prison of Life , and have extend to the captive   incurably afflict in mind and body both   a happy release . 

 third question . on a calm revision of all the circumstance be my conduct worthy of any serious blame ? most emphatically , no ! have I not carefully avoid expose myself to the odium of commit unnecessary crime ? with my vast resource in chemistry , I might have take Lady Glyde 's life . at immense personal sacrifice I follow the dictate of my own ingenuity , my own humanity , my own caution , and take her identity instead . judge I by what I might have do . how comparatively innocent ! how indirectly virtuous I appear in what I really do ! 

 I announce on begin it that this narrative would be a remarkable document . it have entirely answer my expectation . receive these fervid line my last legacy to the country I leave for ever . they be worthy of the occasion , and worthy of 

 FOSCO . 



 the STORY CONCLUDED BY WALTER HARTRIGHT 



 I 

 when I close the last leaf of the Count 's manuscript the half - hour during which I have engage to remain at Forest Road have expire . Monsieur Rubelle look at his watch and bow . I rise immediately , and leave the agent in possession of the empty house . I never see he again I never hear more of he or of his wife . out of the dark byway of villainy and deceit they have crawl across our path into the same byway they crawl back secretly and be lose . 

 in a quarter of an hour after leave Forest Road I be at home again . 

 but few word suffice to tell Laura and Marian how my desperate venture have end , and what the next event in our life be likely to be . I leave all detail to be describe later in the day , and hasten back to St. John 's Wood , to see the person of whom Count Fosco have order the fly , when he go to meet Laura at the station . 

 the address in my possession lead I to some " livery stable , " about a quarter of a mile distant from Forest Road . the proprietor prove to be a civil and respectable man . when I explain that an important family matter oblige I to ask he to refer to his book for the purpose of ascertain a date with which the record of his business transaction might supply I , he offer no objection to grant my request . the book be produce , and there , under the date of " July 26th , 1850 , " the order be enter in these word 

 " Brougham to Count Fosco , 5 Forest Road . two o'clock .   John Owen . " 

 I find on inquiry that the name of " John Owen , " attach to the entry , refer to the man who have be employ to drive the fly . he be then at work in the stable - yard , and be send for to see I at my request . 

 " do you remember drive a gentleman , in the month of July last , from Number five Forest Road to the Waterloo Bridge station ? " I ask . 

 " well , sir , " say the man , " I can not   exactly say I do . " 

 " perhaps you remember the gentleman himself ? can you call to mind drive a foreigner last summer a tall gentleman and remarkably fat ? " the man 's face brighten directly . 

 " I remember he , sir ! the fat gentleman as ever I see , and the heavy customer as ever I drive . yes , yes I call he to mind , sir ! we do go to the station , and it be from Forest Road . there be a parrot , or summat like it , screech in the window . the gentleman be in a mortal hurry about the lady 's luggage , and he give I a handsome present for look sharp and get the box . " 

 get the box ! I recollect immediately that Laura 's own account of herself on her arrival in London describe her luggage as be collect for she by some person whom Count Fosco bring with he to the station . this be the man . 

 " do you see the lady ? " I ask . " what do she look like ? be she young or old ? " 

 " well , sir , what with the hurry and the crowd of people push about , I can not   rightly say what the lady look like . I can not   call nothing to mind about she that I know of except her name . " 

 " you remember her name ? " 

 " yes , sir . her name be Lady Glyde . " 

 " how do you come to remember that , when you have forget what she look like ? " 

 the man smile , and shift his foot in some little embarrassment . 

 " why , to tell you the truth , sir , " he say , " I have not   be long marry at that time , and my wife 's name , before she change it for mine , be the same as the lady 's meaning the name of Glyde , sir . the lady mention it herself . ' be your name on your box , ma'am ? ' say I. ' yes , ' say she , ' my name be on my luggage it be Lady Glyde . ' ' come ! ' I say to myself , ' I have   a bad head for gentlefolk ' name in general but this one come like an old friend , at any rate . ' I can not   say nothing about the time , sir , it might be nigh on a year ago , or it might not . but I can swear to the stout gentleman , and swear to the lady 's name . " 

 there be no need that he should remember the time the date be positively establish by his master 's order - book . I feel at once that the mean be now in my power of strike down the whole conspiracy at a blow with the irresistible weapon of plain fact . without a moment 's hesitation , I take the proprietor of the livery stable aside and tell he what the real importance be of the evidence of his order - book and the evidence of his driver . an arrangement to compensate he for the temporary loss of the man 's service be easily make , and a copy of the entry in the book be take by myself , and certify as true by the master 's own signature . I leave the livery stable , have settle that John Owen be to hold himself at my disposal for the next three day , or for a long period if necessity require it . 

 I now have in my possession all the paper that I want the district registrar 's own copy of the certificate of death , and Sir Percival 's dated letter to the Count , be safe in my pocket - book . 

 with this write evidence about I , and with the coachman 's answer fresh in my memory , I next turn my step , for the first time since the beginning of all my inquiry , in the direction of Mr. Kyrle 's office . one of my object in pay he this second visit be , necessarily , to tell he what I have do . the other be to warn he of my resolution to take my wife to Limmeridge the next morning , and to have she publicly receive and recognise in her uncle 's house . I leave it to Mr. Kyrle to decide under these circumstance , and in Mr. Gilmore 's absence , whether he be or be not bind , as the family solicitor , to be present on that occasion in the family interest . 

 I will say nothing of Mr. Kyrle 's amazement , or of the term in which he express his opinion of my conduct from the first stage of the investigation to the last . it be only necessary to mention that he at once decide on accompany we to Cumberland . 

 we start the next morning by the early train . Laura , Marian , Mr. Kyrle , and myself in one carriage , and John Owen , with a clerk from Mr. Kyrle 's office , occupy place in another . on reach the Limmeridge station we go first to the farmhouse at Todd 's Corner . it be my firm determination that Laura should not enter her uncle 's house till she appear there publicly recognise as his niece . I leave Marian to settle the question of accommodation with Mrs. Todd , as soon as the good woman have recover from the bewilderment of hear what our errand be in Cumberland , and I arrange with her husband that John Owen be to be commit to the ready hospitality of the farm - servant . these preliminary complete , Mr. Kyrle and I set forth together for Limmeridge House . 

 I can not write at any length of our interview with Mr. Fairlie , for I can not recall it to mind without feeling of impatience and contempt , which make the scene , even in remembrance only , utterly repulsive to I . I prefer to record simply that I carry my point . Mr. Fairlie attempt to treat we on his customary plan . we pass without notice his polite insolence at the outset of the interview . we hear without sympathy the protestation with which he try next to persuade we that the disclosure of the conspiracy have overwhelm he . he absolutely whine and whimper at last like a fretful child . " how be he to know that his niece be alive when he be tell that she be dead ? he would welcome dear Laura with pleasure , if we would only allow he time to recover . do we think he look as if he want hurry into his grave ? no . then , why hurry he ? " he reiterate these remonstrance at every available opportunity , until I check they once for all , by place he firmly between two inevitable alternative . I give he his choice between do his niece justice on my term , or face the consequence of a public assertion of her existence in a court of law . Mr. Kyrle , to whom he turn for help , tell he plainly that he must decide the question then and there . characteristically choose the alternative which promise soonest to release he from all personal anxiety , he announce with a sudden outburst of energy , that he be not strong enough to bear any more bullying , and that we might do as we please . 

 Mr. Kyrle and I at once go downstairs , and agree upon a form of letter which be to be send round to the tenant who have attend the false funeral , summon they , in Mr. Fairlie 's name , to assemble in Limmeridge House on the next day but one . an order refer to the same date be also write , direct a statuary in Carlisle to send a man to Limmeridge churchyard for the purpose of erase an inscription Mr. Kyrle , who have arrange to sleep in the house , undertake that Mr. Fairlie should hear these letter read to he , and should sign they with his own hand . 

 I occupy the interval day at the farm in write a plain narrative of the conspiracy , and in add to it a statement of the practical contradiction which fact offer to the assertion of Laura 's death . this I submit to Mr. Kyrle before I read it the next day to the assemble tenant . we also arrange the form in which the evidence should be present at the close of the reading . after these matter be settle , Mr. Kyrle endeavour to turn the conversation next to Laura 's affair . know , and desire to know nothing of those affair , and doubt whether he would approve , as a man of business , of my conduct in relation to my wife 's life - interest in the legacy leave to Madame Fosco , I beg Mr. Kyrle to excuse I if I abstain from discuss the subject . it be connect , as I could truly tell he , with those sorrow and trouble of the past which we never refer to among ourselves , and which we instinctively shrink from discuss with other . 

 my last labour , as the evening approach , be to obtain " the Narrative of the Tombstone , " by take a copy of the false inscription on the grave before it be erase . 


 the day come the day when Laura once more enter the familiar breakfast - room at Limmeridge House . all the person assemble rise from their seat as Marian and I lead she in . a perceptible shock of surprise , an audible murmur of interest run through they , at the sight of her face . Mr. Fairlie be present   by my express stipulation , with Mr. Kyrle by his side . his valet stand behind he with a smell - bottle ready in one hand , and a white handkerchief , saturate with eau - de - Cologne , in the other . 

 I open the proceeding by publicly appeal to Mr. Fairlie to say whether I appear there with his authority and under his express sanction . he extend an arm , on either side , to Mr. Kyrle and to his valet be by they assist to stand on his leg , and then express himself in these term : " allow I to present Mr. Hartright . I be as great an invalid as ever , and he be so very obliging as to speak for I . the subject be dreadfully embarrassing . please hear he , and do not   make a noise ! " with those word he slowly sink back again into the chair , and take refuge in his scented pocket - handkerchief . 

 the disclosure of the conspiracy follow , after I have offer my preliminary explanation , first of all , in the few and the plain word . I be there present   I inform my hearer   to declare , first , that my wife , then sit by I , be the daughter of the late Mr. Philip Fairlie ; secondly , to prove by positive fact , that the funeral which they have attend in Limmeridge churchyard be the funeral of another woman ; thirdly , to give they a plain account of how it have all happen . without further preface , I at once read the narrative of the conspiracy , describe it in clear outline , and dwell only upon the pecuniary motive for it , in order to avoid complicate my statement by unnecessary reference to Sir Percival 's secret . this do , I remind my audience of the date on the inscription in the churchyard   the 25th , and confirm its correctness by produce the certificate of death . I then read they Sir Percival 's letter of the 25th , announce his wife 's intended journey from Hampshire to London on the 26th . I next show that she have take that journey , by the personal testimony of the driver of the fly , and I prove that she have perform it on the appoint day , by the order - book at the livery stable . Marian then add her own statement of the meeting between Laura and herself at the mad - house , and of her sister 's escape . after which I close the proceeding by inform the person present of Sir Percival 's death and of my marriage . 

 Mr. Kyrle rise when I resume my seat , and declare , as the legal adviser of the family , that my case be prove by the plainest evidence he have ever hear in his life . as he speak those word , I put my arm round Laura , and raise she so that she be plainly visible to every one in the room . " be you all of the same opinion ? " I ask , advance towards they a few step , and point to my wife . 

 the effect of the question be electrical . far down at the low end of the room one of the old tenant on the estate start to his foot , and lead the rest with he in an instant . I see the man now , with his honest brown face and his iron - grey hair , mount on the window - seat , wave his heavy riding - whip over his head , and lead the cheer . " there she be , alive and hearty God bless she ! Gi ' it tongue , lad ! Gi ' it tongue ! " the shout that answer he , reiterate again and again , be the sweetest music I ever hear . the labourer in the village and the boy from the school , assemble on the lawn , catch up the cheering and echo it back on we . the farmer ' wife cluster round Laura , and struggle which should be first to shake hand with she , and to implore she , with the tear pour over their own cheek , to bear up bravely and not to cry . she be so completely overwhelmed , that I be oblige to take she from they , and carry she to the door . there I give she into Marian 's care Marian , who have never fail we yet , whose courageous self - control do not fail we now . leave by myself at the door , I invite all the person present   after thank they in Laura 's name and mine   to follow I to the churchyard , and see the false inscription strike off the tombstone with their own eye . 

 they all leave the house , and all join the throng of villager collect round the grave , where the statuary 's man be wait for we . in a breathless silence , the first sharp stroke of the steel sound on the marble . not a voice be hear not a soul move , till those three word , " Laura , Lady Glyde , " have vanish from sight . then there be a great heave of relief among the crowd , as if they feel that the last fetter of the conspiracy have be strike off Laura herself , and the assembly slowly withdraw . it be late in the day before the whole inscription be erase . one line only be afterwards engrave in its place : " Anne Catherick , July 25th , 1850 . " 

 I return to Limmeridge House early enough in the evening to take leave of Mr. Kyrle . he and his clerk , and the driver of the fly , go back to London by the night train . on their departure an insolent message be deliver to I from Mr. Fairlie who have be carry from the room in a shattered condition , when the first outbreak of cheering answer my appeal to the tenantry . the message convey to we " Mr. Fairlie 's good congratulation , " and request to know whether " we contemplate stop in the house . " I send back word that the only object for which we have enter his door be accomplish that I contemplate stop in no man 's house but my own and that Mr. Fairlie need not entertain the slight apprehension of ever see we or hear from we again . we go back to our friend at the farm to rest that night , and the next morning escort to the station , with the heartiest enthusiasm and good will , by the whole village and by all the farmer in the neighbourhood we return to London . 

 as our view of the Cumberland hill fade in the distance , I think of the first disheartening circumstance under which the long struggle that be now past and over have be pursue . it be strange to look back and to see , now , that the poverty which have deny we all hope of assistance have be the indirect mean of our success , by force I to act for myself . if we have be rich enough to find legal help , what would have be the result ? the gain   on Mr. Kyrle 's own showing   would have be more than doubtful the loss , judge by the plain test of event as they have really happen , certain . the law would never have obtain I my interview with Mrs. Catherick . the law would never have make Pesca the mean of force a confession from the Count . 



 II 

 two more event remain to be add to the chain before it reach fairly from the outset of the story to the close . 

 while our new sense of freedom from the long oppression of the past be still strange to we , I be send for by the friend who have give I my first employment in wood engraving , to receive from he a fresh testimony of his regard for my welfare . he have be commission by his employer to go to Paris , and to examine for they a fresh discovery in the practical application of his Art , the merit of which they be anxious to ascertain . his own engagement have not allow he leisure time to undertake the errand , and he have most kindly suggest that it should be transfer to I . I could have no hesitation in thankfully accept the offer , for if I acquit myself of my commission as I hop I should , the result would be a permanent engagement on the illustrated newspaper , to which I be now only occasionally attach . 

 I receive my instruction and pack up for the journey the next day . on leave Laura once more   under what change circumstance !   in her sister 's care , a serious consideration recur to I , which have more than once cross my wife 's mind , as well as my own , already I mean the consideration of Marian 's future . have we any right to let our selfish affection accept the devotion of all that generous life ? be it not our duty , our good expression of gratitude , to forget ourselves , and to think only of she ? I try to say this when we be alone for a moment , before I go away . she take my hand , and silence I at the first word . 

 " after all that we three have suffer together , " she say " there can be no parting between we till the last parting of all . my heart and my happiness , Walter , be with Laura and you . wait a little till there be child 's voice at your fireside . I will teach they to speak for I in their language , and the first lesson they say to their father and mother shall be we can not   spare our aunt ! " 

 my journey to Paris be not undertake alone . at the eleventh hour Pesca decide that he would accompany I . he have not recover his customary cheerfulness since the night at the Opera , and he determine to try what a week 's holiday would do to raise his spirit . 

 I perform the errand entrust to I , and draw out the necessary report , on the fourth day from our arrival in Paris . the fifth day I arrange to devote to sight - seeing and amusement in Pesca 's company . 

 our hotel have be too full to accommodate we both on the same floor . my room be on the second story , and Pesca 's be above I , on the third . on the morning of the fifth day I go upstairs to see if the Professor be ready to go out . just before I reach the landing I see his door open from the inside a long , delicate , nervous hand   not my friend 's hand certainly   hold it ajar . at the same time I hear Pesca 's voice say eagerly , in low tone , and in his own language " I remember the name , but I do not   know the man . you see at the Opera he be so changed that I could not recognise he . I will forward the report I can do no more . " " no more need be do , " answer the second voice . the door open wide , and the light - haired man with the scar on his cheek the man I have see follow Count Fosco 's cab a week before come out . he bow as I draw aside to let he pass his face be fearfully pale and he hold fast by the banister as he descend the stair . 

 I push open the door and enter Pesca 's room . he be crouch up , in the strange manner , in a corner of the sofa . he seem to shrink from I when I approach he . 

 " be I disturb you ? " I ask . " I do not know you have a friend with you till I see he come out . " 

 " no friend , " say Pesca eagerly . " I see he to - day for the first time and the last . " 

 " I be afraid he have bring you bad news ? " 

 " horrible news , Walter ! let we go back to London I do not   want to stop here I be sorry I ever come . the misfortune of my youth be very hard upon I , " he say , turn his face to the wall , " very hard upon I in my later time . I try to forget they and they will not forget I ! " 

 " we can not   return , I be afraid , before the afternoon , " I reply . " would you like to come out with I in the meantime ? " 

 " no , my friend , I will wait here . but let we go back to - day pray let we go back . " 

 I leave he with the assurance that he should leave Paris that afternoon . we have arrange the evening before to ascend the Cathedral of Notre Dame , with Victor Hugo 's noble romance for our guide . there be nothing in the french capital that I be more anxious to see , and I depart by myself for the church . 

 Approaching Notre Dame by the river - side , I pass on my way the terrible dead - house of Paris the Morgue . a great crowd clamour and heave round the door . there be evidently something inside which excite the popular curiosity , and feed the popular appetite for horror . 

 I should have walk on to the church if the conversation of two man and a woman on the outskirt of the crowd have not catch my ear . they have just come out from see the sight in the Morgue , and the account they be give of the dead body to their neighbour describe it as the corpse of a man a man of immense size , with a strange mark on his left arm . 

 the moment those word reach I I stop and take my place with the crowd go in . some dim foreshadowing of the truth have cross my mind when I hear Pesca 's voice through the open door , and when I see the stranger 's face as he pass I on the stair of the hotel . now the truth itself be reveal to I reveal in the chance word that have just reach my ear . other vengeance than mine have follow that fated man from the theatre to his own door from his own door to his refuge in Paris . other vengeance than mine have call he to the day of reckoning , and have exact from he the penalty of his life . the moment when I have point he out to Pesca at the theatre in the hearing of that stranger by our side , who be look for he too be the moment that seal his doom . I remember the struggle in my own heart , when he and I stand face to face the struggle before I could let he escape I and shudder as I recall it . 

 slowly , inch by inch , I press in with the crowd , move nearer and near to the great glass screen that part the dead from the living at the Morgue nearer and nearer , till I be close behind the front row of spectator , and could look in . 

 there he lay , unowne , unknown , expose to the flippant curiosity of a french mob ! there be the dreadful end of that long life of degraded ability and heartless crime ! hush in the sublime repose of death , the broad , firm , massive face and head front we so grandly that the chatter Frenchwomen about I lift their hand in admiration , and cry in shrill chorus , " ah , what a handsome man ! " the wound that have kill he have be strike with a knife or dagger exactly over his heart . no other trace of violence appear about the body except on the left arm , and there , exactly in the place where I have see the brand on Pesca 's arm , be two deep cut in the shape of the letter T , which entirely obliterate the mark of the Brotherhood . his clothe , hang above he , show that he have be himself conscious of his danger they be clothe that have disguise he as a French artisan . for a few moment , but not for long , I force myself to see these thing through the glass screen . I can write of they at no great length , for I see no more . 

 the few fact in connection with his death which I subsequently ascertain   partly from Pesca and partly from other source , may be state here before the subject be dismiss from these page . 

 his body be take out of the Seine in the disguise which I have describe , nothing be find on he which reveal his name , his rank , or his place of abode . the hand that strike he be never trace , and the circumstance under which he be kill be never discover . I leave other to draw their own conclusion in reference to the secret of the assassination as I have draw mine . when I have intimate that the foreigner with the scar be a member of the Brotherhood   admit in Italy after Pesca 's departure from his native country , and when I have far add that the two cut , in the form of a t , on the left arm of the dead man , signify the italian word " Traditore , " and show that justice have be do by the Brotherhood on a traitor , I have contribute all that I know towards elucidate the mystery of Count Fosco 's death . 

 the body be identify the day after I have see it by mean of an anonymous letter address to his wife . he be bury by Madame Fosco in the cemetery of Pere la Chaise . fresh funeral wreath continue to this day to be hang on the ornamental bronze railing round the tomb by the Countess 's own hand . she live in the strict retirement at Versailles . not long since she publish a biography of her deceased husband . the work throw no light whatever on the name that be really his own or on the secret history of his life it be almost entirely devoted to the praise of his domestic virtue , the assertion of his rare ability , and the enumeration of the honour confer on he . the circumstance attend his death be very briefly notice , and be sum up on the last page in this sentence " his life be one long assertion of the right of the aristocracy and the sacred principle of order , and he die a martyr to his cause . " 



 III 

 the summer and autumn pass after my return from Paris , and bring no change with they which need be notice here . we live so simply and quietly that the income which I be now steadily earn suffice for all our want . 

 in the February of the new year our first child be bear a son . my mother and sister and Mrs. Vesey be our guest at the little christen party , and Mrs. Clements be present to assist my wife on the same occasion . Marian be our boy 's godmother , and Pesca and Mr. Gilmore   the latter act by proxy   be his godfather . I may add here that when Mr. Gilmore return to we a year later he assist the design of these page , at my request , by write the Narrative which appear early in the story under his name , and which , though first in order of precedence , be thus , in order of time , the last that I receive . 

 the only event in our life which now remain to be record , occur when our little Walter be six month old . 

 at that time I be send to Ireland to make sketch for certain forthcoming illustration in the newspaper to which I be attach . I be away for nearly a fortnight , correspond regularly with my wife and Marian , except during the last three day of my absence , when my movement be too uncertain to enable I to receive letter . I perform the latter part of my journey back at night , and when I reach home in the morning , to my utter astonishment there be no one to receive I . Laura and Marian and the child have leave the house on the day before my return . 

 a note from my wife , which be give to I by the servant , only increase my surprise , by inform I that they have go to Limmeridge House . Marian have prohibit any attempt at write explanation I be entreat to follow they the moment I come back complete enlightenment await I on my arrival in Cumberland and I be forbid to feel the slight anxiety in the meantime . there the note end . it be still early enough to catch the morning train . I reach Limmeridge House the same afternoon . 

 my wife and Marian be both upstairs . they have establish themselves   by way of complete my amazement   in the little room which have be once assign to I for a studio , when I be employ on Mr. Fairlie 's drawing . on the very chair which I use to occupy when I be at work Marian be sit now , with the child industriously suck his coral upon her lap while Laura be stand by the well - remember drawing - table which I have so often use , with the little album that I have fill for she in past time open under her hand . 

 " what in the name of heaven have bring you here ? " I ask . " do Mr. Fairlie know ? " 

 Marian suspend the question on my lip by tell I that Mr. Fairlie be dead . he have be strike by paralysis , and have never rally after the shock . Mr. Kyrle have inform they of his death , and have advise they to proceed immediately to Limmeridge House . 

 some dim perception of a great change dawn on my mind . Laura speak before I have quite realise it . she steal close to I to enjoy the surprise which be still express in my face . 

 " my darling Walter , " she say , " must we really account for our boldness in come here ? I be afraid , love , I can only explain it by break through our rule , and refer to the past . " 

 " there be not the least necessity for do anything of the kind , " say Marian . " we can be just as explicit , and much more interesting , by refer to the future . " she rise and hold up the child kicking and crow in her arm . " do you know who this be , Walter ? " she ask , with bright tear of happiness gathering in her eye . 

 " even MY bewilderment have its limit , " I reply . " I think I can still answer for know my own child . " 

 " child ! " she exclaim , with all her easy gaiety of old time . " do you talk in that familiar manner of one of the land gentry of England ? be you aware , when I present this illustrious baby to your notice , in whose presence you stand ? evidently not ! let I make two eminent personage know to one another : Mr. Walter Hartright the heir of LIMMERIDGE . " 


 so she speak . in write those last word , I have write all . the pen falter in my hand . the long , happy labour of many month be over . Marian be the good angel of our life let Marian end our Story . 


