NIGHT and DAY 


  to 
  vanessa BELL 
  BUT , look for a PHRASE , 
  I find none to stand 
  BESIDE your name 

 CHAPTER I 

 it be a Sunday evening in October , and in common with many other young lady of her class , Katharine Hilbery be pour out tea . perhaps a fifth part of her mind be thus occupy , and the remain part leapt over the little barrier of day which interpose between Monday morning and this rather subdue moment , and play with the thing one do voluntarily and normally in the daylight . but although she be silent , she be evidently mistress of a situation which be familiar enough to she , and incline to let it take its way for the six hundredth time , perhaps , without bring into play any of her unoccupied faculty . a single glance be enough to show that Mrs. Hilbery be so rich in the gift which make tea - party of elderly distinguished people successful , that she scarcely need any help from her daughter , provide that the tiresome business of teacup and bread and butter be discharge for she . 

 consider that the little party have be seat round the tea - table for less than twenty minute , the animation observable on their face , and the amount of sound they be produce collectively , be very creditable to the hostess . it suddenly come into Katharine 's mind that if some one open the door at this moment he would think that they be enjoy themselves ; he would think , " what an extremely nice house to come into ! " and instinctively she laugh , and say something to increase the noise , for the credit of the house presumably , since she herself have not be feel exhilarate . at the very same moment , rather to her amusement , the door be fling open , and a young man enter the room . Katharine , as she shake hand with he , ask he , in her own mind , " now , do you think we be enjoy ourselves enormously ? " ... " Mr. Denham , mother , " she say aloud , for she see that her mother have forget his name . 

 that fact be perceptible to Mr. Denham also , and increase the awkwardness which inevitably attend the entrance of a stranger into a room full of people much at their ease , and all launch upon sentence . at the same time , it seem to Mr. Denham as if a thousand softly pad door have close between he and the street outside . a fine mist , the etherealized essence of the fog , hang visibly in the wide and rather empty space of the drawing - room , all silver where the candle be group on the tea - table , and ruddy again in the firelight . with the omnibus and cab still run in his head , and his body still tingle with his quick walk along the street and in and out of traffic and foot - passenger , this drawing - room seem very remote and still ; and the face of the elderly people be mellow , at some distance from each other , and have a bloom on they owe to the fact that the air in the drawing - room be thicken by blue grain of mist . Mr. Denham have come in as Mr. Fortescue , the eminent novelist , reach the middle of a very long sentence . he keep this suspend while the newcomer sit down , and Mrs. Hilbery deftly join the sever part by lean towards he and remark : 

 " now , what would you do if you be married to an engineer , and have to live in Manchester , Mr. Denham ? " 

 " surely she could learn Persian , " break in a thin , elderly gentleman . " be there no retired schoolmaster or man of letter in Manchester with whom she could read Persian ? " 

 " a cousin of our have marry and go to live in Manchester , " Katharine explain . Mr. Denham mutter something , which be indeed all that be require of he , and the novelist go on where he have leave off . privately , Mr. Denham curse himself very sharply for have exchange the freedom of the street for this sophisticated drawing - room , where , among other disagreeable , he certainly would not appear at his good . he glance round he , and see that , save for Katharine , they be all over forty , the only consolation be that Mr. Fortescue be a considerable celebrity , so that to - morrow one might be glad to have meet he . 

 " have you ever be to Manchester ? " he ask Katharine . 

 " never , " she reply . 

 " why do you object to it , then ? " 

 Katharine stir her tea , and seem to speculate , so Denham thought , upon the duty of fill somebody else 's cup , but she be really wonder how she be go to keep this strange young man in harmony with the rest . she observe that he be compress his teacup , so that there be danger lest the thin china might cave inward . she could see that he be nervous ; one would expect a bony young man with his face slightly redden by the wind , and his hair not altogether smooth , to be nervous in such a party . far , he probably dislike this kind of thing , and have come out of curiosity , or because her father have invite he anyhow , he would not be easily combine with the rest . 

 " I should think there would be no one to talk to in Manchester , " she reply at random . Mr. Fortescue have be observe she for a moment or two , as novelist be incline to observe , and at this remark he smile , and make it the text for a little further speculation . 

 " in spite of a slight tendency to exaggeration , Katharine decidedly hit the mark , " he say , and lie back in his chair , with his opaque contemplative eye fix on the ceiling , and the tip of his finger press together , he depict , first the horror of the street of Manchester , and then the bare , immense moor on the outskirt of the town , and then the scrubby little house in which the girl would live , and then the professor and the miserable young student devote to the more strenuous work of our young dramatist , who would visit she , and how her appearance would change by degree , and how she would fly to London , and how Katharine would have to lead she about , as one lead an eager dog on a chain , past row of clamorous butcher ' shop , poor dear creature . 

 " oh , Mr. Fortescue , " exclaim Mrs. Hilbery , as he finish , " I have just write to say how I envy she ! I be think of the big garden and the dear old lady in mitten , who read nothing but the " Spectator , " and snuff the candle . have they all disappear ? I tell she she would find the nice thing of London without the horrid street that depress one so . " 

 " there be the University , " say the thin gentleman , who have previously insist upon the existence of people know Persian . 

 " I know there be moor there , because I read about they in a book the other day , " say Katharine . 

 " I be grieve and amazed at the ignorance of my family , " Mr. Hilbery remark . he be an elderly man , with a pair of oval , hazel eye which be rather bright for his time of life , and relieve the heaviness of his face . he play constantly with a little green stone attach to his watch - chain , thus display long and very sensitive finger , and have a habit of move his head hither and thither very quickly without alter the position of his large and rather corpulent body , so that he seem to be provide himself incessantly with food for amusement and reflection with the least possible expenditure of energy . one might suppose that he have pass the time of life when his ambition be personal , or that he have gratify they as far as he be likely to do , and now employ his considerable acuteness rather to observe and reflect than to attain any result . 

 Katharine , so Denham decide , while Mr. Fortescue build up another rounded structure of word , have a likeness to each of her parent , but these element be rather oddly blend . she have the quick , impulsive movement of her mother , the lip part often to speak , and close again ; and the dark oval eye of her father brim with light upon a basis of sadness , or , since she be too young to have acquire a sorrowful point of view , one might say that the basis be not sadness so much as a spirit give to contemplation and self - control . judge by her hair , her coloring , and the shape of her feature , she be strike , if not actually beautiful . decision and composure stamp she , a combination of quality that produce a very marked character , and one that be not calculate to put a young man , who scarcely know she , at his ease . for the rest , she be tall ; her dress be of some quiet color , with old yellow - tint lace for ornament , to which the spark of an ancient jewel give its one red gleam . Denham notice that , although silent , she keep sufficient control of the situation to answer immediately her mother appeal to she for help , and yet it be obvious to he that she attend only with the surface skin of her mind . it strike he that her position at the tea - table , among all these elderly people , be not without its difficulty , and he check his inclination to find she , or her attitude , generally antipathetic to he . the talk have pass over Manchester , after deal with it very generously . 

 " would it be the Battle of Trafalgar or the Spanish Armada , Katharine ? " her mother demand . 

 " Trafalgar , mother . " 

 " Trafalgar , of course ! how stupid of I ! another cup of tea , with a thin slice of lemon in it , and then , dear Mr. Fortescue , please explain my absurd little puzzle . one can not   help believe gentleman with roman nose , even if one meet they in omnibus . " 

 Mr. Hilbery here interpose so far as Denham be concern , and talk a great deal of sense about the solicitor ' profession , and the change which he have see in his lifetime . indeed , Denham properly fall to his lot , owe to the fact that an article by Denham upon some legal matter , publish by Mr. Hilbery in his Review , have bring they acquainted . but when a moment later Mrs. Sutton Bailey be announce , he turn to she , and Mr. Denham find himself sit silent , reject possible thing to say , beside Katharine , who be silent too . be much about the same age and both under thirty , they be prohibit from the use of a great many convenient phrase which launch conversation into smooth water . they be far silence by Katharine 's rather malicious determination not to help this young man , in whose upright and resolute bearing she detect something hostile to her surrounding , by any of the usual feminine amenity . they therefore sit silent , Denham control his desire to say something abrupt and explosive , which should shock she into life . but Mrs. Hilbery be immediately sensitive to any silence in the drawing - room , as of a dumb note in a sonorous scale , and lean across the table she observe , in the curiously tentative detach manner which always give her phrase the likeness of butterfly flaunt from one sunny spot to another , " d'you know , Mr. Denham , you remind I so much of dear Mr. Ruskin .... be it his tie , Katharine , or his hair , or the way he sit in his chair ? do tell I , Mr. Denham , be you an admirer of Ruskin ? some one , the other day , say to I , ' oh , no , we do not   read Ruskin , Mrs. Hilbery . ' what do you read , I wonder ? for you can not   spend all your time go up in aeroplane and burrow into the bowel of the earth . " 

 she look benevolently at Denham , who say nothing articulate , and then at Katharine , who smile but say nothing either , upon which Mrs. Hilbery seem possess by a brilliant idea , and exclaim : 

 " I be sure Mr. Denham would like to see our thing , Katharine . I be sure he be not like that dreadful young man , Mr. Ponting , who tell I that he consider it our duty to live exclusively in the present . after all , what be the present ? half of it be the past , and the well half , too , I should say , " she add , turn to Mr. Fortescue . 

 Denham rise , half meaning to go , and think that he have see all that there be to see , but Katharine rise at the same moment , and say , " perhaps you would like to see the picture , " lead the way across the drawing - room to a small room opening out of it . 

 the small room be something like a chapel in a cathedral , or a grotto in a cave , for the booming sound of the traffic in the distance suggest the soft surge of water , and the oval mirror , with their silver surface , be like deep pool tremble beneath starlight . but the comparison to a religious temple of some kind be the more apt of the two , for the little room be crowd with relic . 

 as Katharine touch different spot , light sprang here and there , and reveal a square mass of red - and - gold book , and then a long skirt in blue - and - white paint lustrous behind glass , and then a mahogany writing - table , with its orderly equipment , and , finally , a picture above the table , to which special illumination be accord . when Katharine have touch these last light , she stand back , as much as to say , " there ! " Denham find himself look down upon by the eye of the great poet , Richard Alardyce , and suffer a little shock which would have lead he , have he be wear a hat , to remove it . the eye look at he out of the mellow pink and yellow of the paint with divine friendliness , which embrace he , and pass on to contemplate the entire world . the paint have so fade that very little but the beautiful large eye be leave , dark in the surround dimness . 

 Katharine wait as though for he to receive a full impression , and then she say : 

 " this be his writing - table . he use this pen , " and she lift a quill pen and lay it down again . the writing - table be splash with old ink , and the pen dishevel in service . there lie the gigantic gold - rim spectacle , ready to his hand , and beneath the table be a pair of large , wear slipper , one of which Katharine pick up , remark : 

 " I think my grandfather must have be at least twice as large as any one be nowadays . this , " she go on , as if she know what she have to say by heart , " be the original manuscript of the ' Ode to Winter . ' the early poem be far less correct than the later . would you like to look at it ? " 

 while Mr. Denham examine the manuscript , she glance up at her grandfather , and , for the thousandth time , fall into a pleasant dreamy state in which she seem to be the companion of those giant man , of their own lineage , at any rate , and the insignificant present moment be put to shame . that magnificent ghostly head on the canvas , surely , never behold all the triviality of a Sunday afternoon , and it do not seem to matter what she and this young man say to each other , for they be only small people . 

 " this be a copy of the first edition of the poem , " she continue , without consider the fact that Mr. Denham be still occupy with the manuscript , " which contain several poem that have not be reprint , as well as correction . " she pause for a minute , and then go on , as if these space have all be calculate . 

 " that lady in blue be my great - grandmother , by Millington . here be my uncle 's walking - stick he be Sir Richard Warburton , you know , and ride with Havelock to the Relief of Lucknow . and then , let I see oh , that be the original Alardyce , 1697 , the founder of the family fortune , with his wife . some one give we this bowl the other day because it have their crest and initial . we think it must have be give they to celebrate their silver wedding - day . " 

 here she stop for a moment , wonder why it be that Mr. Denham say nothing . her feeling that he be antagonistic to she , which have lapse while she think of her family possession , return so keenly that she stop in the middle of her catalog and look at he . her mother , wish to connect he reputably with the great dead , have compare he with Mr. Ruskin ; and the comparison be in Katharine 's mind , and lead she to be more critical of the young man than be fair , for a young man pay a call in a tail - coat be in a different element altogether from a head seize at its climax of expressiveness , gaze immutably from behind a sheet of glass , which be all that remain to she of Mr. Ruskin . he have a singular face a face build for swiftness and decision rather than for massive contemplation ; the forehead broad , the nose long and formidable , the lip clean - shaven and at once dogged and sensitive , the cheek lean , with a deeply run tide of red blood in they . his eye , expressive now of the usual masculine impersonality and authority , might reveal more subtle emotion under favorable circumstance , for they be large , and of a clear , brown color ; they seem unexpectedly to hesitate and speculate ; but Katharine only look at he to wonder whether his face would not have come near the standard of her dead hero if it have be adorn with side - whisker . in his spare build and thin , though healthy , cheek , she see token of an angular and acrid soul . his voice , she notice , have a slight vibrate or creak sound in it , as he lay down the manuscript and say : 

 " you must be very proud of your family , Miss Hilbery . " 

 " yes , I be , " Katharine answer , and she add , " do you think there be anything wrong in that ? " 

 " Wrong ? how should it be wrong ? it must be a bore , though , show your thing to visitor , " he add reflectively . 

 " not if the visitor like they . " 

 " be not   it difficult to live up to your ancestor ? " he proceed . 

 " I dare say I should not   try to write poetry , " Katharine reply . 

 " no . and that be what I should hate . I could not   bear my grandfather to cut I out . and , after all , " Denham go on , glance round he satirically , as Katharine think , " it be not your grandfather only . you be cut out all the way round . I suppose you come of one of the most distinguished family in England . there be the Warburtons and the Mannings and you be relate to the Otways , be not   you ? I read it all in some magazine , " he add . 

 " the Otways be my cousin , " Katharine reply . 

 " well , " say Denham , in a final tone of voice , as if his argument be prove . 

 " well , " say Katharine , " I do not   see that you have   prove anything . " 

 Denham smile , in a peculiarly provoking way . he be amuse and gratify to find that he have the power to annoy his oblivious , supercilious hostess , if he could not impress she ; though he would have prefer to impress she . 

 he sit silent , hold the precious little book of poem unopened in his hand , and Katharine watch he , the melancholy or contemplative expression deepen in her eye as her annoyance fade . she appear to be consider many thing . she have forget her duty . 

 " well , " say Denham again , suddenly open the little book of poem , as though he have say all that he mean to say or could , with propriety , say . he turn over the page with great decision , as if he be judge the book in its entirety , the printing and paper and binding , as well as the poetry , and then , have satisfy himself of its good or bad quality , he place it on the writing - table , and examine the malacca cane with the gold knob which have belong to the soldier . 

 " but be not   you proud of your family ? " Katharine demand . 

 " no , " say Denham . " we have   never do anything to be proud of unless you count pay one 's bill a matter for pride . " 

 " that sound rather dull , " Katharine remark . 

 " you would think we horribly dull , " Denham agree . 

 " yes , I might find you dull , but I do not   think I should find you ridiculous , " Katharine add , as if Denham have actually bring that charge against her family . 

 " no because we be not in the least ridiculous . we be a respectable middle - class family , live at Highgate . " 

 " we do not   live at Highgate , but we be middle class too , I suppose . " 

 Denham merely smile , and replace the malacca cane on the rack , he draw a sword from its ornamental sheath . 

 " that belong to Clive , so we say , " say Katharine , take up her duty as hostess again automatically . 

 " be it a lie ? " Denham inquire . 

 " it be a family tradition . I do not   know that we can prove it . " 

 " you see , we do not   have tradition in our family , " say Denham . 

 " you sound very dull , " Katharine remark , for the second time . 

 " merely middle class , " Denham reply . 

 " you pay your bill , and you speak the truth . I do not   see why you should despise we . " 

 Mr. Denham carefully sheathe the sword which the Hilberys say belong to Clive . 

 " I should not   like to be you ; that be all I say , " he reply , as if he be say what he think as accurately as he could . 

 " no , but one never would like to be any one else . " 

 " I should . I should like to be lot of other people . " 

 " then why not we ? " Katharine ask . 

 Denham look at she as she sit in her grandfather 's arm - chair , draw her great - uncle 's malacca cane smoothly through her finger , while her background be make up equally of lustrous blue - and - white paint , and crimson book with gilt line on they . the vitality and composure of her attitude , as of a bright - plume bird poise easily before further flight , rouse he to show she the limitation of her lot . so soon , so easily , would he be forget . 

 " you will never know anything at first hand , " he begin , almost savagely . " it be all be do for you . you will never know the pleasure of buy thing after save up for they , or read book for the first time , or make discovery . " 

 " go on , " Katharine observe , as he pause , suddenly doubtful , when he hear his voice proclaim aloud these fact , whether there be any truth in they . 

 " of course , I do not   know how you spend your time , " he continue , a little stiffly , " but I suppose you have to show people round . you be write a life of your grandfather , be not   you ? and this kind of thing " he nod towards the other room , where they could hear burst of cultivate laughter " must take up a lot of time . " 

 she look at he expectantly , as if between they they be decorate a small figure of herself , and she see he hesitate in the disposition of some bow or sash . 

 " you have   get it very nearly right , " she say , " but I only help my mother . I do not   write myself . " 

 " do you do anything yourself ? " he demand . 

 " what do you mean ? " she ask . " I do not   leave the house at ten and come back at six . " 

 " I do not   mean that . " 

 Mr. Denham have recover his self - control ; he speak with a quietness which make Katharine rather anxious that he should explain himself , but at the same time she wish to annoy he , to waft he away from she on some light current of ridicule or satire , as she be will not to do with these intermittent young man of her father 's . 

 " nobody ever do do anything worth do nowadays , " she remark . " you see " she tap the volume of her grandfather 's poem " we do not   even print as well as they do , and as for poet or painter or novelist there be none ; so , at any rate , I be not singular . " 

 " no , we have not   any great man , " Denham reply . " I be very glad that we have not . I hate great man . the worship of greatness in the nineteenth century seem to I to explain the worthlessness of that generation . " 

 Katharine open her lip and draw in her breath , as if to reply with equal vigor , when the shutting of a door in the next room withdraw her attention , and they both become conscious that the voice , which have be rise and fall round the tea - table , have fall silent ; the light , even , seem to have sink lower . a moment later Mrs. Hilbery appear in the doorway of the ante - room . she stand look at they with a smile of expectancy on her face , as if a scene from the drama of the young generation be be play for her benefit . she be a remarkable - looking woman , well advanced in the sixty , but owe to the lightness of her frame and the brightness of her eye she seem to have be waft over the surface of the year without take much harm in the passage . her face be shrink and aquiline , but any hint of sharpness be dispel by the large blue eye , at once sagacious and innocent , which seem to regard the world with an enormous desire that it should behave itself nobly , and an entire confidence that it could do so , if it would only take the pain . 

 certain line on the broad forehead and about the lip might be take to suggest that she have know moment of some difficulty and perplexity in the course of her career , but these have not destroy her trustfulness , and she be clearly still prepared to give every one any number of fresh chance and the whole system the benefit of the doubt . she wear a great resemblance to her father , and suggest , as he do , the fresh air and open space of a young world . 

 " well , " she say , " how do you like our thing , Mr. Denham ? " 

 Mr. Denham rise , put his book down , open his mouth , but say nothing , as Katharine observe , with some amusement . 

 Mrs. Hilbery handle the book he have lay down . 

 " there be some book that live , " she muse . " they be young with we , and they grow old with we . be you fond of poetry , Mr. Denham ? but what an absurd question to ask ! the truth be , dear Mr. Fortescue have almost tire I out . he be so eloquent and so witty , so search and so profound that , after half an hour or so , I feel inclined to turn out all the light . but perhaps he would be more wonderful than ever in the dark . what d'you think , Katharine ? shall we give a little party in complete darkness ? there would have to be bright room for the bore .... " 

 here Mr. Denham hold out his hand . 

 " but we have   any number of thing to show you ! " Mrs. Hilbery exclaim , take no notice of it . " book , picture , china , manuscript , and the very chair that Mary Queen of Scots sit in when she hear of Darnley 's murder . I must lie down for a little , and Katharine must change her dress   though she be wear a very pretty one , but if you do not   mind be leave alone , supper will be at eight . I dare say you will write a poem of your own while you be wait . ah , how I love the firelight ! do not   our room look charming ? " 

 she step back and bade they contemplate the empty drawing - room , with its rich , irregular light , as the flame leapt and waver . 

 " dear thing ! " she exclaim . " dear chair and table ! how like old friend they be faithful , silent friend . which remind I , Katharine , little Mr. Anning be come to - night , and Tite Street , and Cadogan Square .... do remember to get that drawing of your great - uncle glaze . Aunt Millicent remark it last time she be here , and I know how it would hurt I to see my father in a broken glass . " 

 it be like tear through a maze of diamond - glitter spider ' webs to say good - bye and escape , for at each movement Mrs. Hilbery remember something far about the villainy of picture - framer or the delight of poetry , and at one time it seem to the young man that he would be hypnotize into do what she pretend to want he to do , for he could not suppose that she attach any value whatever to his presence . Katharine , however , make an opportunity for he to leave , and for that he be grateful to she , as one young person be grateful for the understanding of another . 





 CHAPTER II 

 the young man shut the door with a sharp slam than any visitor have use that afternoon , and walk up the street at a great pace , cut the air with his walking - stick . he be glad to find himself outside that drawing - room , breathe raw fog , and in contact with unpolished people who only want their share of the pavement allow they . he think that if he have have Mr. or Mrs. or Miss Hilbery out here he would have make they , somehow , feel his superiority , for he be chafe by the memory of halt awkward sentence which have fail to give even the young woman with the sad , but inwardly ironical eye a hint of his force . he try to recall the actual word of his little outburst , and unconsciously supplement they by so many word of great expressiveness that the irritation of his failure be somewhat assuage . sudden stab of the unmitigated truth assail he now and then , for he be not incline by nature to take a rosy view of his conduct , but what with the beat of his foot upon the pavement , and the glimpse which half - draw curtain offer he of kitchen , dining - room , and drawing - room , illustrate with mute power different scene from different life , his own experience lose its sharpness . 

 his own experience undergo a curious change . his speed slacken , his head sink a little towards his breast , and the lamplight shine now and again upon a face grow strangely tranquil . his thought be so absorbing that when it become necessary to verify the name of a street , he look at it for a time before he read it ; when he come to a crossing , he seem to have to reassure himself by two or three tap , such as a blind man give , upon the curb ; and , reach the Underground station , he blink in the bright circle of light , glance at his watch , decide that he might still indulge himself in darkness , and walk straight on . 

 and yet the thought be the thought with which he have start . he be still think about the people in the house which he have leave ; but instead of remembering , with whatever accuracy he could , their look and saying , he have consciously take leave of the literal truth . a turn of the street , a firelit room , something monumental in the procession of the lamp - post , who shall say what accident of light or shape have suddenly change the prospect within his mind , and lead he to murmur aloud : 

 " she will do .... yes , Katharine Hilbery'll do .... I will take Katharine Hilbery . " 

 as soon as he have say this , his pace slacken , his head fall , his eye become fix . the desire to justify himself , which have be so urgent , cease to torment he , and , as if release from constraint , so that they work without friction or bidding , his faculty leapt forward and fix , as a matter of course , upon the form of Katharine Hilbery . it be marvellous how much they find to feed upon , consider the destructive nature of Denham 's criticism in her presence . the charm , which he have try to disown , when under the effect of it , the beauty , the character , the aloofness , which he have be determine not to feel , now possess he wholly ; and when , as happen by the nature of thing , he have exhaust his memory , he go on with his imagination . he be conscious of what he be about , for in thus dwell upon Miss Hilbery 's quality , he show a kind of method , as if he require this vision of she for a particular purpose . he increase her height , he darken her hair ; but physically there be not much to change in she . his most daring liberty be take with her mind , which , for reason of his own , he desire to be exalt and infallible , and of such independence that it be only in the case of Ralph Denham that it swerve from its high , swift flight , but where he be concern , though fastidious at first , she finally swoop from her eminence to crown he with her approval . these delicious detail , however , be to be work out in all their ramification at his leisure ; the main point be that Katharine Hilbery would do ; she would do for week , perhaps for month . in take she he have provide himself with something the lack of which have leave a bare place in his mind for a considerable time . he give a sigh of satisfaction ; his consciousness of his actual position somewhere in the neighborhood of Knightsbridge return to he , and he be soon speed in the train towards Highgate . 

 although thus support by the knowledge of his new possession of considerable value , he be not proof against the familiar thought which the suburban street and the damp shrub grow in front garden and the absurd name paint in white upon the gate of those garden suggest to he . his walk be uphill , and his mind dwelt gloomily upon the house which he approach , where he would find six or seven brother and sister , a widow mother , and , probably , some aunt or uncle sit down to an unpleasant meal under a very bright light . should he put in force the threat which , two week ago , some such gathering have wring from he the terrible threat that if visitor come on Sunday he should dine alone in his room ? a glance in the direction of Miss Hilbery determine he to make his stand this very night , and accordingly , have let himself in , have verify the presence of Uncle Joseph by mean of a bowler hat and a very large umbrella , he give his order to the maid , and go upstairs to his room . 

 he go up a great many flight of stair , and he notice , as he have very seldom notice , how the carpet become steadily shabby , until it cease altogether , how the wall be discolor , sometimes by cascade of damp , and sometimes by the outline of picture - frame since remove , how the paper flap loose at the corner , and a great flake of plaster have fall from the ceiling . the room itself be a cheerless one to return to at this inauspicious hour . a flattened sofa would , later in the evening , become a bed ; one of the table conceal a washing apparatus ; his clothe and boot be disagreeably mixed with book which bear the gilt of college arm ; and , for decoration , there hang upon the wall photograph of bridge and cathedral and large , unprepossesse group of insufficiently clothe young man , sit in row one above another upon stone step . there be a look of meanness and shabbiness in the furniture and curtain , and nowhere any sign of luxury or even of a cultivate taste , unless the cheap classic in the book - case be a sign of an effort in that direction . the only object that throw any light upon the character of the room 's owner be a large perch , place in the window to catch the air and sun , upon which a tame and , apparently , decrepit rook hop dryly from side to side . the bird , encourage by a scratch behind the ear , settle upon Denham 's shoulder . he light his gas - fire and settle down in gloomy patience to await his dinner . after sit thus for some minute a small girl pop her head in to say , 

 " mother say , be not   you come down , Ralph ? Uncle Joseph " 

 " they be to bring my dinner up here , " say Ralph , peremptorily ; whereupon she vanish , leave the door ajar in her haste to be go . after Denham have wait some minute , in the course of which neither he nor the rook take their eye off the fire , he mutter a curse , run downstairs , intercept the parlor - maid , and cut himself a slice of bread and cold meat . as he do so , the dining - room door spring open , a voice exclaim " Ralph ! " but Ralph pay no attention to the voice , and make off upstairs with his plate . he set it down in a chair opposite he , and eat with a ferocity that be due partly to anger and partly to hunger . his mother , then , be determined not to respect his wish ; he be a person of no importance in his own family ; he be send for and treat as a child . he reflect , with a grow sense of injury , that almost every one of his action since open the door of his room have be win from the grasp of the family system . by right , he should have be sit downstairs in the drawing - room describe his afternoon 's adventure , or listen to the afternoon 's adventure of other people ; the room itself , the gas - fire , the arm - chair all have be fight for ; the wretched bird , with half its feather out and one leg lamed by a cat , have be rescue under protest ; but what his family most resent , he reflect , be his wish for privacy . to dine alone , or to sit alone after dinner , be flat rebellion , to be fight with every weapon of underhand stealth or of open appeal . which do he dislike most deception or tear ? but , at any rate , they could not rob he of his thought ; they could not make he say where he have be or whom he have see . that be his own affair ; that , indeed , be a step entirely in the right direction , and , light his pipe , and cut up the remain of his meal for the benefit of the rook , Ralph calm his rather excessive irritation and settle down to think over his prospect . 

 this particular afternoon be a step in the right direction , because it be part of his plan to get to know people beyond the family circuit , just as it be part of his plan to learn German this autumn , and to review legal book for Mr. Hilbery 's " Critical Review . " he have always make plan since he be a small boy ; for poverty , and the fact that he be the eld son of a large family , have give he the habit of thinking of spring and summer , autumn and winter , as so many stage in a prolonged campaign . although he be still under thirty , this forecasting habit have mark two semicircular line above his eyebrow , which threaten , at this moment , to crease into their wonte shape . but instead of settle down to think , he rise , take a small piece of cardboard mark in large letter with the word OUT , and hang it upon the handle of his door . this do , he sharpen a pencil , light a reading - lamp and open his book . but still he hesitate to take his seat . he scratch the rook , he walk to the window ; he part the curtain , and look down upon the city which lay , hazily luminous , beneath he . he look across the vapor in the direction of Chelsea ; look fixedly for a moment , and then return to his chair . but the whole thickness of some learn counsel 's treatise upon Torts do not screen he satisfactorily . through the page he see a drawing - room , very empty and spacious ; he hear low voice , he see woman 's figure , he could even smell the scent of the cedar log which flame in the grate . his mind relax its tension , and seem to be give out now what it have take in unconsciously at the time . he could remember Mr. Fortescue 's exact word , and the rolling emphasis with which he deliver they , and he begin to repeat what Mr. Fortescue have say , in Mr. Fortescue 's own manner , about Manchester . his mind then begin to wander about the house , and he wonder whether there be other room like the drawing - room , and he think , inconsequently , how beautiful the bathroom must be , and how leisurely it be the life of these well - keep people , who be , no doubt , still sit in the same room , only they have change their clothe , and little Mr. Anning be there , and the aunt who would mind if the glass of her father 's picture be break . Miss Hilbery have change her dress   " although she be wear such a pretty one , " he hear her mother say , and she be talk to Mr. Anning , who be well over forty , and bald into the bargain , about book . how peaceful and spacious it be ; and the peace possess he so completely that his muscle slacken , his book droop from his hand , and he forget that the hour of work be waste minute by minute . 

 he be rouse by a creak upon the stair . with a guilty start he compose himself , frown and look intently at the fifty - sixth page of his volume . a step pause outside his door , and he know that the person , whoever it might be , be consider the placard , and debate whether to honor its decree or not . certainly , policy advise he to sit still in autocratic silence , for no custom can take root in a family unless every breach of it be punish severely for the first six month or so . but Ralph be conscious of a distinct wish to be interrupt , and his disappointment be perceptible when he hear the creak sound rather far down the stair , as if his visitor have decide to withdraw . he rise , open the door with unnecessary abruptness , and wait on the landing . the person stop simultaneously half a flight downstairs . 

 " Ralph ? " say a voice , inquiringly . 

 " Joan ? " 

 " I be come up , but I see your notice . " 

 " well , come along in , then . " he conceal his desire beneath a tone as grudging as he could make it . 

 Joan come in , but she be careful to show , by stand upright with one hand upon the mantelpiece , that she be only there for a definite purpose , which discharge , she would go . 

 she be old than Ralph by some three or four year . her face be round but worn , and express that tolerant but anxious good humor which be the special attribute of elder sister in large family . her pleasant brown eye resemble Ralph 's , save in expression , for whereas he seem to look straightly and keenly at one object , she appear to be in the habit of consider everything from many different point of view . this make she appear his elder by more year than exist in fact between they . her gaze rest for a moment or two upon the rook . she then say , without any preface : 

 " it be about Charles and Uncle John 's offer .... Mother 's be talk to I . she say she can not   afford to pay for he after this term . she say she will have to ask for an overdraft as it be . " 

 " that be simply not true , " say Ralph . 

 " no . I think not . but she will not   believe I when I say it . " 

 Ralph , as if he could foresee the length of this familiar argument , draw up a chair for his sister and sit down himself . 

 " I be not interrupt ? " she inquire . 

 Ralph shake his head , and for a time they sit silent . the line curve themselves in semicircle above their eye . 

 " she do not   understand that one be get to take risk , " he observe , finally . 

 " I believe mother would take risk if she know that Charles be the sort of boy to profit by it . " 

 " he be get brain , have not   he ? " say Ralph . his tone have take on that shade of pugnacity which suggest to his sister that some personal grievance drive he to take the line he do . she wonder what it might be , but at once recall her mind , and assent . 

 " in some way he be fearfully backward , though , compare with what you be at his age . and he be difficult at home , too . he make molly slave for he . " 

 Ralph make a sound which belittle this particular argument . it be plain to Joan that she have strike one of her brother 's perverse mood , and he be go to oppose whatever his mother say . he call she ' she , " which be a proof of it . she sigh involuntarily , and the sigh annoyed Ralph , and he exclaim with irritation : 

 " it be pretty hard line to stick a boy into an office at seventeen ! " 

 " nobody want to stick he into an office , " she say . 

 she , too , be become annoy . she have spend the whole of the afternoon discuss wearisome detail of education and expense with her mother , and she have come to her brother for help , encouraged , rather irrationally , to expect help by the fact that he have be out somewhere , she do not   know and do not   mean to ask where , all the afternoon . 

 Ralph be fond of his sister , and her irritation make he think how unfair it be that all these burden should be lay on her shoulder . 

 " the truth be , " he observe gloomily , " that I ought to have accept Uncle John 's offer . I should have be make six hundred a year by this time . " 

 " I do not   think that for a moment , " Joan reply quickly , repent of her annoyance . " the question , to my mind , be , whether we could not   cut down our expense in some way . " 

 " a small house ? " 

 " few servant , perhaps . " 

 neither brother nor sister speak with much conviction , and after reflect for a moment what these propose reform in a strictly economical household meant , Ralph announce very decidedly : 

 " it be out of the question . " 

 it be out of the question that she should put any more household work upon herself . no , the hardship must fall on he , for he be determined that his family should have as many chance of distinguish themselves as other family have as the Hilberys have , for example . he believe secretly and rather defiantly , for it be a fact not capable of proof , that there be something very remarkable about his family . 

 " if mother will not   run risk " 

 " you really can not   expect she to sell out again . " 

 " she ought to look upon it as an investment ; but if she will not , we must find some other way , that be all . " 

 a threat be contain in this sentence , and Joan know , without ask , what the threat be . in the course of his professional life , which now extend over six or seven year , Ralph have save , perhaps , three or four hundred pound . consider the sacrifice he have make in order to put by this sum it always amazed Joan to find that he use it to gamble with , buy share and sell they again , increase it sometimes , sometimes diminish it , and always run the risk of lose every penny of it in a day 's disaster . but although she wonder , she could not help love he the well for his odd combination of Spartan self - control and what appear to her romantic and childish folly . Ralph interest she more than any one else in the world , and she often break off in the middle of one of these economic discussion , in spite of their gravity , to consider some fresh aspect of his character . 

 " I think you would be foolish to risk your money on poor old Charles , " she observe . " Fond as I be of he , he do not   seem to I exactly brilliant .... besides , why should you be sacrifice ? " 

 " my dear Joan , " Ralph exclaim , stretch himself out with a gesture of impatience , " do not   you see that we have   all get to be sacrifice ? what be the use of deny it ? what be the use of struggle against it ? so it always have be , so it always will be . we have   get no money and we never shall have any money . we shall just turn round in the mill every day of our life until we drop and die , wear out , as most people do , when one come to think of it . " 

 Joan look at he , open her lip as if to speak , and close they again . then she say , very tentatively : 

 " be not   you happy , Ralph ? " 

 " no . be you ? perhaps I be as happy as most people , though . God know whether I be happy or not . what be happiness ? " 

 he glance with half a smile , in spite of his gloomy irritation , at his sister . she look , as usual , as if she be weigh one thing with another , and balance they together before she make up her mind . 

 " happiness , " she remark at length enigmatically , rather as if she be sample the word , and then she pause . she pause for a considerable space , as if she be consider happiness in all its bearing . " Hilda be here to - day , " she suddenly resume , as if they have never mention happiness . " she bring Bobbie he be a fine boy now . " Ralph observe , with an amusement that have a tinge of irony in it , that she be now go to sidle away quickly from this dangerous approach to intimacy on to topic of general and family interest . nevertheless , he reflect , she be the only one of his family with whom he find it possible to discuss happiness , although he might very well have discuss happiness with Miss Hilbery at their first meeting . he look critically at Joan , and wish that she do not look so provincial or suburban in her high green dress with the faded trimming , so patient , and almost resign . he begin to wish to tell she about the Hilberys in order to abuse they , for in the miniature battle which so often rag between two quickly follow impression of life , the life of the Hilberys be get the well of the life of the Denhams in his mind , and he want to assure himself that there be some quality in which Joan infinitely surpass Miss Hilbery . he should have feel that his own sister be more original , and have great vitality than Miss Hilbery have ; but his main impression of Katharine now be of a person of great vitality and composure ; and at the moment he could not perceive what poor dear Joan have gain from the fact that she be the granddaughter of a man who keep a shop , and herself earn her own living . the infinite dreariness and sordidness of their life oppress he in spite of his fundamental belief that , as a family , they be somehow remarkable . 

 " shall you talk to mother ? " Joan inquire . " because , you see , the thing be get to be settle , one way or another . Charles must write to Uncle John if he be go there . " 

 Ralph sigh impatiently . 

 " I suppose it do not   much matter either way , " he exclaim . " he be doom to misery in the long run . " 

 a slight flush come into Joan 's cheek . 

 " you know you be talk nonsense , " she say . " it do not   hurt any one to have to earn their own living . I be very glad I have to earn mine . " 

 Ralph be pleased that she should feel this , and wish she to continue , but he go on , perversely enough . 

 " be not   that only because you have   forget how to enjoy yourself ? you never have time for anything decent " 

 " as for instance ? " 

 " well , go for walk , or music , or book , or see interesting people . you never do anything that be really worth do any more than I do . " 

 " I always think you could make this room much nice , if you like , " she observe . 

 " what do it matter what sort of room I have when I be force to spend all the good year of my life draw up deed in an office ? " 

 " you say two day ago that you find the law so interesting . " 

 " so it be if one could afford to know anything about it . " 

  " that be Herbert only just go to bed now , " Joan interpose , as a door on the landing slam vigorously . " and then he will not   get up in the morning . " 

 Ralph look at the ceiling , and shut his lip closely together . why , he wonder , could Joan never for one moment detach her mind from the detail of domestic life ? it seem to he that she be get more and more enmesh in they , and capable of short and less frequent flight into the outer world , and yet she be only thirty - three . 

 " D'you ever pay call now ? " he ask abruptly . 

 " I do not   often have the time . why do you ask ? " 

 " it might be a good thing , to get to know new people , that be all . " 

 " Poor Ralph ! " say Joan suddenly , with a smile . " you think your sister 's get very old and very dull that be it , be not   it ? " 

 " I do not   think anything of the kind , " he say stoutly , but he flush . " but you lead a dog 's life , Joan . when you be not work in an office , you be worry over the rest of we . and I be not much good to you , I be afraid . " 

 Joan rise , and stand for a moment warm her hand , and , apparently , meditate as to whether she should say anything more or not . a feeling of great intimacy unite the brother and sister , and the semicircular line above their eyebrow disappear . no , there be nothing more to be say on either side . Joan brush her brother 's head with her hand as she pass he , murmur good night , and leave the room . for some minute after she have go Ralph lie quiescent , rest his head on his hand , but gradually his eye fill with thought , and the line reappear on his brow , as the pleasant impression of companionship and ancient sympathy wan , and he be leave to think on alone . 

 after a time he open his book , and read on steadily , glance once or twice at his watch , as if he have set himself a task to be accomplish in a certain measure of time . now and then he hear voice in the house , and the closing of bedroom door , which show that the building , at the top of which he sit , be inhabit in every one of its cell . when midnight strike , Ralph shut his book , and with a candle in his hand , descend to the ground floor , to ascertain that all light be extinct and all door lock . it be a threadbare , well - wear house that he thus examine , as if the inmate have graze down all luxuriance and plenty to the verge of decency ; and in the night , bereft of life , bare place and ancient blemish be unpleasantly visible . Katharine Hilbery , he think , would condemn it off - hand . 





 CHAPTER III 

 Denham have accuse Katharine Hilbery of belong to one of the most distinguished family in England , and if any one will take the trouble to consult Mr. Galton 's " Hereditary Genius , " he will find that this assertion be not far from the truth . the Alardyces , the Hilberys , the Millingtons , and the Otways seem to prove that intellect be a possession which can be toss from one member of a certain group to another almost indefinitely , and with apparent certainty that the brilliant gift will be safely catch and hold by nine out of ten of the privileged race . they have be conspicuous judge and admiral , lawyer and servant of the State for some year before the richness of the soil culminate in the rare flower that any family can boast , a great writer , a poet eminent among the poet of England , a Richard Alardyce ; and have produce he , they prove once more the amazing virtue of their race by proceed unconcernedly again with their usual task of breed distinguished man . they have sail with Sir John Franklin to the North Pole , and ride with Havelock to the Relief of Lucknow , and when they be not lighthouse firmly base on rock for the guidance of their generation , they be steady , serviceable candle , illuminate the ordinary chamber of daily life . whatever profession you look at , there be a Warburton or an Alardyce , a Millington or a hilbery somewhere in authority and prominence . 

 it may be say , indeed , that english society be what it be , no very great merit be require , once you bear a well - know name , to put you into a position where it be easy on the whole to be eminent than obscure . and if this be true of the son , even the daughter , even in the nineteenth century , be apt to become people of importance philanthropist and educationalist if they be spinster , and the wife of distinguished man if they marry . it be true that there be several lamentable exception to this rule in the Alardyce group , which seem to indicate that the cadet of such house go more rapidly to the bad than the child of ordinary father and mother , as if it be somehow a relief to they . but , on the whole , in these first year of the twentieth century , the alardyce and their relation be keep their head well above water . one find they at the top of profession , with letter after their name ; they sit in luxurious public office , with private secretary attach to they ; they write solid book in dark cover , issue by the press of the two great university , and when one of they die the chance be that another of they write his biography . 

 now the source of this nobility be , of course , the poet , and his immediate descendant , therefore , be invest with great luster than the collateral branch . Mrs. Hilbery , in virtue of her position as the only child of the poet , be spiritually the head of the family , and Katharine , her daughter , have some superior rank among all the cousin and connection , the more so because she be an only child . the Alardyces have marry and intermarry , and their offspring be generally profuse , and have a way of meet regularly in each other 's house for meal and family celebration which have acquire a semi - sacred character , and be as regularly observe as day of feast and fast in the Church . 

 in time go by , Mrs. Hilbery have know all the poet , all the novelist , all the beautiful woman and distinguished man of her time . these be now either dead or seclude in their infirm glory , she make her house a meeting - place for her own relation , to whom she would lament the passing of the great day of the nineteenth century , when every department of letter and art be represent in England by two or three illustrious name . where be their successor ? she would ask , and the absence of any poet or painter or novelist of the true caliber at the present day be a text upon which she like to ruminate , in a sunset mood of benignant reminiscence , which it would have be hard to disturb have there be need . but she be far from visit their inferiority upon the young generation . she welcome they very heartily to her house , tell they her story , give they sovereign and ice and good advice , and weave round they romance which have generally no likeness to the truth . 

 the quality of her birth ooze into Katharine 's consciousness from a dozen different source as soon as she be able to perceive anything . above her nursery fireplace hang a photograph of her grandfather 's tomb in Poets ' Corner , and she be tell in one of those moment of grow - up confidence which be so tremendously impressive to the child 's mind , that he be bury there because he be a " good and great man . " later , on an anniversary , she be take by her mother through the fog in a hansom cab , and give a large bunch of bright , sweet - scented flower to lay upon his tomb . the candle in the church , the singing and the booming of the organ , be all , she think , in his honor . again and again she be bring down into the drawing - room to receive the blessing of some awful distinguished old man , who sit , even to her childish eye , somewhat apart , all gather together and clutch a stick , unlike an ordinary visitor in her father 's own arm - chair , and her father himself be there , unlike himself , too , a little excited and very polite . these formidable old creature use to take she in their arm , look very keenly in her eye , and then to bless she , and tell she that she must mind and be a good girl , or detect a look in her face something like Richard 's as a small boy . that draw down upon she her mother 's fervent embrace , and she be send back to the nursery very proud , and with a mysterious sense of an important and unexplained state of thing , which time , by degree , unveil to she . 

 there be always visitor uncle and aunt and cousin " from India , " to be reverence for their relationship alone , and other of the solitary and formidable class , whom she be enjoin by her parent to " remember all your life . " by these mean , and from hear constant talk of great man and their work , her early conception of the world include an august circle of being to whom she give the name of Shakespeare , Milton , Wordsworth , Shelley , and so on , who be , for some reason , much more nearly akin to the Hilberys than to other people . they make a kind of boundary to her vision of life , and play a considerable part in determine her scale of good and bad in her own small affair . her descent from one of these god be no surprise to she , but matter for satisfaction , until , as the year wear on , the privilege of her lot be take for grant , and certain drawback make themselves very manifest . perhaps it be a little depressing to inherit not land but an example of intellectual and spiritual virtue ; perhaps the conclusiveness of a great ancestor be a little discouraging to those who run the risk of comparison with he . it seem as if , have flower so splendidly , nothing now remain possible but a steady growth of good , green stalk and leaf . for these reason , and for other , Katharine have her moment of despondency . the glorious past , in which man and woman grow to unexampled size , intrude too much upon the present , and dwarf it too consistently , to be altogether encourage to one force to make her experiment in live when the great age be dead . 

 she be draw to dwell upon these matter more than be natural , in the first place owe to her mother 's absorption in they , and in the second because a great part of her time be spend in imagination with the dead , since she be help her mother to produce a life of the great poet . when Katharine be seventeen or eighteen that be to say , some ten year ago her mother have enthusiastically announce that now , with a daughter to help she , the biography would soon be publish . notice to this effect find their way into the literary paper , and for some time Katharine work with a sense of great pride and achievement . 

 lately , however , it have seem to she that they be make no way at all , and this be the more tantalizing because no one with the ghost of a literary temperament could doubt but that they have material for one of the great biography that have ever be write . shelf and box bulge with the precious stuff . the most private life of the most interesting people lie furl in yellow bundle of close - write manuscript . in addition to this Mrs. Hilbery have in her own head as bright a vision of that time as now remain to the living , and could give those flash and thrill to the old word which give they almost the substance of flesh . she have no difficulty in writing , and cover a page every morning as instinctively as a thrush sing , but nevertheless , with all this to urge and inspire , and the most devout intention to accomplish the work , the book still remain unwritten . paper accumulate without much further their task , and in dull moment Katharine have her doubt whether they would ever produce anything at all fit to lay before the public . where do the difficulty lie ? not in their material , alas ! nor in their ambition , but in something more profound , in her own inaptitude , and above all , in her mother 's temperament . Katharine would calculate that she have never know her write for more than ten minute at a time . idea come to she chiefly when she be in motion . she like to perambulate the room with a duster in her hand , with which she stop to polish the back of already lustrous book , muse and romancing as she do so . suddenly the right phrase or the penetrate point of view would suggest itself , and she would drop her duster and write ecstatically for a few breathless moment ; and then the mood would pass away , and the duster would be seek for , and the old book polish again . these spell of inspiration never burn steadily , but flicker over the gigantic mass of the subject as capriciously as a will - o'-the - wisp , light now on this point , now on that . it be as much as Katharine could do to keep the page of her mother 's manuscript in order , but to sort they so that the sixteenth year of Richard Alardyce 's life succeed the fifteenth be beyond her skill . and yet they be so brilliant , these paragraph , so nobly phrased , so lightning - like in their illumination , that the dead seem to crowd the very room . read continuously , they produce a sort of vertigo , and set she ask herself in despair what on earth she be to do with they ? her mother refuse , also , to face the radical question of what to leave in and what to leave out . she could not decide how far the public be to be tell the truth about the poet 's separation from his wife . she draft passage to suit either case , and then like each so well that she could not decide upon the rejection of either . 

 but the book must be write . it be a duty that they owe the world , and to Katharine , at least , it mean more than that , for if they could not between they get this one book accomplish they have no right to their privileged position . their increment become yearly more and more unearned . besides , it must be establish indisputably that her grandfather be a very great man . 

 by the time she be twenty - seven , these thought have become very familiar to she . they trod their way through her mind as she sit opposite her mother of a morning at a table heap with bundle of old letter and well supply with pencil , scissor , bottle of gum , india - rubber band , large envelope , and other appliance for the manufacture of book . shortly before Ralph Denham 's visit , Katharine have resolve to try the effect of strict rule upon her mother 's habit of literary composition . they be to be seat at their table every morning at ten o'clock , with a clean - sweep morning of empty , seclude hour before they . they be to keep their eye fast upon the paper , and nothing be to tempt they to speech , save at the stroke of the hour when ten minute for relaxation be to be allow they . if these rule be observe for a year , she make out on a sheet of paper that the completion of the book be certain , and she lay her scheme before her mother with a feeling that much of the task be already accomplish . Mrs. Hilbery examine the sheet of paper very carefully . then she clap her hand and exclaim enthusiastically : 

 " well do , Katharine ! what a wonderful head for business you have   get ! now I shall keep this before I , and every day I shall make a little mark in my pocketbook , and on the last day of all let I think , what shall we do to celebrate the last day of all ? if it be not   the winter we could take a jaunt to Italy . they say Switzerland 's very lovely in the snow , except for the cold . but , as you say , the great thing be to finish the book . now let I see " 

 when they inspect her manuscript , which Katharine have put in order , they find a state of thing well calculate to dash their spirit , if they have not just resolve on reform . they find , to begin with , a great variety of very impose paragraph with which the biography be to open ; many of these , it be true , be unfinished , and resemble triumphal arch stand upon one leg , but , as Mrs. Hilbery observe , they could be patch up in ten minute , if she give her mind to it . next , there be an account of the ancient home of the Alardyces , or rather , of spring in Suffolk , which be very beautifully write , although not essential to the story . however , Katharine have put together a string of name and date , so that the poet be capably bring into the world , and his ninth year be reach without further mishap . after that , Mrs. Hilbery wish , for sentimental reason , to introduce the recollection of a very fluent old lady , who have be bring up in the same village , but these Katharine decide must go . it might be advisable to introduce here a sketch of contemporary poetry contribute by Mr. Hilbery , and thus terse and learn and altogether out of keep with the rest , but Mrs. Hilbery be of opinion that it be too bare , and make one feel altogether like a good little girl in a lecture - room , which be not at all in keep with her father . it be put on one side . now come the period of his early manhood , when various affair of the heart must either be conceal or reveal ; here again Mrs. Hilbery be of two mind , and a thick packet of manuscript be shelve for further consideration . 

 several year be now altogether omit , because Mrs. Hilbery have find something distasteful to she in that period , and have prefer to dwell upon her own recollection as a child . after this , it seem to Katharine that the book become a wild dance of will - o'-the - wisps , without form or continuity , without coherence even , or any attempt to make a narrative . here be twenty page upon her grandfather 's taste in hat , an essay upon contemporary china , a long account of a summer day 's expedition into the country , when they have miss their train , together with fragmentary vision of all sort of famous man and woman , which seem to be partly imaginary and partly authentic . there be , moreover , thousand of letter , and a mass of faithful recollection contribute by old friend , which have grow yellow now in their envelope , but must be place somewhere , or their feeling would be hurt . so many volume have be write about the poet since his death that she have also to dispose of a great number of misstatement , which involve minute research and much correspondence . sometimes Katharine brood , half crush , among her paper ; sometimes she feel that it be necessary for her very existence that she should free herself from the past ; at other , that the past have completely displace the present , which , when one resume life after a morning among the dead , prove to be of an utterly thin and inferior composition . 

 the bad of it be that she have no aptitude for literature . she do not like phrase . she have even some natural antipathy to that process of self - examination , that perpetual effort to understand one 's own feeling , and express it beautifully , fitly , or energetically in language , which constitute so great a part of her mother 's existence . she be , on the contrary , incline to be silent ; she shrink from express herself even in talk , let alone in writing . as this disposition be highly convenient in a family much give to the manufacture of phrase , and seem to argue a corresponding capacity for action , she be , from her childhood even , put in charge of household affair . she have the reputation , which nothing in her manner contradict , of be the most practical of people . order meal , direct servant , pay bill , and so contrive that every clock tick more or less accurately in time , and a number of vas be always full of fresh flower be suppose to be a natural endowment of her , and , indeed , Mrs. Hilbery often observe that it be poetry the wrong side out . from a very early age , too , she have to exert herself in another capacity ; she have to counsel and help and generally sustain her mother . Mrs. Hilbery would have be perfectly well able to sustain herself if the world have be what the world be not . she be beautifully adapt for life in another planet . but the natural genius she have for conduct affair there be of no real use to she here . her watch , for example , be a constant source of surprise to she , and at the age of sixty - five she be still amazed at the ascendancy which rule and reason exert over the life of other people . she have never learn her lesson , and have constantly to be punish for her ignorance . but as that ignorance be combine with a fine natural insight which see deep whenever it see at all , it be not possible to write Mrs. Hilbery off among the dunce ; on the contrary , she have a way of seem the wise person in the room . but , on the whole , she find it very necessary to seek support in her daughter . 

 Katharine , thus , be a member of a very great profession which have , as yet , no title and very little recognition , although the labor of mill and factory be , perhaps , no more severe and the result of less benefit to the world . she live at home . she do it very well , too . any one come to the house in Cheyne Walk feel that here be an orderly place , shapely , control a place where life have be train to show to the good advantage , and , though compose of different element , make to appear harmonious and with a character of its own . perhaps it be the chief triumph of Katharine 's art that Mrs. Hilbery 's character predominate . she and Mr. Hilbery appear to be a rich background for her mother 's more striking quality . 

 silence be , thus , both natural to she and impose upon she , the only other remark that her mother 's friend be in the habit of make about it be that it be neither a stupid silence nor an indifferent silence . but to what quality it owe its character , since character of some sort it have , no one trouble themselves to inquire . it be understand that she be help her mother to produce a great book . she be know to manage the household . she be certainly beautiful . that account for she satisfactorily . but it would have be a surprise , not only to other people but to Katharine herself , if some magic watch could have take count of the moment spend in an entirely different occupation from her ostensible one . sit with fade paper before she , she take part in a series of scene such as the taming of wild pony upon the american prairie , or the conduct of a vast ship in a hurricane round a black promontory of rock , or in other more peaceful , but mark by her complete emancipation from her present surrounding and , needless to say , by her surpass ability in her new vocation . when she be rid of the pretense of paper and pen , phrase - making and biography , she turn her attention in a more legitimate direction , though , strangely enough , she would rather have confess her wild dream of hurricane and prairie than the fact that , upstairs , alone in her room , she rise early in the morning or sit up late at night to ... work at mathematic . no force on earth would have make her confess that . her action when thus engage be furtive and secretive , like those of some nocturnal animal . step have only to sound on the staircase , and she slip her paper between the leaf of a great greek dictionary which she have purloin from her father 's room for this purpose . it be only at night , indeed , that she feel secure enough from surprise to concentrate her mind to the utmost . 

 perhaps the unwomanly nature of the science make she instinctively wish to conceal her love of it . but the more profound reason be that in her mind mathematic be directly oppose to literature . she would not have care to confess how infinitely she prefer the exactitude , the star - like impersonality , of figure to the confusion , agitation , and vagueness of the fine prose . there be something a little unseemly in thus oppose the tradition of her family ; something that make she feel wrong - head , and thus more than ever disposed to shut her desire away from view and cherish they with extraordinary fondness . again and again she be think of some problem when she should have be think of her grandfather . wake from these trance , she would see that her mother , too , have lapse into some dream almost as visionary as her own , for the people who play their part in it have long be number among the dead . but , see her own state mirror in her mother 's face , Katharine would shake herself awake with a sense of irritation . her mother be the last person she wish to resemble , much though she admire she . her common sense would assert itself almost brutally , and Mrs. Hilbery , look at she with her odd sidelong glance , that be half malicious and half tender , would liken she to " your wicked old Uncle Judge Peter , who use to be hear deliver sentence of death in the bathroom . thank Heaven , Katharine , I have   not a drop of HIM in I ! " 





 CHAPTER IV 

 at about nine o'clock at night , on every alternate Wednesday , Miss Mary Datchet make the same resolve , that she would never again lend her room for any purpose whatsoever . be , as they be , rather large and conveniently situate in a street mostly dedicate to office off the Strand , people who wish to meet , either for purpose of enjoyment , or to discuss art , or to reform the state , have a way of suggest that Mary have well be ask to lend they her room . she always meet the request with the same frown of well - simulate annoyance , which presently dissolve in a kind of half - humorous , half - surly shrug , as of a large dog torment by child who shake his ear . she would lend her room , but only on condition that all the arrangement be make by she . this fortnightly meeting of a society for the free discussion of everything entail a great deal of move , and pull , and range of furniture against the wall , and place of breakable and precious thing in safe place . Miss Datchet be quite capable of lift a kitchen table on her back , if need be , for although well - proportion and dress becomingly , she have the appearance of unusual strength and determination . 

 she be some twenty - five year of age , but look old because she earn , or intend to earn , her own living , and have already lose the look of the irresponsible spectator , and take on that of the private in the army of worker . her gesture seem to have a certain purpose , the muscle round eye and lip be set rather firmly , as though the sens have undergo some discipline , and be hold ready for a call on they . she have contract two faint line between her eyebrow , not from anxiety but from thought , and it be quite evident that all the feminine instinct of pleasing , soothe , and charming be cross by other in no way peculiar to her sex . for the rest she be brown - eye , a little clumsy in movement , and suggest country birth and a descent from respectable hard - work ancestor , who have be man of faith and integrity rather than doubter or fanatic . 

 at the end of a fairly hard day 's work it be certainly something of an effort to clear one 's room , to pull the mattress off one 's bed , and lie it on the floor , to fill a pitcher with cold coffee , and to sweep a long table clear for plate and cup and saucer , with pyramid of little pink biscuit between they ; but when these alteration be effect , Mary feel a lightness of spirit come to she , as if she have put off the stout stuff of her work hour and slip over her entire be some vesture of thin , bright silk . she kneel before the fire and look out into the room . the light fall softly , but with clear radiance , through shade of yellow and blue paper , and the room , which be set with one or two sofa resemble grassy mound in their lack of shape , look unusually large and quiet . Mary be lead to think of the height of a Sussex down , and the swell green circle of some camp of ancient warrior . the moonlight would be fall there so peacefully now , and she could fancy the rough pathway of silver upon the wrinkle skin of the sea . 

 " and here we be , " she say , half aloud , half satirically , yet with evident pride , " talk about art . " 

 she pull a basket contain ball of differently color wool and a pair of stocking which need darning towards she , and begin to set her finger to work ; while her mind , reflect the lassitude of her body , go on perversely , conjure up vision of solitude and quiet , and she picture herself lay aside her knitting and walk out on to the down , and hear nothing but the sheep crop the grass close to the root , while the shadow of the little tree move very slightly this way and that in the moonlight , as the breeze go through they . but she be perfectly conscious of her present situation , and derive some pleasure from the reflection that she could rejoice equally in solitude , and in the presence of the many very different people who be now make their way , by diver path , across London to the spot where she be sit . 

 as she run her needle in and out of the wool , she think of the various stage in her own life which make her present position seem the culmination of successive miracle . she think of her clerical father in his country parsonage , and of her mother 's death , and of her own determination to obtain education , and of her college life , which have merge , not so very long ago , in the wonderful maze of London , which still seem to she , in spite of her constitutional level - headedness , like a vast electric light , cast radiance upon the myriad of man and woman who crowd round it . and here she be at the very center of it all , that center which be constantly in the mind of people in remote canadian forest and on the plain of India , when their thought turn to England . the nine mellow stroke , by which she be now apprise of the hour , be a message from the great clock at Westminster itself . as the last of they die away , there be a firm knock on her own door , and she rise and open it . she return to the room , with a look of steady pleasure in her eye , and she be talk to Ralph Denham , who follow she . 

 " alone ? " he say , as if he be pleasantly surprise by that fact . 

 " I be sometimes alone , " she reply . 

 " but you expect a great many people , " he add , look round he . " it be like a room on the stage . who be it to - night ? " 

 " William Rodney , upon the Elizabethan use of metaphor . I expect a good solid paper , with plenty of quotation from the classic . " 

 Ralph warm his hand at the fire , which be flap bravely in the grate , while Mary take up her stocking again . 

 " I suppose you be the only woman in London who darn her own stocking , " he observe . 

 " I be only one of a great many thousand really , " she reply , " though I must admit that I be think myself very remarkable when you come in . and now that you be here I do not   think myself remarkable at all . how horrid of you ! but I be afraid you be much more remarkable than I be . you have   do much more than I have   do . " 

 " if that be your standard , you have   nothing to be proud of , " say Ralph grimly . 

 " well , I must reflect with Emerson that it be be and not do that matter , " she continue . 

 " Emerson ? " Ralph exclaim , with derision . " you do not   mean to say you read Emerson ? " 

 " perhaps it be not   Emerson ; but why should not   I read Emerson ? " she ask , with a tinge of anxiety . 

 " there be no reason that I know of . it be the combination that be odd book and stocking . the combination be very odd . " but it seem to recommend itself to he . Mary give a little laugh , expressive of happiness , and the particular stitch that she be now put into her work appear to she to be do with singular grace and felicity . she hold out the stocking and look at it approvingly . 

 " you always say that , " she say . " I assure you it be a common ' combination , ' as you call it , in the house of the clergy . the only thing that be odd about I be that I enjoy they both Emerson and the stocking . " 

 a knock be hear , and Ralph exclaim : 

 " damn those people ! I wish they be not   come ! " 

 " it be only Mr. Turner , on the floor below , " say Mary , and she feel grateful to Mr. Turner for have alarm Ralph , and for have give a false alarm . 

 " will there be a crowd ? " Ralph ask , after a pause . 

 " there will be the Morrises and the Crashaws , and Dick Osborne , and Septimus , and all that set . Katharine Hilbery be come , by the way , so William Rodney tell I . " 

 " Katharine Hilbery ! " Ralph exclaim . 

 " you know she ? " Mary ask , with some surprise . 

 " I go to a tea - party at her house . " 

 Mary press he to tell she all about it , and Ralph be not at all unwilling to exhibit proof of the extent of his knowledge . he describe the scene with certain addition and exaggeration which interest Mary very much . 

 " but , in spite of what you say , I do admire she , " she say . " I have   only see she once or twice , but she seem to I to be what one call a ' personality . ' " 

 " I do not   mean to abuse she . I only feel that she be not   very sympathetic to I . " 

 " they say she be go to marry that queer creature Rodney . " 

 " Marry Rodney ? then she must be more deluded than I think she . " 

 " now that be my door , all right , " Mary exclaim , carefully put her wool away , as a succession of knock reverberate unnecessarily , accompany by a sound of people stamp their foot and laugh . a moment later the room be full of young man and woman , who come in with a peculiar look of expectation , exclaim " oh ! " when they see Denham , and then stand still , gap rather foolishly . 

 the room very soon contain between twenty and thirty people , who find seat for the most part upon the floor , occupy the mattress , and hunch themselves together into triangular shape . they be all young and some of they seem to make a protest by their hair and dress , and something somber and truculent in the expression of their face , against the more normal type , who would have pass unnoticed in an omnibus or an underground railway . it be notable that the talk be confine to group , and be , at first , entirely spasmodic in character , and mutter in undertone as if the speaker be suspicious of their fellow - guest . 

 Katharine Hilbery come in rather late , and take up a position on the floor , with she back against the wall . she look round quickly , recognize about half a dozen people , to whom she nod , but fail to see Ralph , or , if so , have already forget to attach any name to he . but in a second these heterogeneous element be all unite by the voice of Mr. Rodney , who suddenly stride up to the table , and begin very rapidly in high - strained tone : 

 " in undertaking to speak of the Elizabethan use of metaphor in poetry " 

 all the different head swing slightly or steady themselves into a position in which they could gaze straight at the speaker 's face , and the same rather solemn expression be visible on all of they . but , at the same time , even the face that be most expose to view , and therefore most tautly under control , disclose a sudden impulsive tremor which , unless directly check , would have develop into an outburst of laughter . the first sight of Mr. Rodney be irresistibly ludicrous . he be very red in the face , whether from the cool November night or nervousness , and every movement , from the way he wring his hand to the way he jerk his head to right and leave , as though a vision draw he now to the door , now to the window , bespoke his horrible discomfort under the stare of so many eye . he be scrupulously well dressed , and a pearl in the center of his tie seem to give he a touch of aristocratic opulence . but the rather prominent eye and the impulsive stammering manner , which seem to indicate a torrent of idea intermittently press for utterance and always check in their course by a clutch of nervousness , draw no pity , as in the case of a more imposing personage , but a desire to laugh , which be , however , entirely lack in malice . Mr. Rodney be evidently so painfully conscious of the oddity of his appearance , and his very redness and the start to which his body be liable give such proof of his own discomfort , that there be something endear in this ridiculous susceptibility , although most people would probably have echo Denham 's private exclamation , " Fancy marry a creature like that ! " 

 his paper be carefully write out , but in spite of this precaution Mr. Rodney manage to turn over two sheet instead of one , to choose the wrong sentence where two be write together , and to discover his own handwriting suddenly illegible . when he find himself possess of a coherent passage , he shake it at his audience almost aggressively , and then fumble for another . after a distressing search a fresh discovery would be make , and produce in the same way , until , by mean of repeat attack , he have stir his audience to a degree of animation quite remarkable in these gathering . whether they be stir by his enthusiasm for poetry or by the contortion which a human being be go through for their benefit , it would be hard to say . at length Mr. Rodney sit down impulsively in the middle of a sentence , and , after a pause of bewilderment , the audience express its relief at be able to laugh aloud in a decided outburst of applause . 

 Mr. Rodney acknowledge this with a wild glance round he , and , instead of wait to answer question , he jump up , thrust himself through the seat body into the corner where Katharine be sit , and exclaim , very audibly : 

 " well , Katharine , I hope I have   make a big enough fool of myself even for you ! it be terrible ! terrible ! terrible ! " 

 " Hush ! you must answer their question , " Katharine whisper , desire , at all cost , to keep he quiet . oddly enough , when the speaker be no long in front of they , there seem to be much that be suggestive in what he have say . at any rate , a pale - faced young man with sad eye be already on his foot , deliver an accurately word speech with perfect composure . William Rodney listen with a curious lifting of his upper lip , although his face be still quiver slightly with emotion . 

 " Idiot ! " he whisper . " he be misunderstood every word I say ! " 

 " well then , answer he , " Katharine whisper back . 

 " no , I shall not ! they would only laugh at I . why do I let you persuade I that these sort of people care for literature ? " he continue . 

 there be much to be say both for and against Mr. Rodney 's paper . it have be cram with assertion that such - and - such passage , take liberally from English , French , and italian , be the supreme pearl of literature . far , he be fond of use metaphor which , compound in the study , be apt to sound either cramped or out of place as he deliver they in fragment . literature be a fresh garland of spring flower , he say , in which yew - berry and the purple nightshade mingle with the various tint of the anemone ; and somehow or other this garland encircle marble brow . he have read very badly some very beautiful quotation . but through his manner and his confusion of language there have emerge some passion of feeling which , as he speak , form in the majority of the audience a little picture or an idea which each now be eager to give expression to . Most of the people there propose to spend their life in the practice either of writing or painting , and merely by look at they it could be see that , as they listen to Mr. Purvis first , and then to Mr. Greenhalgh , they be see something do by these gentleman to a possession which they think to be their own . one person after another rose , and , as with an ill - balanced axe , attempt to hew out his conception of art a little more clearly , and sit down with the feeling that , for some reason which he could not grasp , his stroke have go awry . as they sit down they turn almost invariably to the person sit next they , and rectify and continue what they have just say in public . before long , therefore , the group on the mattress and the group on the chair be all in communication with each other , and Mary Datchet , who have begin to darn stocking again , stoop down and remark to Ralph : 

 " that be what I call a first - rate paper . " 

 both of they instinctively turn their eye in the direction of the reader of the paper . he be lie back against the wall , with his eye apparently shut , and his chin sink upon his collar . Katharine be turn over the page of his manuscript as if she be look for some passage that have particularly strike she , and have a difficulty in find it . 

 " let us go and tell he how much we like it , " say Mary , thus suggest an action which Ralph be anxious to take , though without she he would have be too proud to do it , for he suspect that he have more interest in Katharine than she have in he . 

 " that be a very interesting paper , " Mary begin , without any shyness , seat herself on the floor opposite to Rodney and Katharine . " will you lend I the manuscript to read in peace ? " 

 Rodney , who have open his eye on their approach , regard she for a moment in suspicious silence . 

 " do you say that merely to disguise the fact of my ridiculous failure ? " he ask . 

 Katharine look up from her reading with a smile . 

 " he say he do not   mind what we think of he , " she remark . " he say we do not   care a rap for art of any kind . " 

 " I ask she to pity I , and she tease I ! " Rodney exclaim . 

 " I do not   intend to pity you , Mr. Rodney , " Mary remark , kindly , but firmly . " when a paper 's a failure , nobody say anything , whereas now , just listen to they ! " 

 the sound , which fill the room , with its hurry of short syllable , its sudden pause , and its sudden attack , might be compare to some animal hubbub , frantic and inarticulate . 

 " d'you think that be all about my paper ? " Rodney inquire , after a moment 's attention , with a distinct brightening of expression . 

 " of course it be , " say Mary . " it be a very suggestive paper . " 

 she turn to Denham for confirmation , and he corroborate she . 

 " it be the ten minute after a paper be read that prove whether it be be a success or not , " he say . " if I be you , Rodney , I should be very pleased with myself . " 

 this commendation seem to comfort Mr. Rodney completely , and he begin to bethink he of all the passage in his paper which deserve to be call ' suggestive . " 

 " do you agree at all , Denham , with what I say about Shakespeare 's later use of imagery ? I be afraid I do not   altogether make my meaning plain . " 

 here he gather himself together , and by mean of a series of frog - like jerk , succeed in bring himself close to Denham . 

 Denham answer he with the brevity which be the result of have another sentence in the mind to be address to another person . he wish to say to Katharine : " do you remember to get that picture glaze before your aunt come to dinner ? " but , besides have to answer Rodney , he be not sure that the remark , with its assertion of intimacy , would not strike Katharine as impertinent . she be listen to what some one in another group be say . Rodney , meanwhile , be talk about the Elizabethan dramatist . 

 he be a curious - looking man since , upon first sight , especially if he chance to be talk with animation , he appear , in some way , ridiculous ; but , next moment , in repose , his face , with its large nose , thin cheek and lip express the utmost sensibility , somehow recall a roman head bind with laurel , cut upon a circle of semi - transparent reddish stone . it have dignity and character . by profession a clerk in a Government office , he be one of those martyr spirit to whom literature be at once a source of divine joy and of almost intolerable irritation . not content to rest in their love of it , they must attempt to practise it themselves , and they be generally endow with very little facility in composition . they condemn whatever they produce . moreover , the violence of their feeling be such that they seldom meet with adequate sympathy , and be render very sensitive by their cultivate perception , suffer constant slight both to their own person and to the thing they worship . but Rodney could never resist make trial of the sympathy of any one who seem favorably dispose , and Denham 's praise have stimulate his very susceptible vanity . 

 " you remember the passage just before the death of the Duchess ? " he continue , edge still close to Denham , and adjust his elbow and knee in an incredibly angular combination . here , Katharine , who have be cut off by these maneuver from all communication with the outer world , rise , and seat herself upon the window - sill , where she be join by Mary Datchet . the two young woman could thus survey the whole party . Denham look after they , and make as if he be tear handfuls of grass up by the root from the carpet . but as it fall in accurately with his conception of life that all one 's desire be bind to be frustrate , he concentrate his mind upon literature , and determine , philosophically , to get what he could out of that . 

 Katharine be pleasantly excited . a variety of course be open to she . she know several people slightly , and at any moment one of they might rise from the floor and come and speak to she ; on the other hand , she might select somebody for herself , or she might strike into Rodney 's discourse , to which she be intermittently attentive . she be conscious of Mary 's body beside she , but , at the same time , the consciousness of be both of they woman make it unnecessary to speak to she . but Mary , feeling , as she have say , that Katharine be a " personality , " wish so much to speak to she that in a few moment she do . 

 " they be exactly like a flock of sheep , be not   they ? " she say , refer to the noise that rise from the scatter body beneath she . 

 Katharine turn and smile . 

 " I wonder what they be make such a noise about ? " she say . 

 " the Elizabethans , I suppose . " 

 " no , I do not   think it be get anything to do with the Elizabethans . there ! do not   you hear they say , ' Insurance Bill ' ? " 

 " I wonder why man always talk about politic ? " Mary speculate . " I suppose , if we have vote , we should , too . " 

 " I dare say we should . and you spend your life in get we vote , do not   you ? " 

 " I do , " say Mary , stoutly . " from ten to six every day I be at it . " 

 Katharine look at Ralph Denham , who be now pound his way through the metaphysics of metaphor with Rodney , and be remind of his talk that Sunday afternoon . she connect he vaguely with Mary . 

 " I suppose you be one of the people who think we should all have profession , " she say , rather distantly , as if feel her way among the phantom of an unknown world . 

 " oh dear no , " say Mary at once . 

 " well , I think I do , " Katharine continue , with half a sigh . " you will always be able to say that you have   do something , whereas , in a crowd like this , I feel rather melancholy . " 

 " in a crowd ? why in a crowd ? " Mary ask , deepen the two line between her eye , and hoist herself near to Katharine upon the window - sill . 

 " do not   you see how many different thing these people care about ? and I want to beat they down I only mean , " she correct herself , " that I want to assert myself , and it be difficult , if one have not   a profession . " 

 Mary smile , think that to beat people down be a process that should present no difficulty to Miss Katharine Hilbery . they know each other so slightly that the beginning of intimacy , which Katharine seem to initiate by talk about herself , have something solemn in it , and they be silent , as if to decide whether to proceed or not . they test the ground . 

 " ah , but I want to trample upon their prostrate body ! " Katharine announce , a moment later , with a laugh , as if at the train of thought which have lead she to this conclusion . 

 " one do not   necessarily trample upon people 's body because one run an office , " Mary remark . 

 " no . perhaps not , " Katharine reply . the conversation lapse , and Mary see Katharine look out into the room rather moodily with closed lip , the desire to talk about herself or to initiate a friendship have , apparently , leave she . Mary be strike by her capacity for be thus easily silent , and occupy with her own thought . it be a habit that speak of loneliness and a mind think for itself . when Katharine remain silent Mary be slightly embarrassed . 

 " yes , they be very like sheep , " she repeat , foolishly . 

 " and yet they be very clever at least , " Katharine add , " I suppose they have all read Webster . " 

 " surely you do not   think that a proof of cleverness ? I have   read Webster , I have   read Ben Jonson , but I do not   think myself clever not exactly , at least . " 

 " I think you must be very clever , " Katharine observe . 

 " why ? because I run an office ? " 

 " I be not   think of that . I be think how you live alone in this room , and have party . " 

 Mary reflect for a second . 

 " it mean , chiefly , a power of be disagreeable to one 's own family , I think . I have that , perhaps . I do not   want to live at home , and I tell my father . he do not   like it .... but then I have a sister , and you have not , have you ? " 

 " no , I have not   any sister . " 

 " you be write a life of your grandfather ? " Mary pursue . 

 Katharine seem instantly to be confront by some familiar thought from which she wish to escape . she reply , " yes , I be help my mother , " in such a way that Mary feel herself baffle , and put back again into the position in which she have be at the beginning of their talk . it seem to she that Katharine possess a curious power of draw near and recede , which send alternate emotion through her far more quickly than be usual , and keep she in a condition of curious alertness . desire to classify she , Mary bethink she of the convenient term " egoist . " 

 " she be an egoist , " she say to herself , and store that word up to give to Ralph one day when , as it would certainly fall out , they be discuss Miss Hilbery . 

 " Heavens , what a mess there will be to - morrow morning ! " Katharine exclaim . " I hope you do not   sleep in this room , Miss Datchet ? " 

 Mary laugh . 

 " what be you laugh at ? " Katharine demand . 

 " I will not   tell you . " 

 " let I guess . you be laugh because you think I have change the conversation ? " 

 " no . " 

 " because you think " she pause . 

 " if you want to know , I be laugh at the way you say Miss Datchet . " 

 " Mary , then . Mary , Mary , Mary . " 

 so say , Katharine draw back the curtain in order , perhaps , to conceal the momentary flush of pleasure which be cause by come perceptibly near to another person . 

 " Mary Datchet , " say Mary . " it be not such an impose name as Katharine Hilbery , I be afraid . " 

 they both look out of the window , first up at the hard silver moon , stationary among a hurry of little grey - blue cloud , and then down upon the roof of London , with all their upright chimney , and then below they at the empty moonlit pavement of the street , upon which the joint of each paving - stone be clearly mark out . Mary then see Katharine raise her eye again to the moon , with a contemplative look in they , as though she be set that moon against the moon of other night , hold in memory . some one in the room behind they make a joke about star - gazing , which destroy their pleasure in it , and they look back into the room again . 

 Ralph have be watch for this moment , and he instantly produce his sentence . 

 " I wonder , Miss Hilbery , whether you remember to get that picture glaze ? " his voice show that the question be one that have be prepare . 

 " oh , you idiot ! " Mary exclaim , very nearly aloud , with a sense that Ralph have say something very stupid . so , after three lesson in Latin grammar , one might correct a fellow student , whose knowledge do not embrace the ablative of " mensa . " 

 " picture what picture ? " Katharine ask . " oh , at home , you mean that Sunday afternoon . be it the day Mr. Fortescue come ? yes , I think I remember it . " 

 the three of they stand for a moment awkwardly silent , and then Mary leave they in order to see that the great pitcher of coffee be properly handle , for beneath all her education she preserve the anxiety of one who own china . 

 Ralph could think of nothing furth to say ; but could one have strip off his mask of flesh , one would have see that his will - power be rigidly set upon a single object that Miss Hilbery should obey he . he wish she to stay there until , by some measure not yet apparent to he , he have conquer her interest . these state of mind transmit themselves very often without the use of language , and it be evident to Katharine that this young man have fix his mind upon she . she instantly recall her first impression of he , and see herself again proffer family relic . she revert to the state of mind in which he have leave she that Sunday afternoon . she suppose that he judge she very severely . she argue naturally that , if this be the case , the burden of the conversation should rest with he . but she submit so far as to stand perfectly still , her eye upon the opposite wall , and her lip very nearly closed , though the desire to laugh stir they slightly . 

 " you know the name of the star , I suppose ? " Denham remark , and from the tone of his voice one might have think that he grudge Katharine the knowledge he attribute to she . 

 she keep her voice steady with some difficulty . 

 " I know how to find the Pole star if I be lose . " 

 " I do not   suppose that often happen to you . " 

 " no . nothing interesting ever happen to I , " she say . 

 " I think you make a system of say disagreeable thing , Miss Hilbery , " he break out , again go far than he mean to . " I suppose it be one of the characteristic of your class . they never talk seriously to their inferior . " 

 whether it be that they be meet on neutral ground to - night , or whether the carelessness of an old grey coat that Denham wear give an ease to his bearing that he lack in conventional dress , Katharine certainly feel no impulse to consider he outside the particular set in which she live . 

 " in what sense be you my inferior ? " she ask , look at he gravely , as though honestly search for his meaning . the look give he great pleasure . for the first time he feel himself on perfectly equal term with a woman whom he wish to think well of he , although he could not have explain why her opinion of he matter one way or another . perhaps , after all , he only want to have something of she to take home to think about . but he be not destine to profit by his advantage . 

 " I do not   think I understand what you mean , " Katharine repeat , and then she be oblige to stop and answer some one who wish to know whether she would buy a ticket for an opera from they , at a reduction . indeed , the temper of the meeting be now unfavorable to separate conversation ; it have become rather debauched and hilarious , and people who scarcely know each other be make use of christian name with apparent cordiality , and have reach that kind of gay tolerance and general friendliness which human being in England only attain after sit together for three hour or so , and the first cold blast in the air of the street freeze they into isolation once more . cloak be be fling round the shoulder , hat swiftly pin to the head ; and Denham have the mortification of see Katharine help to prepare herself by the ridiculous Rodney . it be not the convention of the meeting to say good - bye , or necessarily even to nod to the person with whom one be talk ; but , nevertheless , Denham be disappoint by the completeness with which Katharine part from he , without any attempt to finish her sentence . she leave with Rodney . 





 CHAPTER V 

 Denham have no conscious intention of follow Katharine , but , see her depart , he take his hat and run rather more quickly down the stair than he would have do if Katharine have not be in front of he . he overtake a friend of his , by name Harry Sandys , who be go the same way , and they walk together a few pace behind Katharine and Rodney . 

 the night be very still , and on such night , when the traffic thin away , the walker become conscious of the moon in the street , as if the curtain of the sky have be draw apart , and the heaven lie bare , as it do in the country . the air be softly cool , so that people who have be sit talk in a crowd find it pleasant to walk a little before decide to stop an omnibus or encounter light again in an underground railway . Sandys , who be a barrister with a philosophic tendency , take out his pipe , light it , murmur " hum " and " ha , " and be silent . the couple in front of they keep their distance accurately , and appear , so far as Denham could judge by the way they turn towards each other , to be talk very constantly . he observe that when a pedestrian go the opposite way force they to part they come together again directly afterwards . without intend to watch they he never quite lose sight of the yellow scarf twisted round Katharine 's head , or the light overcoat which make Rodney look fashionable among the crowd . at the Strand he suppose that they would separate , but instead they cross the road , and take their way down one of the narrow passage which lead through ancient court to the river . among the crowd of people in the big thoroughfare Rodney seem merely to be lend Katharine his escort , but now , when passenger be rare and the footstep of the couple be distinctly hear in the silence , Denham could not help picture to himself some change in their conversation . the effect of the light and shadow , which seem to increase their height , be to make they mysterious and significant , so that Denham have no feeling of irritation with Katharine , but rather a half - dreamy acquiescence in the course of the world . yes , she do very well to dream about but Sandys have suddenly begin to talk . he be a solitary man who have make his friend at college and always address they as if they be still undergraduate argue in his room , though many month or even year have pass in some case between the last sentence and the present one . the method be a little singular , but very restful , for it seem to ignore completely all accident of human life , and to span very deep abyss with a few simple word . 

 on this occasion he begin , while they wait for a minute on the edge of the Strand : 

 " I hear that Bennett have give up his theory of truth . " 

 Denham return a suitable answer , and he proceed to explain how this decision have be arrive at , and what change it involve in the philosophy which they both accept . meanwhile Katharine and Rodney draw far ahead , and Denham keep , if that be the right expression for an involuntary action , one filament of his mind upon they , while with the rest of his intelligence he seek to understand what Sandys be say . 

 as they pass through the court thus talk , Sandys lay the tip of his stick upon one of the stone form a time - wear arch , and strike it meditatively two or three time in order to illustrate something very obscure about the complex nature of one 's apprehension of fact . during the pause which this necessitate , Katharine and Rodney turn the corner and disappear . for a moment Denham stop involuntarily in his sentence , and continue it with a sense of have lose something . 

 unconscious that they be observe , Katharine and Rodney have come out on the Embankment . when they have cross the road , Rodney slap his hand upon the stone parapet above the river and exclaim : 

 " I promise I will not   say another word about it , Katharine ! but do stop a minute and look at the moon upon the water . " 

 Katharine pause , look up and down the river , and snuff the air . 

 " I be sure one can smell the sea , with the wind blow this way , " she say . 

 they stand silent for a few moment while the river shift in its bed , and the silver and red light which be lay upon it be tear by the current and join together again . very far off up the river a steamer hoot with its hollow voice of unspeakable melancholy , as if from the heart of lonely mist - shroud voyaging . 

 " ah ! " Rodney cry , strike his hand once more upon the balustrade , " why can not   one say how beautiful it all be ? why be I condemn for ever , Katharine , to feel what I can not   express ? and the thing I can give there be no use in my giving . trust I , Katharine , " he add hastily , " I will not   speak of it again . but in the presence of beauty look at the iridescence round the moon ! one feel one feel perhaps if you marry I I be half a poet , you see , and I can not   pretend not to feel what I do feel . if I could write ah , that would be another matter . I should not   bother you to marry I then , Katharine . " 

 he speak these disconnected sentence rather abruptly , with his eye alternately upon the moon and upon the stream . 

 " but for I I suppose you would recommend marriage ? " say Katharine , with her eye fix on the moon . 

 " certainly I should . not for you only , but for all woman . why , you be nothing at all without it ; you be only half alive ; use only half your faculty ; you must feel that for yourself . that be why " here he stop himself , and they begin to walk slowly along the Embankment , the moon front they . 

  " with how sad step she climb the sky , 
  how silently and with how wan a face , " 
 Rodney quote . 

 " I have   be tell a great many unpleasant thing about myself to - night , " Katharine state , without attend to he . " Mr. Denham seem to think it his mission to lecture I , though I hardly know he . by the way , William , you know he ; tell I , what be he like ? " 

 William draw a deep sigh . 

 " we may lecture you till we be blue in the face " 

 " yes but what be he like ? " 

 " and we write sonnet to your eyebrow , you cruel practical creature . Denham ? " he add , as Katharine remain silent . " a good fellow , I should think . he care , naturally , for the right sort of thing , I expect . but you must not   marry he , though . he scold you , do he what do he say ? " 

 " what happen with Mr. Denham be this : he come to tea . I do all I can to put he at his ease . he merely sit and scowl at I . then I show he our manuscript . at this he become really angry , and tell I I have   no business to call myself a middle - class woman . so we part in a huff ; and next time we meet , which be to - night , he walk straight up to I , and say , ' go to the Devil ! ' that be the sort of behavior my mother complain of . I want to know , what do it mean ? " 

 she pause and , slacken her step , look at the lighted train draw itself smoothly over Hungerford Bridge . 

 " it mean , I should say , that he find you chilly and unsympathetic . " 

 Katharine laugh with round , separate note of genuine amusement . 

 " it be time I jump into a cab and hide myself in my own house , " she exclaim . 

 " would your mother object to my be see with you ? no one could possibly recognize we , could they ? " Rodney inquire , with some solicitude . 

 Katharine look at he , and perceive that his solicitude be genuine , she laugh again , but with an ironical note in her laughter . 

 " you may laugh , Katharine , but I can tell you that if any of your friend see we together at this time of night they would talk about it , and I should find that very disagreeable . but why do you laugh ? " 

 " I do not   know . because you be such a queer mixture , I think . you be half poet and half old maid . " 

 " I know I always seem to you highly ridiculous . but I can not   help have inherit certain tradition and try to put they into practice . " 

 " Nonsense , William . you may come of the old family in Devonshire , but that be no reason why you should mind be see alone with I on the Embankment . " 

 " I be ten year old than you be , Katharine , and I know more of the world than you do . " 

 " very well . leave I and go home . " 

 Rodney look back over his shoulder and perceive that they be be follow at a short distance by a taxicab , which evidently await his summon . Katharine see it , too , and exclaim : 

 " do not   call that cab for I , William . I shall walk . " 

 " Nonsense , Katharine ; you will do nothing of the kind . it be nearly twelve o'clock , and we have   walk too far as it be . " 

 Katharine laugh and walk on so quickly that both Rodney and the taxicab have to increase their pace to keep up with she . 

 " now , William , " she say , " if people see I race along the Embankment like this they will talk . you have far well say good - night , if you do not   want people to talk . " 

 at this William beckon , with a despotic gesture , to the cab with one hand , and with the other he bring Katharine to a standstill . 

 " do not   let the man see we struggle , for God 's sake ! " he murmur . Katharine stand for a moment quite still . 

 " there be more of the old maid in you than the poet , " she observe briefly . 

 William shut the door sharply , give the address to the driver , and turn away , lift his hat punctiliously high in farewell to the invisible lady . 

 he look back after the cab twice , suspiciously , half expect that she would stop it and dismount ; but it bear she swiftly on , and be soon out of sight . William feel in the mood for a short soliloquy of indignation , for Katharine have contrive to exasperate he in more way than one . 

 " of all the unreasonable , inconsiderate creature I have   ever know , she be the bad ! " he exclaim to himself , stride back along the Embankment . " Heaven forbid that I should ever make a fool of myself with she again . why , I would soon marry the daughter of my landlady than Katharine Hilbery ! she would leave I not a moment 's peace and she would never understand I never , never , never ! " 

 utter aloud and with vehemence so that the star of Heaven might hear , for there be no human being at hand , these sentiment sound satisfactorily irrefutable . Rodney quiet down , and walk on in silence , until he perceive some one approach he , who have something , either in his walk or his dress , which proclaim that he be one of William 's acquaintance before it be possible to tell which of they he be . it be Denham who , have part from Sandys at the bottom of his staircase , be now walk to the Tube at Charing Cross , deep in the thought which his talk with Sandys have suggest . he have forget the meeting at Mary Datchet 's room , he have forget Rodney , and metaphor and Elizabethan drama , and could have swear that he have forget Katharine Hilbery , too , although that be more disputable . his mind be scale the high pinnacle of its alp , where there be only starlight and the untrodden snow . he cast strange eye upon Rodney , as they encounter each other beneath a lamp - post . 

 " ha ! " Rodney exclaim . 

 if he have be in full possession of his mind , Denham would probably have pass on with a salutation . but the shock of the interruption make he stand still , and before he know what he be do , he have turn and be walk with Rodney in obedience to Rodney 's invitation to come to his room and have something to drink . Denham have no wish to drink with Rodney , but he follow he passively enough . Rodney be gratify by this obedience . he feel inclined to be communicative with this silent man , who possess so obviously all the good masculine quality in which Katharine now seem lamentably deficient . 

 " you do well , Denham , " he begin impulsively , " to have nothing to do with young woman . I offer you my experience if one trust they one invariably have cause to repent . not that I have any reason at this moment , " he add hastily , " to complain of they . it be a subject that crop up now and again for no particular reason . Miss Datchet , I dare say , be one of the exception . do you like Miss Datchet ? " 

 these remark indicate clearly enough that Rodney 's nerve be in a state of irritation , and Denham speedily wake to the situation of the world as it have be one hour ago . he have last see Rodney walk with Katharine . he could not help regret the eagerness with which his mind return to these interest , and fret he with the old trivial anxiety . he sink in his own esteem . reason bade he break from Rodney , who clearly tend to become confidential , before he have utterly lose touch with the problem of high philosophy . he look along the road , and mark a lamp - post at a distance of some hundred yard , and decide that he would part from Rodney when they reach this point . 

 " yes , I like Mary ; I do not   see how one could help like she , " he remark cautiously , with his eye on the lamp - post . 

 " ah , Denham , you be so different from I . you never give yourself away . I watch you this evening with Katharine Hilbery . my instinct be to trust the person I be talk to . that be why I be always be take in , I suppose . " 

 Denham seem to be ponder this statement of Rodney 's , but , as a matter of fact , he be hardly conscious of Rodney and his revelation , and be only concerned to make he mention Katharine again before they reach the lamp - post . 

 " who be take you in now ? " he ask . " Katharine Hilbery ? " 

 Rodney stop and once more begin beat a kind of rhythm , as if he be mark a phrase in a symphony , upon the smooth stone balustrade of the Embankment . 

 " Katharine Hilbery , " he repeat , with a curious little chuckle . " no , Denham , I have no illusion about that young woman . I think I make that plain to she to - night . but do not   run away with a false impression , " he continue eagerly , turn and link his arm through Denham 's , as though to prevent he from escape ; and , thus compel , Denham pass the monitory lamp - post , to which , in pass , he breathe an excuse , for how could he break away when Rodney 's arm be actually link in his ? " you must not think that I have any bitterness against she far from it . it be not altogether her fault , poor girl . she live , you know , one of those odious , self - center life at least , I think they odious for a woman feed her wit upon everything , have control of everything , get far too much her own way at home spoilt , in a sense , feel that every one be at her foot , and so not realize how she hurt that be , how rudely she behave to people who have not   all her advantage . still , to do her justice , she be no fool , " he add , as if to warn Denham not to take any liberty . " she have taste . she have sense . she can understand you when you talk to she . but she be a woman , and there be an end of it , " he add , with another little chuckle , and drop Denham 's arm . 

 " and do you tell she all this to - night ? " Denham ask . 

 " oh dear I , no . I should never think of tell Katharine the truth about herself . that would not   do at all . one have to be in an attitude of adoration in order to get on with Katharine . 

 " now I have   learn that she be refuse to marry he why do not   I go home ? " Denham think to himself . but he go on walk beside Rodney , and for a time they do not speak , though Rodney hum snatch of a tune out of an opera by Mozart . a feeling of contempt and like combine very naturally in the mind of one to whom another have just speak unpremeditatedly , reveal rather more of his private feeling than he intend to reveal . Denham begin to wonder what sort of person Rodney be , and at the same time Rodney begin to think about Denham . 

 " you be a slave like I , I suppose ? " he ask . 

 " a solicitor , yes . " 

 " I sometimes wonder why we do not   chuck it . why do not   you emigrate , Denham ? I should have think that would suit you . " 

 " I have   a family . " 

 " I be often on the point of go myself . and then I know I could not   live without this " and he wave his hand towards the City of London , which wear , at this moment , the appearance of a town cut out of gray - blue cardboard , and paste flat against the sky , which be of a deep blue . 

 " there be one or two people I be fond of , and there be a little good music , and a few picture , now and then just enough to keep one dangle about here . ah , but I could not   live with savage ! be you fond of book ? music ? picture ? D'you care at all for first edition ? I have   get a few nice thing up here , thing I pick up cheap , for I can not   afford to give what they ask . " 

 they have reach a small court of high eighteenth - century house , in one of which Rodney have his room . they climb a very steep staircase , through whose uncurtained window the moonlight fall , illuminate the banister with their twisted pillar , and the pile of plate set on the window - sill , and jar half - full of milk . Rodney 's room be small , but the sit - room window look out into a courtyard , with its flagged pavement , and its single tree , and across to the flat red - brick front of the opposite house , which would not have surprise Dr. Johnson , if he have come out of his grave for a turn in the moonlight . Rodney light his lamp , pull his curtain , offer Denham a chair , and , fling the manuscript of his paper on the Elizabethan use of Metaphor on to the table , exclaim : 

 " oh dear I , what a waste of time ! but it be over now , and so we may think no more about it . " 

 he then busy himself very dexterously in light a fire , produce glass , whisky , a cake , and cup and saucer . he put on a fade crimson dressing - gown , and a pair of red slipper , and advance to Denham with a tumbler in one hand and a well - burnish book in the other . 

 " the Baskerville Congreve , " say Rodney , offer it to his guest . " I could not   read he in a cheap edition . " 

 when he be see thus among his book and his valuable , amiably anxious to make his visitor comfortable , and move about with something of the dexterity and grace of a persian cat , Denham relax his critical attitude , and feel more at home with Rodney than he would have do with many man well know to he . Rodney 's room be the room of a person who cherish a great many personal taste , guard they from the rough blast of the public with scrupulous attention . his paper and his book rise in jagged mound on table and floor , round which he skirt with nervous care lest his dressing - gown might disarrange they ever so slightly . on a chair stand a stack of photograph of statue and picture , which it be his habit to exhibit , one by one , for the space of a day or two . the book on his shelf be as orderly as regiment of soldier , and the back of they shine like so many bronze beetle - wing ; though , if you take one from its place you see a shabby volume behind it , since space be limited . an oval venetian mirror stand above the fireplace , and reflect duskily in its spot depth the faint yellow and crimson of a jarful of tulip which stand among the letter and pipe and cigarette upon the mantelpiece . a small piano occupy a corner of the room , with the score of " Don Giovanni " open upon the bracket . 

 " well , Rodney , " say Denham , as he fill his pipe and look about he , " this be all very nice and comfortable . " 

 Rodney turn his head half round and smile , with the pride of a proprietor , and then prevent himself from smile . 

 " tolerable , " he mutter . 

 " but I dare say it be just as well that you have to earn your own living . " 

 " if you mean that I should not   do anything good with leisure if I have it , I dare say you be right . but I should be ten time as happy with my whole day to spend as I like . " 

 " I doubt that , " Denham reply . 

 they sit silent , and the smoke from their pipe join amicably in a blue vapor above their head . 

 " I could spend three hour every day read shakespeare , " Rodney remark . " and there be music and picture , let alone the society of the people one like . " 

 " you would be bore to death in a year 's time . " 

 " oh , I grant you I should be bored if I do nothing . but I should write play . " 

 " H'm ! " 

 " I should write play , " he repeat . " I have   write three - quarter of one already , and I be only wait for a holiday to finish it . and it be not bad no , some of it be really rather nice . " 

 the question arise in Denham 's mind whether he should ask to see this play , as , no doubt , he be expect to do . he look rather stealthily at Rodney , who be tap the coal nervously with a poker , and quiver almost physically , so Denham thought , with desire to talk about this play of his , and vanity unrequited and urgent . he seem very much at Denham 's mercy , and Denham could not help like he , partly on that account . 

 " well , ... will you let I see the play ? " Denham ask , and Rodney look immediately appease , but , nevertheless , he sit silent for a moment , hold the poker perfectly upright in the air , regard it with his rather prominent eye , and open his lip and shut they again . 

 " do you really care for this kind of thing ? " he ask at length , in a different tone of voice from that in which he have be speak . and , without wait for an answer , he go on , rather querulously : " very few people care for poetry . I dare say it bore you . " 

 " perhaps , " Denham remark . 

 " well , I will lend it you , " Rodney announce , put down the poker . 

 as he move to fetch the play , Denham stretch a hand to the bookcase beside he , and take down the first volume which his finger touch . it happen to be a small and very lovely edition of Sir Thomas Browne , contain the " Urn Burial , " the " Hydriotaphia , " and the " Garden of Cyrus , " and , open it at a passage which he know very nearly by heart , Denham begin to read and , for some time , continue to read . 

 Rodney resume his seat , with his manuscript on his knee , and from time to time he glance at Denham , and then join his finger - tip and cross his thin leg over the fender , as if he experience a good deal of pleasure . at length Denham shut the book , and stand , with his back to the fireplace , occasionally make an inarticulate humming sound which seem to refer to Sir Thomas Browne . he put his hat on his head , and stand over Rodney , who still lie stretch back in his chair , with his toe within the fender . 

 " I shall look in again some time , " Denham remark , upon which Rodney hold up his hand , contain his manuscript , without say anything except " if you like . " 

 Denham take the manuscript and go . two day later he be much surprised to find a thin parcel on his breakfast - plate , which , on be open , reveal the very copy of Sir Thomas Browne which he have study so intently in Rodney 's room . from sheer laziness he return no thank , but he think of Rodney from time to time with interest , disconnect he from Katharine , and mean to go round one evening and smoke a pipe with he . it please Rodney thus to give away whatever his friend genuinely admire . his library be constantly be diminish . 





 CHAPTER VI 

 of all the hour of an ordinary work week - day , which be the pleasantest to look forward to and to look back upon ? if a single instance be of use in frame a theory , it may be say that the minute between nine - twenty - five and nine - thirty in the morning have a singular charm for Mary Datchet . she spend they in a very enviable frame of mind ; her contentment be almost unalloyed . high in the air as her flat be , some beam from the morning sun reach she even in November , strike straight at curtain , chair , and carpet , and paint there three bright , true space of green , blue , and purple , upon which the eye rest with a pleasure which give physical warmth to the body . 

 there be few morning when Mary do not look up , as she bend to lace her boot , and as she follow the yellow rod from curtain to breakfast - table she usually breathe some sigh of thankfulness that her life provide she with such moment of pure enjoyment . she be rob no one of anything , and yet , to get so much pleasure from simple thing , such as eat one 's breakfast alone in a room which have nice color in it , clean from the skirting of the board to the corner of the ceiling , seem to suit she so thoroughly that she use at first to hunt about for some one to apologize to , or for some flaw in the situation . she have now be six month in London , and she could find no flaw , but that , as she invariably conclude by the time her boot be lace , be solely and entirely due to the fact that she have her work . every day , as she stand with her dispatch - box in her hand at the door of her flat , and give one look back into the room to see that everything be straight before she leave , she say to herself that she be very glad that she be go to leave it all , that to have sit there all day long , in the enjoyment of leisure , would have be intolerable . 

 out in the street she like to think herself one of the worker who , at this hour , take their way in rapid single file along all the broad pavement of the city , with their head slightly lower , as if all their effort be to follow each other as closely as might be ; so that Mary use to figure to herself a straight rabbit - run wear by their unswerve foot upon the pavement . but she like to pretend that she be indistinguishable from the rest , and that when a wet day drive she to the Underground or omnibus , she give and take her share of crowd and wet with clerk and typist and commercial man , and share with they the serious business of winding - up the world to tick for another four - and - twenty hour . 

 thus think , on the particular morning in question , she make she away across Lincoln 's Inn Fields and up Kingsway , and so through Southampton Row until she reach her office in Russell Square . now and then she would pause and look into the window of some bookseller or flower shop , where , at this early hour , the good be be arrange , and empty gap behind the plate glass reveal a state of undress . Mary feel kindly disposed towards the shopkeeper , and hop that they would trick the midday public into purchasing , for at this hour of the morning she range herself entirely on the side of the shopkeeper and bank clerk , and regard all who sleep late and have money to spend as her enemy and natural prey . and directly she have cross the road at Holborn , her thought all come naturally and regularly to roost upon her work , and she forget that she be , properly speak , an amateur worker , whose service be unpaid , and could hardly be say to wind the world up for its daily task , since the world , so far , have show very little desire to take the boon which Mary 's society for woman 's suffrage have offer it . 

 she be think all the way up Southampton Row of notepaper and foolscap , and how an economy in the use of paper might be effect   without , of course , hurt Mrs. Seal 's feeling , for she be certain that the great organizer always pounce , to begin with , upon trifle like these , and build up their triumphant reform upon a basis of absolute solidity ; and , without acknowledge it for a moment , Mary Datchet be determined to be a great organizer , and have already doom her society to reconstruction of the most radical kind . once or twice lately , it be true , she have start , broad awake , before turn into Russell Square , and denounce herself rather sharply for be already in a groove , capable , that be , of think the same thought every morning at the same hour , so that the chestnut - colored brick of the Russell Square house have some curious connection with her thought about office economy , and serve also as a sign that she should get into trim for meet Mr. Clacton , or Mrs. Seal , or whoever might be beforehand with she at the office . have no religious belief , she be the more conscientious about her life , examine her position from time to time very seriously , and nothing annoy she more than to find one of these bad habit nibble away unheeded at the precious substance . what be the good , after all , of be a woman if one do not   keep fresh , and cram one 's life with all sort of view and experiment ? thus she always give herself a little shake , as she turn the corner , and , as often as not , reach her own door whistle a snatch of a Somersetshire ballad . 

 the suffrage office be at the top of one of the large Russell Square house , which have once be live in by a great city merchant and his family , and be now let out in slice to a number of society which display assorted initial upon door of ground glass , and keep , each of they , a typewriter which click busily all day long . the old house , with its great stone staircase , echo hollowly to the sound of typewriter and of errand - boy from ten to six . the noise of different typewriter already at work , disseminate their view upon the protection of native race , or the value of cereal as foodstuff , quicken Mary 's step , and she always run up the last flight of step which lead to her own landing , at whatever hour she come , so as to get her typewriter to take its place in competition with the rest . 

 she sit herself down to her letter , and very soon all these speculation be forget , and the two line draw themselves between her eyebrow , as the content of the letter , the office furniture , and the sound of activity in the next room gradually assert their sway upon she . by eleven o'clock the atmosphere of concentration be run so strongly in one direction that any thought of a different order could hardly have survive its birth more than a moment or so . the task which lie before she be to organize a series of entertainment , the profit of which be to benefit the society , which droop for want of fund . it be her first attempt at organization on a large scale , and she mean to achieve something remarkable . she mean to use the cumbrous machine to pick out this , that , and the other interesting person from the muddle of the world , and to set they for a week in a pattern which must catch the eye of Cabinet Ministers , and the eye once catch , the old argument be to be deliver with unexampled originality . such be the scheme as a whole ; and in contemplation of it she would become quite flushed and excited , and have to remind herself of all the detail that intervene between she and success . 

 the door would open , and Mr. Clacton would come in to search for a certain leaflet bury beneath a pyramid of leaflet . he be a thin , sandy - haired man of about thirty - five , speak with a Cockney accent , and have about he a frugal look , as if nature have not deal generously with he in any way , which , naturally , prevent he from deal generously with other people . when he have find his leaflet , and offer a few jocular hint upon keep paper in order , the typewriting would stop abruptly , and Mrs. Seal would burst into the room with a letter which need explanation in her hand . this be a more serious interruption than the other , because she never know exactly what she want , and half a dozen request would bolt from she , no one of which be clearly state . dress in plum - colored velveteen , with short , gray hair , and a face that seem permanently flush with philanthropic enthusiasm , she be always in a hurry , and always in some disorder . she wear two crucifix , which get themselves entangle in a heavy gold chain upon her breast , and seem to Mary expressive of her mental ambiguity . only her vast enthusiasm and her worship of Miss Markham , one of the pioneer of the society , keep she in her place , for which she have no sound qualification . 

 so the morning wear on , and the pile of letter grow , and Mary feel , at last , that she be the center ganglion of a very fine network of nerve which fall over England , and one of these day , when she touch the heart of the system , would begin feel and rush together and emit their splendid blaze of revolutionary firework for some such metaphor represent what she feel about her work , when her brain have be heat by three hour of application . 

 shortly before one o'clock Mr. Clacton and Mrs. Seal desist from their labor , and the old joke about luncheon , which come out regularly at this hour , be repeat with scarcely any variation of word . Mr. Clacton patronize a vegetarian restaurant ; Mrs. Seal bring sandwich , which she eat beneath the plane - tree in Russell Square ; while Mary generally go to a gaudy establishment , upholstered in red plush , near by , where , much to the vegetarian 's disapproval , you could buy steak , two inch thick , or a roast section of fowl , swim in a pewter dish . 

 " the bare branch against the sky do one so much good , " Mrs. Seal assert , look out into the Square . 

 " but one can not   lunch off tree , Sally , " say Mary . 

 " I confess I do not   know how you manage it , Miss Datchet , " Mr. Clacton remark . " I should sleep all the afternoon , I know , if I take a heavy meal in the middle of the day . " 

 " what be the very late thing in literature ? " Mary ask , good - humoredly pointing to the yellow - cover volume beneath Mr. Clacton 's arm , for he invariably read some new french author at lunch - time , or squeeze in a visit to a picture gallery , balance his social work with an ardent culture of which he be secretly proud , as Mary have very soon divine . 

 so they part and Mary walk away , wonder if they guess that she really want to get away from they , and suppose that they have not quite reach that degree of subtlety . she buy herself an evening paper , which she read as she eat , look over the top of it again and again at the queer people who be buy cake or impart their secret , until some young woman whom she know come in , and she call out , " Eleanor , come and sit by I , " and they finish their lunch together , part on the strip of pavement among the different line of traffic with a pleasant feeling that they be step once more into their separate place in the great and eternally move pattern of human life . 

 but , instead of go straight back to the office to - day , Mary turn into the British Museum , and stroll down the gallery with the shape of stone until she find an empty seat directly beneath the gaze of the Elgin marble . she look at they , and seem , as usual , bear up on some wave of exaltation and emotion , by which her life at once become solemn and beautiful an impression which be due as much , perhaps , to the solitude and chill and silence of the gallery as to the actual beauty of the statue . one must suppose , at least , that her emotion be not purely esthetic , because , after she have gaze at the Ulysses for a minute or two , she begin to think about Ralph Denham . so secure do she feel with these silent shape that she almost yield to an impulse to say " I be in love with you " aloud . the presence of this immense and endure beauty make she almost alarmingly conscious of her desire , and at the same time proud of a feeling which do not display anything like the same proportion when she be go about her daily work . 

 she repress her impulse to speak aloud , and rise and wander about rather aimlessly among the statue until she find herself in another gallery devote to engrave obelisk and wing assyrian bull , and her emotion take another turn . she begin to picture herself travel with Ralph in a land where these monster be couchant in the sand . " for , " she think to herself , as she gaze fixedly at some information print behind a piece of glass , " the wonderful thing about you be that you be ready for anything ; you be not in the least conventional , like most clever man . " 

 and she conjure up a scene of herself on a camel 's back , in the desert , while Ralph command a whole tribe of native . 

 " that be what you can do , " she go on , move on to the next statue . " you always make people do what you want . " 

 a glow spread over her spirit , and fill her eye with brightness . nevertheless , before she leave the Museum she be very far from say , even in the privacy of her own mind , " I be in love with you , " and that sentence might very well never have frame itself . she be , indeed , rather annoyed with herself for have allow such an ill - consider breach of her reserve , weaken her power of resistance , she feel , should this impulse return again . for , as she walk along the street to her office , the force of all her customary objection to be in love with any one overcome she . she do not want to marry at all . it seem to she that there be something amateurish in bring love into touch with a perfectly straightforward friendship , such as hers be with Ralph , which , for two year now , have base itself upon common interest in impersonal topic , such as the housing of the poor , or the taxation of land value . 

 but the afternoon spirit differ intrinsically from the morning spirit . Mary find herself watch the flight of a bird , or make drawing of the branch of the plane - tree upon her blotting - paper . People come in to see Mr. Clacton on business , and a seductive smell of cigarette smoke issue from his room . Mrs. Seal wander about with newspaper cutting , which seem to she either " quite splendid " or " really too bad for word . " she use to paste these into book , or send they to her friend , have first draw a broad bar in blue pencil down the margin , a proceeding which signify equally and indistinguishably the depth of her reprobation or the height of her approval . 

 about four o'clock on that same afternoon Katharine Hilbery be walk up Kingsway . the question of tea present itself . the street lamp be be light already , and as she stand still for a moment beneath one of they , she try to think of some neighbor drawing - room where there would be firelight and talk congenial to her mood . that mood , owe to the spin traffic and the evening veil of unreality , be ill - adapt to her home surrounding . perhaps , on the whole , a shop be the good place in which to preserve this queer sense of heightened existence . at the same time she wish to talk . remember Mary Datchet and her repeat invitation , she cross the road , turn into Russell Square , and peer about , seek for number with a sense of adventure that be out of all proportion to the deed itself . she find herself in a dimly light hall , unguarde by a porter , and push open the first swing door . but the office - boy have never hear of Miss Datchet . do she belong to the S.R.F.R. ? Katharine shake her head with a smile of dismay . a voice from within shout , " no . the S.G.S. top floor . " 

 Katharine mount past innumerable glass door , with initial on they , and become steadily more and more doubtful of the wisdom of her venture . at the top she pause for a moment to breathe and collect herself . she hear the typewriter and formal professional voice inside , not belong , she think , to any one she have ever speak to . she touch the bell , and the door be open almost immediately by Mary herself . her face have to change its expression entirely when she see Katharine . 

 " you ! " she exclaim . " we think you be the printer . " still hold the door open , she call back , " no , Mr. Clacton , it be not Penningtons . I should ring they up again double three double eight , Central . well , this be a surprise . come in , " she add . " you be just in time for tea . " 

 the light of relief shone in Mary 's eye . the boredom of the afternoon be dissipate at once , and she be glad that Katharine have find they in a momentary press of activity , owe to the failure of the printer to send back certain proof . 

 the unshaded electric light shin upon the table cover with paper daze Katharine for a moment . after the confusion of her twilight walk , and her random thought , life in this small room appear extremely concentrated and bright . she turn instinctively to look out of the window , which be uncurtained , but Mary immediately recall she . 

 " it be very clever of you to find your way , " she say , and Katharine wonder , as she stand there , feel , for the moment , entirely detach and unabsorbed , why she have come . she look , indeed , to Mary 's eye strangely out of place in the office . her figure in the long cloak , which take deep fold , and her face , which be compose into a mask of sensitive apprehension , disturb Mary for a moment with a sense of the presence of some one who be of another world , and , therefore , subversive of her world . she become immediately anxious that Katharine should be impress by the importance of her world , and hop that neither Mrs. Seal nor Mr. Clacton would appear until the impression of importance have be receive . but in this she be disappoint . Mrs. Seal burst into the room hold a kettle in her hand , which she set upon the stove , and then , with inefficient haste , she set light to the gas , which flare up , explode , and go out . 

 " always the way , always the way , " she mutter . " Kit Markham be the only person who know how to deal with the thing . " 

 Mary have to go to her help , and together they spread the table , and apologize for the disparity between the cup and the plainness of the food . 

 " if we have know Miss Hilbery be come , we should have buy a cake , " say Mary , upon which Mrs. Seal look at Katharine for the first time , suspiciously , because she be a person who need cake . 

 here Mr. Clacton open the door , and come in , hold a typewritten letter in his hand , which he be read aloud . 

 " Salford 's affiliate , " he say . 

 " well do , Salford ! " Mrs. Seal exclaim enthusiastically , thump the teapot which she hold upon the table , in token of applause . 

 " yes , these provincial center seem to be come into line at last , " say Mr. Clacton , and then Mary introduce he to Miss Hilbery , and he ask she , in a very formal manner , if she be interested " in our work . " 

 " and the proof still not come ? " say Mrs. Seal , put both her elbow on the table , and prop her chin on her hand , as Mary begin to pour out tea . " it be too bad too bad . at this rate we shall miss the country post . which remind I , Mr. Clacton , do not   you think we should circularize the province with Partridge 's last speech ? what ? you have   not read it ? oh , it be the good thing they have   have in the House this Session . even the Prime Minister " 

 but Mary cut her short . 

 " we do not   allow shop at tea , Sally , " she say firmly . " we fine she a penny each time she forget , and the fine go to buy a plum cake , " she explain , seek to draw Katharine into the community . she have give up all hope of impress she . 

 " I be sorry , I be sorry , " Mrs. Seal apologize . " it be my misfortune to be an enthusiast , " she say , turn to Katharine . " my father 's daughter could hardly be anything else . I think I have   be on as many committee as most people . Waifs and Strays , Rescue Work , Church Work , C. O. S. local branch besides the usual civic duty which fall to one as a householder . but I have   give they all up for our work here , and I do not   regret it for a second , " she add . " this be the root question , I feel ; until woman have vote " 

 " it will be sixpence , at least , Sally , " say Mary , bring her fist down on the table . " and we be all sick to death of woman and their vote . " 

 Mrs. Seal look for a moment as though she could hardly believe her ear , and make a deprecate " tut - tut - tut " in her throat , look alternately at Katharine and Mary , and shake her head as she do so . then she remark , rather confidentially to Katharine , with a little nod in Mary 's direction : 

 " she be do more for the cause than any of we . she be give her youth for , alas ! when I be young there be domestic circumstance " she sigh , and stop short . 

 Mr. Clacton hastily revert to the joke about luncheon , and explain how Mrs. Seal feed on a bag of biscuit under the tree , whatever the weather might be , rather , Katharine think , as though Mrs. Seal be a pet dog who have convenient trick . 

 " yes , I take my little bag into the square , " say Mrs. Seal , with the self - conscious guilt of a child own some fault to its elder . " it be really very sustain , and the bare bough against the sky do one so much good . but I shall have to give up go into the square , " she proceed , wrinkle her forehead . " the injustice of it ! why should I have a beautiful square all to myself , when poor woman who need rest have nowhere at all to sit ? " she look fiercely at Katharine , give her short lock a little shake . " it be dreadful what a tyrant one still be , in spite of all one 's effort . one try to lead a decent life , but one can not . of course , directly one think of it , one see that all square should be open to every one . be there any society with that object , Mr. Clacton ? if not , there should be , surely . " 

 " a most excellent object , " say Mr. Clacton in his professional manner . " at the same time , one must deplore the ramification of organization , Mrs. Seal . so much excellent effort throw away , not to speak of pound , shilling , and penny . now how many organization of a philanthropic nature do you suppose there be in the City of London itself , Miss Hilbery ? " he add , screw his mouth into a queer little smile , as if to show that the question have its frivolous side . 

 Katharine smile , too . her unlikeness to the rest of they have , by this time , penetrate to Mr. Clacton , who be not naturally observant , and he be wonder who she be ; this same unlikeness have subtly stimulate Mrs. Seal to try and make a convert of she . Mary , too , look at she almost as if she beg she to make thing easy . for Katharine have show no disposition to make thing easy . she have scarcely speak , and her silence , though grave and even thoughtful , seem to Mary the silence of one who criticize . 

 " well , there be more in this house than I have any notion of , " she say . " on the ground floor you protect native , on the next you emigrate woman and tell people to eat nut " 

 " why do you say that ' we ' do these thing ? " Mary interpose , rather sharply . " we be not responsible for all the crank who choose to lodge in the same house with we . " 

 Mr. Clacton clear his throat and look at each of the young lady in turn . he be a good deal strike by the appearance and manner of Miss Hilbery , which seem to he to place she among those cultivate and luxurious people of whom he use to dream . Mary , on the other hand , be more of his own sort , and a little too much inclined to order he about . he pick up crumb of dry biscuit and put they into his mouth with incredible rapidity . 

 " you do not   belong to our society , then ? " say Mrs. Seal . 

 " no , I be afraid I do not , " say Katharine , with such ready candor that Mrs. Seal be nonplus , and star at she with a puzzled expression , as if she could not classify she among the variety of human being know to she . 

 " but surely , " she begin . 

 " Mrs. Seal be an enthusiast in these matter , " say Mr. Clacton , almost apologetically . " we have to remind she sometimes that other have a right to their view even if they differ from our own .... " Punch " have a very funny picture this week , about a Suffragist and an agricultural laborer . have you see this week 's " Punch , " Miss Datchet ? " 

 Mary laugh , and say " no . " 

 Mr. Clacton then tell they the substance of the joke , which , however , depend a good deal for its success upon the expression which the artist have put into the people 's face . Mrs. Seal sit all the time perfectly grave . directly he have do speak she burst out : 

 " but surely , if you care about the welfare of your sex at all , you must wish they to have the vote ? " 

 " I never say I do not   wish they to have the vote , " Katharine protest . 

 " then why be not   you a member of our society ? " Mrs. Seal demand . 

 Katharine stir her spoon round and round , star into the swirl of the tea , and remain silent . Mr. Clacton , meanwhile , frame a question which , after a moment 's hesitation , he put to Katharine . 

 " be you in any way related , I wonder , to the poet Alardyce ? his daughter , I believe , marry a Mr. Hilbery . " 

 " yes ; I be the poet 's granddaughter , " say Katharine , with a little sigh , after a pause ; and for a moment they be all silent . 

 " the poet 's granddaughter ! " Mrs. Seal repeat , half to herself , with a shake of her head , as if that explain what be otherwise inexplicable . 

 the light kindle in Mr. Clacton 's eye . 

 " ah , indeed . that interest I very much , " he say . " I owe a great debt to your grandfather , Miss Hilbery . at one time I could have repeat the great part of he by heart . but one get out of the way of read poetry , unfortunately . you do not   remember he , I suppose ? " 

 a sharp rap at the door make Katharine 's answer inaudible . Mrs. Seal look up with renew hope in her eye , and exclaim : 

 " the proof at last ! " run to open the door . " oh , it be only Mr. Denham ! " she cry , without any attempt to conceal her disappointment . Ralph , Katharine suppose , be a frequent visitor , for the only person he think it necessary to greet be herself , and Mary at once explain the strange fact of she be there by say : 

 " Katharine have come to see how one run an office . " 

 Ralph feel himself stiffen uncomfortably , as he say : 

 " I hope Mary have not   persuade you that she know how to run an office ? " 

 " what , do not   she ? " say Katharine , look from one to the other . 

 at these remark Mrs. Seal begin to exhibit sign of discomposure , which display themselves by a tossing movement of her head , and , as Ralph take a letter from his pocket , and place his finger upon a certain sentence , she forestall he by exclaim in confusion : 

 " now , I know what you be go to say , Mr. Denham ! but it be the day Kit Markham be here , and she upset one so with her wonderful vitality , always think of something new that we ought to be do and be not   and I be conscious at the time that my date be mixed . it have nothing to do with Mary at all , I assure you . " 

 " my dear Sally , do not   apologize , " say Mary , laugh . " man be such pedant they do not   know what thing matter , and what thing do not . " 

 " now , Denham , speak up for our sex , " say Mr. Clacton in a jocular manner , indeed , but like most insignificant man he be very quick to resent be find fault with by a woman , in argument with whom he be fond of call himself " a mere man . " he wish , however , to enter into a literary conservation with Miss Hilbery , and thus let the matter drop . 

 " do not   it seem strange to you , Miss Hilbery , " he say , " that the French , with all their wealth of illustrious name , have no poet who can compare with your grandfather ? let I see . there be Chenier and Hugo and Alfred de Musset wonderful man , but , at the same time , there be a richness , a freshness about Alardyce " 

 here the telephone bell ring , and he have to absent himself with a smile and a bow which signify that , although literature be delightful , it be not work . Mrs. Seal rise at the same time , but remain hover over the table , deliver herself of a tirade against party government . " for if I be to tell you what I know of back - stair intrigue , and what can be do by the power of the purse , you would not   credit I , Mr. Denham , you would not , indeed . which be why I feel that the only work for my father 's daughter for he be one of the pioneer , Mr. Denham , and on his tombstone I have that verse from the Psalms put , about the sower and the seed .... and what would not   I give that he should be alive now , see what we be go to see " but reflect that the glory of the future depend in part upon the activity of her typewriter , she bob her head , and hurry back to the seclusion of her little room , from which immediately issue sound of enthusiastic , but obviously erratic , composition . 

 Mary make it clear at once , by start a fresh topic of general interest , that though she see the humor of her colleague , she do not intend to have she laugh at . 

 " the standard of morality seem to I frightfully low , " she observe reflectively , pour out a second cup of tea , " especially among woman who be not   well educate . they do not   see that small thing matter , and that be where the leakage begin , and then we find ourselves in difficulty I very nearly lose my temper yesterday , " she go on , look at Ralph with a little smile , as though he know what happen when she lose her temper . " it make I very angry when people tell I lie do not   it make you angry ? " she ask Katharine . 

 " but consider that every one tell lie , " Katharine remark , look about the room to see where she have put down her umbrella and her parcel , for there be an intimacy in the way in which Mary and Ralph address each other which make her wish to leave they . Mary , on the other hand , be anxious , superficially at least , that Katharine should stay and so fortify she in her determination not to be in love with Ralph . 

 Ralph , while lift his cup from his lip to the table , have make up his mind that if Miss Hilbery leave , he would go with she . 

 " I do not   think that I tell lie , and I do not   think that Ralph tell lie , do you , Ralph ? " Mary continue . 

 Katharine laugh , with more gayety , as it seem to Mary , than she could properly account for . what be she laugh at ? at they , presumably . Katharine have rise , and be glance hither and thither , at the press and the cupboard , and all the machinery of the office , as if she include they all in her rather malicious amusement , which cause Mary to keep her eye on her straightly and rather fiercely , as if she be a gay - plume , mischievous bird , who might light on the topmost bough and pick off the ruddy cherry , without any warning . two woman less like each other could scarcely be imagine , Ralph thought , look from one to the other . next moment , he too , rise , and nod to Mary , as Katharine say good - bye , open the door for she , and follow she out . 

 Mary sit still and make no attempt to prevent they from go . for a second or two after the door have shut on they her eye rest on the door with a straightforward fierceness in which , for a moment , a certain degree of bewilderment seem to enter ; but , after a brief hesitation , she put down her cup and proceed to clear away the tea - thing . 

 the impulse which have drive Ralph to take this action be the result of a very swift little piece of reasoning , and thus , perhaps , be not quite so much of an impulse as it seem . it pass through his mind that if he miss this chance of talk to Katharine , he would have to face an enraged ghost , when he be alone in his room again , demand an explanation of his cowardly indecision . it be well , on the whole , to risk present discomfiture than to waste an evening bandying excuse and construct impossible scene with this uncompromise section of himself . for ever since he have visit the Hilberys he have be much at the mercy of a phantom Katharine , who come to he when he sit alone , and answer he as he would have her answer , and be always beside he to crown those vary triumph which be transact almost every night , in imaginary scene , as he walk through the lamplit street home from the office . to walk with Katharine in the flesh would either feed that phantom with fresh food , which , as all who nourish dream be aware , be a process that become necessary from time to time , or refine it to such a degree of thinness that it be scarcely serviceable any long ; and that , too , be sometimes a welcome change to a dreamer . and all the time Ralph be well aware that the bulk of Katharine be not represent in his dream at all , so that when he meet she he be bewilder by the fact that she have nothing to do with his dream of she . 

 when , on reach the street , Katharine find that Mr. Denham proceed to keep pace by her side , she be surprised and , perhaps , a little annoyed . she , too , have her margin of imagination , and to - night her activity in this obscure region of the mind require solitude . if she have have her way , she would have walk very fast down the Tottenham Court Road , and then spring into a cab and race swiftly home . the view she have have of the inside of an office be of the nature of a dream to she . shut off up there , she compare Mrs. Seal , and Mary Datchet , and Mr. Clacton to enchant people in a bewitched tower , with the spider ' webs loop across the corner of the room , and all the tool of the necromancer 's craft at hand ; for so aloof and unreal and apart from the normal world do they seem to she , in the house of innumerable typewriter , murmur their incantation and concoct their drug , and fling their frail spider ' webs over the torrent of life which rush down the street outside . 

 she may have be conscious that there be some exaggeration in this fancy of her , for she certainly do not wish to share it with Ralph . to he , she suppose , Mary Datchet , compose leaflet for Cabinet Ministers among her typewriter , represent all that be interesting and genuine ; and , accordingly , she shut they both out from all share in the crowded street , with its pendant necklace of lamp , its light window , and its throng of man and woman , which exhilarate she to such an extent that she very nearly forget her companion . she walk very fast , and the effect of people pass in the opposite direction be to produce a queer dizziness both in her head and in Ralph 's , which set their body far apart . but she do her duty by her companion almost unconsciously . 

 " Mary Datchet do that sort of work very well .... she be responsible for it , I suppose ? " 

 " yes . the other do not   help at all .... have she make a convert of you ? " 

 " oh no . that is , I be a convert already . " 

 " but she have not   persuade you to work for they ? " 

 " oh dear no that would not   do at all . " 

 so they walk on down the Tottenham Court Road , part and come together again , and Ralph feel much as though he be address the summit of a poplar in a high gale of wind . 

 " suppose we get on to that omnibus ? " he suggest . 

 Katharine acquiesce , and they climb up , and find themselves alone on top of it . 

 " but which way be you go ? " Katharine ask , wake a little from the trance into which movement among move thing have throw she . 

 " I be go to the Temple , " Ralph reply , invent a destination on the spur of the moment . he feel the change come over she as they sit down and the omnibus begin to move forward . he imagine she contemplate the avenue in front of they with those honest sad eye which seem to set he at such a distance from they . but the breeze be blow in their face ; it lift her hat for a second , and she draw out a pin and stick it in again , a little action which seem , for some reason , to make she rather more fallible . ah , if only her hat would blow off , and leave she altogether dishevel , accept it from his hand ! 

 " this be like Venice , " she observe , raise her hand . " the motor - car , I mean , shoot about so quickly , with their light . " 

 " I have   never see Venice , " he reply . " I keep that and some other thing for my old age . " 

 " what be the other thing ? " she ask . 

 " there be Venice and India and , I think , Dante , too . " 

 she laugh . 

 " think of provide for one 's old age ! and would you refuse to see Venice if you have the chance ? " 

 instead of answer she , he wonder whether he should tell she something that be quite true about himself ; and as he wonder , he tell she . 

 " I have   plan out my life in section ever since I be a child , to make it last long . you see , I be always afraid that I be miss something " 

 " and so be I ! " Katharine exclaim . " but , after all , " she add , " why should you miss anything ? " 

 " why ? because I be poor , for one thing , " Ralph rejoin . " you , I suppose , can have Venice and India and Dante every day of your life . " 

 she say nothing for a moment , but rest one hand , which be bare of glove , upon the rail in front of she , meditate upon a variety of thing , of which one be that this strange young man pronounce Dante as she be use to hear it pronounce , and another , that he have , most unexpectedly , a feeling about life that be familiar to she . perhaps , then , he be the sort of person she might take an interest in , if she come to know he well , and as she have place he among those whom she would never want to know well , this be enough to make she silent . she hastily recall her first view of he , in the little room where the relic be keep , and run a bar through half her impression , as one cancel a badly write sentence , have find the right one . 

 " but to know that one might have thing do not   alter the fact that one have not   get they , " she say , in some confusion . " how could I go to India , for example ? besides , " she begin impulsively , and stop herself . here the conductor come round , and interrupt they . Ralph wait for she to resume her sentence , but she say no more . 

 " I have a message to give your father , " he remark . " perhaps you would give it he , or I could come " 

 " yes , do come , " Katharine reply . 

 " still , I do not   see why you should not   go to India , " Ralph begin , in order to keep she from rise , as she threaten to do . 

 but she get up in spite of he , and say good - bye with her usual air of decision , and leave he with a quickness which Ralph connect now with all her movement . he look down and see she stand on the pavement edge , an alert , command figure , which wait its season to cross , and then walk boldly and swiftly to the other side . that gesture and action would be add to the picture he have of she , but at present the real woman completely rout the phantom one . 





 CHAPTER VII 

 " and little Augustus Pelham say to I , ' it be the young generation knock at the door , ' and I say to he , ' oh , but the young generation come in without knock , Mr. Pelham . ' such a feeble little joke , be not   it , but down it go into his notebook all the same . " 

 " let we congratulate ourselves that we shall be in the grave before that work be publish , " say Mr. Hilbery . 

 the elderly couple be wait for the dinner - bell to ring and for their daughter to come into the room . their arm - chair be draw up on either side of the fire , and each sit in the same slightly crouch position , look into the coal , with the expression of people who have have their share of experience and wait , rather passively , for something to happen . Mr. Hilbery now give all his attention to a piece of coal which have fall out of the grate , and to select a favorable position for it among the lump that be burn already . Mrs. Hilbery watch he in silence , and the smile change on her lip as if her mind still play with the event of the afternoon . 

 when Mr. Hilbery have accomplish his task , he resume his crouch position again , and begin to toy with the little green stone attach to his watch - chain . his deep , oval - shape eye be fix upon the flame , but behind the superficial glaze seem to brood an observant and whimsical spirit , which keep the brown of the eye still unusually vivid . but a look of indolence , the result of skepticism or of a taste too fastidious to be satisfied by the prize and conclusion so easily within his grasp , lend he an expression almost of melancholy . after sit thus for a time , he seem to reach some point in his thinking which demonstrate its futility , upon which he sigh and stretch his hand for a book lie on the table by his side . 

 directly the door open he close the book , and the eye of father and mother both rest on Katharine as she come towards they . the sight seem at once to give they a motive which they have not have before . to they she appear , as she walk towards they in her light evening dress , extremely young , and the sight of she refresh they , be it only because her youth and ignorance make their knowledge of the world of some value . 

 " the only excuse for you , Katharine , be that dinner be still later than you be , " say Mr. Hilbery , put down his spectacle . 

 " I do not   mind she be late when the result be so charming , " say Mrs. Hilbery , look with pride at her daughter . " still , I do not   know that I like your be out so late , Katharine , " she continue . " you take a cab , I hope ? " 

 here dinner be announce , and Mr. Hilbery formally lead his wife downstairs on his arm . they be all dress for dinner , and , indeed , the prettiness of the dinner - table merit that compliment . there be no cloth upon the table , and the china make regular circle of deep blue upon the shin brown wood . in the middle there be a bowl of tawny red and yellow chrysanthemum , and one of pure white , so fresh that the narrow petal be curve backwards into a firm white ball . from the surround wall the head of three famous victorian writer survey this entertainment , and slip of paper paste beneath they testify in the great man 's own handwriting that he be yours sincerely or affectionately or for ever . the father and daughter would have be quite content , apparently , to eat their dinner in silence , or with a few cryptic remark express in a shorthand which could not be understand by the servant . but silence depress Mrs. Hilbery , and far from mind the presence of maid , she would often address herself to they , and be never altogether unconscious of their approval or disapproval of her remark . in the first place she call they to witness that the room be dark than usual , and have all the light turn on . 

 " that be more cheerful , " she exclaim . " d'you know , Katharine , that ridiculous goose come to tea with I ? oh , how I want you ! he try to make epigram all the time , and I get so nervous , expect they , you know , that I spill the tea and he make an epigram about that ! " 

 " which ridiculous goose ? " Katharine ask her father . 

 " only one of my geese , happily , make epigram Augustus Pelham , of course , " say Mrs. Hilbery . 

 " I be not sorry that I be out , " say Katharine . 

 " Poor Augustus ! " Mrs. Hilbery exclaim . " but we be all too hard on he . remember how devoted he be to his tiresome old mother . " 

 " that be only because she be his mother . any one connect with himself " 

 " no , no , Katharine that be too bad . that be what be the word I mean , Trevor , something long and Latin the sort of word you and Katharine know " 

 Mr. Hilbery suggest " cynical . " 

 " well , that will do . I do not   believe in send girl to college , but I should teach they that sort of thing . it make one feel so dignified , bring out these little allusion , and pass on gracefully to the next topic . but I do not   know what be come over I I actually have to ask Augustus the name of the lady Hamlet be in love with , as you be out , Katharine , and Heaven know what he may not   put down about I in his diary . " 

 " I wish , " Katharine start , with great impetuosity , and check herself . her mother always stir she to feel and think quickly , and then she remember that her father be there , listen with attention . 

 " what be it you wish ? " he ask , as she pause . 

 he often surprise she , thus , into tell he what she have not mean to tell he ; and then they argue , while Mrs. Hilbery go on with her own thought . 

 " I wish mother be not   famous . I be out at tea , and they would talk to I about poetry . " 

 " think you must be poetical , I see and be not   you ? " 

 " who be be talk to you about poetry , Katharine ? " Mrs. Hilbery demand , and Katharine be commit to give her parent an account of her visit to the Suffrage office . 

 " they have an office at the top of one of the old house in Russell Square . I never see such queer - look people . and the man discover I be relate to the poet , and talk to I about poetry . even Mary Datchet seem different in that atmosphere . " 

 " yes , the office atmosphere be very bad for the soul , " say Mr. Hilbery . 

 " I do not   remember any office in Russell Square in the old day , when Mamma live there , " Mrs. Hilbery muse , " and I can not   fancy turn one of those noble great room into a stuffy little Suffrage office . still , if the clerk read poetry there must be something nice about they . " 

 " no , because they do not   read it as we read it , " Katharine insist . 

 " but it be nice to think of they read your grandfather , and not fill up those dreadful little form all day long , " Mrs. Hilbery persist , her notion of office life be derive from some chance view of a scene behind the counter at her bank , as she slip the sovereign into her purse . 

 " at any rate , they have not   make a convert of Katharine , which be what I be afraid of , " Mr. Hilbery remark . 

 " oh no , " say Katharine very decidedly , " I would not   work with they for anything . " 

 " it be curious , " Mr. Hilbery continue , agree with his daughter , " how the sight of one 's fellow - enthusiast always choke one off . they show up the fault of one 's cause so much more plainly than one 's antagonist . one can be enthusiastic in one 's study , but directly one come into touch with the people who agree with one , all the glamor go . so I have   always find , " and he proceed to tell they , as he peel his apple , how he commit himself once , in his youthful day , to make a speech at a political meeting , and go there ablaze with enthusiasm for the ideal of his own side ; but while his leader speak , he become gradually convert to the other way of thinking , if think it could be call , and have to feign illness in order to avoid make a fool of himself an experience which have sicken he of public meeting . 

 Katharine listen and feel as she generally do when her father , and to some extent her mother , describe their feeling , that she quite understand and agree with they , but , at the same time , see something which they do not see , and always feel some disappointment when they fall short of her vision , as they always do . the plate succeed each other swiftly and noiselessly in front of she , and the table be deck for dessert , and as the talk murmur on in familiar groove , she sit there , rather like a judge , listen to her parent , who do , indeed , feel it very pleasant when they make her laugh . 

 daily life in a house where there be young and old be full of curious little ceremony and piety , which be discharge quite punctually , though the meaning of they be obscure , and a mystery have come to brood over they which lend even a superstitious charm to their performance . such be the nightly ceremony of the cigar and the glass of port , which be place on the right hand and on the left hand of Mr. Hilbery , and simultaneously Mrs. Hilbery and Katharine leave the room . all the year they have live together they have never see Mr. Hilbery smoke his cigar or drink his port , and they would have feel it unseemly if , by chance , they have surprise he as he sit there . these short , but clearly marked , period of separation between the sex be always use for an intimate postscript to what have be say at dinner , the sense of be woman together come out most strongly when the male sex be , as if by some religious rite , seclude from the female . Katharine know by heart the sort of mood that possess she as she walk upstairs to the drawing - room , her mother 's arm in her ; and she could anticipate the pleasure with which , when she have turn on the light , they both regard the drawing - room , fresh sweep and set in order for the last section of the day , with the red parrot swing on the chintz curtain , and the arm - chair warming in the blaze . Mrs. Hilbery stand over the fire , with one foot on the fender , and her skirt slightly raise . 

 " oh , Katharine , " she exclaim , " how you have   make I think of Mamma and the old day in Russell Square ! I can see the chandelier , and the green silk of the piano , and Mamma sit in her cashmere shawl by the window , sing till the little ragamuffin boy outside stop to listen . Papa send I in with a bunch of violet while he wait round the corner . it must have be a summer evening . that be before thing be hopeless .... " 

 as she speak an expression of regret , which must have come frequently to cause the line which now grow deep round the lip and eye , settle on her face . the poet 's marriage have not be a happy one . he have leave his wife , and after some year of a rather reckless existence , she have die , before her time . this disaster have lead to great irregularity of education , and , indeed , Mrs. Hilbery might be say to have escape education altogether . but she have be her father 's companion at the season when he write the fine of his poem . she have sit on his knee in tavern and other haunt of drunken poet , and it be for her sake , so people say , that he have cure himself of his dissipation , and become the irreproachable literary character that the world know , whose inspiration have desert he . as Mrs. Hilbery grow old she think more and more of the past , and this ancient disaster seem at time almost to prey upon her mind , as if she could not pass out of life herself without lay the ghost of her parent 's sorrow to rest . 

 Katharine wish to comfort her mother , but it be difficult to do this satisfactorily when the fact themselves be so much of a legend . the house in Russell Square , for example , with its noble room , and the magnolia - tree in the garden , and the sweet - voice piano , and the sound of foot come down the corridor , and other property of size and romance have they any existence ? yet why should Mrs. Alardyce live all alone in this gigantic mansion , and , if she do not live alone , with whom do she live ? for its own sake , Katharine rather like this tragic story , and would have be glad to hear the detail of it , and to have be able to discuss they frankly . but this it become less and less possible to do , for though Mrs. Hilbery be constantly revert to the story , it be always in this tentative and restless fashion , as though by a touch here and there she could set thing straight which have be crook these sixty year . perhaps , indeed , she no long know what the truth be . 

 " if they have live now , " she conclude , " I feel it would not   have happen . People be not   so set upon tragedy as they be then . if my father have be able to go round the world , or if she have have a rest cure , everything would have come right . but what could I do ? and then they have bad friend , both of they , who make mischief . ah , Katharine , when you marry , be quite , quite sure that you love your husband ! " 

 the tear stand in Mrs. Hilbery 's eye . 

 while comfort she , Katharine think to herself , " now this be what Mary Datchet and Mr. Denham do not   understand . this be the sort of position I be always get into . how simple it must be to live as they do ! " for all the evening she have be compare her home and her father and mother with the Suffrage office and the people there . 

 " but , Katharine , " Mrs. Hilbery continue , with one of her sudden change of mood , " though , Heaven know , I do not   want to see you marry , surely if ever a man love a woman , William love you . and it be a nice , rich - sound name too Katharine Rodney , which , unfortunately , do not   mean that he be get any money , because he have not . " 

 the alteration of her name annoyed Katharine , and she observe , rather sharply , that she do not   want to marry any one . 

 " it be very dull that you can only marry one husband , certainly , " Mrs. Hilbery reflect . " I always wish that you could marry everybody who want to marry you . perhaps they will come to that in time , but meanwhile I confess that dear William " but here Mr. Hilbery come in , and the more solid part of the evening begin . this consist in the reading aloud by Katharine from some prose work or other , while her mother knit scarve intermittently on a little circular frame , and her father read the newspaper , not so attentively but that he could comment humorously now and again upon the fortune of the hero and the heroine . the Hilberys subscribe to a library , which deliver book on Tuesdays and Fridays , and Katharine do she good to interest her parent in the work of live and highly respectable author ; but Mrs. Hilbery be perturb by the very look of the light , gold - wreathed volume , and would make little face as if she taste something bitter as the reading go on ; while Mr. Hilbery would treat the modern with a curious elaborate banter such as one might apply to the antic of a promising child . so this evening , after five page or so of one of these master , Mrs. Hilbery protest that it be all too clever and cheap and nasty for word . 

 " please , Katharine , read we something real . " 

 Katharine have to go to the bookcase and choose a portly volume in sleek , yellow calf , which have directly a sedative effect upon both her parent . but the delivery of the evening post break in upon the period of Henry Fielding , and Katharine find that her letter need all her attention . 





 CHAPTER VIII 

 she take her letter up to her room with she , have persuade her mother to go to bed directly Mr. Hilbery leave they , for so long as she sit in the same room as her mother , Mrs. Hilbery might , at any moment , ask for a sight of the post . a very hasty glance through many sheet have show Katharine that , by some coincidence , her attention have to be direct to many different anxiety simultaneously . in the first place , Rodney have write a very full account of his state of mind , which be illustrate by a sonnet , and he demand a reconsideration of their position , which agitate Katharine more than she like . then there be two letter which have to be lay side by side and compare before she could make out the truth of their story , and even when she know the fact she could not decide what to make of they ; and finally she have to reflect upon a great many page from a cousin who find himself in financial difficulty , which force he to the uncongenial occupation of teach the young lady of Bungay to play upon the violin . 

 but the two letter which each tell the same story differently be the chief source of her perplexity . she be really rather shocked to find it definitely establish that her own second cousin , Cyril Alardyce , have live for the last four year with a woman who be not his wife , who have bear he two child , and be now about to bear he another . this state of thing have be discover by Mrs. Milvain , her aunt Celia , a zealous inquirer into such matter , whose letter be also under consideration . Cyril , she say , must be make to marry the woman at once ; and Cyril , rightly or wrongly , be indignant with such interference with his affair , and would not own that he have any cause to be ashamed of himself . have he any cause to be ashamed of himself , Katharine wonder ; and she turn to her aunt again . 

 " remember , " she write , in her profuse , emphatic statement , " that he bear your grandfather 's name , and so will the child that be to be bear . the poor boy be not so much to blame as the woman who delude he , think he a gentleman , which he be , and have money , which he have not . " 

 " what would Ralph Denham say to this ? " think Katharine , begin to pace up and down her bedroom . she twitch aside the curtain , so that , on turn , she be face by darkness , and look out , could just distinguish the branch of a plane - tree and the yellow light of some one else 's window . 

 " what would Mary Datchet and Ralph Denham say ? " she reflect , pause by the window , which , as the night be warm , she raise , in order to feel the air upon her face , and to lose herself in the nothingness of night . but with the air the distant hum sound of far - off crowded thoroughfare be admit to the room . the incessant and tumultuous hum of the distant traffic seem , as she stand there , to represent the thick texture of her life , for her life be so hem in with the progress of other life that the sound of its own advance be inaudible . People like Ralph and Mary , she think , have it all their own way , and an empty space before they , and , as she envy they , she cast her mind out to imagine an empty land where all this petty intercourse of man and woman , this life make up of the dense crossing and entanglement of man and woman , have no existence whatever . even now , alone , at night , look out into the shapeless mass of London , she be force to remember that there be one point and here another with which she have some connection . William Rodney , at this very moment , be seat in a minute speck of light somewhere to the east of she , and his mind be occupy , not with his book , but with she . she wish that no one in the whole world would think of she . however , there be no way of escape from one 's fellow - being , she conclude , and shut the window with a sigh , and return once more to her letter . 

 she could not doubt but that William 's letter be the most genuine she have yet receive from he . he have come to the conclusion that he could not live without she , he write . he believe that he know she , and could give her happiness , and that their marriage would be unlike other marriage . nor be the sonnet , in spite of its accomplishment , lack in passion , and Katharine , as she read the page through again , could see in what direction her feeling ought to flow , suppose they reveal themselves . she would come to feel a humorous sort of tenderness for he , a zealous care for his susceptibility , and , after all , she consider , think of her father and mother , what be love ? 

 naturally , with her face , position , and background , she have experience of young man who wish to marry she , and make protestation of love , but , perhaps because she do not return the feeling , it remain something of a pageant to she . not have experience of it herself , her mind have unconsciously occupy itself for some year in dress up an image of love , and the marriage that be the outcome of love , and the man who inspire love , which naturally dwarf any example that come her way . easily , and without correction by reason , her imagination make picture , superb background cast a rich though phantom light upon the fact in the foreground . Splendid as the water that drop with resound thunder from high ledge of rock , and plunge downwards into the blue depth of night , be the presence of love she dream , draw into it every drop of the force of life , and dash they all asunder in the superb catastrophe in which everything be surrender , and nothing might be reclaim . the man , too , be some magnanimous hero , rid a great horse by the shore of the sea . they ride through forest together , they gallop by the rim of the sea . but wake , she be able to contemplate a perfectly loveless marriage , as the thing one do actually in real life , for possibly the people who dream thus be those who do the most prosaic thing . 

 at this moment she be much inclined to sit on into the night , spin her light fabric of thought until she tired of their futility , and go to her mathematic ; but , as she know very well , it be necessary that she should see her father before he go to bed . the case of Cyril Alardyce must be discuss , her mother 's illusion and the right of the family attend to . be vague herself as to what all this amount to , she have to take counsel with her father . she take her letter in her hand and go downstairs . it be past eleven , and the clock have come into their reign , the grandfather 's clock in the hall tick in competition with the small clock on the landing . Mr. Hilbery 's study run out behind the rest of the house , on the ground floor , and be a very silent , subterranean place , the sun in daytime cast a mere abstract of light through a skylight upon his book and the large table , with its spread of white paper , now illumine by a green reading - lamp . here Mr. Hilbery sit edit his review , or place together document by mean of which it could be prove that Shelley have write " of " instead of " and , " or that the inn in which Byron have sleep be call the " Nag 's Head " and not the " Turkish Knight , " or that the christian name of Keats 's uncle have be John rather than Richard , for he know more minute detail about these poet than any man in England , probably , and be prepare an edition of Shelley which scrupulously observe the poet 's system of punctuation . he see the humor of these research , but that do not prevent he from carry they out with the utmost scrupulosity . 

 he be lie back comfortably in a deep arm - chair smoke a cigar , and ruminate the fruitful question as to whether Coleridge have wish to marry Dorothy Wordsworth , and what , if he have do so , would have be the consequence to he in particular , and to literature in general . when Katharine come in he reflect that he know what she have come for , and he make a pencil note before he speak to she . have do this , he see that she be read , and he watch she for a moment without say anything . she be read " Isabella and the Pot of Basil , " and her mind be full of the italian hill and the blue daylight , and the hedge set with little rosette of red and white rose . feel that her father wait for she , she sigh and say , shut her book : 

 " I have   have a letter from Aunt Celia about Cyril , father .... it seem to be true about his marriage . what be we to do ? " 

 " Cyril seem to have be behave in a very foolish manner , " say Mr. Hilbery , in his pleasant and deliberate tone . 

 Katharine find some difficulty in carry on the conversation , while her father balance his finger - tip so judiciously , and seem to reserve so many of his thought for himself . 

 " he be about do for himself , I should say , " he continue . without say anything , he take Katharine 's letter out of her hand , adjust his eyeglass , and read they through . 

 at length he say " Humph ! " and give the letter back to she . 

 " mother know nothing about it , " Katharine remark . " will you tell she ? " 

 " I shall tell your mother . but I shall tell she that there be nothing whatever for we to do . " 

 " but the marriage ? " Katharine ask , with some diffidence . 

 Mr. Hilbery say nothing , and star into the fire . 

 " what in the name of conscience do he do it for ? " he speculate at last , rather to himself than to she . 

 Katharine have begin to read her aunt 's letter over again , and she now quote a sentence . " Ibsen and Butler .... he have send I a letter full of quotation nonsense , though clever nonsense . " 

 " well , if the young generation want to carry on its life on those line , it be none of our affair , " he remark . 

 " but be not   it our affair , perhaps , to make they get marry ? " Katharine ask rather wearily . 

 " why the dicken should they apply to I ? " her father demand with sudden irritation . 

 " only as the head of the family " 

 " but I be not the head of the family . Alfred 's the head of the family . let they apply to Alfred , " say Mr. Hilbery , relapse again into his arm - chair . Katharine be aware that she have touch a sensitive spot , however , in mention the family . 

 " I think , perhaps , the good thing would be for I to go and see they , " she observe . 

 " I will not   have you go anywhere near they , " Mr. Hilbery reply with unwonted decision and authority . " indeed , I do not   understand why they have   drag you into the business at all I do not   see that it be get anything to do with you . " 

 " I have   always be friend with Cyril , " Katharine observe . 

 " but do he ever tell you anything about this ? " Mr. Hilbery ask rather sharply . 

 Katharine shake her head . she be , indeed , a good deal hurt that Cyril have not confide in she do he think , as Ralph Denham or Mary Datchet might think , that she be , for some reason , unsympathetic hostile even ? 

 " as to your mother , " say Mr. Hilbery , after a pause , in which he seem to be consider the color of the flame , " you have well tell she the fact . she would well know the fact before every one begin to talk about it , though why Aunt Celia think it necessary to come , I be sure I do not   know . and the less talk there be the well . " 

 grant the assumption that gentleman of sixty who be highly cultivate , and have have much experience of life , probably think of many thing which they do not say , Katharine could not help feel rather puzzled by her father 's attitude , as she go back to her room . what a distance he be from it all ! how superficially he smooth these event into a semblance of decency which harmonize with his own view of life ! he never wonder what Cyril have feel , nor do the hidden aspect of the case tempt he to examine into they . he merely seem to realize , rather languidly , that Cyril have behave in a way which be foolish , because other people do not behave in that way . he seem to be look through a telescope at little figure hundred of mile in the distance . 

 her selfish anxiety not to have to tell Mrs. Hilbery what have happen make she follow her father into the hall after breakfast the next morning in order to question he . 

 " have you tell mother ? " she ask . her manner to her father be almost stern , and she seem to hold endless depth of reflection in the dark of her eye . 

 Mr. Hilbery sigh . 

 " my dear child , it go out of my head . " he smooth his silk hat energetically , and at once affect an air of hurry . " I will send a note round from the office .... I be late this morning , and I have   any amount of proof to get through . " 

 " that would not   do at all , " Katharine say decidedly . " she must be tell you or I must tell she . we ought to have tell she at first . " 

 Mr. Hilbery have now place his hat on his head , and his hand be on the door - knob . an expression which Katharine know well from her childhood , when he ask she to shield he in some neglect of duty , come into his eye ; malice , humor , and irresponsibility be blend in it . he nod his head to and fro significantly , open the door with an adroit movement , and step out with a lightness unexpected at his age . he wave his hand once to his daughter , and be go . leave alone , Katharine could not help laugh to find herself cheat as usual in domestic bargaining with her father , and leave to do the disagreeable work which belong , by right , to he . 





 CHAPTER IX 

 Katharine dislike tell her mother about Cyril 's misbehavior quite as much as her father do , and for much the same reason . they both shrink , nervously , as people fear the report of a gun on the stage , from all that would have to be say on this occasion . Katharine , moreover , be unable to decide what she think of Cyril 's misbehavior . as usual , she see something which her father and mother do not see , and the effect of that something be to suspend Cyril 's behavior in her mind without any qualification at all . they would think whether it be good or bad ; to she it be merely a thing that have happen . 

 when Katharine reach the study , Mrs. Hilbery have already dip her pen in the ink . 

 " Katharine , " she say , lift it in the air , " I have   just make out such a queer , strange thing about your grandfather . I be three year and six month old than he be when he die . I could not   very well have be his mother , but I might have be his eld sister , and that seem to I such a pleasant fancy . I be go to start quite fresh this morning , and get a lot do . " 

 she begin her sentence , at any rate , and Katharine sit down at her own table , untie the bundle of old letter upon which she be work , smooth they out absent - mindedly , and begin to decipher the faded script . in a minute she look across at her mother , to judge her mood . peace and happiness have relax every muscle in her face ; her lip be part very slightly , and her breath come in smooth , control inspiration like those of a child who be surround itself with a building of brick , and increase in ecstasy as each brick be place in position . so Mrs. Hilbery be raise round she the sky and tree of the past with every stroke of her pen , and recall the voice of the dead . quiet as the room be , and undisturbe by the sound of the present moment , Katharine could fancy that here be a deep pool of past time , and that she and her mother be bath in the light of sixty year ago . what could the present give , she wonder , to compare with the rich crowd of gift bestow by the past ? here be a Thursday morning in process of manufacture ; each second be mint fresh by the clock upon the mantelpiece . she strain her ear and could just hear , far off , the hoot of a motor - car and the rush of wheel come near and die away again , and the voice of man cry old iron and vegetable in one of the poor street at the back of the house . room , of course , accumulate their suggestion , and any room in which one have be use to carry on any particular occupation give off memory of mood , of idea , of posture that have be see in it ; so that to attempt any different kind of work there be almost impossible . 

 Katharine be unconsciously affect , each time she enter her mother 's room , by all these influence , which have have their birth year ago , when she be a child , and have something sweet and solemn about they , and connect themselves with early memory of the cavernous gloom and sonorous echo of the Abbey where her grandfather lie bury . all the book and picture , even the chair and table , have belong to he , or have reference to he ; even the china dog on the mantelpiece and the little shepherdess with their sheep have be buy by he for a penny a piece from a man who use to stand with a tray of toy in Kensington High Street , as Katharine have often hear her mother tell . often she have sit in this room , with her mind fix so firmly on those vanish figure that she could almost see the muscle round their eye and lip , and have give to each his own voice , with its trick of accent , and his coat and his cravat . often she have seem to herself to be move among they , an invisible ghost among the living , well acquaint with they than with her own friend , because she know their secret and possess a divine foreknowledge of their destiny . they have be so unhappy , such muddler , so wrong - headed , it seem to she . she could have tell they what to do , and what not to do . it be a melancholy fact that they would pay no heed to she , and be bind to come to grief in their own antiquated way . their behavior be often grotesquely irrational ; their convention monstrously absurd ; and yet , as she brood upon they , she feel so closely attach to they that it be useless to try to pass judgment upon they . she very nearly lose consciousness that she be a separate being , with a future of her own . on a morning of slight depression , such as this , she would try to find some sort of clue to the muddle which their old letter present ; some reason which seem to make it worth while to they ; some aim which they keep steadily in view but she be interrupt . 

 Mrs. Hilbery have rise from her table , and be stand look out of the window at a string of barge swim up the river . 

 Katharine watch she . suddenly Mrs. Hilbery turn abruptly , and exclaim : 

 " I really believe I be bewitch ! I only want three sentence , you see , something quite straightforward and commonplace , and I can not   find them . " 

 she begin to pace up and down the room , snatch up her duster ; but she be too much annoyed to find any relief , as yet , in polish the back of book . 

 " besides , " she say , give the sheet she have write to Katharine , " I do not   believe this will do . do your grandfather ever visit the Hebrides , Katharine ? " she look in a strangely beseech way at her daughter . " my mind get run on the Hebrides , and I could not   help write a little description of they . perhaps it would do at the beginning of a chapter . chapter often begin quite differently from the way they go on , you know . " Katharine read what her mother have write . she might have be a schoolmaster criticize a child 's essay . her face give Mrs. Hilbery , who watch it anxiously , no ground for hope . 

 " it be very beautiful , " she state , " but , you see , mother , we ought to go from point to point " 

 " oh , I know , " Mrs. Hilbery exclaim . " and that be just what I can not   do . thing keep come into my head . it be not   that I do not   know everything and feel everything   who do know he , if I do not ? , but I can not   put it down , you see . there be a kind of blind spot , " she say , touch her forehead , " there . and when I can not   sleep o ' night , I fancy I shall die without have do it . " 

 from exultation she have pass to the depth of depression which the imagination of her death arouse . the depression communicate itself to Katharine . how impotent they be , fiddle about all day long with paper ! and the clock be strike eleven and nothing do ! she watch her mother , now rummage in a great brass - bind box which stand by her table , but she do not go to her help . of course , Katharine reflect , her mother have now lose some paper , and they would waste the rest of the morning look for it . she cast her eye down in irritation , and read again her mother 's musical sentence about the silver gull , and the root of little pink flower wash by pellucid stream , and the blue mist of hyacinth , until she be strike by her mother 's silence . she raise her eye . Mrs. Hilbery have empty a portfolio contain old photograph over her table , and be look from one to another . 

 " surely , Katharine , " she say , " the man be far handsomer in those day than they be now , in spite of their odious whisker ? look at old John Graham , in his white waistcoat look at Uncle Harley . that be Peter the manservant , I suppose . Uncle John bring he back from India . " 

 Katharine look at her mother , but do not stir or answer . she have suddenly become very angry , with a rage which their relationship make silent , and therefore doubly powerful and critical . she feel all the unfairness of the claim which her mother tacitly make to her time and sympathy , and what Mrs. Hilbery take , Katharine think bitterly , she waste . then , in a flash , she remember that she have still to tell she about Cyril 's misbehavior . her anger immediately dissipate itself ; it break like some wave that have gather itself high above the rest ; the water be resume into the sea again , and Katharine feel once more full of peace and solicitude , and anxious only that her mother should be protect from pain . she cross the room instinctively , and sit on the arm of her mother 's chair . Mrs. Hilbery leant her head against her daughter 's body . 

 " what be nobler , " she muse , turn over the photograph , " than to be a woman to whom every one turn , in sorrow or difficulty ? how have the young woman of your generation improve upon that , Katharine ? I can see they now , sweep over the lawn at Melbury House , in their flounce and furbelow , so calm and stately and imperial   and the monkey and the little black dwarf follow behind , as if nothing matter in the world but to be beautiful and kind . but they do more than we do , I sometimes think . they be , and that be well than do . they seem to I like ship , like majestic ship , hold on their way , not shove or push , not fret by little thing , as we be , but take their way , like ship with white sail . " 

 Katharine try to interrupt this discourse , but the opportunity do not come , and she could not forbear to turn over the page of the album in which the old photograph be store . the face of these man and woman shine forth wonderfully after the hubbub of live face , and seem , as her mother have say , to wear a marvelous dignity and calm , as if they have rule their kingdom justly and deserve great love . some be of almost incredible beauty , other be ugly enough in a forcible way , but none be dull or bored or insignificant . the superb stiff fold of the crinoline suit the woman ; the cloak and hat of the gentleman seem full of character . once more Katharine feel the serene air all round she , and seem far off to hear the solemn beat of the sea upon the shore . but she know that she must join the present on to this past . 

 Mrs. Hilbery be ramble on , from story to story . 

 " that be Janie Mannering , " she say , point to a superb , white - haired dame , whose satin robe seem string with pearl . " I must have tell you how she find her cook drunk under the kitchen table when the Empress be come to dinner , and tuck up her velvet sleeve   she always dress like an Empress herself , cook the whole meal , and appear in the drawing - room as if she have be sleep on a bank of rose all day . she could do anything with her hand they all could make a cottage or embroider a petticoat . 

 " and that be Queenie Colquhoun , " she go on , turn the page , " who take her coffin out with she to Jamaica , pack with lovely shawl and bonnet , because you could not   get coffin in Jamaica , and she have a horror of die there   as she do , and be devour by the white ant . and there be Sabine , the lovely of they all ; ah ! it be like a star rise when she come into the room . and that be Miriam , in her coachman 's cloak , with all the little cape on , and she wear great top - boot underneath . you young people may say you be unconventional , but you be nothing compare with she . " 

 turn the page , she come upon the picture of a very masculine , handsome lady , whose head the photographer have adorn with an imperial crown . 

 " ah , you wretch ! " Mrs. Hilbery exclaim , " what a wicked old despot you be , in your day ! how we all bow down before you ! ' Maggie , ' she use to say , ' if it have not   be for I , where would you be now ? ' and it be true ; she bring they together , you know . she say to my father , ' marry she , ' and he do ; and she say to poor little Clara , ' fall down and worship he , ' and she do ; but she get up again , of course . what else could one expect ? she be a mere child eighteen and half dead with fright , too . but that old tyrant never repent . she use to say that she have give they three perfect month , and no one have a right to more ; and I sometimes think , Katharine , that be true , you know . it be more than most of we have , only we have to pretend , which be a thing neither of they could ever do . I fancy , " Mrs. Hilbery muse , " that there be a kind of sincerity in those day between man and woman which , with all your outspokenness , you have not   get . " 

 Katharine again try to interrupt . but Mrs. Hilbery have be gather impetus from her recollection , and be now in high spirit . 

 " they must have be good friend at heart , " she resume , " because she use to sing his song . ah , how do it go ? " and Mrs. Hilbery , who have a very sweet voice , troll out a famous lyric of her father 's which have be set to an absurdly and charmingly sentimental air by some early victorian composer . 

 " it be the vitality of they ! " she conclude , strike her fist against the table . " that be what we have not   get ! we be virtuous , we be earnest , we go to meeting , we pay the poor their wage , but we do not   live as they live . as often as not , my father be not   in bed three night out of the seven , but always fresh as paint in the morning . I hear he now , come sing up the stair to the nursery , and toss the loaf for breakfast on his sword - stick , and then off we go for a day 's pleasuring Richmond , Hampton Court , the Surrey Hills . why should not   we go , Katharine ? it be go to be a fine day . " 

 at this moment , just as Mrs. Hilbery be examine the weather from the window , there be a knock at the door . a slight , elderly lady come in , and be salute by Katharine , with very evident dismay , as " Aunt Celia ! " she be dismay because she guess why Aunt Celia have come . it be certainly in order to discuss the case of Cyril and the woman who be not his wife , and owe to her procrastination Mrs. Hilbery be quite unprepared . who could be more unprepared ? here she be , suggest that all three of they should go on a jaunt to Blackfriars to inspect the site of Shakespeare 's theater , for the weather be hardly settle enough for the country . 

 to this proposal Mrs. Milvain listen with a patient smile , which indicate that for many year she have accept such eccentricity in her sister - in - law with bland philosophy . Katharine take up her position at some distance , stand with her foot on the fender , as though by so do she could get a well view of the matter . but , in spite of her aunt 's presence , how unreal the whole question of Cyril and his morality appear ! the difficulty , it now seem , be not to break the news gently to Mrs. Hilbery , but to make she understand it . how be one to lasso her mind , and tether it to this minute , unimportant spot ? a matter - of - fact statement seem good . 

 " I think Aunt Celia have come to talk about Cyril , mother , " she say rather brutally . " Aunt Celia have discover that Cyril be marry . he have a wife and child . " 

 " no , he be not marry , " Mrs. Milvain interpose , in low tone , address herself to Mrs. Hilbery . " he have two child , and another on the way . " 

 Mrs. Hilbery look from one to the other in bewilderment . 

 " we think it well to wait until it be prove before we tell you , " Katharine add . 

 " but I meet Cyril only a fortnight ago at the National Gallery ! " Mrs. Hilbery exclaim . " I do not   believe a word of it , " and she toss her head with a smile on her lip at Mrs. Milvain , as though she could quite understand her mistake , which be a very natural mistake , in the case of a childless woman , whose husband be something very dull in the Board of Trade . 

 " I do not   wish to believe it , Maggie , " say Mrs. Milvain . " for a long time I couldn't believe it . but now I have   see , and I have to believe it . " 

 " Katharine , " Mrs. Hilbery demand , " do your father know of this ? " 

 Katharine nod . 

 " Cyril marry ! " Mrs. Hilbery repeat . " and never tell we a word , though we have   have he in our house since he be a child noble William 's son ! I can not   believe my ear ! " 

 feel that the burden of proof be lay upon she , Mrs. Milvain now proceed with her story . she be elderly and fragile , but her childlessness seem always to impose these painful duty on she , and to revere the family , and to keep it in repair , have now become the chief object of her life . she tell her story in a low , spasmodic , and somewhat break voice . 

 " I have suspect for some time that he be not happy . there be new line on his face . so I go to his room , when I know he be engage at the poor man 's college . he lecture there roman law , you know , or it may be greek . the landlady say Mr. Alardyce only sleep there about once a fortnight now . he look so ill , she say . she have see he with a young person . I suspect something directly . I go to his room , and there be an envelope on the mantelpiece , and a letter with an address in Seton Street , off the Kennington Road . " 

 Mrs. Hilbery fidget rather restlessly , and hum fragment of her tune , as if to interrupt . 

 " I go to Seton Street , " Aunt Celia continue firmly . " a very low place lodge - house , you know , with canary in the window . number seven just like all the other . I ring , I knock ; no one come . I go down the area . I be certain I see some one inside child a cradle . but no reply no reply . " she sigh , and look straight in front of she with a glaze expression in her half - veil blue eye . 

 " I stand in the street , " she resume , " in case I could catch a sight of one of they . it seem a very long time . there be rough man sing in the public - house round the corner . at last the door open , and some one it must have be the woman herself come right past I . there be only the pillar - box between we . " 

 " and what do she look like ? " Mrs. Hilbery demand . 

 " one could see how the poor boy have be delude , " be all that Mrs. Milvain vouchsafe by way of description . 

 " poor thing ! " Mrs. Hilbery exclaim . 

 " poor Cyril ! " Mrs. Milvain say , lay a slight emphasis upon Cyril . 

 " but they have   get nothing to live upon , " Mrs. Hilbery continue . " if he would come to we like a man , " she go on , " and say , ' I have   be a fool , ' one would have pity he ; one would have try to help he . there be nothing so disgraceful after all but he be be go about all these year , pretend , let one take it for grant , that he be single . and the poor desert little wife " 

 " she be not his wife , " Aunt Celia interrupt . 

 " I have   never hear anything so detestable ! " Mrs. Hilbery wind up , strike her fist on the arm of her chair . as she realize the fact she become thoroughly disgusted , although , perhaps , she be more hurt by the concealment of the sin than by the sin itself . she look splendidly roused and indignant ; and Katharine feel an immense relief and pride in her mother . it be plain that her indignation be very genuine , and that her mind be as perfectly focus upon the fact as any one could wish more so , by a long way , than Aunt Celia 's mind , which seem to be timidly circle , with a morbid pleasure , in these unpleasant shade . she and her mother together would take the situation in hand , visit Cyril , and see the whole thing through . 

 " we must realize Cyril 's point of view first , " she say , speak directly to her mother , as if to a contemporary , but before the word be out of her mouth , there be more confusion outside , and Cousin Caroline , Mrs. Hilbery 's maiden cousin , enter the room . although she be by birth an Alardyce , and Aunt Celia a Hilbery , the complexity of the family relationship be such that each be at once first and second cousin to the other , and thus aunt and cousin to the culprit Cyril , so that his misbehavior be almost as much Cousin Caroline 's affair as Aunt Celia 's . Cousin Caroline be a lady of very impose height and circumference , but in spite of her size and her handsome trapping , there be something expose and unsheltere in her expression , as if for many summer her thin red skin and hooked nose and reduplication of chin , so much resemble the profile of a cockatoo , have be bar to the weather ; she be , indeed , a single lady ; but she have , it be the habit to say , " make a life for herself , " and be thus entitle to be hear with respect . 

 " this unhappy business , " she begin , out of breath as she be . " if the train have not go out of the station just as I arrive , I should have be with you before . Celia have doubtless tell you . you will agree with I , Maggie . he must be make to marry she at once for the sake of the child " 

 " but do he refuse to marry she ? " Mrs. Hilbery inquire , with a return of her bewilderment . 

 " he have write an absurd perverted letter , all quotation , " Cousin Caroline puff . " he think he be do a very fine thing , where we only see the folly of it .... the girl be every bit as infatuate as he be for which I blame he . " 

 " she entangle he , " Aunt Celia intervene , with a very curious smoothness of intonation , which seem to convey a vision of thread weave and interweave a close , white mesh round their victim . 

 " it be no use go into the right and wrong of the affair now , Celia , " say Cousin Caroline with some acerbity , for she believe herself the only practical one of the family , and regret that , owe to the slowness of the kitchen clock , Mrs. Milvain have already confuse poor dear Maggie with her own incomplete version of the fact . " the mischief 's do , and very ugly mischief too . be we to allow the third child to be bear out of wedlock ?   I be sorry to have to say these thing before you , Katharine .   he will bear your name , Maggie your father 's name , remember . " 

 " but let we hope it will be a girl , " say Mrs. Hilbery . 

 Katharine , who have be look at her mother constantly , while the chatter of tongue hold sway , perceive that the look of straightforward indignation have already vanish ; her mother be evidently cast about in her mind for some method of escape , or bright spot , or sudden illumination which should show to the satisfaction of everybody that all have happen , miraculously but incontestably , for the good . 

 " it be detestable quite detestable ! " she repeat , but in tone of no great assurance ; and then her face light up with a smile which , tentative at first , soon become almost assured . " nowadays , people do not   think so badly of these thing as they use to do , " she begin . " it will be horribly uncomfortable for they sometimes , but if they be brave , clever child , as they will be , I dare say it will make remarkable people of they in the end . Robert Browning use to say that every great man have jewish blood in he , and we must try to look at it in that light . and , after all , Cyril have act on principle . one may disagree with his principle , but , at least , one can respect it like the French Revolution , or Cromwell cut the King 's head off . some of the most terrible thing in history have be do on principle , " she conclude . 

 " I be afraid I take a very different view of principle , " Cousin Caroline remark tartly . 

 " Principle ! " Aunt Celia repeat , with an air of deprecate such a word in such a connection . " I will go to - morrow and see he , " she add . 

 " but why should you take these disagreeable thing upon yourself , Celia ? " Mrs. Hilbery interpose , and Cousin Caroline thereupon protest with some further plan involve sacrifice of herself . 

 grow weary of it all , Katharine turn to the window , and stand among the fold of the curtain , press close to the window - pane , and gaze disconsolately at the river much in the attitude of a child depress by the meaningless talk of its elder . she be much disappointed in her mother and in herself too . the little tug which she give to the blind , let it fly up to the top with a snap , signify her annoyance . she be very angry , and yet impotent to give expression to her anger , or know with whom she be angry . how they talk and moralize and make up story to suit their own version of the becoming , and secretly praise their own devotion and tact ! no ; they have their dwelling in a mist , she decide ; hundred of mile away away from what ? " perhaps it would be well if I marry William , " she think suddenly , and the thought appear to loom through the mist like solid ground . she stand there , think of her own destiny , and the elder lady talk on , until they have talk themselves into a decision to ask the young woman to luncheon , and tell she , very friendlily , how such behavior appear to woman like themselves , who know the world . and then Mrs. Hilbery be strike by a well idea . 





 CHAPTER X 

 Messrs. Grateley and Hooper , the solicitor in whose firm Ralph Denham be clerk , have their office in Lincoln 's Inn Fields , and there Ralph Denham appear every morning very punctually at ten o'clock . his punctuality , together with other quality , mark he out among the clerk for success , and indeed it would have be safe to wager that in ten year ' time or so one would find he at the head of his profession , have it not be for a peculiarity which sometimes seem to make everything about he uncertain and perilous . his sister Joan have already be disturb by his love of gamble with his saving . scrutinize he constantly with the eye of affection , she have become aware of a curious perversity in his temperament which cause her much anxiety , and would have cause she still more if she have not recognize the germ of it in her own nature . she could fancy Ralph suddenly sacrifice his entire career for some fantastic imagination ; some cause or idea or even   so her fancy run   for some woman see from a railway train , hang up clothe in a back yard . when he have find this beauty or this cause , no force , she know , would avail to restrain he from pursuit of it . she suspect the East also , and always fidget herself when she see he with a book of indian travel in his hand , as though he be suck contagion from the page . on the other hand , no common love affair , have there be such a thing , would have cause she a moment 's uneasiness where Ralph be concern . he be destine in her fancy for something splendid in the way of success or failure , she know not which . 

 and yet nobody could have work hard or do well in all the recognize stage of a young man 's life than Ralph have do , and Joan have to gather material for her fear from trifle in her brother 's behavior which would have escape any other eye . it be natural that she should be anxious . life have be so arduous for all of they from the start that she could not help dread any sudden relaxation of his grasp upon what he hold , though , as she know from inspection of her own life , such sudden impulse to let go and make away from the discipline and the drudgery be sometimes almost irresistible . but with Ralph , if he break away , she know that it would be only to put himself under harsh constraint ; she figure he toil through sandy desert under a tropical sun to find the source of some river or the haunt of some fly ; she figure he live by the labor of his hand in some city slum , the victim of one of those terrible theory of right and wrong which be current at the time ; she figure he prisoner for life in the house of a woman who have seduce he by her misfortune . half proudly , and wholly anxiously , she frame such thought , as they sit , late at night , talk together over the gas - stove in Ralph 's bedroom . 

 it be likely that Ralph would not have recognize his own dream of a future in the forecast which disturb his sister 's peace of mind . certainly , if any one of they have be put before he he would have reject it with a laugh , as the sort of life that hold no attraction for he . he could not have say how it be that he have put these absurd notion into his sister 's head . indeed , he pride himself upon be well break into a life of hard work , about which he have no sort of illusion . his vision of his own future , unlike many such forecast , could have be make public at any moment without a blush ; he attribute to himself a strong brain , and confer on himself a seat in the House of Commons at the age of fifty , a moderate fortune , and , with luck , an unimportant office in a Liberal Government . there be nothing extravagant in a forecast of that kind , and certainly nothing dishonorable . nevertheless , as his sister guess , it need all Ralph 's strength of will , together with the pressure of circumstance , to keep his foot move in the path which lead that way . it need , in particular , a constant repetition of a phrase to the effect that he share the common fate , find it good of all , and wish for no other ; and by repeat such phrase he acquire punctuality and habit of work , and could very plausibly demonstrate that to be a clerk in a solicitor 's office be the good of all possible life , and that other ambition be vain . 

 but , like all belief not genuinely hold , this one depend very much upon the amount of acceptance it receive from other people , and in private , when the pressure of public opinion be remove , Ralph let himself swing very rapidly away from his actual circumstance upon strange voyage which , indeed , he would have be ashamed to describe . in these dream , of course , he figure in noble and romantic part , but self - glorification be not the only motive of they . they give outlet to some spirit which find no work to do in real life , for , with the pessimism which his lot force upon he , Ralph have make up his mind that there be no use for what , contemptuously enough , he call dream , in the world which we inhabit . it sometimes seem to he that this spirit be the most valuable possession he have ; he think that by mean of it he could set flower waste tract of the earth , cure many ill , or raise up beauty where none now exist ; it be , too , a fierce and potent spirit which would devour the dusty book and parchment on the office wall with one lick of its tongue , and leave he in a minute stand in nakedness , if he give way to it . his endeavor , for many year , have be to control the spirit , and at the age of twenty - nine he think he could pride himself upon a life rigidly divide into the hour of work and those of dream ; the two live side by side without harm each other . as a matter of fact , this effort at discipline have be help by the interest of a difficult profession , but the old conclusion to which Ralph have come when he leave college still hold sway in his mind , and ting his view with the melancholy belief that life for most people compel the exercise of the low gift and waste the precious one , until it force we to agree that there be little virtue , as well as little profit , in what once seem to we the noblest part of our inheritance . 

 Denham be not altogether popular either in his office or among his family . he be too positive , at this stage of his career , as to what be right and what wrong , too proud of his self - control , and , as be natural in the case of person not altogether happy or well suited in their condition , too apt to prove the folly of contentment , if he find any one who confess to that weakness . in the office his rather ostentatious efficiency annoy those who take their own work more lightly , and , if they foretold his advancement , it be not altogether sympathetically . indeed , he appear to be rather a hard and self - sufficient young man , with a queer temper , and manner that be uncompromisingly abrupt , who be consume with a desire to get on in the world , which be natural , these critic think , in a man of no mean , but not engage . 

 the young man in the office have a perfect right to these opinion , because Denham show no particular desire for their friendship . he like they well enough , but shut they up in that compartment of life which be devoted to work . Hitherto , indeed , he have find little difficulty in arrange his life as methodically as he arrange his expenditure , but about this time he begin to encounter experience which be not so easy to classify . Mary Datchet have begin this confusion two year ago by burst into laughter at some remark of his , almost the first time they meet . she could not explain why it be . she think he quite astonishingly odd . when he know she well enough to tell she how he spend Monday and Wednesday and Saturday , she be still more amused ; she laugh till he laugh , too , without know why . it seem to she very odd that he should know as much about breed bulldog as any man in England ; that he have a collection of wild flower find near London ; and his weekly visit to old Miss Trotter at Ealing , who be an authority upon the science of Heraldry , never fail to excite her laughter . she want to know everything , even the kind of cake which the old lady supply on these occasion ; and their summer excursion to church in the neighborhood of London for the purpose of take rubbing of the brass become most important festival , from the interest she take in they . in six month she know more about his odd friend and hobby than his own brother and sister know , after live with he all his life ; and Ralph find this very pleasant , though disorder , for his own view of himself have always be profoundly serious . 

 certainly it be very pleasant to be with Mary Datchet and to become , directly the door be shut , quite a different sort of person , eccentric and lovable , with scarcely any likeness to the self most people know . he become less serious , and rather less dictatorial at home , for he be apt to hear Mary laugh at he , and tell he , as she be fond of do , that he know nothing at all about anything . she make he , also , take an interest in public question , for which she have a natural liking ; and be in process of turn he from Tory to Radical , after a course of public meeting , which begin by bore he acutely , and end by excite he even more than they excite she . 

 but he be reserve ; when idea start up in his mind , he divide they automatically into those he could discuss with Mary , and those he must keep for himself . she know this and it interest she , for she be accustom to find young man very ready to talk about themselves , and have come to listen to they as one listen to child , without any thought of herself . but with Ralph , she have very little of this maternal feeling , and , in consequence , a much keener sense of her own individuality . 

 late one afternoon Ralph step along the Strand to an interview with a lawyer upon business . the afternoon light be almost over , and already stream of greenish and yellowish artificial light be be pour into an atmosphere which , in country lane , would now have be soft with the smoke of wood fire ; and on both side of the road the shop window be full of sparkle chain and highly polished leather case , which stand upon shelf make of thick plate - glass . none of these different object be see separately by Denham , but from all of they he draw an impression of stir and cheerfulness . thus it come about that he see Katharine Hilbery come towards he , and look straight at she , as if she be only an illustration of the argument that be go forward in his mind . in this spirit he notice the rather set expression in her eye , and the slight , half - conscious movement of her lip , which , together with her height and the distinction of her dress , make she look as if the scurry crowd impede she , and her direction be different from theirs . he notice this calmly ; but suddenly , as he pass she , his hand and knee begin to tremble , and his heart beat painfully . she do not see he , and go on repeat to herself some line which have stick to her memory : " it be life that matter , nothing but life the process of discover the everlasting and perpetual process , not the discovery itself at all . " thus occupy , she do not see Denham , and he have not the courage to stop she . but immediately the whole scene in the Strand wear that curious look of order and purpose which be impart to the most heterogeneous thing when music sound ; and so pleasant be this impression that he be very glad that he have not stop she , after all . it grow slowly fainter , but last until he stand outside the barrister 's chamber . 

 when his interview with the barrister be over , it be too late to go back to the office . his sight of Katharine have put he queerly out of tune for a domestic evening . where should he go ? to walk through the street of London until he come to Katharine 's house , to look up at the window and fancy she within , seem to he possible for a moment ; and then he reject the plan almost with a blush as , with a curious division of consciousness , one pluck a flower sentimentally and throw it away , with a blush , when it be actually pick . no , he would go and see Mary Datchet . by this time she would be back from her work . 

 to see Ralph appear unexpectedly in her room throw Mary for a second off her balance . she have be clean knife in her little scullery , and when she have let he in she go back again , and turn on the cold - water tap to its full volume , and then turn it off again . " now , " she think to herself , as she screw it tight , " I be not go to let these silly idea come into my head .... do not   you think Mr. Asquith deserve to be hang ? " she call back into the sitting - room , and when she join he , dry her hand , she begin to tell he about the late evasion on the part of the Government with respect to the Women 's Suffrage Bill . Ralph do not want to talk about politic , but he could not help respect Mary for take such an interest in public question . he look at she as she leant forward , poke the fire , and express herself very clearly in phrase which bear distantly the taint of the platform , and he think , " how absurd Mary would think I if she know that I almost make up my mind to walk all the way to Chelsea in order to look at Katharine 's window . she would not   understand it , but I like she very much as she be . " 

 for some time they discuss what the woman have well do ; and as Ralph become genuinely interested in the question , Mary unconsciously let her attention wander , and a great desire come over she to talk to Ralph about her own feeling ; or , at any rate , about something personal , so that she might see what he feel for she ; but she resist this wish . but she could not prevent he from feel her lack of interest in what he be say , and gradually they both become silent . one thought after another come up in Ralph 's mind , but they be all , in some way , connect with Katharine , or with vague feeling of romance and adventure such as she inspire . but he could not talk to Mary about such thought ; and he pity she for know nothing of what he be feel . " here , " he think , " be where we differ from woman ; they have no sense of romance . " 

 " well , Mary , " he say at length , " why do not   you say something amusing ? " 

 his tone be certainly provoke , but , as a general rule , Mary be not easily provoke . this evening , however , she reply rather sharply : 

 " because I have   get nothing amusing to say , I suppose . " 

 Ralph think for a moment , and then remark : 

 " you work too hard . I do not   mean your health , " he add , as she laugh scornfully , " I mean that you seem to I to be get wrap up in your work . " 

 " and be that a bad thing ? " she ask , shade her eye with her hand . 

 " I think it be , " he return abruptly . 

 " but only a week ago you be say the opposite . " her tone be defiant , but she become curiously depressed . Ralph do not perceive it , and take this opportunity of lecture she , and express his late view upon the proper conduct of life . she listen , but her main impression be that he have be meet some one who have influence he . he be tell she that she ought to read more , and to see that there be other point of view as deserve of attention as her own . naturally , have last see he as he leave the office in company with Katharine , she attribute the change to she ; it be likely that Katharine , on leave the scene which she have so clearly despise , have pronounce some such criticism , or suggest it by her own attitude . but she know that Ralph would never admit that he have be influence by anybody . 

 " you do not   read enough , Mary , " he be say . " you ought to read more poetry . " 

 it be true that Mary 's reading have be rather limited to such work as she need to know for the sake of examination ; and her time for read in London be very little . for some reason , no one like to be tell that they do not read enough poetry , but her resentment be only visible in the way she change the position of her hand , and in the fixed look in her eye . and then she think to herself , " I be behave exactly as I say I would not   behave , " whereupon she relax all her muscle and say , in her reasonable way : 

 " tell I what I ought to read , then . " 

 Ralph have unconsciously be irritate by Mary , and he now deliver himself of a few name of great poet which be the text for a discourse upon the imperfection of Mary 's character and way of life . 

 " you live with your inferior , " he say , warm unreasonably , as he know , to his text . " and you get into a groove because , on the whole , it be rather a pleasant groove . and you tend to forget what you be there for . you have   the feminine habit of make much of detail . you do not   see when thing matter and when they do not . and that be what be the ruin of all these organization . that be why the Suffragists have never do anything all these year . what be the point of drawing - room meeting and bazaar ? you want to have idea , Mary ; get hold of something big ; never mind make mistake , but do not   niggle . why do not   you throw it all up for a year , and travel ? see something of the world . do not   be content to live with half a dozen people in a backwater all your life . but you will not , " he conclude . 

 " I have   rather come to that way of think myself about myself , I mean , " say Mary , surprise he by her acquiescence . " I should like to go somewhere far away . " 

 for a moment they be both silent . Ralph then say : 

 " but look here , Mary , you have not   be take this seriously , have you ? " his irritation be spend , and the depression , which she could not keep out of her voice , make he feel suddenly with remorse that he have be hurt she . 

 " you will not   go away , will you ? " he ask . and as she say nothing , he add , " oh no , do not   go away . " 

 " I do not   know exactly what I mean to do , " she reply . she hover on the verge of some discussion of her plan , but she receive no encouragement . he fall into one of his queer silence , which seem to Mary , in spite of all her precaution , to have reference to what she also could not prevent herself from think about their feeling for each other and their relationship . she feel that the two line of thought bore their way in long , parallel tunnel which come very close indeed , but never run into each other . 

 when he have go , and he leave she without break his silence more than be need to wish her good night , she sit on for a time , review what he have say . if love be a devastating fire which melt the whole be into one mountain torrent , Mary be no more in love with Denham than she be in love with her poker or her tong . but probably these extreme passion be very rare , and the state of mind thus depict belong to the very last stage of love , when the power to resist have be eat away , week by week or day by day . like most intelligent people , Mary be something of an egoist , to the extent , that be , of attach great importance to what she feel , and she be by nature enough of a moralist to like to make certain , from time to time , that her feeling be creditable to she . when Ralph leave she she think over her state of mind , and come to the conclusion that it would be a good thing to learn a language say italian or german . she then go to a drawer , which she have to unlock , and take from it certain deeply score manuscript page . she read they through , look up from her reading every now and then and think very intently for a few second about Ralph . she do she good to verify all the quality in he which give rise to emotion in she ; and persuade herself that she account reasonably for they all . then she look back again at her manuscript , and decide that to write grammatical english prose be the hard thing in the world . but she think about herself a great deal more than she think about grammatical english prose or about Ralph Denham , and it may therefore be dispute whether she be in love , or , if so , to which branch of the family her passion belong . 





 CHAPTER XI 

 " it be life that matter , nothing but life the process of discover , the everlasting and perpetual process , " say Katharine , as she pass under the archway , and so into the wide space of King 's Bench Walk , " not the discovery itself at all . " she speak the last word look up at Rodney 's window , which be a semilucent red color , in her honor , as she know . he have ask she to tea with he . but she be in a mood when it be almost physically disagreeable to interrupt the stride of one 's thought , and she walk up and down two or three time under the tree before approach his staircase . she like get hold of some book which neither her father or mother have read , and keep it to herself , and gnaw its content in privacy , and ponder the meaning without share her thought with any one , or have to decide whether the book be a good one or a bad one . this evening she have twist the word of Dostoevsky to suit her mood a fatalistic mood to proclaim that the process of discovery be life , and that , presumably , the nature of one 's goal matter not at all . she sit down for a moment upon one of the seat ; feel herself carry along in the swirl of many thing ; decide , in her sudden way , that it be time to heave all this thinking overboard , and rise , leave a fishmonger 's basket on the seat behind she . two minute later her rap sound with authority upon Rodney 's door . 

 " well , William , " she say , " I be afraid I be late . " 

 it be true , but he be so glad to see she that he forget his annoyance . he have be occupy for over an hour in make thing ready for she , and he now have his reward in see she look right and leave , as she slip her cloak from her shoulder , with evident satisfaction , although she say nothing . he have see that the fire burn well ; jam - pot be on the table , tin cover shine in the fender , and the shabby comfort of the room be extreme . he be dress in his old crimson dressing - gown , which be fade irregularly , and have bright new patch on it , like the pale grass which one find on lift a stone . he make the tea , and Katharine draw off her glove , and cross her leg with a gesture that be rather masculine in its ease . nor do they talk much until they be smoke cigarette over the fire , have place their teacup upon the floor between they . 

 they have not meet since they have exchange letter about their relationship . Katharine 's answer to his protestation have be short and sensible . half a sheet of notepaper contain the whole of it , for she merely have to say that she be not in love with he , and so could not marry he , but their friendship would continue , she hop , unchanged . she have add a postscript in which she state , " I like your sonnet very much . " 

 so far as William be concern , this appearance of ease be assume . three time that afternoon he have dress himself in a tail - coat , and three time he have discard it for an old dressing - gown ; three time he have place his pearl tie - pin in position , and three time he have remove it again , the little look - glass in his room be the witness of these change of mind . the question be , which would Katharine prefer on this particular afternoon in December ? he read her note once more , and the postscript about the sonnet settle the matter . evidently she admire most the poet in he ; and as this , on the whole , agree with his own opinion , he decide to err , if anything , on the side of shabbiness . his demeanor be also regulate with premeditation ; he speak little , and only on impersonal matter ; he wish she to realize that in visit he for the first time alone she be do nothing remarkable , although , in fact , that be a point about which he be not at all sure . 

 certainly Katharine seem quite unmove by any disturbing thought ; and if he have be completely master of himself , he might , indeed , have complain that she be a trifle absent - minded . the ease , the familiarity of the situation alone with Rodney , among teacup and candle , have more effect upon she than be apparent . she ask to look at his book , and then at his picture . it be while she hold photograph from the Greek in her hand that she exclaim , impulsively , if incongruously : 

 " my oyster ! I have a basket , " she explain , " and I have   leave it somewhere . Uncle Dudley din with we to - night . what in the world have I do with they ? " 

 she rise and begin to wander about the room . William rise also , and stand in front of the fire , muttering , " oyster , oyster your basket of oyster ! " but though he look vaguely here and there , as if the oyster might be on the top of the bookshelf , his eye return always to Katharine . she draw the curtain and look out among the scanty leaf of the plane - tree . 

 " I have they , " she calculate , " in the Strand ; I sit on a seat . well , never mind , " she conclude , turn back into the room abruptly , " I dare say some old creature be enjoy they by this time . " 

 " I should have think that you never forgot anything , " William remark , as they settle down again . 

 " that be part of the myth about I , I know , " Katharine reply . 

 " and I wonder , " William proceed , with some caution , " what the truth about you be ? but I know this sort of thing do not   interest you , " he add hastily , with a touch of peevishness . 

 " no ; it do not   interest I very much , " she reply candidly . 

 " what shall we talk about then ? " he ask . 

 she look rather whimsically round the wall of the room . 

 " however we start , we end by talk about the same thing about poetry , I mean . I wonder if you realize , William , that I have   never read even Shakespeare ? it be rather wonderful how I have   keep it up all these year . " 

 " you have   keep it up for ten year very beautifully , as far as I be concern , " he say . 

 " ten year ? so long as that ? " 

 " and I do not   think it be always bored you , " he add . 

 she look into the fire silently . she could not deny that the surface of her feeling be absolutely unruffled by anything in William 's character ; on the contrary , she feel certain that she could deal with whatever turn up . he give her peace , in which she could think of thing that be far removed from what they talk about . even now , when he sit within a yard of she , how easily her mind range hither and thither ! suddenly a picture present itself before she , without any effort on her part as picture will , of herself in these very room ; she have come in from a lecture , and she hold a pile of book in her hand , scientific book , and book about mathematic and astronomy which she have master . she put they down on the table over there . it be a picture pluck from her life two or three year hence , when she be married to William ; but here she check herself abruptly . 

 she could not entirely forget William 's presence , because , in spite of his effort to control himself , his nervousness be apparent . on such occasion his eye protrude more than ever , and his face have more than ever the appearance of be cover with a thin crackling skin , through which every flush of his volatile blood show itself instantly . by this time he have shape so many sentence and reject they , feel so many impulse and subdue they , that he be a uniform scarlet . 

 " you may say you do not   read book , " he remark , " but , all the same , you know about they . besides , who want you to be learn ? leave that to the poor devil who have   get nothing well to do . you you ahem ! " 

 " well , then , why do not   you read I something before I go ? " say Katharine , look at her watch . 

 " Katharine , you have   only just come ! let I see now , what have I get to show you ? " he rise , and stir about the paper on his table , as if in doubt ; he then pick up a manuscript , and after spread it smoothly upon his knee , he look up at Katharine suspiciously . he catch her smile . 

 " I believe you only ask I to read out of kindness , " he burst out . " let us find something else to talk about . who have you be see ? " 

 " I do not   generally ask thing out of kindness , " Katharine observe ; " however , if you do not   want to read , you need not . " 

 William give a queer snort of exasperation , and open his manuscript once more , though he keep his eye upon her face as he do so . no face could have be graver or more judicial . 

 " one can trust you , certainly , to say unpleasant thing , " he say , smooth out the page , clear his throat , and read half a stanza to himself . " Ahem ! the Princess be lose in the wood , and she hear the sound of a horn .   this would all be very pretty on the stage , but I can not   get the effect here .   anyhow , Sylvano enter , accompany by the rest of the gentleman of Gratian 's court . I begin where he soliloquize . " he jerk his head and begin to read . 

 although Katharine have just disclaim any knowledge of literature , she listen attentively . at least , she listen to the first twenty - five line attentively , and then she frown . her attention be only arouse again when Rodney raise his finger a sign , she know , that the meter be about to change . 

 his theory be that every mood have its meter . his mastery of meter be very great ; and , if the beauty of a drama depend upon the variety of measure in which the personage speak , Rodney 's play must have challenge the work of Shakespeare . Katharine 's ignorance of Shakespeare do not prevent she from feel fairly certain that play should not produce a sense of chill stupor in the audience , such as overcome she as the line flow on , sometimes long and sometimes short , but always deliver with the same lilt of voice , which seem to nail each line firmly on to the same spot in the hearer 's brain . still , she reflect , these sort of skill be almost exclusively masculine ; woman neither practice they nor know how to value they ; and one 's husband 's proficiency in this direction might legitimately increase one 's respect for he , since mystification be no bad basis for respect . no one could doubt that William be a scholar . the reading end with the finish of the Act ; Katharine have prepare a little speech . 

 " that seem to I extremely well write , William ; although , of course , I do not   know enough to criticize in detail . " 

 " but it be the skill that strike you not the emotion ? " 

 " in a fragment like that , of course , the skill strike one most . " 

 " but perhaps have you time to listen to one more short piece ? the scene between the lover ? there be some real feeling in that , I think . Denham agree that it be the good thing I have   do . " 

 " you have   read it to Ralph Denham ? " Katharine inquire , with surprise . " he be a well judge than I be . what do he say ? " 

 " my dear Katharine , " Rodney exclaim , " I do not   ask you for criticism , as I should ask a scholar . I dare say there be only five man in England whose opinion of my work matter a straw to I . but I trust you where feeling be concern . I have you in my mind often when I be write those scene . I keep ask myself , ' now be this the sort of thing Katharine would like ? ' I always think of you when I be write , Katharine , even when it be the sort of thing you would not   know about . and I would rather yes , I really believe I would rather you think well of my writing than any one in the world . " 

 this be so genuine a tribute to his trust in she that Katharine be touch . 

 " you think too much of I altogether , William , " she say , forget that she have not mean to speak in this way . 

 " no , Katharine , I do not , " he reply , replace his manuscript in the drawer . " it do I good to think of you . " 

 so quiet an answer , follow as it be by no expression of love , but merely by the statement that if she must go he would take she to the Strand , and would , if she could wait a moment , change his dressing - gown for a coat , move she to the warm feeling of affection for he that she have yet experience . while he change in the next room , she stand by the bookcase , take down book and open they , but read nothing on their page . 

 she feel certain that she would marry Rodney . how could one avoid it ? how could one find fault with it ? here she sigh , and , put the thought of marriage away , fall into a dream state , in which she become another person , and the whole world seem change . be a frequent visitor to that world , she could find her way there unhesitatingly . if she have try to analyze her impression , she would have say that there dwelt the reality of the appearance which figure in our world ; so direct , powerful , and unimpeded be her sensation there , compare with those call forth in actual life . there dwelt the thing one might have feel , have there be cause ; the perfect happiness of which here we taste the fragment ; the beauty see here in fly glimpse only . no doubt much of the furniture of this world be draw directly from the past , and even from the England of the Elizabethan age . however the embellishment of this imaginary world might change , two quality be constant in it . it be a place where feeling be liberate from the constraint which the real world put upon they ; and the process of awakenment be always mark by resignation and a kind of stoical acceptance of fact . she meet no acquaintance there , as Denham do , miraculously transfigure ; she play no heroic part . but there certainly she love some magnanimous hero , and as they sweep together among the leaf - hang tree of an unknown world , they share the feeling which come fresh and fast as the wave on the shore . but the sand of her liberation be run fast ; even through the forest branch come sound of Rodney move thing on his dressing - table ; and Katharine wake herself from this excursion by shut the cover of the book she be hold , and replace it in the bookshelf . 

 " William , " she say , speak rather faintly at first , like one send a voice from sleep to reach the living . " William , " she repeat firmly , " if you still want I to marry you , I will . " 

 perhaps it be that no man could expect to have the most momentous question of his life settle in a voice so level , so toneless , so devoid of joy or energy . at any rate William make no answer . she wait stoically . a moment later he step briskly from his dressing - room , and observe that if she want to buy more oyster he think he know where they could find a fishmonger 's shop still open . she breathe deeply a sigh of relief . 

 extract from a letter send a few day later by Mrs. Hilbery to her sister - in - law , Mrs. Milvain : 

 " ... how stupid of I to forget the name in my telegram . such a nice , rich , english name , too , and , in addition , he have all the grace of intellect ; he have read literally EVERYTHING . I tell Katharine , I shall always put he on my right side at dinner , so as to have he by I when people begin talk about character in Shakespeare . they will not   be rich , but they will be very , very happy . I be sit in my room late one night , feel that nothing nice would ever happen to I again , when I hear Katharine outside in the passage , and I think to myself , ' shall I call she in ? ' and then I think   in that hopeless , dreary way one do think , with the fire go out and one 's birthday just over , ' why should I lay my trouble on she ? ' but my little self - control have its reward , for next moment she tap at the door and come in , and sit on the rug , and though we neither of we say anything , I feel so happy all of a second that I could not   help cry , ' oh , Katharine , when you come to my age , how I hope you will have a daughter , too ! ' you know how silent Katharine be . she be so silent , for such a long time , that in my foolish , nervous state I dread something , I do not   quite know what . and then she tell I how , after all , she have make up her mind . she have write . she expect he to - morrow . at first I be not   glad at all . I do not   want she to marry any one ; but when she say , ' it will make no difference . I shall always care for you and father most , ' then I see how selfish I be , and I tell she she must give he everything , everything , everything ! I tell she I should be thankful to come second . but why , when everything be turn out just as one always hop it would turn out , why then can one do nothing but cry , nothing but feel a desolate old woman whose life be be a failure , and now be nearly over , and age be so cruel ? but Katharine say to I , ' I be happy . I be very happy . ' and then I think , though it all seem so desperately dismal at the time , Katharine have say she be happy , and I should have a son , and it would all turn out so much more wonderfully than I could possibly imagine , for though the sermon do not   say so , I do believe the world be mean for we to be happy in . she tell I that they would live quite near we , and see we every day ; and she would go on with the Life , and we should finish it as we have mean to . and , after all , it would be far more horrid if she do not   marry or suppose she marry some one we could not   endure ? suppose she have fall in love with some one who be marry already ? 

 " and though one never think any one good enough for the people one 's fond of , he have the kind , true instinct , I be sure , and though he seem nervous and his manner be not command , I only think these thing because it be Katharine . and now I have   write this , it come over I that , of course , all the time , Katharine have what he have not . she do command , she be not   nervous ; it come naturally to she to rule and control . it be time that she should give all this to some one who will need she when we be not   there , save in our spirit , for whatever people say , I be sure I shall come back to this wonderful world where one be be so happy and so miserable , where , even now , I seem to see myself stretch out my hand for another present from the great Fairy Tree whose bough be still hang with enchanting toy , though they be rare now , perhaps , and between the branch one see no long the blue sky , but the star and the top of the mountain . 

 " one do not   know any more , do one ? one have not   any advice to give one 's child . one can only hope that they will have the same vision and the same power to believe , without which life would be so meaningless . that be what I ask for Katharine and her husband . " 





 CHAPTER XII 

 " be Mr. Hilbery at home , or Mrs. Hilbery ? " Denham ask , of the parlor - maid in Chelsea , a week later . 

 " no , sir . but Miss Hilbery be at home , " the girl answer . 

 Ralph have anticipate many answer , but not this one , and now it be unexpectedly make plain to he that it be the chance of see Katharine that have bring he all the way to Chelsea on pretence of see her father . 

 he make some show of consider the matter , and be take upstairs to the drawing - room . as upon that first occasion , some week ago , the door close as if it be a thousand door softly exclude the world ; and once more Ralph receive an impression of a room full of deep shadow , firelight , unwavere silver candle flame , and empty space to be cross before reach the round table in the middle of the room , with its frail burden of silver tray and china teacup . but this time Katharine be there by herself ; the volume in her hand show that she expect no visitor . 

 Ralph say something about hop to find her father . 

 " my father be out , " she reply . " but if you can wait , I expect he soon . " 

 it might have be due merely to politeness , but Ralph feel that she receive he almost with cordiality . perhaps she be bore by drink tea and read a book all alone ; at any rate , she toss the book on to a sofa with a gesture of relief . 

 " be that one of the modern whom you despise ? " he ask , smile at the carelessness of her gesture . 

 " yes , " she reply . " I think even you would despise he . " 

 " even I ? " he repeat . " why even I ? " 

 " you say you like modern thing ; I say I hat they . " 

 this be not a very accurate report of their conversation among the relic , perhaps , but Ralph be flatter to think that she remember anything about it . 

 " or do I confess that I hat all book ? " she go on , see he look up with an air of inquiry . " I forget " 

 " do you hate all book ? " he ask . 

 " it would be absurd to say that I hate all book when I have   only read ten , perhaps ; but ' here she pull herself up short . 

 " well ? " 

 " yes , I do hate book , " she continue . " why do you want to be for ever talk about your feeling ? that be what I can not   make out . and poetry be all about feeling novel be all about feeling . " 

 she cut a cake vigorously into slice , and provide a tray with bread and butter for Mrs. Hilbery , who be in her room with a cold , she rise to go upstairs . 

 Ralph hold the door open for she , and then stand with clasped hand in the middle of the room . his eye be bright , and , indeed , he scarcely know whether they behold dream or reality . all down the street and on the doorstep , and while he mount the stair , his dream of Katharine possess he ; on the threshold of the room he have dismiss it , in order to prevent too painful a collision between what he dream of she and what she be . and in five minute she have fill the shell of the old dream with the flesh of life ; look with fire out of phantom eye . he glance about he with bewilderment at find himself among her chair and table ; they be solid , for he grasp the back of the chair in which Katharine have sit ; and yet they be unreal ; the atmosphere be that of a dream . he summon all the faculty of his spirit to seize what the minute have to give he ; and from the depth of his mind there rise unchecked a joyful recognition of the truth that human nature surpasse , in its beauty , all that our wild dream bring we hint of . 

 Katharine come into the room a moment later . he stand watch she come towards he , and think she more beautiful and strange than his dream of she ; for the real Katharine could speak the word which seem to crowd behind the forehead and in the depth of the eye , and the commonest sentence would be flash on by this immortal light . and she overflow the edge of the dream ; he remark that her softness be like that of some vast snowy owl ; she wear a ruby on her finger . 

 " my mother want I to tell you , " she say , " that she hop you have begin your poem . she say every one ought to write poetry .... all my relation write poetry , " she go on . " I can not   bear to think of it sometimes because , of course , it be none of it any good . but then one need not   read it " 

 " you do not   encourage I to write a poem , " say Ralph . 

 " but you be not a poet , too , be you ? " she inquire , turn upon he with a laugh . 

 " should I tell you if I be ? " 

 " yes . because I think you speak the truth , " she say , search he for proof of this apparently , with eye now almost impersonally direct . it would be easy , Ralph thought , to worship one so far remove , and yet of so straight a nature ; easy to submit recklessly to she , without thought of future pain . 

 " be you a poet ? " she demand . he feel that her question have an unexplained weight of mean behind it , as if she seek an answer to a question that she do not ask . 

 " no . I have not   write any poetry for year , " he reply . " but all the same , I do not   agree with you . I think it be the only thing worth do . " 

 " why do you say that ? " she ask , almost with impatience , tap her spoon two or three time against the side of her cup . 

 " why ? " Ralph lay hand on the first word that come to mind . " because , I suppose , it keep an ideal alive which might die otherwise . " 

 a curious change come over her face , as if the flame of her mind be subdue ; and she look at he ironically and with the expression which he have call sad before , for want of a well name for it . 

 " I do not   know that there be much sense in have ideal , " she say . 

 " but you have they , " he reply energetically . " why do we call they ideal ? it be a stupid word . dream , I mean " 

 she follow his word with part lip , as though to answer eagerly when he have do ; but as he say , " dream , I mean , " the door of the drawing - room swung open , and so remain for a perceptible instant . they both hold themselves silent , her lip still part . 

 far off , they hear the rustle of skirt . then the owner of the skirt appear in the doorway , which she almost fill , nearly conceal the figure of a very much small lady who accompany she . 

 " my aunt ! " Katharine murmur , under her breath . her tone have a hint of tragedy in it , but no less , Ralph thought , than the situation require . she address the large lady as Aunt Millicent ; the small be Aunt Celia , Mrs. Milvain , who have lately undertake the task of marry Cyril to his wife . both lady , but Mrs. Cosham   Aunt Millicent   in particular , have that look of heighten , smooth , incarnadine existence which be proper to elderly lady pay call in London about five o'clock in the afternoon . portrait by Romney , see through glass , have something of their pink , mellow look , their blooming softness , as of apricot hang upon a red wall in the afternoon sun . Mrs. Cosham be so appareled with hang muff , chain , and swing drapery that it be impossible to detect the shape of a human being in the mass of brown and black which fill the arm - chair . Mrs. Milvain be a much slighter figure ; but the same doubt as to the precise line of her contour fill Ralph , as he regard they , with dismal foreboding . what remark of his would ever reach these fabulous and fantastic character ? for there be something fantastically unreal in the curious swaying and nodding of Mrs. Cosham , as if her equipment include a large wire spring . her voice have a high - pitch , coo note , which prolong word and cut they short until the english language seem no long fit for common purpose . in a moment of nervousness , so Ralph thought , Katharine have turn on innumerable electric light . but Mrs. Cosham have gain impetus   perhaps her sway movement have that end in view   for sustained speech ; and she now address Ralph deliberately and elaborately . 

 " I come from Woking , Mr. Popham . you may well ask I , why Woking ? and to that I answer , for perhaps the hundredth time , because of the sunset . we go there for the sunset , but that be five - and - twenty year ago . where be the sunset now ? alas ! there be no sunset now near than the South Coast . " her rich and romantic note be accompany by a wave of a long white hand , which , when wave , give off a flash of diamond , ruby , and emerald . Ralph wonder whether she more resemble an elephant , with a jewel head - dress , or a superb cockatoo , balance insecurely upon its perch , and peck capriciously at a lump of sugar . 

 " where be the sunset now ? " she repeat . " do you find sunset now , Mr. Popham ? " 

 " I live at Highgate , " he reply . 

 " at Highgate ? yes , Highgate have its charm ; your Uncle John live at Highgate , " she jerk in the direction of Katharine . she sink her head upon her breast , as if for a moment 's meditation , which past , she look up and observe : " I dare say there be very pretty lane in Highgate . I can recollect walk with your mother , Katharine , through lane blossom with wild hawthorn . but where be the hawthorn now ? you remember that exquisite description in De Quincey , Mr. Popham ? but I forget , you , in your generation , with all your activity and enlightenment , at which I can only marvel " here she display both her beautiful white hand " do not read De Quincey . you have your Belloc , your Chesterton , your Bernard Shaw why should you read De Quincey ? " 

 " but I do read De Quincey , " Ralph protest , " more than Belloc and Chesterton , anyhow . " 

 " indeed ! " exclaim Mrs. Cosham , with a gesture of surprise and relief mingle . " you be , then , a ' rara avis ' in your generation . I be delighted to meet anyone who read De Quincey . " 

 here she hollow her hand into a screen , and , lean towards Katharine , inquire , in a very audible whisper , " do your friend WRITE ? " 

 " Mr. Denham , " say Katharine , with more than her usual clearness and firmness , " write for the Review . he be a lawyer . " 

 " the clean - shaven lip , show the expression of the mouth ! I recognize they at once . I always feel at home with lawyer , Mr. Denham " 

 " they use to come about so much in the old day , " Mrs. Milvain interpose , the frail , silvery note of her voice fall with the sweet tone of an old bell . 

 " you say you live at Highgate , " she continue . " I wonder whether you happen to know if there be an old house call Tempest Lodge still in existence an old white house in a garden ? " 

 Ralph shake his head , and she sigh . 

 " ah , no ; it must have be pull down by this time , with all the other old house . there be such pretty lane in those day . that be how your uncle meet your Aunt Emily , you know , " she address Katharine . " they walk home through the lane . " 

 " a sprig of May in her bonnet , " Mrs. Cosham ejaculate , reminiscently . 

 " and next Sunday he have violet in his buttonhole . and that be how we guess . " 

 Katharine laugh . she look at Ralph . his eye be meditative , and she wonder what he find in this old gossip to make he ponder so contentedly . she feel , she hardly know why , a curious pity for he . 

 " Uncle John yes , ' poor John , ' you always call he . why be that ? " she ask , to make they go on talking , which , indeed , they need little invitation to do . 

 " that be what his father , old Sir Richard , always call he . Poor John , or the fool of the family , " Mrs. Milvain hasten to inform they . " the other boy be so brilliant , and he could never pass his examination , so they send he to India a long voyage in those day , poor fellow . you have your own room , you know , and you do it up . but he will get his knighthood and a pension , I believe , " she say , turn to Ralph , " only it be not England . " 

 " no , " Mrs. Cosham confirm she , " it be not England . in those day we think an Indian Judgeship about equal to a county - court judgeship at home . his Honor a pretty title , but still , not at the top of the tree . however , " she sigh , " if you have a wife and seven child , and people nowadays very quickly forget your father 's name well , you have to take what you can get , " she conclude . 

 " and I fancy , " Mrs. Milvain resume , lower her voice rather confidentially , " that John would have do more if it have not   be for his wife , your Aunt Emily . she be a very good woman , devote to he , of course , but she be not ambitious for he , and if a wife be not   ambitious for her husband , especially in a profession like the law , client soon get to know of it . in our young day , Mr. Denham , we use to say that we know which of our friend would become judge , by look at the girl they marry . and so it be , and so , I fancy , it always will be . I do not   think , " she add , sum up these scatter remark , " that any man be really happy unless he succeed in his profession . " 

 Mrs. Cosham approve of this sentiment with more ponderous sagacity from her side of the tea - table , in the first place by sway her head , and in the second by remark : 

 " no , man be not the same as woman . I fancy Alfred Tennyson speak the truth about that as about many other thing . how I wish he have live to write ' the Prince ' a sequel to ' the Princess ' ! I confess I be almost tired of Princesses . we want some one to show we what a good man can be . we have Laura and Beatrice , Antigone and Cordelia , but we have no heroic man . how do you , as a poet , account for that , Mr. Denham ? " 

 " I be not a poet , " say Ralph good - humoredly . " I be only a solicitor . " 

 " but you write , too ? " Mrs. Cosham demand , afraid lest she should be balk of her priceless discovery , a young man truly devoted to literature . 

 " in my spare time , " Denham reassure she . 

 " in your spare time ! " Mrs. Cosham echo . " that be a proof of devotion , indeed . " she half close her eye , and indulge herself in a fascinating picture of a briefless barrister lodge in a garret , write immortal novel by the light of a farthing dip . but the romance which fall upon the figure of great writer and illumine their page be no false radiance in her case . she carry her pocket shakespeare about with she , and meet life fortify by the word of the poet . how far she see Denham , and how far she confuse he with some hero of fiction , it would be hard to say . literature have take possession even of her memory . she be match he , presumably , with certain character in the old novel , for she come out , after a pause , with : 

 " um um Pendennis Warrington I could never forgive Laura , " she pronounce energetically , " for not marry George , in spite of everything . George Eliot do the very same thing ; and Lewes be a little frog - face man , with the manner of a dancing master . but Warrington , now , have everything in his favor ; intellect , passion , romance , distinction , and the connection be a mere piece of undergraduate folly . Arthur , I confess , have always seem to I a bit of a fop ; I can not   imagine how Laura marry he . but you say you be a solicitor , Mr. Denham . now there be one or two thing I should like to ask you about Shakespeare " she draw out her small , wear volume with some difficulty , open it , and shake it in the air . " they say , nowadays , that Shakespeare be a lawyer . they say , that account for his knowledge of human nature . there be a fine example for you , Mr. Denham . study your client , young man , and the world will be the rich one of these day , I have no doubt . tell I , how do we come out of it , now ; well or bad than you expect ? " 

 thus call upon to sum up the worth of human nature in a few word , Ralph answer unhesitatingly : 

 " bad , Mrs. Cosham , a good deal bad . I be afraid the ordinary man be a bit of a rascal " 

 " and the ordinary woman ? " 

 " no , I do not   like the ordinary woman either " 

 " ah , dear I , I have   no doubt that be very true , very true . " Mrs. Cosham sigh . " Swift would have agree with you , anyhow " she look at he , and think that there be sign of distinct power in his brow . he would do well , she think , to devote himself to satire . 

 " Charles Lavington , you remember , be a solicitor , " Mrs. Milvain interpose , rather resent the waste of time involve in talk about fictitious people when you might be talk about real people . " but you would not   remember he , Katharine . " 

 " Mr. Lavington ? oh , yes , I do , " say Katharine , wake from other thought with her little start . " the summer we have a house near Tenby . I remember the field and the pond with the tadpole , and make haystack with Mr. Lavington . " 

 " she be right . there be a pond with tadpole , " Mrs. Cosham corroborate . " Millais make study of it for ' Ophelia . ' some say that be the good picture he ever paint " 

 " and I remember the dog chain up in the yard , and the dead snake hang in the toolhouse . " 

 " it be at Tenby that you be chase by the bull , " Mrs. Milvain continue . " but that you could not   remember , though it be true you be a wonderful child . such eye she have , Mr. Denham ! I use to say to her father , ' she be watch we , and sum we all up in her little mind . ' and they have a nurse in those day , " she go on , tell her story with charming solemnity to Ralph , " who be a good woman , but engage to a sailor . when she ought to have be attend to the baby , her eye be on the sea . and Mrs. Hilbery allow this girl Susan her name be to have he to stay in the village . they abuse her goodness , I be sorry to say , and while they walk in the lane , they stand the perambulator alone in a field where there be a bull . the animal become enrage by the red blanket in the perambulator , and Heaven know what might have happen if a gentleman have not be walk by in the nick of time , and rescue Katharine in his arm ! " 

 " I think the bull be only a cow , Aunt Celia , " say Katharine . 

 " my darling , it be a great red Devonshire bull , and not long after it gore a man to death and have to be destroy . and your mother forgave Susan a thing I could never have do . " 

 " Maggie 's sympathy be entirely with Susan and the sailor , I be sure , " say Mrs. Cosham , rather tartly . " my sister - in - law , " she continue , " have lay her burden upon Providence at every crisis in her life , and Providence , I must confess , have respond nobly , so far " 

 " yes , " say Katharine , with a laugh , for she like the rashness which irritate the rest of the family . " my mother 's bull always turn into cow at the critical moment . " 

 " well , " say Mrs. Milvain , " I be glad you have some one to protect you from bull now . " 

 " I can not   imagine William protect any one from bull , " say Katharine . 

 it happen that Mrs. Cosham have once more produce her pocket volume of Shakespeare , and be consult Ralph upon an obscure passage in " measure for measure . " he do not at once seize the meaning of what Katharine and her aunt be say ; William , he suppose , refer to some small cousin , for he now see Katharine as a child in a pinafore ; but , nevertheless , he be so much distracted that his eye could hardly follow the word on the paper . a moment later he hear they speak distinctly of an engagement ring . 

 " I like ruby , " he hear Katharine say . 

  " to be imprison'd in the viewless wind , 
  and blow with restless violence round about 
  the pendant world .... " 
 Mrs. Cosham intone ; at the same instant " Rodney " fit itself to " William " in Ralph 's mind . he feel convinced that Katharine be engage to Rodney . his first sensation be one of violent rage with she for have deceive he throughout the visit , feed he with pleasant old wife ' tale , let he see she as a child play in a meadow , share her youth with he , while all the time she be a stranger entirely , and engage to marry Rodney . 

 but be it possible ? surely it be not possible . for in his eye she be still a child . he pause so long over the book that Mrs. Cosham have time to look over his shoulder and ask her niece : 

 " and have you settle upon a house yet , Katharine ? " 

 this convince he of the truth of the monstrous idea . he look up at once and say : 

 " yes , it be a difficult passage . " 

 his voice have change so much , he speak with such curtness and even with such contempt , that Mrs. Cosham look at he fairly puzzle . happily she belong to a generation which expect uncouthness in its man , and she merely feel convinced that this Mr. Denham be very , very clever . she take back her Shakespeare , as Denham seem to have no more to say , and secrete it once more about her person with the infinitely pathetic resignation of the old . 

 " Katharine 's engaged to William Rodney , " she say , by way of fill in the pause ; " a very old friend of ours . he have a wonderful knowledge of literature , too wonderful . " she nod her head rather vaguely . " you should meet each other . " 

 Denham 's one wish be to leave the house as soon as he could ; but the elderly lady have rise , and be propose to visit Mrs. Hilbery in her bedroom , so that any move on his part be impossible . at the same time , he wish to say something , but he know not what , to Katharine alone . she take her aunt upstairs , and return , come towards he once more with an air of innocence and friendliness that amaze he . 

 " my father will be back , " she say . " will not   you sit down ? " and she laugh , as if now they might share a perfectly friendly laugh at the tea - party . 

 but Ralph make no attempt to seat himself . 

 " I must congratulate you , " he say . " it be news to I . " he see her face change , but only to become graver than before . 

 " my engagement ? " she ask . " yes , I be go to marry William Rodney . " 

 Ralph remain stand with his hand on the back of a chair in absolute silence . abyss seem to plunge into darkness between they . he look at she , but her face show that she be not think of he . no regret or consciousness of wrong disturb she . 

 " well , I must go , " he say at length . 

 she seem about to say something , then change her mind and say merely : 

 " you will come again , I hope . we always seem " she hesitate " to be interrupt . " 

 he bow and leave the room . 

 Ralph strode with extreme swiftness along the Embankment . every muscle be taut and brace as if to resist some sudden attack from outside . for the moment it seem as if the attack be about to be direct against his body , and his brain thus be on the alert , but without understanding . find himself , after a few minute , no long under observation , and no attack deliver , he slacken his pace , the pain spread all through he , take possession of every governing seat , and meet with scarcely any resistance from power exhaust by their first effort at defence . he take his way languidly along the river embankment , away from home rather than towards it . the world have he at its mercy . he make no pattern out of the sight he see . he feel himself now , as he have often fancy other people , adrift on the stream , and far remove from control of it , a man with no grasp upon circumstance any long . old battered man loaf at the door of public - house now seem to be his fellow , and he feel , as he suppose they to feel , a mingling of envy and hatred towards those who pass quickly and certainly to a goal of their own . they , too , see thing very thin and shadowy , and be waft about by the light breath of wind . for the substantial world , with its prospect of avenue lead on and on to the invisible distance , have slip from he , since Katharine be engage . now all his life be visible , and the straight , meager path have its ending soon enough . Katharine be engage , and she have deceive he , too . he feel for corner of his be untouched by his disaster ; but there be no limit to the flood of damage ; not one of his possession be safe now . Katharine have deceive he ; she have mix herself with every thought of his , and reft of she they seem false thought which he would blush to think again . his life seem immeasurably impoverish . 

 he sit himself down , in spite of the chilly fog which obscure the farth bank and leave its light suspend upon a blank surface , upon one of the riverside seat , and let the tide of disillusionment sweep through he . for the time be all bright point in his life be blot out ; all prominence level . at first he make himself believe that Katharine have treat he badly , and draw comfort from the thought that , leave alone , she would recollect this , and think of he and tender he , in silence , at any rate , an apology . but this grain of comfort fail he after a second or two , for , upon reflection , he have to admit that Katharine owe he nothing . Katharine have promise nothing , take nothing ; to she his dream have mean nothing . this , indeed , be the low pitch of his despair . if the good of one 's feeling mean nothing to the person most concerned in those feeling , what reality be leave we ? the old romance which have warm his day for he , the thought of Katharine which have paint every hour , be now make to appear foolish and enfeeble . he rise , and look into the river , whose swift race of dun - color water seem the very spirit of futility and oblivion . 

 " in what can one trust , then ? " he think , as he leant there . so feeble and insubstantial do he feel himself that he repeat the word aloud . 

 " in what can one trust ? not in man and woman . not in one 's dream about they . there be nothing nothing , nothing leave at all . " 

 now Denham have reason to know that he could bring to birth and keep alive a fine anger when he choose . Rodney provide a good target for that emotion . and yet at the moment , Rodney and Katharine herself seem disembodied ghost . he could scarcely remember the look of they . his mind plunge lower and low . their marriage seem of no importance to he . all thing have turn to ghost ; the whole mass of the world be insubstantial vapor , surround the solitary spark in his mind , whose burning point he could remember , for it burn no more . he have once cherish a belief , and Katharine have embody this belief , and she do so no long . he do not blame she ; he blame nothing , nobody ; he see the truth . he see the dun - color race of water and the blank shore . but life be vigorous ; the body live , and the body , no doubt , dictate the reflection , which now urge he to movement , that one may cast away the form of human being , and yet retain the passion which seem inseparable from their existence in the flesh . now this passion burn on his horizon , as the winter sun make a greenish pane in the west through thin cloud . his eye be set on something infinitely far and remote ; by that light he feel he could walk , and would , in future , have to find his way . but that be all there be leave to he of a populous and teem world . 





 CHAPTER XIII 

 the lunch hour in the office be only partly spend by Denham in the consumption of food . whether fine or wet , he pass most of it pace the gravel path in Lincoln 's Inn Fields . the child get to know his figure , and the sparrow expect their daily scattering of bread - crumb . no doubt , since he often give a copper and almost always a handful of bread , he be not as blind to his surrounding as he think himself . 

 he think that these winter day be spend in long hour before white paper radiant in electric light ; and in short passage through fog - dim street . when he come back to his work after lunch he carry in his head a picture of the Strand , scatter with omnibus , and of the purple shape of leaf press flat upon the gravel , as if his eye have always be bent upon the ground . his brain work incessantly , but his thought be attend with so little joy that he do not willingly recall it ; but drive ahead , now in this direction , now in that ; and come home laden with dark book borrow from a library . 

 Mary Datchet , come from the Strand at lunch - time , see he one day take his turn , closely button in an overcoat , and so lose in thought that he might have be sit in his own room . 

 she be overcome by something very like awe by the sight of he ; then she feel much inclined to laugh , although her pulse beat fast . she pass he , and he never see she . she come back and touch he on the shoulder . 

 " gracious , Mary ! " he exclaim . " how you startle I ! " 

 " yes . you look as if you be walk in your sleep , " she say . " be you arrange some terrible love affair ? have you get to reconcile a desperate couple ? " 

 " I be not   think about my work , " Ralph reply , rather hastily . " and , besides , that sort of thing be not in my line , " he add , rather grimly . 

 the morning be fine , and they have still some minute of leisure to spend . they have not meet for two or three week , and Mary have much to say to Ralph ; but she be not certain how far he wish for her company . however , after a turn or two , in which a few fact be communicate , he suggest sit down , and she take the seat beside he . the sparrow come flutter about they , and Ralph produce from his pocket the half of a roll save from his luncheon . he throw a few crumb among they . 

 " I have   never see sparrow so tame , " Mary observe , by way of say something . 

 " no , " say Ralph . " the sparrow in Hyde Park be not   as tame as this . if we keep perfectly still , I will get one to settle on my arm . " 

 Mary feel that she could have forgo this display of animal good temper , but see that Ralph , for some curious reason , take a pride in the sparrow , she bet he sixpence that he would not succeed . 

 " do ! " he say ; and his eye , which have be gloomy , show a spark of light . his conversation be now address entirely to a bald cock - sparrow , who seem bold than the rest ; and Mary take the opportunity of look at he . she be not satisfied ; his face be wear , and his expression stern . a child come bowl its hoop through the concourse of bird , and Ralph throw his last crumb of bread into the bush with a snort of impatience . 

 " that be what always happen just as I have   almost get he , " he say . " here be your sixpence , Mary . but you have   only get it thank to that brute of a boy . they ought not   to be allow to bowl hoop here " 

 " ought not   to be allow to bowl hoop ! my dear Ralph , what nonsense ! " 

 " you always say that , " he complain ; " and it be not   nonsense . what be the point of have a garden if one can not   watch bird in it ? the street do all right for hoop . and if child can not   be trust in the street , their mother should keep they at home . " 

 Mary make no answer to this remark , but frown . 

 she leant back on the seat and look about she at the great house break the soft gray - blue sky with their chimney . 

 " ah , well , " she say , " London 's a fine place to live in . I believe I could sit and watch people all day long . I like my fellow - creature .... " 

 Ralph sigh impatiently . 

 " yes , I think so , when you come to know they , " she add , as if his disagreement have be speak . 

 " that be just when I do not   like they , " he reply . " still , I do not   see why you should not   cherish that illusion , if it please you . " he speak without much vehemence of agreement or disagreement . he seem chill . 

 " wake up , Ralph ! you be half asleep ! " Mary cry , turn and pinch his sleeve . " what have you be do with yourself ? moping ? working ? despise the world , as usual ? " 

 as he merely shake his head , and fill his pipe , she go on : 

 " it be a bit of a pose , be not   it ? " 

 " not more than most thing , " he say . 

 " well , " Mary remark , " I have   a great deal to say to you , but I must go on we have a committee . " she rise , but hesitate , look down upon he rather gravely . " you do not   look happy , Ralph , " she say . " be it anything , or be it nothing ? " 

 he do not immediately answer she , but rise , too , and walk with she towards the gate . as usual , he do not speak to she without consider whether what he be about to say be the sort of thing that he could say to she . 

 " I have   be bother , " he say at length . " partly by work , and partly by family trouble . Charles have be behave like a fool . he want to go out to Canada as a farmer " 

 " well , there be something to be say for that , " say Mary ; and they pass the gate , and walk slowly round the Fields again , discuss difficulty which , as a matter of fact , be more or less chronic in the Denham family , and only now bring forward to appease Mary 's sympathy , which , however , soothe Ralph more than he be aware of . she make he at least dwell upon problem which be real in the sense that they be capable of solution ; and the true cause of his melancholy , which be not susceptible to such treatment , sink rather more deeply into the shade of his mind . 

 Mary be attentive ; she be helpful . Ralph could not help feel grateful to she , the more so , perhaps , because he have not tell she the truth about his state ; and when they reach the gate again he wish to make some affectionate objection to she leave he . but his affection take the rather uncouth form of expostulate with she about her work . 

 " what d'you want to sit on a committee for ? " he ask . " it be waste of your time , Mary . " 

 " I agree with you that a country walk would benefit the world more , " she say . " look here , " she add suddenly , " why do not   you come to we at Christmas ? it be almost the good time of year . " 

 " come to you at Disham ? " Ralph repeat . 

 " yes . we will not   interfere with you . but you can tell I later , " she say , rather hastily , and then start off in the direction of Russell Square . she have invite he on the impulse of the moment , as a vision of the country come before she ; and now she be annoy with herself for have do so , and then she be annoy at be annoy . 

 " if I can not   face a walk in a field alone with Ralph , " she reason , " I would well buy a cat and live in a lodging at Ealing , like Sally Seal and he will not   come . or do he mean that he would come ? " 

 she shake her head . she really do not know what he have mean . she never feel quite certain ; but now she be more than usually baffle . be he conceal something from she ? his manner have be odd ; his deep absorption have impress she ; there be something in he that she have not fathom , and the mystery of his nature lay more of a spell upon she than she like . moreover , she could not prevent herself from do now what she have often blame other of her sex for do from endow her friend with a kind of heavenly fire , and pass her life before it for his sanction . 

 under this process , the committee rather dwindle in importance ; the Suffrage shrank ; she vow she would work hard at the italian language ; she think she would take up the study of bird . but this program for a perfect life threaten to become so absurd that she very soon catch herself out in the evil habit , and be rehearse her speech to the committee by the time the chestnut - color brick of Russell Square come in sight . indeed , she never notice they . she run upstairs as usual , and be completely awaken to reality by the sight of Mrs. Seal , on the landing outside the office , induce a very large dog to drink water out of a tumbler . 

 " Miss Markham have already arrive , " Mrs. Seal remark , with due solemnity , " and this be her dog . " 

 " a very fine dog , too , " say Mary , pat he on the head . 

 " yes . a magnificent fellow , " Mrs. Seal agree . " a kind of St. Bernard , she tell I so like Kit to have a St. Bernard . and you guard your mistress well , do not   you , Sailor ? you see that wicked man do not   break into her larder when she be out at her work help poor soul who have lose their way .... but we be late we must begin ! " and scatter the rest of the water indiscriminately over the floor , she hurry Mary into the committee - room . 





 CHAPTER XIV 

 Mr. Clacton be in his glory . the machinery which he have perfect and control be now about to turn out its bi - monthly product , a committee meeting ; and his pride in the perfect structure of these assembly be great . he love the jargon of committee - room ; he love the way in which the door keep opening as the clock strike the hour , in obedience to a few stroke of his pen on a piece of paper ; and when it have open sufficiently often , he love to issue from his inner chamber with document in his hand , visibly important , with a preoccupied expression on his face that might have suit a Prime Minister advance to meet his Cabinet . by his order the table have be decorate beforehand with six sheet of blot - paper , with six pen , six ink - pot , a tumbler and a jug of water , a bell , and , in deference to the taste of the lady member , a vase of hardy chrysanthemum . he have already surreptitiously straighten the sheet of blot - paper in relation to the ink - pot , and now stand in front of the fire engage in conversation with Miss Markham . but his eye be on the door , and when Mary and Mrs. Seal enter , he give a little laugh and observe to the assembly which be scatter about the room : 

 " I fancy , lady and gentleman , that we be ready to commence . " 

 so speak , he take his seat at the head of the table , and arrange one bundle of paper upon his right and another upon his left , call upon Miss Datchet to read the minute of the previous meeting . Mary obey . a keen observer might have wonder why it be necessary for the secretary to knit she brow so closely over the tolerably matter - of - fact statement before she . could there be any doubt in her mind that it have be resolve to circularize the province with Leaflet No . 3 , or to issue a statistical diagram show the proportion of married woman to spinster in New Zealand ; or that the net profit of Mrs. Hipsley 's Bazaar have reach a total of five pound eight shilling and twopence half - penny ? 

 could any doubt as to the perfect sense and propriety of these statement be disturb she ? no one could have guess , from the look of she , that she be disturb at all . a pleasanter and saner woman than Mary Datchet be never see within a committee - room . she seem a compound of the autumn leaf and the winter sunshine ; less poetically speak , she show both gentleness and strength , an indefinable promise of soft maternity blend with her evident fitness for honest labor . nevertheless , she have great difficulty in reduce her mind to obedience ; and her reading lack conviction , as if , as be indeed the case , she have lose the power of visualize what she read . and directly the list be complete , her mind float to Lincoln 's Inn Fields and the flutter wing of innumerable sparrow . be Ralph still entice the bald - headed cock - sparrow to sit upon his hand ? have he succeed ? would he ever succeed ? she have mean to ask he why it be that the sparrow in Lincoln 's Inn Fields be tame than the sparrow in Hyde Park perhaps it be that the passer - by be rare , and they come to recognize their benefactor . for the first half - hour of the committee meeting , Mary have thus to do battle with the skeptical presence of Ralph Denham , who threaten to have it all his own way . Mary try half a dozen method of oust he . she raise her voice , she articulate distinctly , she look firmly at Mr. Clacton 's bald head , she begin to write a note . to her annoyance , her pencil draw a little round figure on the blotting - paper , which , she could not deny , be really a bald - headed cock - sparrow . she look again at Mr. Clacton ; yes , he be bald , and so be cock - sparrow . never be a secretary torment by so many unsuitable suggestion , and they all come , alas ! with something ludicrously grotesque about they , which might , at any moment , provoke she to such flippancy as would shock her colleague for ever . the thought of what she might say make she bite her lip , as if her lip would protect she . 

 but all these suggestion be but flotsam and jetsam cast to the surface by a more profound disturbance , which , as she could not consider it at present , manifest its existence by these grotesque nod and beckoning . consider it , she must , when the committee be over . meanwhile , she be behave scandalously ; she be look out of the window , and think of the color of the sky , and of the decoration on the Imperial Hotel , when she ought to have be shepherd her colleague , and pin they down to the matter in hand . she could not bring herself to attach more weight to one project than to another . Ralph have say she could not stop to consider what he have say , but he have somehow divest the proceeding of all reality . and then , without conscious effort , by some trick of the brain , she find herself become interested in some scheme for organize a newspaper campaign . certain article be to be write ; certain editor approach . what line be it advisable to take ? she find herself strongly disapprove of what Mr. Clacton be say . she commit herself to the opinion that now be the time to strike hard . directly she have say this , she feel that she have turn upon Ralph 's ghost ; and she become more and more in earnest , and anxious to bring the other round to her point of view . once more , she know exactly and indisputably what be right and what be wrong . as if emerge from a mist , the old foe of the public good loom ahead of her capitalist , newspaper proprietor , anti - suffragist , and , in some way most pernicious of all , the mass who take no interest one way or another among whom , for the time be , she certainly discern the feature of Ralph Denham . indeed , when Miss Markham ask she to suggest the name of a few friend of her , she express herself with unusual bitterness : 

 " my friend think all this kind of thing useless . " she feel that she be really say that to Ralph himself . 

 " oh , they be that sort , be they ? " say Miss Markham , with a little laugh ; and with renew vigor their legion charge the foe . 

 Mary 's spirit have be low when she enter the committee - room ; but now they be considerably improve . she know the way of this world ; it be a shapely , orderly place ; she feel convinced of its right and its wrong ; and the feeling that she be fit to deal a heavy blow against her enemy warm her heart and kindle her eye . in one of those flight of fancy , not characteristic of she but tiresomely frequent this afternoon , she envisage herself batter with rotten egg upon a platform , from which Ralph vainly beg she to descend . but 

 " what do I matter compare with the cause ? " she say , and so on . much to her credit , however tease by foolish fancy , she keep the surface of her brain moderate and vigilant , and subdue Mrs. Seal very tactfully more than once when she demand , " Action ! everywhere ! at once ! " as become her father 's daughter . 

 the other member of the committee , who be all rather elderly people , be a good deal impress by Mary , and incline to side with she and against each other , partly , perhaps , because of her youth . the feeling that she control they all fill Mary with a sense of power ; and she feel that no work can equal in importance , or be so exciting as , the work of make other people do what you want they to do . indeed , when she have win her point she feel a slight degree of contempt for the people who have yield to she . 

 the committee now rise , gather together their paper , shake they straight , place they in their attache - case , snap the lock firmly together , and hurry away , have , for the most part , to catch train , in order to keep other appointment with other committee , for they be all busy people . Mary , Mrs. Seal , and Mr. Clacton be leave alone ; the room be hot and untidy , the piece of pink blotting - paper be lie at different angle upon the table , and the tumbler be half full of water , which some one have pour out and forget to drink . 

 Mrs. Seal begin prepare the tea , while Mr. Clacton retire to his room to file the fresh accumulation of document . Mary be too much excited even to help Mrs. Seal with the cup and saucer . she fling up the window and stand by it , look out . the street lamp be already light ; and through the mist in the square one could see little figure hurry across the road and along the pavement , on the farth side . in her absurd mood of lustful arrogance , Mary look at the little figure and think , " if I like I could make you go in there or stop short ; I could make you walk in single file or in double file ; I could do what I like with you . " then Mrs. Seal come and stand by she . 

 " ought not   you to put something round your shoulder , Sally ? " Mary ask , in rather a condescend tone of voice , feel a sort of pity for the enthusiastic ineffective little woman . but Mrs. Seal pay no attention to the suggestion . 

 " well , do you enjoy yourself ? " Mary ask , with a little laugh . 

 Mrs. Seal draw a deep breath , restrain herself , and then burst out , look out , too , upon Russell Square and Southampton Row , and at the passer - by , " ah , if only one could get every one of those people into this room , and make they understand for five minute ! but they must see the truth some day .... if only one could make they see it .... " 

 Mary know herself to be very much wise than Mrs. Seal , and when Mrs. Seal say anything , even if it be what Mary herself be feel , she automatically think of all that there be to be say against it . on this occasion her arrogant feeling that she could direct everybody dwindle away . 

 " let us have our tea , " she say , turn back from the window and pull down the blind . " it be a good meeting do not   you think so , Sally ? " she let fall , casually , as she sit down at the table . surely Mrs. Seal must realize that Mary have be extraordinarily efficient ? 

 " but we go at such a snail 's pace , " say Sally , shake her head impatiently . 

 at this Mary burst out laugh , and all her arrogance be dissipate . 

 " you can afford to laugh , " say Sally , with another shake of her head , " but I can not . I be fifty - five , and I dare say I shall be in my grave by the time we get it if we ever do . " 

 " oh , no , you will not   be in your grave , " say Mary , kindly . 

 " it will be such a great day , " say Mrs. Seal , with a toss of her lock . " a great day , not only for we , but for civilization . that be what I feel , you know , about these meeting . each one of they be a step onwards in the great march humanity , you know . we do want the people after we to have a well time of it and so many do not   see it . I wonder how it be that they do not   see it ? " 

 she be carry plate and cup from the cupboard as she speak , so that her sentence be more than usually break apart . Mary could not help look at the odd little priestess of humanity with something like admiration . while she have be think about herself , Mrs. Seal have think of nothing but her vision . 

 " you must not   wear yourself out , Sally , if you want to see the great day , " she say , rise and try to take a plate of biscuit from Mrs. Seal 's hand . 

 " my dear child , what else be my old body good for ? " she exclaim , cling more tightly than before to her plate of biscuit . " should not   I be proud to give everything I have to the cause ? for I be not an intelligence like you . there be domestic circumstance I would like to tell you one of these day so I say foolish thing . I lose my head , you know . you do not . Mr. Clacton do not . it be a great mistake , to lose one 's head . but my heart be in the right place . and I be so glad Kit have a big dog , for I do not   think her look well . " 

 they have their tea , and go over many of the point that have be raise in the committee rather more intimately than have be possible then ; and they all feel an agreeable sense of be in some way behind the scene ; of have their hand upon string which , when pull , would completely change the pageant exhibit daily to those who read the newspaper . although their view be very different , this sense unite they and make they almost cordial in their manner to each other . 

 Mary , however , leave the tea - party rather early , desire both to be alone , and then to hear some music at the Queen 's Hall . she fully intend to use her loneliness to think out her position with regard to Ralph ; but although she walk back to the Strand with this end in view , she find her mind uncomfortably full of different train of thought . she start one and then another . they seem even to take their color from the street she happen to be in . thus the vision of humanity appear to be in some way connect with Bloomsbury , and fade distinctly by the time she cross the main road ; then a belate organ - grinder in Holborn set her thought dance incongruously ; and by the time she be cross the great misty square of Lincoln 's Inn Fields , she be cold and depressed again , and horribly clear - sighted . the dark remove the stimulus of human companionship , and a tear actually slide down her cheek , accompany a sudden conviction within she that she love Ralph , and that he do not   love she . all dark and empty now be the path where they have walk that morning , and the sparrow silent in the bare tree . but the light in her own building soon cheer she ; all these different state of mind be submerge in the deep flood of desire , thought , perception , antagonism , which wash perpetually at the base of her be , to rise into prominence in turn when the condition of the upper world be favorable . she put off the hour of clear thought until Christmas , say to herself , as she light her fire , that it be impossible to think anything out in London ; and , no doubt , Ralph would not   come at Christmas , and she would take long walk into the heart of the country , and decide this question and all the other that puzzle she . meanwhile , she think , draw her foot up on to the fender , life be full of complexity ; life be a thing one must love to the last fiber of it . 

 she have sit there for five minute or so , and her thought have have time to grow dim , when there come a ring at her bell . her eye brighten ; she feel immediately convince that Ralph have come to visit she . accordingly , she wait a moment before open the door ; she want to feel her hand secure upon the rein of all the troublesome emotion which the sight of Ralph would certainly arouse . she compose herself unnecessarily , however , for she have to admit , not Ralph , but Katharine and William Rodney . her first impression be that they be both extremely well dressed . she feel herself shabby and slovenly beside they , and do not know how she should entertain they , nor could she guess why they have come . she have hear nothing of their engagement . but after the first disappointment , she be pleased , for she feel instantly that Katharine be a personality , and , moreover , she need not now exercise her self - control . 

 " we be pass and see a light in your window , so we come up , " Katharine explain , stand and look very tall and distinguished and rather absent - minded . 

 " we have be to see some picture , " say William . " oh , dear , " he exclaim , look about he , " this room remind I of one of the bad hour in my existence when I read a paper , and you all sit round and jeer at I . Katharine be the bad . I could feel her gloating over every mistake I make . Miss Datchet be kind . Miss Datchet just make it possible for I to get through , I remember . " 

 sit down , he draw off his light yellow glove , and begin slap his knee with they . his vitality be pleasant , Mary think , although he make her laugh . the very look of he be inclined to make her laugh . his rather prominent eye pass from one young woman to the other , and his lip perpetually form word which remain unspoken . 

 " we have be see old master at the Grafton Gallery , " say Katharine , apparently pay no attention to William , and accept a cigarette which Mary offer she . she leant back in her chair , and the smoke which hang about her face seem to withdraw she still far from the other . 

 " would you believe it , Miss Datchet , " William continue , " Katharine do not   like Titian . she do not   like apricot , she do not   like peach , she do not   like green pea . she like the Elgin marble , and gray day without any sun . she be a typical example of the cold northern nature . I come from Devonshire " 

 have they be quarrel , Mary wonder , and have they , for that reason , seek refuge in her room , or be they engage , or have Katharine just refuse he ? she be completely baffle . 

 Katharine now reappear from her veil of smoke , knock the ash from her cigarette into the fireplace , and look , with an odd expression of solicitude , at the irritable man . 

 " perhaps , Mary , " she say tentatively , " you would not   mind give we some tea ? we do try to get some , but the shop be so crowded , and in the next one there be a band playing ; and most of the picture , at any rate , be very dull , whatever you may say , William . " she speak with a kind of guard gentleness . 

 Mary , accordingly , retire to make preparation in the pantry . 

 " what in the world be they after ? " she ask of her own reflection in the little look - glass which hang there . she be not leave to doubt much long , for , on come back into the sitting - room with the tea - thing , Katharine inform she , apparently have be instruct so to do by William , of their engagement . 

 " William , " she say , " think that perhaps you do not   know . we be go to be marry . " 

 Mary find herself shake William 's hand , and address her congratulation to he , as if Katharine be inaccessible ; she have , indeed , take hold of the tea - kettle . 

 " let I see , " Katharine say , " one put hot water into the cup first , do not   one ? you have some dodge of your own , have not   you , William , about make tea ? " 

 Mary be half inclined to suspect that this be say in order to conceal nervousness , but if so , the concealment be unusually perfect . talk of marriage be dismiss . Katharine might have be seat in her own drawing - room , control a situation which present no sort of difficulty to her train mind . rather to her surprise , Mary find herself make conversation with William about old italian picture , while Katharine pour out tea , cut cake , keep William 's plate supply , without join more than be necessary in the conversation . she seem to have take possession of Mary 's room , and to handle the cup as if they belong to she . but it be do so naturally that it breed no resentment in Mary ; on the contrary , she find herself put her hand on Katharine 's knee , affectionately , for an instant . be there something maternal in this assumption of control ? and think of Katharine as one who would soon be marry , these maternal air fill Mary 's mind with a new tenderness , and even with awe . Katharine seem very much old and more experienced than she be . 

 meanwhile Rodney talk . if his appearance be superficially against he , it have the advantage of make his solid merit something of a surprise . he have keep notebook ; he know a great deal about picture . he could compare different example in different gallery , and his authoritative answer to intelligent question gain not a little , Mary feel , from the smart tap which he deal , as he deliver they , upon the lump of coal . she be impressed . 

 " your tea , William , " say Katharine gently . 

 he pause , gulp it down , obediently , and continue . 

 and then it strike Mary that Katharine , in the shade of her broad - brim hat , and in the midst of the smoke , and in the obscurity of her character , be , perhaps , smile to herself , not altogether in the maternal spirit . what she say be very simple , but her word , even " your tea , William , " be set down as gently and cautiously and exactly as the foot of a persian cat step among China ornament . for the second time that day Mary feel herself baffle by something inscrutable in the character of a person to whom she feel herself much attract . she think that if she be engage to Katharine , she , too , would find herself very soon use those fretful question with which William evidently tease his bride . and yet Katharine 's voice be humble . 

 " I wonder how you find the time to know all about picture as well as book ? " she ask . 

 " how do I find the time ? " William answer , delight , Mary guess , at this little compliment . " why , I always travel with a notebook . and I ask my way to the picture gallery the very first thing in the morning . and then I meet man , and talk to they . there be a man in my office who know all about the Flemish school . I be tell Miss Datchet about the Flemish school . I pick up a lot of it from he it be a way man have Gibbons , his name be . you must meet he . we will ask he to lunch . and this not care about art , " he explain , turn to Mary , " it be one of Katharine 's pose , Miss Datchet . do you know she pose ? she pretend that she be never read Shakespeare . and why should she read Shakespeare , since she be Shakespeare Rosalind , you know , " and he give his queer little chuckle . somehow this compliment appear very old - fashioned and almost in bad taste . Mary actually feel herself blush , as if he have say " the sex " or " the lady . " Constrained , perhaps , by nervousness , Rodney continue in the same vein . 

 " she know enough enough for all decent purpose . what do you woman want with learning , when you have so much else everything , I should say everything . leave we something , eh , Katharine ? " 

 " leave you something ? " say Katharine , apparently wake from a brown study . " I be think we must be go " 

 " be it to - night that Lady Ferrilby dine with we ? no , we must not   be late , " say Rodney , rise . " d'you know the Ferrilbys , Miss Datchet ? they own Trantem Abbey , " he add , for her information , as she look doubtful . " and if Katharine make herself very charming to - night , perhaps'll lend it to we for the honeymoon . " 

 " I agree that may be a reason . otherwise she be a dull woman , " say Katharine . " at least , " she add , as if to qualify her abruptness , " I find it difficult to talk to she . " 

 " because you expect every one else to take all the trouble . I have   see she sit silent a whole evening , " he say , turn to Mary , as he have frequently do already . " do not   you find that , too ? sometimes when we be alone , I have   count the time on my watch " here he take out a large gold watch , and tap the glass " the time between one remark and the next . and once I count ten minute and twenty second , and then , if you will believe I , she only say ' um ! ' " 

 " I be sure I be sorry , " Katharine apologize . " I know it be a bad habit , but then , you see , at home " 

 the rest of her excuse be cut short , so far as Mary be concern , by the closing of the door . she fancy she could hear William find fresh fault on the stair . a moment later , the door - bell ring again , and Katharine reappear , have leave her purse on a chair . she soon find it , and say , pause for a moment at the door , and speak differently as they be alone : 

 " I think be engage be very bad for the character . " she shake her purse in her hand until the coin jingle , as if she allude merely to this example of her forgetfulness . but the remark puzzle Mary ; it seem to refer to something else ; and her manner have change so strangely , now that William be out of hearing , that she could not help look at she for an explanation . she look almost stern , so that Mary , try to smile at she , only succeed in produce a silent stare of interrogation . 

 as the door shut for the second time , she sink on to the floor in front of the fire , try , now that their body be not there to distract she , to piece together her impression of they as a whole . and , though pride herself , with all other man and woman , upon an infallible eye for character , she could not feel at all certain that she know what motif inspire Katharine Hilbery in life . there be something that carry she on smoothly , out of reach something , yes , but what ? something that remind Mary of Ralph . oddly enough , he give she the same feeling , too , and with he , too , she feel baffled . oddly enough , for no two people , she hastily conclude , be more unlike . and yet both have this hide impulse , this incalculable force this thing they care for and do not   talk about oh , what be it ? 





 CHAPTER XV 

 the village of Disham lie somewhere on the roll piece of cultivate ground in the neighborhood of Lincoln , not so far inland but that a sound , bring rumor of the sea , can be hear on summer night or when the winter storm fle the wave upon the long beach . so large be the church , and in particular the church tower , in comparison with the little street of cottage which compose the village , that the traveler be apt to cast his mind back to the Middle Ages , as the only time when so much piety could have be keep alive . so great a trust in the Church can surely not belong to our day , and he go on to conjecture that every one of the villager have reach the extreme limit of human life . such be the reflection of the superficial stranger , and his sight of the population , as it be represent by two or three man hoe in a turnip - field , a small child carry a jug , and a young woman shake a piece of carpet outside her cottage door , will not lead he to see anything very much out of keep with the Middle Ages in the village of Disham as it be to - day . these people , though they seem young enough , look so angular and so crude that they remind he of the little picture paint by monk in the capital letter of their manuscript . he only half understand what they say , and speak very loud and clearly , as though , indeed , his voice have to carry through a hundred year or more before it reach they . he would have a far well chance of understand some dweller in Paris or Rome , Berlin or Madrid , than these countryman of his who have live for the last two thousand year not two hundred mile from the City of London . 

 the Rectory stand about half a mile beyond the village . it be a large house , and have be grow steadily for some century round the great kitchen , with its narrow red tile , as the Rector would point out to his guest on the first night of their arrival , take his brass candlestick , and bid they mind the step up and the step down , and notice the immense thickness of the wall , the old beam across the ceiling , the staircase as steep as ladder , and the attic , with their deep , tent - like roof , in which swallow breed , and once a white owl . but nothing very interesting or very beautiful have result from the different addition make by the different rector . 

 the house , however , be surround by a garden , in which the Rector take considerable pride . the lawn , which front the drawing - room window , be a rich and uniform green , unspotted by a single daisy , and on the other side of it two straight path lead past bed of tall , stand flower to a charming grassy walk , where the Rev. Wyndham Datchet would pace up and down at the same hour every morning , with a sundial to measure the time for he . as often as not , he carry a book in his hand , into which he would glance , then shut it up , and repeat the rest of the ode from memory . he have most of Horace by heart , and have get into the habit of connect this particular walk with certain ode which he repeat duly , at the same time note the condition of his flower , and stoop now and again to pick any that be wither or overblown . on wet day , such be the power of habit over he , he rise from his chair at the same hour , and pace his study for the same length of time , pause now and then to straighten some book in the bookcase , or alter the position of the two brass crucifix stand upon cairn of serpentine stone upon the mantelpiece . his child have a great respect for he , credit he with far more learning than he actually possess , and see that his habit be not interfere with , if possible . like most people who do thing methodically , the Rector himself have more strength of purpose and power of self - sacrifice than of intellect or of originality . on cold and windy night he ride off to visit sick people , who might need he , without a murmur ; and by virtue of do dull duty punctually , he be much employ upon committee and local Boards and Councils ; and at this period of his life   he be sixty - eight   he be begin to be commiserate by tender old lady for the extreme leanness of his person , which , they say , be wear out upon the road when it should have be rest before a comfortable fire . his eld daughter , Elizabeth , live with he and manage the house , and already much resemble he in dry sincerity and methodical habit of mind ; of the two son one , Richard , be an estate agent , the other , Christopher , be read for the Bar . at Christmas , naturally , they meet together ; and for a month past the arrangement of the Christmas week have be much in the mind of mistress and maid , who pride themselves every year more confidently upon the excellence of their equipment . the late Mrs. Datchet have leave an excellent cupboard of linen , to which Elizabeth have succeed at the age of nineteen , when her mother die , and the charge of the family rest upon the shoulder of the eld daughter . she keep a fine flock of yellow chicken , sketch a little , certain rose - tree in the garden be commit specially to her care ; and what with the care of the house , the care of the chicken , and the care of the poor , she scarcely know what it be to have an idle minute . an extreme rectitude of mind , rather than any gift , give her weight in the family . when Mary write to say that she have ask Ralph Denham to stay with they , she add , out of deference to Elizabeth 's character , that he be very nice , though rather queer , and have be overwork himself in London . no doubt Elizabeth would conclude that Ralph be in love with she , but there could be no doubt either that not a word of this would be speak by either of they , unless , indeed , some catastrophe make mention of it unavoidable . 

 Mary go down to Disham without know whether Ralph intend to come ; but two or three day before Christmas she receive a telegram from Ralph , ask she to take a room for he in the village . this be follow by a letter explain that he hop he might have his meal with they ; but quiet , essential for his work , make it necessary to sleep out . 

 Mary be walk in the garden with Elizabeth , and inspect the rose , when the letter arrive . 

 " but that be absurd , " say Elizabeth decidedly , when the plan be explain to she . " there be five spare room , even when the boy be here . besides , he would not   get a room in the village . and he ought not   to work if he be overwork . " 

 " but perhaps he do not   want to see so much of we , " Mary think to herself , although outwardly she assent , and feel grateful to Elizabeth for support she in what be , of course , her desire . they be cut rose at the time , and lay they , head by head , in a shallow basket . 

 " if Ralph be here , he would find this very dull , " Mary think , with a little shiver of irritation , which lead she to place she rise the wrong way in the basket . meanwhile , they have come to the end of the path , and while Elizabeth straighten some flower , and make they stand upright within their fence of string , Mary look at her father , who be pace up and down , with his hand behind his back and his head bow in meditation . obey an impulse which spring from some desire to interrupt this methodical marching , Mary step on to the grass walk and put her hand on his arm . 

 " a flower for your buttonhole , father , " she say , present a rose . 

 " eh , dear ? " say Mr. Datchet , take the flower , and hold it at an angle which suit his bad eyesight , without pause in his walk . 

 " where do this fellow come from ? one of Elizabeth 's rose I hope you ask she leave . Elizabeth do not   like have her rose pick without her leave , and quite right , too . " 

 he have a habit , Mary remark , and she have never notice it so clearly before , of let his sentence tail away in a continuous murmur , whereupon he pass into a state of abstraction , presume by his child to indicate some train of thought too profound for utterance . 

 " what ? " say Mary , interrupting , for the first time in her life , perhaps , when the murmur cease . he make no reply . she know very well that he wish to be leave alone , but she stick to his side much as she might have stick to some sleep - walker , whom she think it right gradually to awaken . she could think of nothing to rouse he with except : 

 " the garden be look very nice , father . " 

 " yes , yes , yes , " say Mr. Datchet , run his word together in the same abstract manner , and sink his head yet low upon his breast . and suddenly , as they turn their step to retrace their way , he jerk out : 

 " the traffic 's very much increase , you know . More rolling - stock need already . forty truck go down yesterday by the 12.15 count they myself . they have   take off the 9.3 , and give we an 8.30 instead suit the business man , you know . you come by the old 3.10 yesterday , I suppose ? " 

 she say " yes , " as he seem to wish for a reply , and then he look at his watch , and make off down the path towards the house , hold the rose at the same angle in front of he . Elizabeth have go round to the side of the house , where the chicken live , so that Mary find herself alone , hold Ralph 's letter in her hand . she be uneasy . she have put off the season for think thing out very successfully , and now that Ralph be actually come , the next day , she could only wonder how her family would impress he . she think it likely that her father would discuss the train service with he ; Elizabeth would be bright and sensible , and always leave the room to give message to the servant . her brother have already say that they would give he a day 's shooting . she be content to leave the problem of Ralph 's relation to the young man obscure , trust that they would find some common ground of masculine agreement . but what would he think of she ? would he see that she be different from the rest of the family ? she devise a plan for take he to her sitting - room , and artfully lead the talk towards the english poet , who now occupy prominent place in her little bookcase . moreover , she might give he to understand , privately , that she , too , think her family a queer one queer , yes , but not dull . that be the rock past which she be bent on steer he . and she think how she would draw his attention to Edward 's passion for jorrock , and the enthusiasm which lead Christopher to collect moth and butterfly though he be now twenty - two . perhaps Elizabeth 's sketching , if the fruit be invisible , might lend color to the general effect which she wish to produce of a family , eccentric and limited , perhaps , but not dull . Edward , she perceive , be roll the lawn , for the sake of exercise ; and the sight of he , with pink cheek , bright little brown eye , and a general resemblance to a clumsy young cart - horse in its winter coat of dusty brown hair , make Mary violently ashamed of her ambitious scheming . she love he precisely as he be ; she love they all ; and as she walk by his side , up and down , and down and up , her strong moral sense administer a sound drub to the vain and romantic element arouse in she by the mere thought of Ralph . she feel quite certain that , for good or for bad , she be very like the rest of her family . 

 sit in the corner of a third - class railway carriage , on the afternoon of the follow day , Ralph make several inquiry of a commercial traveler in the opposite corner . they center round a village call Lampsher , not three mile , he understand , from Lincoln ; be there a big house in Lampsher , he ask , inhabit by a gentleman of the name of Otway ? 

 the traveler know nothing , but roll the name of otway on his tongue , reflectively , and the sound of it gratify Ralph amazingly . it give he an excuse to take a letter from his pocket in order to verify the address . 

 " Stogdon House , Lampsher , Lincoln , " he read out . 

 " you will find somebody to direct you at Lincoln , " say the man ; and Ralph have to confess that he be not bind there this very evening . 

 " I have   get to walk over from Disham , " he say , and in the heart of he could not help marvel at the pleasure which he derive from make a bagman in a train believe what he himself do not believe . for the letter , though sign by Katharine 's father , contain no invitation or warrant for think that Katharine herself be there ; the only fact it disclose be that for a fortnight this address would be Mr. Hilbery 's address . but when he look out of the window , it be of she he think ; she , too , have see these gray field , and , perhaps , she be there where the tree run up a slope , and one yellow light shine now , and then go out again , at the foot of the hill . the light shine in the window of an old gray house , he think . he lie back in his corner and forget the commercial traveler altogether . the process of visualize Katharine stop short at the old gray manor - house ; instinct warn he that if he go much far with this process reality would soon force itself in ; he could not altogether neglect the figure of William Rodney . since the day when he have hear from Katharine 's lip of her engagement , he have refrain from invest his dream of she with the detail of real life . but the light of the late afternoon glow green behind the straight tree , and become a symbol of she . the light seem to expand his heart . she brood over the gray field , and be with he now in the railway carriage , thoughtful , silent , and infinitely tender ; but the vision press too close , and must be dismiss , for the train be slacken . its abrupt jerk shake he wide awake , and he see Mary Datchet , a sturdy russet figure , with a dash of scarlet about it , as the carriage slide down the platform . a tall youth who accompany she shake he by the hand , take his bag , and lead the way without utter one articulate word . 

 never be voice so beautiful as on a winter 's evening , when dusk almost hide the body , and they seem to issue from nothingness with a note of intimacy seldom hear by day . such an edge be there in Mary 's voice when she greet he . about she seem to hang the mist of the winter hedge , and the clear red of the bramble leaf . he feel himself at once step on to the firm ground of an entirely different world , but he do not allow himself to yield to the pleasure of it directly . they give he his choice of drive with Edward or of walk home across the field with Mary not a short way , they explain , but Mary think it a nice way . he decide to walk with she , be conscious , indeed , that he get comfort from her presence . what could be the cause of her cheerfulness , he wonder , half ironically , and half enviously , as the pony - cart start briskly away , and the dusk swam between their eye and the tall form of Edward , stand up to drive , with the rein in one hand and the whip in the other . People from the village , who have be to the market town , be climb into their gig , or set off home down the road together in little party . many salutation be address to Mary , who shout back , with the addition of the speaker 's name . but soon she lead the way over a stile , and along a path wear slightly dark than the dim green surround it . in front of they the sky now show itself of a reddish - yellow , like a slice of some semilucent stone behind which a lamp burn , while a fringe of black tree with distinct branch stand against the light , which be obscure in one direction by a hump of earth , in all other direction the land lie flat to the very verge of the sky . one of the swift and noiseless bird of the winter 's night seem to follow they across the field , circle a few foot in front of they , disappear and return again and again . 

 Mary have go this walk many hundred time in the course of her life , generally alone , and at different stage the ghost of past mood would flood her mind with a whole scene or train of thought merely at the sight of three tree from a particular angle , or at the sound of the pheasant cluck in the ditch . but to - night the circumstance be strong enough to oust all other scene ; and she look at the field and the tree with an involuntary intensity as if they have no such association for she . 

 " well , Ralph , " she say , " this be well than Lincoln 's Inn Fields , be not   it ? look , there be a bird for you ! oh , you have   bring glass , have you ? Edward and Christopher mean to make you shoot . can you shoot ? I should not   think so " 

 " look here , you must explain , " say Ralph . " who be these young man ? where be I stay ? " 

 " you be stay with we , of course , " she say boldly . " of course , you be stay with we you do not   mind come , do you ? " 

 " if I have , I should not   have come , " he say sturdily . they walk on in silence ; Mary take care not to break it for a time . she wish Ralph to feel , as she think he would , all the fresh delight of the earth and air . she be right . in a moment he express his pleasure , much to her comfort . 

 " this be the sort of country I think you would live in , Mary , " he say , push his hat back on his head , and look about he . " real country . no gentleman 's seat . " 

 he snuff the air , and feel more keenly than he have do for many week the pleasure of own a body . 

 " now we have to find our way through a hedge , " say Mary . in the gap of the hedge Ralph tear up a poacher 's wire , set across a hole to trap a rabbit . 

 " it be quite right that they should poach , " say Mary , watch he tug at the wire . " I wonder whether it be Alfred Duggins or Sid Rankin ? how can one expect they not to , when they only make fifteen shilling a week ? fifteen shilling a week , " she repeat , come out on the other side of the hedge , and run her finger through her hair to rid herself of a bramble which have attach itself to she . " I could live on fifteen shilling a week easily . " 

 " could you ? " say Ralph . " I do not   believe you could , " he add . 

 " oh yes . they have a cottage throw in , and a garden where one can grow vegetable . it would not   be half bad , " say Mary , with a soberness which impress Ralph very much . 

 " but you would get tired of it , " he urge . 

 " I sometimes think it be the only thing one would never get tired of , " she reply . 

 the idea of a cottage where one grow one 's own vegetable and live on fifteen shilling a week , fill Ralph with an extraordinary sense of rest and satisfaction . 

 " but would not   it be on the main road , or next door to a woman with six squall child , who would always be hang she washing out to dry across your garden ? " 

 " the cottage I be think of stand by itself in a little orchard . " 

 " and what about the suffrage ? " he ask , attempt sarcasm . 

 " oh , there be other thing in the world besides the Suffrage , " she reply , in an off - hand manner which be slightly mysterious . 

 Ralph fall silent . it annoy he that she should have plan of which he know nothing ; but he feel that he have no right to press she far . his mind settle upon the idea of life in a country cottage . conceivably , for he could not examine into it now , here lie a tremendous possibility ; a solution of many problem . he strike his stick upon the earth , and star through the dusk at the shape of the country . 

 " d'you know the point of the compass ? " he ask . 

 " well , of course , " say Mary . " what d'you take I for ? a Cockney like you ? " she then tell he exactly where the north lay , and where the south . 

 " it be my native land , this , " she say . " I could smell my way about it blindfold . " 

 as if to prove this boast , she walk a little quick , so that Ralph find it difficult to keep pace with she . at the same time , he feel draw to she as he have never be before ; partly , no doubt , because she be more independent of he than in London , and seem to be attach firmly to a world where he have no place at all . now the dusk have fall to such an extent that he have to follow she implicitly , and even lean his hand on her shoulder when they jump a bank into a very narrow lane . and he feel curiously shy of she when she begin to shout through her hand at a spot of light which swing upon the mist in a neighboring field . he shout , too , and the light stand still . 

 " that be Christopher , come in already , and go to feed his chicken , " she say . 

 she introduce he to Ralph , who could see only a tall figure in gaiter , rise from a flutter circle of soft feathery body , upon whom the light fall in waver disc , call out now a bright spot of yellow , now one of greenish - black and scarlet . Mary dip her hand in the bucket he carry , and be at once the center of a circle also ; and as she cast her grain she talk alternately to the bird and to her brother , in the same clucking , half - inarticulate voice , as it sound to Ralph , stand on the outskirt of the flutter feather in his black overcoat . 

 he have remove his overcoat by the time they sit round the dinner - table , but nevertheless he look very strange among the other . a country life and breeding have preserve in they all a look which Mary hesitate to call either innocent or youthful , as she compare they , now sit round in an oval , softly illuminate by candlelight ; and yet it be something of the kind , yes , even in the case of the Rector himself . though superficially mark with line , his face be a clear pink , and his blue eye have the long - sight , peaceful expression of eye seek the turn of the road , or a distant light through rain , or the darkness of winter . she look at Ralph . he have never appear to she more concentrated and full of purpose ; as if behind his forehead be mass so much experience that he could choose for himself which part of it he would display and which part he would keep to himself . compare with that dark and stern countenance , her brother ' face , bend low over their soup - plate , be mere circle of pink , unmolded flesh . 

 " you come by the 3.10 , Mr. Denham ? " say the Reverend Wyndham Datchet , tuck his napkin into his collar , so that almost the whole of his body be conceal by a large white diamond . " they treat we very well , on the whole . consider the increase of traffic , they treat we very well indeed . I have the curiosity sometimes to count the truck on the good ' train , and they be well over fifty well over fifty , at this season of the year . " 

 the old gentleman have be rouse agreeably by the presence of this attentive and well - inform young man , as be evident by the care with which he finish the last word in his sentence , and his slight exaggeration in the number of truck on the train . indeed , the chief burden of the talk fall upon he , and he sustain it to - night in a manner which cause his son to look at he admiringly now and then ; for they feel shy of Denham , and be glad not to have to talk themselves . the store of information about the present and past of this particular corner of Lincolnshire which old Mr. Datchet produce really surprise his child , for though they know of its existence , they have forget its extent , as they might have forget the amount of family plate store in the plate - chest , until some rare celebration bring it forth . 

 after dinner , parish business take the Rector to his study , and Mary propose that they should sit in the kitchen . 

 " it be not the kitchen really , " Elizabeth hasten to explain to her guest , " but we call it so " 

 " it be the nice room in the house , " say Edward . 

 " it be get the old rest by the side of the fireplace , where the man hang their gun , " say Elizabeth , lead the way , with a tall brass candlestick in her hand , down a passage . " show Mr. Denham the step , Christopher .... when the Ecclesiastical Commissioners be here two year ago they say this be the most interesting part of the house . these narrow brick prove that it be five hundred year old five hundred year , I think they may have say six . " she , too , feel an impulse to exaggerate the age of the brick , as her father have exaggerate the number of truck . a big lamp hang down from the center of the ceiling and , together with a fine log fire , illuminate a large and lofty room , with rafter run from wall to wall , a floor of red tile , and a substantial fireplace build up of those narrow red brick which be say to be five hundred year old . a few rug and a sprinkling of arm - chair have make this ancient kitchen into a sitting - room . Elizabeth , after point out the gun - rack , and the hook for smoking ham , and other evidence of incontestable age , and explain that Mary have have the idea of turn the room into a sitting - room otherwise it be use for hang out the wash and for the man to change in after shoot consider that she have do her duty as hostess , and sit down in an upright chair directly beneath the lamp , beside a very long and narrow oak table . she place a pair of horn spectacle upon her nose , and draw towards she a basketful of thread and wool . in a few minute a smile come to her face , and remain there for the rest of the evening . 

 " will you come out shoot with we to - morrow ? " say Christopher , who have , on the whole , form a favorable impression of his sister 's friend . 

 " I will not   shoot , but I will come with you , " say Ralph . 

 " do not   you care about shooting ? " ask Edward , whose suspicion be not yet lay to rest . 

 " I have   never shoot in my life , " say Ralph , turn and look he in the face , because he be not sure how this confession would be receive . 

 " you would not   have much chance in London , I suppose , " say Christopher . " but will not   you find it rather dull just watch we ? " 

 " I shall watch bird , " Ralph reply , with a smile . 

 " I can show you the place for watch bird , " say Edward , " if that be what you like do . I know a fellow who come down from London about this time every year to watch they . it be a great place for the wild geese and the duck . I have   hear this man say that it be one of the good place for bird in the country . " 

 " it be about the good place in England , " Ralph reply . they be all gratify by this praise of their native county ; and Mary now have the pleasure of hear these short question and answer lose their undertone of suspicious inspection , so far as her brother be concern , and develop into a genuine conversation about the habit of bird which afterwards turn to a discussion as to the habit of solicitor , in which it be scarcely necessary for she to take part . she be pleased to see that her brother like Ralph , to the extent , that be , of wish to secure his good opinion . whether or not he like they it be impossible to tell from his kind but experienced manner . now and then she feed the fire with a fresh log , and as the room fill with the fine , dry heat of burn wood , they all , with the exception of Elizabeth , who be outside the range of the fire , feel less and less anxious about the effect they be make , and more and more inclined for sleep . at this moment a vehement scratching be hear on the door . 

 " Piper ! oh , damn ! I shall have to get up , " murmur Christopher . 

 " it be not piper , it be Pitch , " Edward grunt . 

 " all the same , I shall have to get up , " Christopher grumble . he let in the dog , and stand for a moment by the door , which open into the garden , to revive himself with a draught of the black , starlit air . 

 " do come in and shut the door ! " Mary cry , half turn in her chair . 

 " we shall have a fine day to - morrow , " say Christopher with complacency , and he sit himself on the floor at her foot , and leant his back against her knee , and stretch out his long stockinge leg to the fire all sign that he feel no long any restraint at the presence of the stranger . he be the young of the family , and Mary 's favorite , partly because his character resemble her , as Edward 's character resemble Elizabeth 's . she make she knee a comfortable rest for his head , and run her finger through his hair . 

 " I should like Mary to stroke my head like that , " Ralph think to himself suddenly , and he look at Christopher , almost affectionately , for call forth his sister 's caress . instantly he think of Katharine , the thought of she be surround by the space of night and the open air ; and Mary , watch he , see the line upon his forehead suddenly deepen . he stretch out an arm and place a log upon the fire , constrain himself to fit it carefully into the frail red scaffolding , and also to limit his thought to this one room . 

 Mary have cease to stroke her brother 's head ; he move it impatiently between her knee , and , much as though he be a child , she begin once more to part the thick , reddish - color lock this way and that . but a far strong passion have take possession of her soul than any her brother could inspire in she , and , see Ralph 's change of expression , her hand almost automatically continue its movement , while her mind plunge desperately for some hold upon slippery bank . 





 CHAPTER XVI 

 into that same black night , almost , indeed , into the very same layer of starlit air , Katharine Hilbery be now gaze , although not with a view to the prospect of a fine day for duck shoot on the morrow . she be walk up and down a gravel path in the garden of Stogdon House , her sight of the heaven be partially intercept by the light leafless hoop of a pergola . thus a spray of clematis would completely obscure Cassiopeia , or blot out with its black pattern myriad of mile of the Milky Way . at the end of the pergola , however , there be a stone seat , from which the sky could be see completely sweep clear of any earthly interruption , save to the right , indeed , where a line of elm - tree be beautifully sprinkle with star , and a low stable building have a full drop of quiver silver just issue from the mouth of the chimney . it be a moonless night , but the light of the star be sufficient to show the outline of the young woman 's form , and the shape of her face gaze gravely , indeed almost sternly , into the sky . she have come out into the winter 's night , which be mild enough , not so much to look with scientific eye upon the star , as to shake herself free from certain purely terrestrial discontent . much as a literary person in like circumstance would begin , absent - mindedly , pull out volume after volume , so she step into the garden in order to have the star at hand , even though she do not look at they . not to be happy , when she be suppose to be happy than she would ever be again that , as far as she could see , be the origin of a discontent which have begin almost as soon as she arrive , two day before , and seem now so intolerable that she have leave the family party , and come out here to consider it by herself . it be not she who think herself unhappy , but her cousin , who think it for she . the house be full of cousin , much of her age , or even young , and among they they have some terribly bright eye . they seem always on the search for something between she and Rodney , which they expect to find , and yet do not find ; and when they search , Katharine become aware of want what she have not be conscious of want in London , alone with William and her parent . or , if she do not want it , she miss it . and this state of mind depress she , because she have be accustom always to give complete satisfaction , and her self - love be now a little ruffle . she would have like to break through the reserve habitual to she in order to justify her engagement to some one whose opinion she value . no one have speak a word of criticism , but they leave she alone with William ; not that that would have matter , if they have not leave she alone so politely ; and , perhaps , that would not have matter if they have not seem so queerly silent , almost respectful , in her presence , which give way to criticism , she feel , out of it . 

 look now and then at the sky , she go through the list of her cousin ' name : Eleanor , Humphrey , Marmaduke , Silvia , Henry , Cassandra , Gilbert , and Mostyn Henry , the cousin who teach the young lady of Bungay to play upon the violin , be the only one in whom she could confide , and as she walk up and down beneath the hoop of the pergola , she do begin a little speech to he , which run something like this : 

 " to begin with , I be very fond of William . you can not   deny that . I know he well than any one , almost . but why I be marry he be , partly , I admit I be be quite honest with you , and you must not   tell any one partly because I want to get marry . I want to have a house of my own . it be not   possible at home . it be all very well for you , Henry ; you can go your own way . I have to be there always . besides , you know what our house be . you would not   be happy either , if you do not   do something . it be not   that I have not   the time at home it be the atmosphere . " here , presumably , she imagine that her cousin , who have listen with his usual intelligent sympathy , raise his eyebrow a little , and interpose : 

 " well , but what do you want to do ? " 

 even in this purely imaginary dialogue , Katharine find it difficult to confide her ambition to an imaginary companion . 

 " I should like , " she begin , and hesitate quite a long time before she force herself to add , with a change of voice , " to study mathematic to know about the star . " 

 Henry be clearly amazed , but too kind to express all his doubt ; he only say something about the difficulty of mathematic , and remark that very little be know about the star . 

 Katharine thereupon go on with the statement of her case . 

 " I do not   care much whether I ever get to know anything but I want to work out something in figure something that have not   get to do with human being . I do not   want people particularly . in some way , Henry , I be a humbug I mean , I be not what you all take I for . I be not domestic , or very practical or sensible , really . and if I could calculate thing , and use a telescope , and have to work out figure , and know to a fraction where I be wrong , I should be perfectly happy , and I believe I should give William all he want . " 

 have reach this point , instinct tell she that she have pass beyond the region in which Henry 's advice could be of any good ; and , have rid her mind of its superficial annoyance , she sit herself upon the stone seat , raise her eye unconsciously and think about the deep question which she have to decide , she know , for herself . would she , indeed , give William all he want ? in order to decide the question , she run her mind rapidly over her little collection of significant saying , look , compliment , gesture , which have mark their intercourse during the last day or two . he have be annoy because a box , contain some clothe specially choose by he for she to wear , have be take to the wrong station , owe to her neglect in the matter of label . the box have arrive in the nick of time , and he have remark , as she come downstairs on the first night , that he have never see she look more beautiful . she outshone all her cousin . he have discover that she never make an ugly movement ; he also say that the shape of her head make it possible for she , unlike most woman , to wear her hair low . he have twice reprove she for be silent at dinner ; and once for never attend to what he say . he have be surprised at the excellence of her french accent , but he think it be selfish of she not to go with her mother to call upon the Middletons , because they be old family friend and very nice people . on the whole , the balance be nearly even ; and , write down a kind of conclusion in her mind which finish the sum for the present , at least , she change the focus of her eye , and see nothing but the star . 

 to - night they seem fix with unusual firmness in the blue , and flash back such a ripple of light into her eye that she find herself think that to - night the star be happy . without know or care more for church practice than most people of her age , Katharine could not look into the sky at Christmas time without feel that , at this one season , the Heavens bend over the earth with sympathy , and signal with immortal radiance that they , too , take part in her festival . somehow , it seem to she that they be even now behold the procession of king and wise man upon some road on a distant part of the earth . and yet , after gaze for another second , the star do their usual work upon the mind , freeze to cinder the whole of our short human history , and reduce the human body to an ape - like , furry form , crouch amid the brushwood of a barbarous clod of mud . this stage be soon succeed by another , in which there be nothing in the universe save star and the light of star ; as she look up the pupil of her eye so dilate with starlight that the whole of she seem dissolve in silver and spill over the ledge of the star for ever and ever indefinitely through space . somehow simultaneously , though incongruously , she be rid with the magnanimous hero upon the shore or under forest tree , and so might have continue be it not for the rebuke forcibly administer by the body , which , content with the normal condition of life , in no way further any attempt on the part of the mind to alter they . she grow cold , shake herself , rise , and walk towards the house . 

 by the light of the star , Stogdon House look pale and romantic , and about twice its natural size . build by a retired admiral in the early year of the nineteenth century , the curve bow window of the front , now fill with reddish - yellow light , suggest a portly three - decker , sailing sea where those dolphin and narwhal who disport themselves upon the edge of old map be scatter with an impartial hand . a semicircular flight of shallow step lead to a very large door , which Katharine have leave ajar . she hesitate , cast her eye over the front of the house , mark that a light burn in one small window upon an upper floor , and push the door open . for a moment she stand in the square hall , among many horn skull , sallow globe , crack oil - painting , and stuff owl , hesitating , it seem , whether she should open the door on her right , through which the stir of life reach her ear . listen for a moment , she hear a sound which decide she , apparently , not to enter ; her uncle , Sir Francis , be play his nightly game of whist ; it appear probable that he be lose . 

 she go up the curve stairway , which represent the one attempt at ceremony in the otherwise rather dilapidate mansion , and down a narrow passage until she come to the room whose light she have see from the garden . knock , she be tell to come in . a young man , Henry Otway , be read , with his foot on the fender . he have a fine head , the brow arch in the Elizabethan manner , but the gentle , honest eye be rather skeptical than glow with the Elizabethan vigor . he give the impression that he have not yet find the cause which suit his temperament . 

 he turn , put down his book , and look at she . he notice she rather pale , dew - drench look , as of one whose mind be not altogether settle in the body . he have often lay his difficulty before she , and guess , in some way hop , that perhaps she now have need of he . at the same time , she carry on her life with such independence that he scarcely expect any confidence to be express in word . 

 " you have flee , too , then ? " he say , look at her cloak . Katharine have forget to remove this token of her star - gazing . 

 " flee ? " she ask . " from whom d'you mean ? oh , the family party . yes , it be hot down there , so I go into the garden . " 

 " and be not   you very cold ? " Henry inquire , place coal on the fire , draw a chair up to the grate , and lay aside her cloak . her indifference to such detail often force Henry to act the part generally take by woman in such dealing . it be one of the tie between they . 

 " thank you , Henry , " she say . " I be not disturb you ? " 

 " I be not here . I be at Bungay , " he reply . " I be give a music lesson to Harold and Julia . that be why I have to leave the table with the lady I be spend the night there , and I shall not   be back till late on Christmas Eve . " 

 " how I wish " Katharine begin , and stop short . " I think these party be a great mistake , " she add briefly , and sigh . 

 " oh , horrible ! " he agree ; and they both fall silent . 

 her sigh make he look at she . should he venture to ask she why she sigh ? be her reticence about her own affair as inviolable as it have often be convenient for rather an egoistical young man to think it ? but since her engagement to Rodney , Henry 's feeling towards she have become rather complex ; equally divide between an impulse to hurt she and an impulse to be tender to she ; and all the time he suffer a curious irritation from the sense that she be drift away from he for ever upon unknown sea . on her side , directly Katharine get into his presence , and the sense of the star drop from she , she know that any intercourse between people be extremely partial ; from the whole mass of her feeling , only one or two could be select for Henry 's inspection , and therefore she sigh . then she look at he , and their eye meeting , much more seem to be in common between they than have appear possible . at any rate they have a grandfather in common ; at any rate there be a kind of loyalty between they sometimes find between relation who have no other cause to like each other , as these two have . 

 " well , what be the date of the wedding ? " say Henry , the malicious mood now predominate . 

 " I think some time in March , " she reply . 

 " and afterwards ? " he ask . 

 " we take a house , I suppose , somewhere in Chelsea . " 

 " it be very interesting , " he observe , steal another look at she . 

 she lie back in her arm - chair , her foot high upon the side of the grate , and in front of she , presumably to screen her eye , she hold a newspaper from which she pick up a sentence or two now and again . observe this , Henry remark : 

 " perhaps marriage will make you more human . " 

 at this she lower the newspaper an inch or two , but say nothing . indeed , she sit quite silent for over a minute . 

 " when you consider thing like the star , our affair do not   seem to matter very much , do they ? " she say suddenly . 

 " I do not   think I ever do consider thing like the star , " Henry reply . " I be not sure that that be not the explanation , though , " he add , now observe she steadily . 

 " I doubt whether there be an explanation , " she reply rather hurriedly , not clearly understand what he mean . 

 " what ? no explanation of anything ? " he inquire , with a smile . 

 " oh , thing happen . that be about all , " she let drop in her casual , decide way . 

 " that certainly seem to explain some of your action , " Henry think to himself . 

 " one thing be about as good as another , and one be get to do something , " he say aloud , express what he suppose to be her attitude , much in her accent . perhaps she detect the imitation , for look gently at he , she say , with ironical composure : 

 " well , if you believe that your life must be simple , Henry . " 

 " but I do not   believe it , " he say shortly . 

 " no more do I , " she reply . 

 " what about the star ? " he ask a moment later . " I understand that you rule your life by the star ? " 

 she let this pass , either because she do not attend to it , or because the tone be not to her liking . 

 once more she pause , and then she inquire : 

 " but do you always understand why you do everything ? ought one to understand ? People like my mother understand , " she reflect . " now I must go down to they , I suppose , and see what be happen . " 

 " what could be happen ? " Henry protest . 

 " oh , they may want to settle something , " she reply vaguely , put her foot on the ground , rest her chin on her hand , and look out of her large dark eye contemplatively at the fire . 

 " and then there be William , " she add , as if by an afterthought . 

 Henry very nearly laugh , but restrain himself . 

 " do they know what coal be make of , Henry ? " she ask , a moment later . 

 " mare ' tail , I believe , " he hazard . 

 " have you ever be down a coal - mine ? " she go on . 

 " do not   let us talk about coal - mine , Katharine , " he protest . " we shall probably never see each other again . when you be married " 

 tremendously to his surprise , he see the tear stand in her eye . 

 " why do you all tease I ? " she say . " it be not   kind . " 

 Henry could not pretend that he be altogether ignorant of her meaning , though , certainly , he have never guess that she mind the teasing . but before he know what to say , her eye be clear again , and the sudden crack in the surface be almost fill up . 

 " thing be not   easy , anyhow , " she state . 

 obey an impulse of genuine affection , Henry speak . 

 " promise I , Katharine , that if I can ever help you , you will let I . " 

 she seem to consider , look once more into the red of the fire , and decide to refrain from any explanation . 

 " yes , I promise that , " she say at length , and Henry feel himself gratify by her complete sincerity , and begin to tell she now about the coal - mine , in obedience to her love of fact . 

 they be , indeed , descend the shaft in a small cage , and could hear the pick of the miner , something like the gnawing of rat , in the earth beneath they , when the door be burst open , without any knocking . 

 " well , here you be ! " Rodney exclaim . both Katharine and Henry turn round very quickly and rather guiltily . Rodney be in evening dress . it be clear that his temper be ruffle . 

 " that be where you have   be all the time , " he repeat , look at Katharine . 

 " I have   only be here about ten minute , " she reply . 

 " my dear Katharine , you leave the drawing - room over an hour ago . " 

 she say nothing . 

 " do it very much matter ? " Henry ask . 

 Rodney find it hard to be unreasonable in the presence of another man , and do not answer he . 

 " they do not   like it , " he say . " it be not   kind to old people to leave they alone although I have   no doubt it be much more amusing to sit up here and talk to Henry . " 

 " we be discuss coal - mine , " say Henry urbanely . 

 " yes . but we be talk about much more interesting thing before that , " say Katharine . 

 from the apparent determination to hurt he with which she speak , Henry think that some sort of explosion on Rodney 's part be about to take place . 

 " I can quite understand that , " say Rodney , with his little chuckle , lean over the back of his chair and tap the woodwork lightly with his finger . they be all silent , and the silence be acutely uncomfortable to Henry , at least . 

 " be it very dull , William ? " Katharine suddenly ask , with a complete change of tone and a little gesture of her hand . 

 " of course it be dull , " William say sulkily . 

 " well , you stay and talk to Henry , and I will go down , " she reply . 

 she rise as she speak , and as she turn to leave the room , she lay her hand , with a curiously caress gesture , upon Rodney 's shoulder . instantly Rodney clasp her hand in his , with such an impulse of emotion that Henry be annoy , and rather ostentatiously open a book . 

 " I shall come down with you , " say William , as she draw back her hand , and make as if to pass he . 

 " oh no , " she say hastily . " you stay here and talk to Henry . " 

 " yes , do , " say Henry , shut up his book again . his invitation be polite , without be precisely cordial . Rodney evidently hesitate as to the course he should pursue , but see Katharine at the door , he exclaim : 

 " no . I want to come with you . " 

 she look back , and say in a very commanding tone , and with an expression of authority upon her face : 

 " it be useless for you to come . I shall go to bed in ten minute . good night . " 

 she nod to they both , but Henry could not help notice that her last nod be in his direction . Rodney sit down rather heavily . 

 his mortification be so obvious that Henry scarcely like to open the conversation with some remark of a literary character . on the other hand , unless he check he , Rodney might begin to talk about his feeling , and irreticence be apt to be extremely painful , at any rate in prospect . he therefore adopt a middle course ; that be to say , he write a note upon the fly - leaf of his book , which run , " the situation be become most uncomfortable . " this he decorate with those flourish and decorative border which grow of themselves upon these occasion ; and as he do so , he think to himself that whatever Katharine 's difficulty might be , they do not justify her behavior . she have speak with a kind of brutality which suggest that , whether it be natural or assume , woman have a peculiar blindness to the feeling of man . 

 the penciling of this note give Rodney time to recover himself . perhaps , for he be a very vain man , he be more hurt that Henry have see he rebuff than by the rebuff itself . he be in love with Katharine , and vanity be not decrease but increase by love ; especially , one may hazard , in the presence of one 's own sex . but Rodney enjoy the courage which spring from that laughable and lovable defect , and when he have master his first impulse , in some way to make a fool of himself , he draw inspiration from the perfect fit of his evening dress . he choose a cigarette , tap it on the back of his hand , display his exquisite pump on the edge of the fender , and summon his self - respect . 

 " you have   several big estate round here , Otway , " he begin . " any good hunting ? let I see , what pack would it be ? who be your great man ? " 

 " Sir William Budge , the sugar king , have the big estate . he buy out poor Stanham , who go bankrupt . " 

 " which Stanham would that be ? Verney or Alfred ? " 

 " Alfred .... I do not   hunt myself . you be a great huntsman , be not   you ? you have a great reputation as a horseman , anyhow , " he add , desire to help Rodney in his effort to recover his complacency . 

 " oh , I love rid , " Rodney reply . " could I get a horse down here ? stupid of I ! I forget to bring any clothe . I can not   imagine , though , who tell you I be anything of a rider ? " 

 to tell the truth , Henry labor under the same difficulty ; he do not wish to introduce Katharine 's name , and , therefore , he reply vaguely that he have always hear that Rodney be a great rider . in truth , he have hear very little about he , one way or another , accept he as a figure often to be find in the background at his aunt 's house , and inevitably , though inexplicably , engage to his cousin . 

 " I do not   care much for shooting , " Rodney continue ; " but one have to do it , unless one want to be altogether out of thing . I dare say there be some very pretty country round here . I stay once at Bolham Hall . Young Cranthorpe be up with you , be not   he ? he marry old Lord Bolham 's daughter . very nice people in their way . " 

 " I do not   mix in that society , " Henry remark , rather shortly . but Rodney , now start on an agreeable current of reflection , could not resist the temptation of pursue it a little far . he appear to himself as a man who move easily in very good society , and know enough about the true value of life to be himself above it . 

 " oh , but you should , " he go on . " it be well worth stay there , anyhow , once a year . they make one very comfortable , and the woman be ravish . " 

 " the woman ? " Henry think to himself , with disgust . " what could any woman see in you ? " his tolerance be rapidly become exhaust , but he could not help like Rodney nevertheless , and this appear to he strange , for he be fastidious , and such word in another mouth would have condemn the speaker irreparably . he begin , in short , to wonder what kind of creature this man who be to marry his cousin might be . could any one , except a rather singular character , afford to be so ridiculously vain ? 

 " I do not   think I should get on in that society , " he reply . " I do not   think I should know what to say to Lady Rose if I meet she . " 

 " I do not   find any difficulty , " Rodney chuckle . " you talk to they about their child , if they have any , or their accomplishment painting , gardening , poetry they be so delightfully sympathetic . seriously , you know I think a woman 's opinion of one 's poetry be always worth have . do not   ask they for their reason . just ask they for their feeling . Katharine , for example " 

 " Katharine , " say Henry , with an emphasis upon the name , almost as if he resent Rodney 's use of it , " Katharine be very unlike most woman . " 

 " quite , " Rodney agree . " she be " he seem about to describe she , and he hesitate for a long time . " she be look very well , " he state , or rather almost inquire , in a different tone from that in which he have be speak . Henry bend his head . 

 " but , as a family , you be give to mood , eh ? " 

 " not Katharine , " say Henry , with decision . 

 " not Katharine , " Rodney repeat , as if he weigh the meaning of the word . " no , perhaps you be right . but her engagement have change she . naturally , " he add , " one would expect that to be so . " he wait for Henry to confirm this statement , but Henry remain silent . 

 " Katharine have have a difficult life , in some way , " he continue . " I expect that marriage will be good for she . she have great power . " 

 " great , " say Henry , with decision . 

 " yes but now what direction d'you think they take ? " 

 Rodney have completely drop his pose as a man of the world , and seem to be ask Henry to help he in a difficulty . 

 " I do not   know , " Henry hesitate cautiously . 

 " d'you think child a household that sort of thing d'you think that will satisfy she ? mind , I be out all day . " 

 " she would certainly be very competent , " Henry state . 

 " oh , she be wonderfully competent , " say Rodney . " but I get absorb in my poetry . well , Katharine have not   get that . she admire my poetry , you know , but that would not   be enough for she ? " 

 " no , " say Henry . he pause . " I think you be right , " he add , as if he be sum up his thought . " Katharine have not   find herself yet . life be not   altogether real to she yet I sometimes think " 

 " yes ? " Rodney inquire , as if he be eager for Henry to continue . " that be what I " he be go on , as Henry remain silent , but the sentence be not finish , for the door open , and they be interrupt by Henry 's young brother Gilbert , much to Henry 's relief , for he have already say more than he like . 





 CHAPTER XVII 

 when the sun shine , as it do with unusual brightness that Christmas week , it reveal much that be fade and not altogether well - keep - up in Stogdon House and its ground . in truth , Sir Francis have retire from service under the Government of India with a pension that be not adequate , in his opinion , to his service , as it certainly be not adequate to his ambition . his career have not come up to his expectation , and although he be a very fine , white - whisker , mahogany - color old man to look at , and have lay down a very choice cellar of good reading and good story , you could not long remain ignorant of the fact that some thunder - storm have sour they ; he have a grievance . this grievance date back to the middle year of the last century , when , owe to some official intrigue , his merit have be pass over in a disgraceful manner in favor of another , his junior . 

 the right and wrong of the story , presume that they have some existence in fact , be no long clearly know to his wife and child ; but this disappointment have play a very large part in their life , and have poison the life of Sir Francis much as a disappointment in love be say to poison the whole life of a woman . long brood on his failure , continual arrangement and rearrangement of his desert and rebuff , have make Sir Francis much of an egoist , and in his retirement his temper become increasingly difficult and exact . 

 his wife now offer so little resistance to his mood that she be practically useless to he . he make his daughter Eleanor into his chief confidante , and the prime of her life be be rapidly consume by her father . to she he dictate the memoir which be to avenge his memory , and she have to assure he constantly that his treatment have be a disgrace . already , at the age of thirty - five , her cheek be whiten as her mother 's have whiten , but for she there would be no memory of indian sun and indian river , and clamor of child in a nursery ; she would have very little of substance to think about when she sit , as Lady Otway now sit , knit white wool , with her eye fix almost perpetually upon the same embroider bird upon the same fire - screen . but then Lady Otway be one of the people for whom the great make - believe game of English social life have be invent ; she spend most of her time in pretend to herself and her neighbor that she be a dignified , important , much - occupy person , of considerable social standing and sufficient wealth . in view of the actual state of thing this game need a great deal of skill ; and , perhaps , at the age she have reach she be over sixty she play far more to deceive herself than to deceive any one else . moreover , the armor be wear thin ; she forget to keep up appearance more and more . 

 the worn patch in the carpet , and the pallor of the drawing - room , where no chair or cover have be renew for some year , be due not only to the miserable pension , but to the wear and tear of twelve child , eight of whom be son . as often happen in these large family , a distinct dividing - line could be trace , about half - way in the succession , where the money for educational purpose have run short , and the six young child have grow up far more economically than the elder . if the boy be clever , they win scholarship , and go to school ; if they be not clever , they take what the family connection have to offer they . the girl accept situation occasionally , but there be always one or two at home , nursing sick animal , tend silkworm , or play the flute in their bedroom . the distinction between the eld child and the young correspond almost to the distinction between a high class and a low one , for with only a haphazard education and insufficient allowance , the young child have pick up accomplishment , friend , and point of view which be not to be find within the wall of a public school or of a Government office . between the two division there be considerable hostility , the elder try to patronize the young , the young refuse to respect the elder ; but one feel unite they and instantly close any risk of a breach their common belief in the superiority of their own family to all other . Henry be the eld of the young group , and their leader ; he buy strange book and join odd society ; he go without a tie for a whole year , and have six shirt make of black flannel . he have long refuse to take a seat either in a shipping office or in a tea - merchant 's warehouse ; and persist , in spite of the disapproval of uncle and aunt , in practice both violin and piano , with the result that he could not perform professionally upon either . indeed , for thirty - two year of life he have nothing more substantial to show than a manuscript book contain the score of half an opera . in this protest of his , Katharine have always give he her support , and as she be generally hold to be an extremely sensible person , who dress too well to be eccentric , he have find her support of some use . indeed , when she come down at Christmas she usually spend a great part of her time in private conference with Henry and with Cassandra , the young girl , to whom the silkworm belong . with the young section she have a great reputation for common sense , and for something that they despise but inwardly respect and call knowledge of the world that be to say , of the way in which respectable elderly people , go to their club and din out with minister , think and behave . she have more than once play the part of ambassador between Lady Otway and her child . that poor lady , for instance , consult she for advice when , one day , she open Cassandra 's bedroom door on a mission of discovery , and find the ceiling hang with mulberry - leaf , the window block with cage , and the table stack with home - make machine for the manufacture of silk dress . 

 " I wish you could help she to take an interest in something that other people be interested in , Katharine , " she observe , rather plaintively , detail her grievance . " it be all Henry 's doing , you know , give up her party and take to these nasty insect . it do not   follow that if a man can do a thing a woman may too . " 

 the morning be sufficiently bright to make the chair and sofa in Lady Otway 's private sitting - room appear more than usually shabby , and the gallant gentleman , her brother and cousin , who have defend the empire and leave their bone on many frontier , look at the world through a film of yellow which the morning light seem to have draw across their photograph . Lady Otway sigh , it may be at the faded relic , and turn , with resignation , to her ball of wool , which , curiously and characteristically , be not an ivory - white , but rather a tarnish yellow - white . she have call she niece in for a little chat . she have always trust she , and now more than ever , since her engagement to Rodney , which seem to Lady Otway extremely suitable , and just what one would wish for one 's own daughter . Katharine unwittingly increase her reputation for wisdom by ask to be give knitting - needle too . 

 " it be so very pleasant , " say Lady Otway , " to knit while one 's talk . and now , my dear Katharine , tell I about your plan . " 

 the emotion of the night before , which she have suppress in such a way as to keep she awake till dawn , have leave Katharine a little jade , and thus more matter - of - fact than usual . she be quite ready to discuss her plan house and rent , servant and economy without feel that they concern she very much . as she speak , knit methodically meanwhile , Lady Otway note , with approval , the upright , responsible bearing of her niece , to whom the prospect of marriage have bring some gravity most become in a bride , and yet , in these day , most rare . yes , Katharine 's engagement have change she a little . 

 " what a perfect daughter , or daughter - in - law ! " she think to herself , and could not help contrast she with Cassandra , surround by innumerable silkworm in her bedroom . 

 " yes , " she continue , glance at Katharine , with the round , greenish eye which be as inexpressive as moist marble , " Katharine be like the girl of my youth . we take the serious thing of life seriously . " but just as she be derive satisfaction from this thought , and be produce some of the hoard wisdom which none of her own daughter , alas ! seem now to need , the door open , and Mrs. Hilbery come in , or rather , do not come in , but stand in the doorway and smile , have evidently mistake the room . 

 " I never shall know my way about this house ! " she exclaim . " I be on my way to the library , and I do not   want to interrupt . you and Katharine be have a little chat ? " 

 the presence of her sister - in - law make Lady Otway slightly uneasy . how could she go on with what she be say in Maggie 's presence ? for she be say something that she have never say , all these year , to Maggie herself . 

 " I be tell Katharine a few little commonplace about marriage , " she say , with a little laugh . " be none of my child look after you , Maggie ? " 

 " marriage , " say Mrs. Hilbery , come into the room , and nod her head once or twice , " I always say marriage be a school . and you do not   get the prize unless you go to school . Charlotte have win all the prize , " she add , give her sister - in - law a little pat , which make Lady otway more uncomfortable still . she half laugh , mutter something , and end on a sigh . 

 " Aunt Charlotte be say that it be no good be married unless you submit to your husband , " say Katharine , frame her aunt 's word into a far more definite shape than they have really wear ; and when she speak thus she do not appear at all old - fashioned . Lady Otway look at she and pause for a moment . 

 " well , I really do not   advise a woman who want to have thing her own way to get marry , " she say , begin a fresh row rather elaborately . 

 Mrs. Hilbery know something of the circumstance which , as she think , have inspire this remark . in a moment her face be cloud with sympathy which she do not quite know how to express . 

 " what a shame it be ! " she exclaim , forget that her train of thought might not be obvious to her listener . " but , Charlotte , it would have be much bad if Frank have disgrace himself in any way . and it be not   what our husband get , but what they be . I use to dream of white horse and palanquin , too ; but still , I like the ink - pot well . and who know ? " she conclude , look at Katharine , " your father may be make a baronet to - morrow . " 

 Lady Otway , who be Mr. Hilbery 's sister , know quite well that , in private , the Hilberys call Sir Francis " that old Turk , " and though she do not follow the drift of Mrs. Hilbery 's remark , she know what prompt they . 

 " but if you can give way to your husband , " she say , speak to Katharine , as if there be a separate understanding between they , " a happy marriage be the happy thing in the world . " 

 " yes , " say Katharine , " but " she do not mean to finish her sentence , she merely wish to induce her mother and her aunt to go on talk about marriage , for she be in the mood to feel that other people could help she if they would . she go on knitting , but her finger work with a decision that be oddly unlike the smooth and contemplative sweep of Lady Otway 's plump hand . now and then she look swiftly at her mother , then at her aunt . Mrs. Hilbery hold a book in her hand , and be on her way , as Katharine guess , to the library , where another paragraph be to be add to that varied assortment of paragraph , the Life of Richard Alardyce . normally , Katharine would have hurry her mother downstairs , and see that no excuse for distraction come her way . her attitude towards the poet 's life , however , have change with other change ; and she be content to forget all about her scheme of hour . Mrs. Hilbery be secretly delighted . her relief at find herself excuse manifest itself in a series of sidelong glance of sly humor in her daughter 's direction , and the indulgence put she in the good of spirit . be she to be allow merely to sit and talk ? it be so much pleasanter to sit in a nice room fill with all sort of interesting odd and end which she have not   look at for a year , at least , than to seek out one date which contradict another in a dictionary . 

 " we have   all have perfect husband , " she conclude , generously forgiving Sir Francis all his fault in a lump . " not that I think a bad temper be really a fault in a man . I do not   mean a bad temper , " she correct herself , with a glance obviously in the direction of Sir Francis . " I should say a quick , impatient temper . Most , in fact all great man have have bad temper except your grandfather , Katharine , " and here she sigh , and suggest that , perhaps , she ought to go down to the library . 

 " but in the ordinary marriage , be it necessary to give way to one 's husband ? " say Katharine , take no notice of her mother 's suggestion , blind even to the depression which have now take possession of she at the thought of her own inevitable death . 

 " I should say yes , certainly , " say Lady Otway , with a decision most unusual for she . 

 " then one ought to make up one 's mind to that before one be marry , " Katharine muse , seem to address herself . 

 Mrs. Hilbery be not much interested in these remark , which seem to have a melancholy tendency , and to revive her spirit she have recourse to an infallible remedy she look out of the window . 

 " do look at that lovely little blue bird ! " she exclaim , and her eye look with extreme pleasure at the soft sky . at the tree , at the green field visible behind those tree , and at the leafless branch which surround the body of the small blue tit . her sympathy with nature be exquisite . 

 " Most woman know by instinct whether they can give it or not , " Lady Otway slip in quickly , in rather a low voice , as if she want to get this say while her sister - in - law 's attention be divert . " and if not well then , my advice would be do not   marry . " 

 " oh , but marriage be the happy life for a woman , " say Mrs. Hilbery , catch the word marriage , as she bring her eye back to the room again . then she turn her mind to what she have say . 

 " it be the most interesting life , " she correct herself . she look at her daughter with a look of vague alarm . it be the kind of maternal scrutiny which suggest that , in look at her daughter a mother be really look at herself . she be not altogether satisfied ; but she purposely make no attempt to break down the reserve which , as a matter of fact , be a quality she particularly admire and depend upon in her daughter . but when her mother say that marriage be the most interesting life , Katharine feel , as she be apt to do suddenly , for no definite reason , that they understand each other , in spite of differ in every possible way . yet the wisdom of the old seem to apply more to feeling which we have in common with the rest of the human race than to our feeling as individual , and Katharine know that only some one of her own age could follow her meaning . both these elderly woman seem to she to have be content with so little happiness , and at the moment she have not sufficient force to feel certain that their version of marriage be the wrong one . in London , certainly , this temperate attitude toward her own marriage have seem to she just . why have she now change ? why do it now depress she ? it never occur to she that her own conduct could be anything of a puzzle to her mother , or that eld people be as much affect by the young as the young be by they . and yet it be true that love passion whatever one choose to call it , have play far less part in Mrs. Hilbery 's life than might have seem likely , judge from her enthusiastic and imaginative temperament . she have always be more interested by other thing . Lady Otway , strange though it seem , guess more accurately at Katharine 's state of mind than her mother do . 

 " why do not   we all live in the country ? " exclaim Mrs. Hilbery , once more look out of the window . " I be sure one would think such beautiful thing if one live in the country . no horrid slum house to depress one , no tram or motor - car ; and the people all look so plump and cheerful . be not   there some little cottage near you , Charlotte , which would do for we , with a spare room , perhaps , in case we ask a friend down ? and we should save so much money that we should be able to travel " 

 " yes . you would find it very nice for a week or two , no doubt , " say Lady Otway . " but what hour would you like the carriage this morning ? " she continue , touch the bell . 

 " Katharine shall decide , " say Mrs. Hilbery , feel herself unable to prefer one hour to another . " and I be just go to tell you , Katharine , how , when I wake this morning , everything seem so clear in my head that if I have have a pencil I believe I could have write quite a long chapter . when we be out on our drive I shall find we a house . a few tree round it , and a little garden , a pond with a chinese duck , a study for your father , a study for I , and a sit room for Katharine , because then she will be a married lady . " 

 at this Katharine shiver a little , draw up to the fire , and warm her hand by spread they over the topmost peak of the coal . she wish to bring the talk back to marriage again , in order to hear Aunt Charlotte 's view , but she do not know how to do this . 

 " let I look at your engagement - ring , Aunt Charlotte , " she say , notice her own . 

 she take the cluster of green stone and turn it round and round , but she do not know what to say next . 

 " that poor old ring be a sad disappointment to I when I first have it , " Lady Otway muse . " I would set my heart on a diamond ring , but I never like to tell Frank , naturally . he buy it at Simla . " 

 Katharine turn the ring round once more , and give it back to her aunt without speak . and while she turn it round her lip set themselves firmly together , and it seem to she that she could satisfy William as these woman have satisfy their husband ; she could pretend to like emerald when she prefer diamond . have replace her ring , Lady Otway remark that it be chilly , though not more so than one must expect at this time of year . indeed , one ought to be thankful to see the sun at all , and she advise they both to dress warmly for their drive . her aunt 's stock of commonplace , Katharine sometimes suspect , have be lay in on purpose to fill silence with , and have little to do with her private thought . but at this moment they seem terribly in keep with her own conclusion , so that she take up her knitting again and listen , chiefly with a view to confirm herself in the belief that to be engage to marry some one with whom you be not in love be an inevitable step in a world where the existence of passion be only a traveller 's story bring from the heart of deep forest and tell so rarely that wise people doubt whether the story can be true . she do she good to listen to her mother ask for news of John , and to her aunt reply with the authentic history of Hilda 's engagement to an officer in the indian Army , but she cast her mind alternately towards forest path and starry blossom , and towards page of neatly write mathematical sign . when her mind take this turn her marriage seem no more than an archway through which it be necessary to pass in order to have her desire . at such time the current of her nature run in its deep narrow channel with great force and with an alarming lack of consideration for the feeling of other . just as the two elder lady have finish their survey of the family prospect , and Lady Otway be nervously anticipate some general statement as to life and death from her sister - in - law , Cassandra burst into the room with the news that the carriage be at the door . 

 " why do not   Andrews tell I himself ? " say Lady Otway , peevishly , blame her servant for not live up to her ideal . 

 when Mrs. Hilbery and Katharine arrive in the hall , ready dress for their drive , they find that the usual discussion be go forward as to the plan of the rest of the family . in token of this , a great many door be open and shut , two or three people stand irresolutely on the stair , now go a few step up , and now a few step down , and Sir Francis himself have come out from his study , with the " Times " under his arm , and a complaint about noise and draught from the open door which , at least , have the effect of bundle the people who do not want to go into the carriage , and send those who do not want to stay back to their room . it be decide that Mrs. Hilbery , Katharine , Rodney , and Henry should drive to Lincoln , and any one else who wish to go should follow on bicycle or in the pony - cart . every one who stay at Stogdon House have to make this expedition to Lincoln in obedience to Lady Otway 's conception of the right way to entertain her guest , which she have imbibe from read in fashionable paper of the behavior of Christmas party in ducal house . the carriage horse be both fat and aged , still they match ; the carriage be shaky and uncomfortable , but the Otway arm be visible on the panel . Lady Otway stand on the topmost step , wrap in a white shawl , and wave her hand almost mechanically until they have turn the corner under the laurel - bush , when she retire indoor with a sense that she have play her part , and a sigh at the thought that none of her child feel it necessary to play theirs . 

 the carriage bowl along smoothly over the gently curve road . Mrs. Hilbery drop into a pleasant , inattentive state of mind , in which she be conscious of the run green line of the hedge , of the swell ploughland , and of the mild blue sky , which serve she , after the first five minute , for a pastoral background to the drama of human life ; and then she think of a cottage garden , with the flash of yellow daffodil against blue water ; and what with the arrangement of these different prospect , and the shaping of two or three lovely phrase , she do not notice that the young people in the carriage be almost silent . Henry , indeed , have be include against his wish , and revenge himself by observe Katharine and Rodney with disillusioned eye ; while Katharine be in a state of gloomy self - suppression which result in complete apathy . when Rodney speak to she she either say " Hum ! " or assent so listlessly that he address his next remark to her mother . his deference be agreeable to she , his manner be exemplary ; and when the church tower and factory chimney of the town come into sight , she rouse herself , and recall memory of the fair summer of 1853 , which fit in harmoniously with what she be dream of the future . 





 CHAPTER XVIII 

 but other passenger be approach Lincoln meanwhile by other road on foot . a county town draw the inhabitant of all vicarage , farm , country house , and wayside cottage , within a radius of ten mile at least , once or twice a week to its street ; and among they , on this occasion , be Ralph Denham and Mary Datchet . they despise the road , and take their way across the field ; and yet , from their appearance , it do not seem as if they care much where they walk so long as the way do not actually trip they up . when they leave the vicarage , they have begin an argument which swing their foot along so rhythmically in time with it that they cover the ground at over four mile an hour , and see nothing of the hedgerow , the swell plowland , or the mild blue sky . what they see be the Houses of Parliament and the Government Offices in Whitehall . they both belong to the class which be conscious of have lose its birthright in these great structure and be seek to build another kind of lodge for its own notion of law and government . purposely , perhaps , Mary do not agree with Ralph ; she love to feel her mind in conflict with his , and to be certain that he spar her female judgment no ounce of his male muscularity . he seem to argue as fiercely with she as if she be his brother . they be alike , however , in believe that it behoove they to take in hand the repair and reconstruction of the fabric of England . they agree in think that nature have not be generous in the endowment of our councilor . they agree , unconsciously , in a mute love for the muddy field through which they tramp , with eye narrow close by the concentration of their mind . at length they draw breath , let the argument fly away into the limbo of other good argument , and , lean over a gate , open their eye for the first time and look about they . their foot tingle with warm blood and their breath rise in steam around they . the bodily exercise make they both feel more direct and less self - conscious than usual , and Mary , indeed , be overcome by a sort of light - headedness which make it seem to she that it matter very little what happen next . it matter so little , indeed , that she feel herself on the point of say to Ralph : 

 " I love you ; I shall never love anybody else . marry I or leave I ; think what you like of I I do not   care a straw . " at the moment , however , speech or silence seem immaterial , and she merely clap her hand together , and look at the distant wood with the rust - like bloom on their brown , and the green and blue landscape through the steam of her own breath . it seem a mere toss - up whether she say , " I love you , " or whether she say , " I love the beech - tree , " or only " I love I love . " 

 " do you know , Mary , " Ralph suddenly interrupt she , " I have   make up my mind . " 

 her indifference must have be superficial , for it disappear at once . indeed , she lose sight of the tree , and see her own hand upon the topmost bar of the gate with extreme distinctness , while he go on : 

 " I have   make up my mind to chuck my work and live down here . I want you to tell I about that cottage you speak of . however , I suppose there will be no difficulty about get a cottage , will there ? " he speak with an assumption of carelessness as if expect she to dissuade he . 

 she still wait , as if for he to continue ; she be convince that in some roundabout way he approach the subject of their marriage . 

 " I can not   stand the office any long , " he proceed . " I do not   know what my family will say ; but I be sure I be right . do not   you think so ? " 

 " live down here by yourself ? " she ask . 

 " some old woman would do for I , I suppose , " he reply . " I be sick of the whole thing , " he go on , and open the gate with a jerk . they begin to cross the next field walk side by side . 

 " I tell you , Mary , it be utter destruction , work away , day after day , at stuff that do not   matter a damn to any one . I have   stand eight year of it , and I be not go to stand it any long . I suppose this all seem to you mad , though ? " 

 by this time Mary have recover her self - control . 

 " no . I think you be not   happy , " she say . 

 " why do you think that ? " he ask , with some surprise . 

 " do not   you remember that morning in Lincoln 's Inn Fields ? " she ask . 

 " yes , " say Ralph , slacken his pace and remember Katharine and her engagement , the purple leaf stamp into the path , the white paper radiant under the electric light , and the hopelessness which seem to surround all these thing . 

 " you be right , Mary , " he say , with something of an effort , " though I do not   know how you guess it . " 

 she be silent , hop that he might tell she the reason of his unhappiness , for his excuse have not deceive she . 

 " I be unhappy very unhappy , " he repeat . some six week separate he from that afternoon when he have sit upon the Embankment watch his vision dissolve in mist as the water swam past and the sense of his desolation still make he shiver . he have not recover in the least from that depression . here be an opportunity for make himself face it , as he feel that he ought to ; for , by this time , no doubt , it be only a sentimental ghost , well exorcise by ruthless exposure to such an eye as Mary 's , than allow to underlie all his action and thought as have be the case ever since he first see Katharine Hilbery pour out tea . he must begin , however , by mention her name , and this he find it impossible to do . he persuade himself that he could make an honest statement without speak her name ; he persuade himself that his feeling have very little to do with she . 

 " unhappiness be a state of mind , " he say , " by which I mean that it be not necessarily the result of any particular cause . " 

 this rather stilte beginning do not please he , and it become more and more obvious to he that , whatever he might say , his unhappiness have be directly cause by Katharine . 

 " I begin to find my life unsatisfactory , " he start afresh . " it seem to I meaningless . " he pause again , but feel that this , at any rate , be true , and that on these line he could go on . 

 " all this money - making and work ten hour a day in an office , what be it for ? when one be a boy , you see , one 's head be so full of dream that it do not   seem to matter what one do . and if you be ambitious , you be all right ; you have   get a reason for go on . now my reason cease to satisfy I . perhaps I never have any . that be very likely now I come to think of it .   what reason be there for anything , though ?   still , it be impossible , after a certain age , to take oneself in satisfactorily . and I know what carry I on " for a good reason now occur to he " I want to be the savior of my family and all that kind of thing . I want they to get on in the world . that be a lie , of course a kind of self - glorification , too . like most people , I suppose , I have   live almost entirely among delusion , and now I be at the awkward stage of find it out . I want another delusion to go on with . that be what my unhappiness amount to , Mary . " 

 there be two reason that keep Mary very silent during this speech , and draw curiously straight line upon her face . in the first place , Ralph make no mention of marriage ; in the second , he be not speak the truth . 

 " I do not   think it will be difficult to find a cottage , " she say , with cheerful hardness , ignore the whole of this statement . " you have   get a little money , have not   you ? yes , " she conclude , " I do not   see why it should not   be a very good plan . " 

 they cross the field in complete silence . Ralph be surprise by her remark and a little hurt , and yet , on the whole , rather pleased . he have convince himself that it be impossible to lay his case truthfully before Mary , and , secretly , he be relieve to find that he have not part with his dream to she . she be , as he have always find she , the sensible , loyal friend , the woman he trust ; whose sympathy he could count upon , provide he keep within certain limit . he be not displeased to find that those limit be very clearly marked . when they have cross the next hedge she say to he : 

 " yes , Ralph , it be time you make a break . I have   come to the same conclusion myself . only it will not   be a country cottage in my case ; it will be America . America ! " she cry . " that be the place for I ! they will teach I something about organize a movement there , and I will come back and show you how to do it . " 

 if she mean consciously or unconsciously to belittle the seclusion and security of a country cottage , she do not succeed ; for Ralph 's determination be genuine . but she make he visualize she in her own character , so that he look quickly at she , as she walk a little in front of he across the plow field ; for the first time that morning he see she independently of he or of his preoccupation with Katharine . he seem to see her marching ahead , a rather clumsy but powerful and independent figure , for whose courage he feel the great respect . 

 " do not   go away , Mary ! " he exclaim , and stop . 

 " that be what you say before , Ralph , " she return , without look at he . " you want to go away yourself and you do not   want I to go away . that be not very sensible , be it ? " 

 " Mary , " he cry , sting by the remembrance of his exacting and dictatorial way with she , " what a brute I have   be to you ! " 

 it take all her strength to keep the tear from spring , and to thrust back her assurance that she would forgive he till Doomsday if he choose . she be preserve from do so only by a stubborn kind of respect for herself which lie at the root of her nature and forbade surrender , even in moment of almost overwhelming passion . now , when all be tempest and high - run wave , she know of a land where the sun shine clear upon italian grammar and file of docket paper . nevertheless , from the skeleton pallor of that land and the rock that break its surface , she know that her life there would be harsh and lonely almost beyond endurance . she walk steadily a little in front of he across the plow field . their way take they round the verge of a wood of thin tree stand at the edge of a steep fold in the land . look between the tree - trunk , Ralph see lay out on the perfectly flat and richly green meadow at the bottom of the hill a small gray manor - house , with pond , terrace , and clip hedge in front of it , a farm building or so at the side , and a screen of fir - tree rise behind , all perfectly shelter and self - sufficient . behind the house the hill rise again , and the tree on the farther summit stand upright against the sky , which appear of a more intense blue between their trunk . his mind at once be fill with a sense of the actual presence of Katharine ; the gray house and the intense blue sky give he the feeling of her presence close by . he leant against a tree , form her name beneath his breath : 

 " Katharine , Katharine , " he say aloud , and then , look round , see Mary walk slowly away from he , tear a long spray of ivy from the tree as she pass they . she seem so definitely opposed to the vision he hold in his mind that he return to it with a gesture of impatience . 

 " Katharine , Katharine , " he repeat , and seem to himself to be with she . he lose his sense of all that surround he ; all substantial thing the hour of the day , what we have do and be about to do , the presence of other people and the support we derive from see their belief in a common reality all this slip from he . so he might have feel if the earth have drop from his foot , and the empty blue have hang all round he , and the air have be steep in the presence of one woman . the chirp of a robin on the bough above his head awaken he , and his awakenment be accompany by a sigh . here be the world in which he have live ; here the plow field , the high road yonder , and Mary , strip ivy from the tree . when he come up with she he link his arm through hers and say : 

 " now , Mary , what be all this about America ? " 

 there be a brotherly kindness in his voice which seem to her magnanimous , when she reflect that she have cut short his explanation and show little interest in his change of plan . she give he her reason for think that she might profit by such a journey , omit the one reason which have set all the rest in motion . he listen attentively , and make no attempt to dissuade she . in truth , he find himself curiously eager to make certain of her good sense , and accept each fresh proof of it with satisfaction , as though it help he to make up his mind about something . she forget the pain he have cause she , and in place of it she become conscious of a steady tide of well - being which harmonize very aptly with the tramp of their foot upon the dry road and the support of his arm . the comfort be the more glowing in that it seem to be the reward of her determination to behave to he simply and without attempt to be other than she be . instead of make out an interest in the poet , she avoid they instinctively , and dwelt rather insistently upon the practical nature of her gift . 

 in a practical way she ask for particular of his cottage , which hardly exist in his mind , and correct his vagueness . 

 " you must see that there 's water , " she insist , with an exaggeration of interest . she avoid ask he what he mean to do in this cottage , and , at last , when all the practical detail have be thrash out as much as possible , he reward she by a more intimate statement . 

 " one of the room , " he say , " must be my study , for , you see , Mary , I be go to write a book . " here he withdraw his arm from her , light his pipe , and they tramp on in a sagacious kind of comradeship , the most complete they have attain in all their friendship . 

 " and what be your book to be about ? " she say , as boldly as if she have never come to grief with Ralph in talk about book . he tell she unhesitatingly that he mean to write the history of the english village from Saxon day to the present time . some such plan have lain as a seed in his mind for many year ; and now that he have decide , in a flash , to give up his profession , the seed grow in the space of twenty minute both tall and lusty . he be surprise himself at the positive way in which he speak . it be the same with the question of his cottage . that have come into existence , too , in an unromantic shape a square white house stand just off the high road , no doubt , with a neighbor who keep a pig and a dozen squall child ; for these plan be shorn of all romance in his mind , and the pleasure he derive from thinking of they be check directly it pass a very sober limit . so a sensible man who have lose his chance of some beautiful inheritance might tread out the narrow bound of his actual dwelling - place , and assure himself that life be supportable within its demesne , only one must grow turnip and cabbage , not melon and pomegranate . certainly Ralph take some pride in the resource of his mind , and be insensibly help to right himself by Mary 's trust in he . she wind her ivy spray round her ash - plant , and for the first time for many day , when alone with Ralph , set no spy upon her motif , saying , and feeling , but surrender herself to complete happiness . 

 thus talk , with easy silence and some pause to look at the view over the hedge and to decide upon the specie of a little gray - brown bird slip among the twig , they walk into Lincoln , and after stroll up and down the main street , decide upon an inn where the rounded window suggest substantial fare , nor be they mistaken . for over a hundred and fifty year hot joint , potato , green , and apple pudding have be serve to generation of country gentleman , and now , sit at a table in the hollow of the bow window , Ralph and Mary take their share of this perennial feast . look across the joint , half - way through the meal , Mary wonder whether Ralph would ever come to look quite like the other people in the room . would he be absorb among the round pink face , prick with little white bristle , the calf fit in shiny brown leather , the black - and - white check suit , which be sprinkle about in the same room with they ? she half hop so ; she think that it be only in his mind that he be different . she do not wish he to be too different from other people . the walk have give he a ruddy color , too , and his eye be light up by a steady , honest light , which could not make the simple farmer feel ill at ease , or suggest to the most devout of clergyman a disposition to sneer at his faith . she love the steep cliff of his forehead , and compare it to the brow of a young greek horseman , who rein his horse back so sharply that it half fall on its haunch . he always seem to she like a rider on a spirited horse . and there be an exaltation to she in be with he , because there be a risk that he would not be able to keep to the right pace among other people . sit opposite he at the little table in the window , she come back to that state of careless exaltation which have overcome she when they halt by the gate , but now it be accompany by a sense of sanity and security , for she feel that they have a feeling in common which scarcely need embodiment in word . how silent he be ! lean his forehead on his hand , now and then , and again look steadily and gravely at the back of the two man at the next table , with so little self - consciousness that she could almost watch his mind place one think solidly upon the top of another ; she think that she could feel he think , through the shade of her finger , and she could anticipate the exact moment when he would put an end to his thought and turn a little in his chair and say : 

 " well , Mary ? " invite she to take up the thread of thought where he have drop it . 

 and at that very moment he turn just so , and say : 

 " well , Mary ? " with the curious touch of diffidence which she love in he . 

 she laugh , and she explain her laugh on the spur of the moment by the look of the people in the street below . there be a motor - car with an old lady swathe in blue veil , and a lady 's maid on the seat opposite , hold a King Charles 's spaniel ; there be a country - woman wheel a perambulator full of stick down the middle of the road ; there be a bailiff in gaiter discuss the state of the cattle market with a dissent minister so she define they . 

 she run over this list without any fear that her companion would think her trivial . indeed , whether it be due to the warmth of the room or to the good roast beef , or whether Ralph have achieve the process which be call make up one 's mind , certainly he have give up test the good sense , the independent character , the intelligence show in her remark . he have be build one of those pile of thought , as ramshackle and fantastic as a chinese pagoda , half from word let fall by gentleman in gaiter , half from the litter in his own mind , about duck shooting and legal history , about the roman occupation of Lincoln and the relation of country gentleman with their wife , when , from all this disconnect rambling , there suddenly form itself in his mind the idea that he would ask Mary to marry he . the idea be so spontaneous that it seem to shape itself of its own accord before his eye . it be then that he turn round and make use of his old , instinctive phrase : 

 " well , Mary ? " 

 as it present itself to he at first , the idea be so new and interesting that he be half inclined to address it , without more ado , to Mary herself . his natural instinct to divide his thought carefully into two different class before he express they to she prevail . but as he watch she look out of the window and describe the old lady , the woman with the perambulator , the bailiff and the dissent minister , his eye fill involuntarily with tear . he would have like to lay his head on her shoulder and sob , while she part his hair with her finger and soothe he and say : 

 " there , there . do not   cry ! tell I why you be cry " ; and they would clasp each other tight , and her arm would hold he like his mother 's . he feel that he be very lonely , and that he be afraid of the other people in the room . 

 " how damnable this all be ! " he exclaim abruptly . 

 " what be you talk about ? " she reply , rather vaguely , still look out of the window . 

 he resent this divide attention more than , perhaps , he know , and he think how Mary would soon be on her way to America . 

 " Mary , " he say , " I want to talk to you . have not   we nearly do ? why do not   they take away these plate ? " 

 Mary feel his agitation without look at he ; she feel convinced that she know what it be that he wish to say to she . 

 " they will come all in good time , " she say ; and feel it necessary to display her extreme calmness by lift a salt - cellar and sweep up a little heap of bread - crumb . 

 " I want to apologize , " Ralph continue , not quite know what he be about to say , but feel some curious instinct which urge he to commit himself irrevocably , and to prevent the moment of intimacy from pass . 

 " I think I have   treat you very badly . that is , I have   tell you lie . do you guess that I be lie to you ? once in Lincoln 's Inn Fields and again to - day on our walk . I be a liar , Mary . do you know that ? do you think you do know I ? " 

 " I think I do , " she say . 

 at this point the waiter change their plate . 

 " it be true I do not   want you to go to America , " he say , look fixedly at the table - cloth . " in fact , my feeling towards you seem to be utterly and damnably bad , " he say energetically , although force to keep his voice low . 

 " if I be not   a selfish beast I should tell you to have nothing more to do with I . and yet , Mary , in spite of the fact that I believe what I be say , I also believe that it be good we should know each other the world be what it be , you see " and by a nod of his head he indicate the other occupant of the room , " for , of course , in an ideal state of thing , in a decent community even , there be no doubt you should not   have anything to do with I seriously , that be . " 

 " you forget that I be not an ideal character , either , " say Mary , in the same low and very earnest tone , which , in spite of be almost inaudible , surround their table with an atmosphere of concentration which be quite perceptible to the other diner , who glance at they now and then with a queer mixture of kindness , amusement , and curiosity . 

 " I be much more selfish than I let on , and I be worldly a little more than you think , anyhow . I like boss thing perhaps that be my great fault . I have   none of your passion for " here she hesitate , and glance at he , as if to ascertain what his passion be for " for the truth , " she add , as if she have find what she seek indisputably . 

 " I have   tell you I be a liar , " Ralph repeat obstinately . 

 " oh , in little thing , I dare say , " she say impatiently . " but not in real one , and that be what matter . I dare say I be more truthful than you be in small way . but I could never care " she be surprised to find herself speak the word , and have to force herself to speak it out " for any one who be a liar in that way . I love the truth a certain amount a considerable amount but not in the way you love it . " her voice sink , become inaudible , and waver as if she could scarcely keep herself from tear . 

 " good heaven ! " Ralph exclaim to himself . " she love I ! why do I never see it before ? she be go to cry ; no , but she can not   speak . " 

 the certainty overwhelm he so that he scarcely know what he be do ; the blood rush to his cheek , and although he have quite make up his mind to ask she to marry he , the certainty that she love he seem to change the situation so completely that he could not do it . he do not dare to look at she . if she cry , he do not know what he should do . it seem to he that something of a terrible and devastating nature have happen . the waiter change their plate once more . 

 in his agitation Ralph rise , turn his back upon Mary , and look out of the window . the people in the street seem to he only a dissolve and combine pattern of black particle ; which , for the moment , represent very well the involuntary procession of feeling and thought which form and dissolve in rapid succession in his own mind . at one moment he exult in the thought that Mary love he ; at the next , it seem that he be without feel for she ; her love be repulsive to he . now he feel urge to marry she at once ; now to disappear and never see she again . in order to control this disorderly race of thought he force himself to read the name on the chemist 's shop directly opposite he ; then to examine the object in the shop window , and then to focus his eye exactly upon a little group of woman look in at the great window of a large draper 's shop . this discipline have give he at least a superficial control of himself , he be about to turn and ask the waiter to bring the bill , when his eye be catch by a tall figure walk quickly along the opposite pavement a tall figure , upright , dark , and commanding , much detach from her surrounding . she hold her glove in her left hand , and the left hand be bare . all this Ralph notice and enumerate and recognize before he put a name to the whole Katharine Hilbery . she seem to be look for somebody . her eye , in fact , scan both side of the street , and for one second be raise directly to the bow window in which Ralph stand ; but she look away again instantly without give any sign that she have see he . this sudden apparition have an extraordinary effect upon he . it be as if he have think of she so intensely that his mind have form the shape of she , rather than that he have see she in the flesh outside in the street . and yet he have not be think of she at all . the impression be so intense that he could not dismiss it , nor even think whether he have see she or merely imagine she . he sit down at once , and say , briefly and strangely , rather to himself than to Mary : 

 " that be Katharine Hilbery . " 

 " Katharine Hilbery ? what do you mean ? " she ask , hardly understand from his manner whether he have see she or not . 

 " Katharine Hilbery , " he repeat . " but she be go now . " 

 " Katharine Hilbery ! " Mary think , in an instant of blind revelation ; " I have   always know it be Katharine Hilbery ! " she know it all now . 

 after a moment of downcast stupor , she raise her eye , look steadily at Ralph , and catch his fixed and dreamy gaze level at a point far beyond their surrounding , a point that she have never reach in all the time that she have know he . she notice the lip just part , the finger loosely clench , the whole attitude of rapt contemplation , which fall like a veil between they . she notice everything about he ; if there have be other sign of his utter alienation she would have seek they out , too , for she feel that it be only by heap one truth upon another that she could keep herself sit there , upright . the truth seem to support she ; it strike she , even as she look at his face , that the light of truth be shin far away beyond he ; the light of truth , she seem to frame the word as she rise to go , shin on a world not to be shake by our personal calamity . 

 Ralph hand she her coat and her stick . she take they , fasten the coat securely , grasp the stick firmly . the ivy spray be still twist about the handle ; this one sacrifice , she think , she might make to sentimentality and personality , and she pick two leaf from the ivy and put they in her pocket before she disencumber her stick of the rest of it . she grasp the stick in the middle , and settle her fur cap closely upon her head , as if she must be in trim for a long and stormy walk . next , stand in the middle of the road , she take a slip of paper from her purse , and read out loud a list of commission entrust to her fruit , butter , string , and so on ; and all the time she never speak directly to Ralph or look at he . 

 Ralph hear she give order to attentive , rosy - check man in white apron , and in spite of his own preoccupation , he comment upon the determination with which she make she wish know . once more he begin , automatically , to take stock of her characteristic . stand thus , superficially observant and stir the sawdust on the floor meditatively with the toe of his boot , he be rouse by a musical and familiar voice behind he , accompany by a light touch upon his shoulder . 

 " I be not mistaken ? surely Mr. Denham ? I catch a glimpse of your coat through the window , and I feel sure that I know your coat . have you see Katharine or William ? I be wander about Lincoln look for the ruin . " 

 it be Mrs. Hilbery ; her entrance create some stir in the shop ; many people look at she . 

 " first of all , tell I where I be , " she demand , but , catch sight of the attentive shopman , she appeal to he . " the ruin my party be wait for I at the ruin . the Roman ruin or Greek , Mr. Denham ? your town have a great many beautiful thing in it , but I wish it have not   so many ruin . I never see such delightful little pot of honey in my life be they make by your own bee ? please give I one of those little pot , and tell I how I shall find my way to the ruin . " 

 " and now , " she continue , have receive the information and the pot of honey , have be introduce to Mary , and have insist that they should accompany she back to the ruin , since in a town with so many turning , such prospect , such delightful little half - naked boy dabble in pool , such venetian canal , such old blue china in the curiosity shop , it be impossible for one person all alone to find her way to the ruin . " now , " she exclaim , " please tell I what you be do here , Mr. Denham for you be Mr. Denham , be not   you ? " she inquire , gaze at he with a sudden suspicion of her own accuracy . " the brilliant young man who write for the Review , I mean ? only yesterday my husband be tell I he think you one of the clever young man he know . certainly , you have   be the messenger of Providence to I , for unless I would see you I be sure I should never have find the ruin at all . " 

 they have reach the Roman arch when Mrs. Hilbery catch sight of her own party , stand like sentinel face up and down the road so as to intercept she if , as they expect , she have get lodge in some shop . 

 " I have   find something much well than ruin ! " she exclaim . " I have   find two friend who tell I how to find you , which I could never have do without they . they must come and have tea with we . what a pity that we have   just have luncheon . " could they not somehow revoke that meal ? 

 Katharine , who have go a few step by herself down the road , and be investigate the window of an ironmonger , as if her mother might have get herself conceal among mowing - machine and garden - shear , turn sharply on hear her voice , and come towards they . she be a great deal surprised to see Denham and Mary Datchet . whether the cordiality with which she greet they be merely that which be natural to a surprise meeting in the country , or whether she be really glad to see they both , at any rate she exclaim with unusual pleasure as she shake hand : 

 " I never know you live here . why do not   you say so , and we could have meet ? and be you stay with Mary ? " she continue , turn to Ralph . " what a pity we do not   meet before . " 

 thus confront at a distance of only a few foot by the real body of the woman about whom he have dream so many million dream , Ralph stammer ; he make a clutch at his self - control ; the color either come to his cheek or leave they , he know not which ; but he be determined to face she and track down in the cold light of day whatever vestige of truth there might be in his persistent imagination . he do not succeed in say anything . it be Mary who speak for both of they . he be strike dumb by find that Katharine be quite different , in some strange way , from his memory , so that he have to dismiss his old view in order to accept the new one . the wind be blow her crimson scarf across her face ; the wind have already loosen her hair , which loop across the corner of one of the large , dark eye which , so he use to think , look sad ; now they look bright with the brightness of the sea strike by an unclouded ray ; everything about she seem rapid , fragmentary , and full of a kind of race speed . he realize suddenly that he have never see she in the daylight before . 

 meanwhile , it be decide that it be too late to go in search of ruin as they have intend ; and the whole party begin to walk towards the stable where the carriage have be put up . 

 " do you know , " say Katharine , keep slightly in advance of the rest with Ralph , " I think I see you this morning , stand at a window . but I decide that it could not   be you . and it must have be you all the same . " 

 " yes , I think I see you but it be not   you , " he reply . 

 this remark , and the rough strain in his voice , recall to her memory so many difficult speech and abortive meeting that she be jerk directly back to the London drawing - room , the family relic , and the tea - table ; and at the same time recall some half - finished or interrupted remark which she have want to make herself or to hear from he she could not remember what it be . 

 " I expect it be I , " she say . " I be look for my mother . it happen every time we come to Lincoln . in fact , there never be a family so unable to take care of itself as ours be . not that it very much matter , because some one always turn up in the nick of time to help we out of our scrape . once I be leave in a field with a bull when I be a baby but where do we leave the carriage ? down that street or the next ? the next , I think . " she glance back and see that the other be follow obediently , listen to certain memory of Lincoln upon which Mrs. Hilbery have start . " but what be you do here ? " she ask . 

 " I be buy a cottage . I be go to live here as soon as I can find a cottage , and Mary tell I there will be no difficulty about that . " 

 " but , " she exclaim , almost stand still in her surprise , " you will give up the Bar , then ? " it flash across her mind that he must already be engage to Mary . 

 " the solicitor 's office ? yes . I be give that up . " 

 " but why ? " she ask . she answer herself at once , with a curious change from rapid speech to an almost melancholy tone . " I think you be very wise to give it up . you will be much happy . " 

 at this very moment , when her word seem to be strike a path into the future for he , they step into the yard of an inn , and there behold the family coach of the Otways , to which one sleek horse be already attach , while the second be be lead out of the stable door by the hostler . 

 " I do not   know what one mean by happiness , " he say briefly , have to step aside in order to avoid a groom with a bucket . " why do you think I shall be happy ? I do not   expect to be anything of the kind . I expect to be rather less unhappy . I shall write a book and curse my charwoman if happiness consist in that . what do you think ? " 

 she could not answer because they be immediately surround by other member of the party by Mrs. Hilbery , and Mary , Henry Otway , and William . 

 Rodney go up to Katharine immediately and say to she : 

 " Henry be go to drive home with your mother , and I suggest that they should put we down half - way and let we walk back . " 

 Katharine nod her head . she glance at he with an oddly furtive expression . 

 " unfortunately we go in opposite direction , or we might have give you a lift , " he continue to Denham . his manner be unusually peremptory ; he seem anxious to hasten the departure , and Katharine look at he from time to time , as Denham notice , with an expression half of inquiry , half of annoyance . she at once help her mother into her cloak , and say to Mary : 

 " I want to see you . be you go back to London at once ? I will write . " she half smile at Ralph , but her look be a little overcast by something she be think , and in a very few minute the Otway carriage roll out of the stable yard and turn down the high road lead to the village of Lampsher . 

 the return drive be almost as silent as the drive from home have be in the morning ; indeed , Mrs. Hilbery leant back with closed eye in her corner , and either sleep or feign sleep , as her habit be in the interval between the season of active exertion , or continue the story which she have begin to tell herself that morning . 

 about two mile from Lampsher the road run over the rounded summit of the heath , a lonely spot mark by an obelisk of granite , set forth the gratitude of some great lady of the eighteenth century who have be set upon by highwayman at this spot and deliver from death just as hope seem lost . in summer it be a pleasant place , for the deep wood on either side murmur , and the heather , which grow thick round the granite pedestal , make the light breeze taste sweetly ; in winter the sighing of the tree be deepen to a hollow sound , and the heath be as gray and almost as solitary as the empty sweep of the cloud above it . 

 here Rodney stop the carriage and help Katharine to alight . Henry , too , give she his hand , and fancy that she press it very slightly in parting as if she send he a message . but the carriage roll on immediately , without waken Mrs. Hilbery , and leave the couple stand by the obelisk . that Rodney be angry with she and have make this opportunity for speak to she , Katharine know very well ; she be neither glad nor sorry that the time have come , nor , indeed , know what to expect , and thus remain silent . the carriage grow small and small upon the dusky road , and still Rodney do not speak . perhaps , she think , he wait until the last sign of the carriage have disappear beneath the curve of the road and they be leave entirely alone . to cloak their silence she read the writing on the obelisk , to do which she have to walk completely round it . she be murmur a word to two of the pious lady 's thank above her breath when Rodney join she . in silence they set out along the cart - track which skirt the verge of the tree . 

 to break the silence be exactly what Rodney wish to do , and yet could not do to his own satisfaction . in company it be far easy to approach Katharine ; alone with she , the aloofness and force of her character check all his natural method of attack . he believe that she have behave very badly to he , but each separate instance of unkindness seem too petty to be advance when they be alone together . 

 " there be no need for we to race , " he complain at last ; upon which she immediately slacken her pace , and walk too slowly to suit he . in desperation he say the first thing he think of , very peevishly and without the dignified prelude which he have intend . 

 " I have   not enjoy my holiday . " 

 " no ? " 

 " no . I shall be glad to get back to work again . " 

 " Saturday , Sunday , Monday there be only three day more , " she count . 

 " no one enjoy be make a fool of before other people , " he blurt out , for his irritation rise as she speak , and get the well of his awe of she , and be inflame by that awe . 

 " that refer to I , I suppose , " she say calmly . 

 " every day since we have   be here you have   do something to make I appear ridiculous , " he go on . " of course , so long as it amuse you , you be welcome ; but we have to remember that we be go to spend our life together . I ask you , only this morning , for example , to come out and take a turn with I in the garden . I be wait for you ten minute , and you never come . every one see I wait . the stable - boy see I . I be so ashamed that I go in . then , on the drive you hardly speak to I . Henry notice it . every one notice it .... you find no difficulty in talk to Henry , though . " 

 she note these various complaint and determine philosophically to answer none of they , although the last sting she to considerable irritation . she wish to find out how deep his grievance lay . 

 " none of these thing seem to I to matter , " she say . 

 " very well , then . I may as well hold my tongue , " he reply . 

 " in themselves they do not   seem to I to matter ; if they hurt you , of course they matter , " she correct herself scrupulously . her tone of consideration touch he , and he walk on in silence for a space . 

 " and we might be so happy , Katharine ! " he exclaim impulsively , and draw her arm through his . she withdraw it directly . 

 " as long as you let yourself feel like this we shall never be happy , " she say . 

 the harshness , which Henry have notice , be again unmistakable in her manner . William flinch and be silent . such severity , accompany by something indescribably cold and impersonal in her manner , have constantly be mete out to he during the last few day , always in the company of other . he have recoup himself by some ridiculous display of vanity which , as he know , put he still more at her mercy . now that he be alone with she there be no stimulus from outside to draw his attention from his injury . by a considerable effort of self - control he force himself to remain silent , and to make himself distinguish what part of his pain be due to vanity , what part to the certainty that no woman really love he could speak thus . 

 " what do I feel about Katharine ? " he think to himself . it be clear that she have be a very desirable and distinguished figure , the mistress of her little section of the world ; but more than that , she be the person of all other who seem to he the arbitress of life , the woman whose judgment be naturally right and steady , as his have never be in spite of all his culture . and then he could not see she come into a room without a sense of the flowing of robe , of the flowering of blossom , of the purple wave of the sea , of all thing that be lovely and mutable on the surface but still and passionate in their heart . 

 " if she be callous all the time and have only lead I on to laugh at I I could not   have feel that about she , " he think . " I be not a fool , after all . I can not   have be utterly mistake all these year . and yet , when she speak to I like that ! the truth of it be , " he think , " that I have   get such despicable fault that no one could help speak to I like that . Katharine be quite right . and yet those be not my serious feeling , as she know quite well . how can I change myself ? what would make her care for I ? " he be terribly tempt here to break the silence by ask Katharine in what respect he could change himself to suit she ; but he seek consolation instead by run over the list of his gift and acquirement , his knowledge of Greek and Latin , his knowledge of art and literature , his skill in the management of meter , and his ancient west - country blood . but the feeling that underlay all these feeling and puzzle he profoundly and keep he silent be the certainty that he love Katharine as sincerely as he have it in he to love any one . and yet she could speak to he like that ! in a sort of bewilderment he lose all desire to speak , and would quite readily have take up some different topic of conversation if Katharine have start one . this , however , she do not do . 

 he glance at she , in case her expression might help he to understand her behavior . as usual , she have quicken her pace unconsciously , and be now walk a little in front of he ; but he could gain little information from her eye , which look steadily at the brown heather , or from the line draw seriously upon her forehead . thus to lose touch with she , for he have no idea what she be think , be so unpleasant to he that he begin to talk about his grievance again , without , however , much conviction in his voice . 

 " if you have no feeling for I , would not   it be kind to say so to I in private ? " 

 " oh , William , " she burst out , as if he have interrupt some absorbing train of thought , " how you go on about feeling ! be not   it well not to talk so much , not to be worry always about small thing that do not   really matter ? " 

 " that be the question precisely , " he exclaim . " I only want you to tell I that they do not   matter . there be time when you seem indifferent to everything . I be vain , I have   a thousand fault ; but you know they be not everything ; you know I care for you . " 

 " and if I say that I care for you , do not   you believe I ? " 

 " say it , Katharine ! say it as if you mean it ! make I feel that you care for I ! " 

 she could not force herself to speak a word . the heather be grow dim around they , and the horizon be blot out by white mist . to ask she for passion or for certainty seem like ask that damp prospect for fierce blade of fire , or the fade sky for the intense blue vault of June . 

 he go on now to tell she of his love for she , in word which bore , even to her critical sens , the stamp of truth ; but none of this touch she , until , come to a gate whose hinge be rusty , he heave it open with his shoulder , still talk and take no account of his effort . the virility of this deed impress she ; and yet , normally , she attach no value to the power of opening gate . the strength of muscle have nothing to do on the face of it with the strength of affection ; nevertheless , she feel a sudden concern for this power run to waste on her account , which , combine with a desire to keep possession of that strangely attractive masculine power , make she rouse herself from her torpor . 

 why should she not simply tell he the truth which be that she have accept he in a misty state of mind when nothing have its right shape or size ? that it be deplorable , but that with clear eyesight marriage be out of the question ? she do not want to marry any one . she want to go away by herself , preferably to some bleak northern moor , and there study mathematic and the science of astronomy . twenty word would explain the whole situation to he . he have cease to speak ; he have tell she once more how he love she and why . she summon her courage , fix her eye upon a lightning - splinter ash - tree , and , almost as if she be read a writing fix to the trunk , begin : 

 " I be wrong to get engaged to you . I shall never make you happy . I have never love you . " 

 " Katharine ! " he protest . 

 " no , never , " she repeat obstinately . " not rightly . do not   you see , I do not   know what I be do ? " 

 " you love some one else ? " he cut her short . 

 " absolutely no one . " 

 " Henry ? " he demand . 

 " Henry ? I should have think , William , even you " 

 " there be some one , " he persist . " there have be a change in the last few week . you owe it to I to be honest , Katharine . " 

 " if I could , I would , " she reply . 

 " why do you tell I you would marry I , then ? " he demand . 

 why , indeed ? a moment of pessimism , a sudden conviction of the undeniable prose of life , a lapse of the illusion which sustain youth midway between heaven and earth , a desperate attempt to reconcile herself with fact she could only recall a moment , as of wake from a dream , which now seem to she a moment of surrender . but who could give reason such as these for do what she have do ? she shake her head very sadly . 

 " but you be not a child you be not a woman of mood , " Rodney persist . " you could not   have accept I if you have not   love I ! " he cry . 

 a sense of her own misbehavior , which she have succeed in keep from she by sharpen her consciousness of Rodney 's fault , now sweep over she and almost overwhelm she . what be his fault in comparison with the fact that he care for she ? what be her virtue in comparison with the fact that she do not care for he ? in a flash the conviction that not to care be the uttermost sin of all stamp itself upon her inmost think ; and she feel herself brand for ever . 

 he have take her arm , and hold her hand firmly in his , nor have she the force to resist what now seem to she his enormously superior strength . very well ; she would submit , as her mother and her aunt and most woman , perhaps , have submit ; and yet she know that every second of such submission to his strength be a second of treachery to he . 

 " I do say I would marry you , but it be wrong , " she force herself to say , and she stiffen her arm as if to annul even the seem submission of that separate part of she ; " for I do not   love you , William ; you have   notice it , every one 's notice it ; why should we go on pretend ? when I tell you I love you , I be wrong . I say what I know to be untrue . " 

 as none of her word seem to she at all adequate to represent what she feel , she repeat they , and emphasize they without realize the effect that they might have upon a man who care for she . she be completely take aback by find her arm suddenly drop ; then she see his face most strangely contort ; be he laugh , it flash across she ? in another moment she see that he be in tear . in her bewilderment at this apparition she stand aghast for a second . with a desperate sense that this horror must , at all cost , be stop , she then put her arm about he , draw his head for a moment upon her shoulder , and lead he on , murmur word of consolation , until he heave a great sigh . they hold fast to each other ; her tear , too , run down her cheek ; and be both quite silent . notice the difficulty with which he walk , and feel the same extreme lassitude in her own limb , she propose that they should rest for a moment where the bracken be brown and shrivel beneath an oak - tree . he assent . once more he give a great sigh , and wipe his eye with a childlike unconsciousness , and begin to speak without a trace of his previous anger . the idea come to she that they be like the child in the fairy tale who be lose in a wood , and with this in her mind she notice the scattering of dead leaf all round they which have be blow by the wind into heap , a foot or two deep , here and there . 

 " when do you begin to feel this , Katharine ? " he say ; " for it be not   true to say that you have   always feel it . I admit I be unreasonable the first night when you find that your clothe have be leave behind . still , where be the fault in that ? I could promise you never to interfere with your clothe again . I admit I be cross when I find you upstairs with Henry . perhaps I show it too openly . but that be not unreasonable either when one be engage . ask your mother . and now this terrible thing " he break off , unable for the moment to proceed any far . " this decision you say you have   come to have you discuss it with any one ? your mother , for example , or Henry ? " 

 " no , no , of course not , " she say , stir the leaf with her hand . " but you do not   understand I , William " 

 " help I to understand you " 

 " you do not   understand , I mean , my real feeling ; how could you ? I have   only now face they myself . but I have not   get the sort of feel love , I mean I do not   know what to call it " she look vaguely towards the horizon sink under mist " but , anyhow , without it our marriage would be a farce " 

 " how a farce ? " he ask . " but this kind of analysis be disastrous ! " he exclaim . 

 " I should have do it before , " she say gloomily . 

 " you make yourself think thing you do not   think , " he continue , become demonstrative with his hand , as his manner be . " believe I , Katharine , before we come here we be perfectly happy . you be full of plan for our house the chair - cover , do not   you remember ? like any other woman who be about to be marry . now , for no reason whatever , you begin to fret about your feeling and about my feeling , with the usual result . I assure you , Katharine , I have   be through it all myself . at one time I be always ask myself absurd question which come to nothing either . what you want , if I may say so , be some occupation to take you out of yourself when this morbid mood come on . if it have not   be for my poetry , I assure you , I should often have be very much in the same state myself . to let you into a secret , " he continue , with his little chuckle , which now sound almost assured , " I have   often go home from see you in such a state of nerve that I have to force myself to write a page or two before I could get you out of my head . ask Denham ; he will tell you how he meet I one night ; he will tell you what a state he find I in . " 

 Katharine start with displeasure at the mention of Ralph 's name . the thought of the conversation in which her conduct have be make a subject for discussion with Denham rouse her anger ; but , as she instantly feel , she have scarcely the right to grudge William any use of her name , see what her fault against he have be from first to last . and yet Denham ! she have a view of he as a judge . she figure he sternly weigh instance of her levity in this masculine court of inquiry into feminine morality and gruffly dismiss both she and her family with some half - sarcastic , half - tolerant phrase which seal her doom , as far as he be concern , for ever . have meet he so lately , the sense of his character be strong in she . the thought be not a pleasant one for a proud woman , but she have yet to learn the art of subdue her expression . her eye fix upon the ground , her brow draw together , give William a very fair picture of the resentment that she be force herself to control . a certain degree of apprehension , occasionally culminate in a kind of fear , have always enter into his love for she , and have increase , rather to his surprise , in the great intimacy of their engagement . beneath her steady , exemplary surface run a vein of passion which seem to he now perverse , now completely irrational , for it never take the normal channel of glorification of he and his doing ; and , indeed , he almost prefer the steady good sense , which have always mark their relationship , to a more romantic bond . but passion she have , he could not deny it , and hitherto he have try to see it employ in his thought upon the life of the child who be to be bear to they . 

 " she will make a perfect mother a mother of son , " he think ; but see she sit there , gloomy and silent , he begin to have his doubt on this point . " a farce , a farce , " he think to himself . " she say that our marriage would be a farce , " and he become suddenly aware of their situation , sit upon the ground , among the dead leaf , not fifty yard from the main road , so that it be quite possible for some one pass to see and recognize they . he brush off his face any trace that might remain of that unseemly exhibition of emotion . but he be more troubled by Katharine 's appearance , as she sit rapt in thought upon the ground , than by his own ; there be something improper to he in her self - forgetfulness . a man naturally alive to the convention of society , he be strictly conventional where woman be concern , and especially if the woman happen to be in any way connect with he . he notice with distress the long strand of dark hair touch her shoulder and two or three dead beech - leaf attach to her dress ; but to recall her mind in their present circumstance to a sense of these detail be impossible . she sit there , seem unconscious of everything . he suspect that in her silence she be reproach herself ; but he wish that she would think of her hair and of the dead beech - leaf , which be of more immediate importance to he than anything else . indeed , these trifle draw his attention strangely from his own doubtful and uneasy state of mind ; for relief , mix itself with pain , stir up a most curious hurry and tumult in his breast , almost conceal his first sharp sense of bleak and overwhelming disappointment . in order to relieve this restlessness and close a distressingly ill - order scene , he rise abruptly and help Katharine to her foot . she smile a little at the minute care with which he tidy she and yet , when he brush the dead leaf from his own coat , she flinch , see in that action the gesture of a lonely man . 

 " William , " she say , " I will marry you . I will try to make you happy . " 





 CHAPTER XIX 

 the afternoon be already grow dark when the two other wayfarer , Mary and Ralph Denham , come out on the high road beyond the outskirt of Lincoln . the high road , as they both feel , be well suit to this return journey than the open country , and for the first mile or so of the way they speak little . in his own mind Ralph be follow the passage of the Otway carriage over the heath ; he then go back to the five or ten minute that he have spend with Katharine , and examine each word with the care that a scholar display upon the irregularity of an ancient text . he be determined that the glow , the romance , the atmosphere of this meeting should not paint what he must in future regard as sober fact . on her side Mary be silent , not because her thought take much handling , but because her mind seem empty of thought as her heart of feeling . only Ralph 's presence , as she know , preserve this numbness , for she could foresee a time of loneliness when many variety of pain would beset she . at the present moment her effort be to preserve what she could of the wreck of her self - respect , for such she deem that momentary glimpse of her love so involuntarily reveal to Ralph . in the light of reason it do not much matter , perhaps , but it be her instinct to be careful of that vision of herself which keep pace so evenly beside every one of we , and have be damage by her confession . the gray night come down over the country be kind to she ; and she think that one of these day she would find comfort in sit upon the earth , alone , beneath a tree . look through the darkness , she mark the swell ground and the tree . Ralph make she start by say abruptly ; 

 " what I be go to say when we be interrupt at lunch be that if you go to America I shall come , too . it can not   be hard to earn a living there than it be here . however , that be not the point . the point be , Mary , that I want to marry you . well , what do you say ? " he speak firmly , wait for no answer , and take her arm in his . " you know I by this time , the good and the bad , " he go on . " you know my temper . I have   try to let you know my fault . well , what do you say , Mary ? " 

 she say nothing , but this do not seem to strike he . 

 " in most way , at least in the important way , as you say , we know each other and we think alike . I believe you be the only person in the world I could live with happily . and if you feel the same about I as you do , do not   you , Mary ? we should make each other happy . " here he pause , and seem to be in no hurry for an answer ; he seem , indeed , to be continue his own thought . 

 " yes , but I be afraid I could not   do it , " Mary say at last . the casual and rather hurried way in which she speak , together with the fact that she be say the exact opposite of what he expect she to say , baffle he so much that he instinctively loosen his clasp upon her arm and she withdraw it quietly . 

 " you could not   do it ? " he ask . 

 " no , I could not   marry you , " she reply . 

 " you do not   care for I ? " 

 she make no answer . 

 " well , Mary , " he say , with a curious laugh , " I must be an arrant fool , for I think you do . " they walk for a minute or two in silence , and suddenly he turn to she , look at she , and exclaim : " I do not   believe you , Mary . you be not tell I the truth . " 

 " I be too tired to argue , Ralph , " she reply , turn her head away from he . " I ask you to believe what I say . I can not   marry you ; I do not   want to marry you . " 

 the voice in which she state this be so evidently the voice of one in some extremity of anguish that Ralph have no course but to obey she . and as soon as the tone of her voice have die out , and the surprise fade from his mind , he find himself believe that she have speak the truth , for he have but little vanity , and soon her refusal seem a natural thing to he . he slip through all the grade of despondency until he reach a bottom of absolute gloom . failure seem to mark the whole of his life ; he have fail with Katharine , and now he have fail with Mary . up at once spring the thought of Katharine , and with it a sense of exult freedom , but this he check instantly . no good have ever come to he from Katharine ; his whole relationship with she have be make up of dream ; and as he think of the little substance there have be in his dream he begin to lay the blame of the present catastrophe upon his dream . 

 " have not   I always be think of Katharine while I be with Mary ? I might have love Mary if it have not   be for that idiocy of mine . she care for I once , I be certain of that , but I torment she so with my humor that I let my chance slip , and now she will not   risk marry I . and this be what I have   make of my life nothing , nothing , nothing . " 

 the tramp of their boot upon the dry road seem to asseverate nothing , nothing , nothing . Mary think that this silence be the silence of relief ; his depression she ascribe to the fact that he have see Katharine and part from she , leave she in the company of William Rodney . she could not blame he for love Katharine , but that , when he love another , he should ask she to marry he that seem to she the cruell treachery . their old friendship and its firm base upon indestructible quality of character crumble , and her whole past seem foolish , herself weak and credulous , and Ralph merely the shell of an honest man . oh , the past so much make up of Ralph ; and now , as she see , make up of something strange and false and other than she have think it . she try to recapture a saying she have make to help herself that morning , as Ralph pay the bill for luncheon ; but she could see he pay the bill more vividly than she could remember the phrase . something about truth be in it ; how to see the truth be our great chance in this world . 

 " if you do not   want to marry I , " Ralph now begin again , without abruptness , with diffidence rather , " there be no need why we should cease to see each other , be there ? or would you rather that we should keep apart for the present ? " 

 " keep apart ? I do not   know I must think about it . " 

 " tell I one thing , Mary , " he resume ; " have I do anything to make you change your mind about I ? " 

 she be immensely tempt to give way to her natural trust in he , revive by the deep and now melancholy tone of his voice , and to tell he of her love , and of what have change it . but although it seem likely that she would soon control her anger with he , the certainty that he do not love she , confirm by every word of his proposal , forbid any freedom of speech . to hear he speak and to feel herself unable to reply , or constrain in her reply , be so painful that she long for the time when she should be alone . a more pliant woman would have take this chance of an explanation , whatever risk attach to it ; but to one of Mary 's firm and resolute temperament there be degradation in the idea of self - abandonment ; let the wave of emotion rise ever so high , she could not shut her eye to what she conceive to be the truth . her silence puzzle Ralph . he search his memory for word or deed that might have make she think badly of he . in his present mood instance come but too quickly , and on top of they this culminate proof of his baseness that he have ask she to marry he when his reason for such a proposal be selfish and half - hearted . 

 " you need not   answer , " he say grimly . " there be reason enough , I know . but must they kill our friendship , Mary ? let I keep that , at least . " 

 " oh , " she think to herself , with a sudden rush of anguish which threaten disaster to her self - respect , " it have come to this to this when I could have give he everything ! " 

 " yes , we can still be friend , " she say , with what firmness she could muster . 

 " I shall want your friendship , " he say . he add , " if you find it possible , let I see you as often as you can . the oftener the well . I shall want your help . " 

 she promise this , and they go on to talk calmly of thing that have no reference to their feeling a talk which , in its constraint , be infinitely sad to both of they . 

 one more reference be make to the state of thing between they late that night , when Elizabeth have go to her room , and the two young man have stumble off to bed in such a state of sleep that they hardly feel the floor beneath their foot after a day 's shooting . 

 Mary draw her chair a little near to the fire , for the log be burn low , and at this time of night it be hardly worth while to replenish they . Ralph be read , but she have notice for some time that his eye instead of follow the print be fix rather above the page with an intensity of gloom that come to weigh upon her mind . she have not weaken in her resolve not to give way , for reflection have only make she more bitterly certain that , if she give way , it would be to her own wish and not to his . but she have determine that there be no reason why he should suffer if her reticence be the cause of his suffering . therefore , although she find it painful , she speak : 

 " you ask I if I have change my mind about you , Ralph , " she say . " I think there be only one thing . when you ask I to marry you , I do not   think you mean it . that make I angry for the moment . before , you would always speak the truth . " 

 Ralph 's book slide down upon his knee and fall upon the floor . he rest his forehead on his hand and look into the fire . he be try to recall the exact word in which he have make his proposal to Mary . 

 " I never say I love you , " he say at last . 

 she wince ; but she respect he for say what he do , for this , after all , be a fragment of the truth which she have vow to live by . 

 " and to I marriage without love do not   seem worth while , " she say . 

 " well , Mary , I be not go to press you , " he say . " I see you do not   want to marry I . but love do not   we all talk a great deal of nonsense about it ? what do one mean ? I believe I care for you more genuinely than nine man out of ten care for the woman they be in love with . it be only a story one make up in one 's mind about another person , and one know all the time it be not   true . of course one know ; why , one be always take care not to destroy the illusion . one take care not to see they too often , or to be alone with they for too long together . it be a pleasant illusion , but if you be think of the risk of marriage , it seem to I that the risk of marry a person you be in love with be something colossal . " 

 " I do not   believe a word of that , and what be more you do not , either , " she reply with anger . " however , we do not   agree ; I only want you to understand . " she shift her position , as if she be about to go . an instinctive desire to prevent she from leave the room make Ralph rise at this point and begin pace up and down the nearly empty kitchen , check his desire , each time he reach the door , to open it and step out into the garden . a moralist might have say that at this point his mind should have be full of self - reproach for the suffering he have cause . on the contrary , he be extremely angry , with the confused impotent anger of one who find himself unreasonably but efficiently frustrated . he be trap by the illogicality of human life . the obstacle in the way of his desire seem to he purely artificial , and yet he could see no way of remove they . Mary 's word , the tone of her voice even , anger he , for she would not help he . she be part of the insanely jumbled muddle of a world which impede the sensible life . he would have like to slam the door or break the hind leg of a chair , for the obstacle have take some such curiously substantial shape in his mind . 

 " I doubt that one human being ever understand another , " he say , stop in his march and confront Mary at a distance of a few foot . 

 " such damned liar as we all be , how can we ? but we can try . if you do not   want to marry I , do not ; but the position you take up about love , and not see each other be not   that mere sentimentality ? you think I have   behave very badly , " he continue , as she do not speak . " of course I behave badly ; but you can not   judge people by what they do . you can not   go through life measure right and wrong with a foot - rule . that be what you be always do , Mary ; that be what you be do now . " 

 she see herself in the Suffrage Office , deliver judgment , mete out right and wrong , and there seem to she to be some justice in the charge , although it do not affect her main position . 

 " I be not angry with you , " she say slowly . " I will go on see you , as I say I would . " 

 it be true that she have promise that much already , and it be difficult for he to say what more it be that he want some intimacy , some help against the ghost of Katharine , perhaps , something that he know he have no right to ask ; and yet , as he sink into his chair and look once more at the die fire it seem to he that he have be defeat , not so much by Mary as by life itself . he feel himself throw back to the beginning of life again , where everything have yet to be win ; but in extreme youth one have an ignorant hope . he be no long certain that he would triumph . 





 CHAPTER XX 

 Happily for Mary Datchet she return to the office to find that by some obscure parliamentary maneuver the vote have once more slip beyond the attainment of woman . Mrs. Seal be in a condition border upon frenzy . the duplicity of Ministers , the treachery of mankind , the insult to womanhood , the setback to civilization , the ruin of her life 's work , the feeling of her father 's daughter all these topic be discuss in turn , and the office be litter with newspaper cutting brand with the blue , if ambiguous , mark of her displeasure . she confess herself at fault in her estimate of human nature . 

 " the simple elementary act of justice , " she say , wave her hand towards the window , and indicate the foot - passenger and omnibus then pass down the far side of Russell Square , " be as far beyond they as they ever be . we can only look upon ourselves , Mary , as pioneer in a wilderness . we can only go on patiently put the truth before they . it be not   they , " she continue , take heart from her sight of the traffic , " it be their leader . it be those gentleman sit in Parliament and draw four hundred a year of the people 's money . if we have to put our case to the people , we should soon have justice do to we . I have always believe in the people , and I do so still . but " she shake her head and imply that she would give they one more chance , and if they do not   take advantage of that she could not   answer for the consequence . 

 Mr. Clacton 's attitude be more philosophical and well support by statistic . he come into the room after Mrs. Seal 's outburst and point out , with historical illustration , that such revers have happen in every political campaign of any importance . if anything , his spirit be improve by the disaster . the enemy , he say , have take the offensive ; and it be now up to the Society to outwit the enemy . he give Mary to understand that he have take the measure of their cunning , and have already bend his mind to the task which , so far as she could make out , depend solely upon he . it depend , so she come to think , when invite into his room for a private conference , upon a systematic revision of the card - index , upon the issue of certain new lemon - color leaflet , in which the fact be marshal once more in a very striking way , and upon a large scale map of England dot with little pin tufte with differently colored plume of hair accord to their geographical position . each district , under the new system , have its flag , its bottle of ink , its sheaf of document tabulate and file for reference in a drawer , so that by look under M or S , as the case might be , you have all the fact with respect to the Suffrage organization of that county at your finger ' end . this would require a great deal of work , of course . 

 " we must try to consider ourselves rather in the light of a telephone exchange for the exchange of idea , Miss Datchet , " he say ; and take pleasure in his image , he continue it . " we should consider ourselves the center of an enormous system of wire , connect we up with every district of the country . we must have our finger upon the pulse of the community ; we want to know what people all over England be think ; we want to put they in the way of think rightly . " the system , of course , be only roughly sketch so far jot down , in fact , during the Christmas holiday . 

 " when you ought to have be take a rest , Mr. Clacton , " say Mary dutifully , but her tone be flat and tired . 

 " we learn to do without holiday , Miss Datchet , " say Mr. Clacton , with a spark of satisfaction in his eye . 

 he wish particularly to have her opinion of the lemon - color leaflet . accord to his plan , it be to be distribute in immense quantity immediately , in order to stimulate and generate , " to generate and stimulate , " he repeat , " right thought in the country before the meeting of Parliament . " 

 " we have to take the enemy by surprise , " he say . " they do not   let the grass grow under their foot . have you see Bingham 's address to his constituent ? that be a hint of the sort of thing we have   get to meet , Miss Datchet . " 

 he hand she a great bundle of newspaper cutting , and , beg she to give he her view upon the yellow leaflet before lunch - time , he turn with alacrity to his different sheet of paper and his different bottle of ink . 

 Mary shut the door , lay the document upon her table , and sink her head on her hand . her brain be curiously empty of any thought . she listen , as if , perhaps , by listen she would become merge again in the atmosphere of the office . from the next room come the rapid spasmodic sound of Mrs. Seal 's erratic typewriting ; she , doubtless , be already hard at work help the people of England , as Mr. Clacton put it , to think rightly ; " generate and stimulating , " those be his word . she be strike a blow against the enemy , no doubt , who do not   let the grass grow beneath their foot . Mr. Clacton 's word repeat themselves accurately in her brain . she push the paper wearily over to the farth side of the table . it be no use , though ; something or other have happen to her brain a change of focus so that near thing be indistinct again . the same thing have happen to she once before , she remember , after she have meet Ralph in the garden of Lincoln 's Inn Fields ; she have spend the whole of a committee meeting in think about sparrow and color , until , almost at the end of the meeting , her old conviction have all come back to she . but they have only come back , she think with scorn at her feebleness , because she want to use they to fight against Ralph . they be not , rightly speak , conviction at all . she could not see the world divide into separate compartment of good people and bad people , any more than she could believe so implicitly in the rightness of her own thought as to wish to bring the population of the British Isles into agreement with it . she look at the lemon - color leaflet , and think almost enviously of the faith which could find comfort in the issue of such document ; for herself she would be content to remain silent for ever if a share of personal happiness be grant she . she read Mr. Clacton 's statement with a curious division of judgment , note its weak and pompous verbosity on the one hand , and , at the same time , feel that faith , faith in an illusion , perhaps , but , at any rate , faith in something , be of all gift the most to be envy . an illusion it be , no doubt . she look curiously round she at the furniture of the office , at the machinery in which she have take so much pride , and marvel to think that once the copying - press , the card - index , the file of document , have all be shroud , wrap in some mist which give they a unity and a general dignity and purpose independently of their separate significance . the ugly cumbersomeness of the furniture alone impress she now . her attitude have become very lax and despondent when the typewriter stop in the next room . Mary immediately draw up to the table , lay hand on an unopened envelope , and adopt an expression which might hide her state of mind from Mrs. Seal . some instinct of decency require that she should not allow Mrs. Seal to see her face . shade her eye with her finger , she watch Mrs. Seal pull out one drawer after another in her search for some envelope or leaflet . she be tempt to drop her finger and exclaim : 

 " do sit down , Sally , and tell I how you manage it how you manage , that is , to bustle about with perfect confidence in the necessity of your own activity , which to I seem as futile as the buzzing of a belate blue - bottle . " she say nothing of the kind , however , and the presence of industry which she preserve so long as Mrs. Seal be in the room serve to set her brain in motion , so that she dispatch her morning 's work much as usual . at one o'clock she be surprised to find how efficiently she have deal with the morning . as she put her hat on she determine to lunch at a shop in the Strand , so as to set that other piece of mechanism , her body , into action . with a brain work and a body work one could keep step with the crowd and never be find out for the hollow machine , lack the essential thing , that one be conscious of be . 

 she consider her case as she walk down the Charing Cross Road . she put to herself a series of question . would she mind , for example , if the wheel of that motor - omnibus pass over she and crush she to death ? no , not in the least ; or an adventure with that disagreeable - look man hang about the entrance of the Tube station ? no ; she could not conceive fear or excitement . do suffer in any form appall she ? no , suffering be neither good nor bad . and this essential thing ? in the eye of every single person she detect a flame ; as if a spark in the brain ignite spontaneously at contact with the thing they meet and drive they on . the young woman look into the milliner ' window have that look in their eye ; and elderly man turn over book in the second - hand book - shop , and eagerly wait to hear what the price be the very low price they have it , too . but she care nothing at all for clothe or for money either . book she shrink from , for they be connect too closely with Ralph . she keep on her way resolutely through the crowd of people , among whom she be so much of an alien , feel they cleave and give way before she . 

 strange thought be breed in pass through crowd street should the passenger , by chance , have no exact destination in front of he , much as the mind shape all kind of form , solution , image when listen inattentively to music . from an acute consciousness of herself as an individual , Mary pass to a conception of the scheme of thing in which , as a human being , she must have her share . she half hold a vision ; the vision shape and dwindle . she wish she have a pencil and a piece of paper to help she to give a form to this conception which compose itself as she walk down the Charing Cross Road . but if she talk to any one , the conception might escape she . her vision seem to lay out the line of her life until death in a way which satisfy her sense of harmony . it only need a persistent effort of thought , stimulate in this strange way by the crowd and the noise , to climb the crest of existence and see it all lay out once and for ever . already her suffering as an individual be leave behind she . of this process , which be to she so full of effort , which comprise infinitely swift and full passage of thought , lead from one crest to another , as she shape her conception of life in this world , only two articulate word escape she , mutter beneath her breath " not happiness not happiness . " 

 she sit down on a seat opposite the statue of one of London 's hero upon the Embankment , and speak the word aloud . to she they represent the rare flower or splinter of rock bring down by a climber in proof that he have stand for a moment , at least , upon the high peak of the mountain . she have be up there and see the world spread to the horizon . it be now necessary to alter her course to some extent , accord to her new resolve . her post should be in one of those expose and desolate station which be shun naturally by happy people . she arrange the detail of the new plan in her mind , not without a grim satisfaction . 

 " now , " she say to herself , rise from her seat , " I will think of Ralph . " 

 where be he to be place in the new scale of life ? her exalted mood seem to make it safe to handle the question . but she be dismay to find how quickly her passion leapt forward the moment she sanction this line of thought . now she be identify with he and rethink his thought with complete self - surrender ; now , with a sudden cleavage of spirit , she turn upon he and denounce he for his cruelty . 

 " but I refuse I refuse to hate any one , " she say aloud ; choose the moment to cross the road with circumspection , and ten minute later lunch in the Strand , cut her meat firmly into small piece , but give her fellow - diner no further cause to judge her eccentric . her soliloquy crystallize itself into little fragmentary phrase emerge suddenly from the turbulence of her thought , particularly when she have to exert herself in any way , either to move , to count money , or to choose a turning . " to know the truth to accept without bitterness " those , perhaps , be the most articulate of her utterance , for no one could have make head or tail of the queer gibberish murmur in front of the statue of Francis , Duke of Bedford , save that the name of Ralph occur frequently in very strange connection , as if , have speak it , she wish , superstitiously , to cancel it by add some other word that rob the sentence with his name in it of any meaning . 

 those champion of the cause of woman , Mr. Clacton and Mrs. Seal , do not perceive anything strange in Mary 's behavior , save that she be almost half an hour later than usual in come back to the office . happily , their own affair keep they busy , and she be free from their inspection . if they have surprise she they would have find she lost , apparently , in admiration of the large hotel across the square , for , after write a few word , her pen rest upon the paper , and her mind pursue its own journey among the sun - blazon window and the drift of purplish smoke which form her view . and , indeed , this background be by no mean out of keep with her thought . she see to the remote space behind the strife of the foreground , enable now to gaze there , since she have renounce her own demand , privileged to see the large view , to share the vast desire and suffering of the mass of mankind . she have be too lately and too roughly master by fact to take an easy pleasure in the relief of renunciation ; such satisfaction as she feel come only from the discovery that , have renounce everything that make life happy , easy , splendid , individual , there remain a hard reality , unimpaire by one 's personal adventure , remote as the star , unquenchable as they be . 

 while Mary Datchet be undergo this curious transformation from the particular to the universal , Mrs. Seal remember her duty with regard to the kettle and the gas - fire . she be a little surprised to find that Mary have draw her chair to the window , and , have light the gas , she raise herself from a stoop posture and look at she . the most obvious reason for such an attitude in a secretary be some kind of indisposition . but Mary , rouse herself with an effort , deny that she be indispose . 

 " I be frightfully lazy this afternoon , " she add , with a glance at her table . " you must really get another secretary , Sally . " 

 the word be mean to be take lightly , but something in the tone of they rouse a jealous fear which be always dormant in Mrs. Seal 's breast . she be terribly afraid that one of these day Mary , the young woman who typify so many rather sentimental and enthusiastic idea , who have some sort of visionary existence in white with a sheaf of lily in her hand , would announce , in a jaunty way , that she be about to be marry . 

 " you do not   mean that you be go to leave we ? " she say . 

 " I have   not make up my mind about anything , " say Mary a remark which could be take as a generalization . 

 Mrs. Seal get the teacup out of the cupboard and set they on the table . 

 " you be not go to be marry , be you ? " she ask , pronounce the word with nervous speed . 

 " why be you ask such absurd question this afternoon , Sally ? " Mary ask , not very steadily . " must we all get marry ? " 

 Mrs. Seal emit a most peculiar chuckle . she seem for one moment to acknowledge the terrible side of life which be concern with the emotion , the private life , of the sex , and then to sheer off from it with all possible speed into the shade of her own shivering virginity . she be make so uncomfortable by the turn the conversation have take , that she plunge her head into the cupboard , and endeavor to abstract some very obscure piece of china . 

 " we have our work , " she say , withdraw her head , display cheek more than usually crimson , and place a jam - pot emphatically upon the table . but , for the moment , she be unable to launch herself upon one of those enthusiastic , but inconsequent , tirade upon liberty , democracy , the right of the people , and the iniquity of the Government , in which she delight . some memory from her own past or from the past of her sex rise to her mind and keep she abash . she glance furtively at Mary , who still sit by the window with her arm upon the sill . she notice how young she be and full of the promise of womanhood . the sight make she so uneasy that she fidget the cup upon their saucer . 

 " yes enough work to last a lifetime , " say Mary , as if conclude some passage of thought . 

 Mrs. Seal brighten at once . she lament her lack of scientific training , and her deficiency in the process of logic , but she set her mind to work at once to make the prospect of the cause appear as alluring and important as she could . she deliver herself of an harangue in which she ask a great many rhetorical question and answer they with a little bang of one fist upon another . 

 " to last a lifetime ? my dear child , it will last all our lifetime . as one fall another step into the breach . my father , in his generation , a pioneer I , come after he , do my little good . what , alas ! can one do more ? and now it be you young woman we look to you the future look to you . ah , my dear , if I have a thousand life , I would give they all to our cause . the cause of woman , d'you say ? I say the cause of humanity . and there be some " she glance fiercely at the window " who do not   see it ! there be some who be satisfied to go on , year after year , refuse to admit the truth . and we who have the vision the kettle boil over ? no , no , let I see to it we who know the truth , " she continue , gesticulate with the kettle and the teapot . owe to these encumbrance , perhaps , she lose the thread of her discourse , and conclude , rather wistfully , " it be all so SIMPLE . " she refer to a matter that be a perpetual source of bewilderment to she the extraordinary incapacity of the human race , in a world where the good be so unmistakably divide from the bad , of distinguish one from the other , and embody what ought to be do in a few large , simple act of Parliament , which would , in a very short time , completely change the lot of humanity . 

 " one would have think , " she say , " that man of University training , like Mr. Asquith one would have think that an appeal to reason would not be unheard by they . but reason , " she reflect , " what be reason without reality ? " 

 do homage to the phrase , she repeat it once more , and catch the ear of Mr. Clacton , as he issue from his room ; and he repeat it a third time , give it , as he be in the habit of do with Mrs. Seal 's phrase , a dryly humorous intonation . he be well pleased with the world , however , and he remark , in a flattering manner , that he would like to see that phrase in large letter at the head of a leaflet . 

 " but , Mrs. Seal , we have to aim at a judicious combination of the two , " he add in his magisterial way to check the unbalanced enthusiasm of the woman . " reality have to be voice by reason before it can make itself feel . the weak point of all these movement , Miss Datchet , " he continue , take his place at the table and turn to Mary as usual when about to deliver his more profound cogitation , " be that they be not base upon sufficiently intellectual ground . a mistake , in my opinion . the british public like a pellet of reason in its jam of eloquence a pill of reason in its pudding of sentiment , " he say , sharpen the phrase to a satisfactory degree of literary precision . 

 his eye rest , with something of the vanity of an author , upon the yellow leaflet which Mary hold in her hand . she rise , take her seat at the head of the table , pour out tea for her colleague , and give her opinion upon the leaflet . so she have pour out tea , so she have criticize Mr. Clacton 's leaflet a hundred time already ; but now it seem to she that she be do it in a different spirit ; she have enlist in the army , and be a volunteer no long . she have renounce something and be now how could she express it ? not quite " in the running " for life . she have always know that Mr. Clacton and Mrs. Seal be not in the running , and across the gulf that separate they she have see they in the guise of shadow people , flit in and out of the rank of the live eccentric , undeveloped human being , from whose substance some essential part have be cut away . all this have never strike she so clearly as it do this afternoon , when she feel that her lot be cast with they for ever . one view of the world plunge in darkness , so a more volatile temperament might have argue after a season of despair , let the world turn again and show another , more splendid , perhaps . no , Mary think , with unflinche loyalty to what appear to she to be the true view , have lose what be good , I do not mean to pretend that any other view do instead . whatever happen , I mean to have no presence in my life . her very word have a sort of distinctness which be sometimes produce by sharp , bodily pain . to Mrs. Seal 's secret jubilation the rule which forbid discussion of shop at tea - time be overlook . Mary and Mr. Clacton argue with a cogency and a ferocity which make the little woman feel that something very important she hardly know what be take place . she become much excited ; one crucifix become entangle with another , and she dig a considerable hole in the table with the point of her pencil in order to emphasize the most striking head of the discourse ; and how any combination of Cabinet Ministers could resist such discourse she really do not know . 

 she could hardly bring herself to remember her own private instrument of justice the typewriter . the telephone - bell rang , and as she hurry off to answer a voice which always seem a proof of importance by itself , she feel that it be at this exact spot on the surface of the globe that all the subterranean wire of thought and progress come together . when she return , with a message from the printer , she find that Mary be put on her hat firmly ; there be something imperious and dominating in her attitude altogether . 

 " look , Sally , " she say , " these letter want copy . these I have   not look at . the question of the new census will have to be go into carefully . but I be go home now . good night , Mr. Clacton ; good night , Sally . " 

 " we be very fortunate in our secretary , Mr. Clacton , " say Mrs. Seal , pause with her hand on the paper , as the door shut behind Mary . Mr. Clacton himself have be vaguely impressed by something in Mary 's behavior towards he . he envisage a time even when it would become necessary to tell she that there could not be two master in one office but she be certainly able , very able , and in touch with a group of very clever young man . no doubt they have suggest to she some of her new idea . 

 he signify his assent to Mrs. Seal 's remark , but observe , with a glance at the clock , which show only half an hour past five : 

 " if she take the work seriously , Mrs. Seal but that be just what some of your clever young lady do not   do . " so say he return to his room , and Mrs. Seal , after a moment 's hesitation , hurry back to her labor . 





 CHAPTER XXI 

 Mary walk to the near station and reach home in an incredibly short space of time , just so much , indeed , as be need for the intelligent understanding of the news of the world as the " Westminster Gazette " report it . within a few minute of open her door , she be in trim for a hard evening 's work . she unlock a drawer and take out a manuscript , which consist of a very few page , entitle , in a forcible hand , " some aspect of the Democratic State . " the aspect dwindle out in a cry - cross of blot line in the very middle of a sentence , and suggest that the author have be interrupt , or convince of the futility of proceeding , with her pen in the air .... oh , yes , Ralph have come in at that point . she score that sheet very effectively , and , choose a fresh one , begin at a great rate with a generalization upon the structure of human society , which be a good deal bold than her custom . Ralph have tell she once that she could not   write English , which account for those frequent blot and insertion ; but she put all that behind she , and drive ahead with such word as come her way , until she have accomplish half a page of generalization and might legitimately draw breath . directly her hand stop her brain stop too , and she begin to listen . a paper - boy shout down the street ; an omnibus cease and lurch on again with the heave of duty once more shoulder ; the dullness of the sound suggest that a fog have rise since her return , if , indeed , a fog have power to deaden sound , of which fact , she could not be sure at the present moment . it be the sort of fact Ralph Denham know . at any rate , it be no concern of her , and she be about to dip a pen when her ear be catch by the sound of a step upon the stone staircase . she follow it past Mr. Chippen 's chamber ; past Mr. Gibson 's ; past Mr. Turner 's ; after which it become her sound . a postman , a washerwoman , a circular , a bill she present herself with each of these perfectly natural possibility ; but , to her surprise , her mind reject each one of they impatiently , even apprehensively . the step become slow , as it be apt to do at the end of the steep climb , and Mary , listen for the regular sound , be fill with an intolerable nervousness . lean against the table , she feel the knock of her heart push her body perceptibly backwards and forwards a state of nerve astonish and reprehensible in a stable woman . Grotesque fancy take shape . alone , at the top of the house , an unknown person approach nearer and nearer how could she escape ? there be no way of escape . she do not even know whether that oblong mark on the ceiling be a trap - door to the roof or not . and if she get on to the roof well , there be a drop of sixty foot or so on to the pavement . but she sit perfectly still , and when the knock sound , she get up directly and open the door without hesitation . she see a tall figure outside , with something ominous to her eye in the look of it . 

 " what do you want ? " she say , not recognize the face in the fitful light of the staircase . 

 " Mary ? I be Katharine Hilbery ! " 

 Mary 's self - possession return almost excessively , and her welcome be decidedly cold , as if she must recoup herself for this ridiculous waste of emotion . she move her green - shaded lamp to another table , and cover " some aspect of the Democratic State " with a sheet of blot - paper . 

 " why can not   they leave I alone ? " she think bitterly , connect Katharine and Ralph in a conspiracy to take from she even this hour of solitary study , even this poor little defence against the world . and , as she smooth down the sheet of blot - paper over the manuscript , she brace herself to resist Katharine , whose presence strike she , not merely by its force , as usual , but as something in the nature of a menace . 

 " you be work ? " say Katharine , with hesitation , perceive that she be not welcome . 

 " nothing that matter , " Mary reply , draw forward the good of the chair and poke the fire . 

 " I do not   know you have to work after you have leave the office , " say Katharine , in a tone which give the impression that she be think of something else , as be , indeed , the case . 

 she have be pay call with her mother , and in between the call Mrs. Hilbery have rush into shop and buy pillow - case and blot - book on no perceptible method for the furnishing of Katharine 's house . Katharine have a sense of impedimenta accumulate on all side of she . she have leave she at length , and have come on to keep an engagement to dine with Rodney at his room . but she do not mean to get to he before seven o'clock , and so have plenty of time to walk all the way from Bond Street to the Temple if she wish it . the flow of face stream on either side of she have hypnotize she into a mood of profound despondency , to which her expectation of an evening alone with Rodney contribute . they be very good friend again , well friend , they both say , than ever before . so far as she be concern this be true . there be many more thing in he than she have guess until emotion bring they forth strength , affection , sympathy . and she think of they and look at the face pass , and think how much alike they be , and how distant , nobody feel anything as she feel nothing , and distance , she think , lie inevitably between the close , and their intimacy be the bad presence of all . for , " oh dear , " she think , look into a tobacconist 's window , " I do not   care for any of they , and I do not   care for William , and people say this be the thing that matter most , and I can not   see what they mean by it . " 

 she look desperately at the smooth - bowl pipe , and wonder should she walk on by the Strand or by the Embankment ? it be not a simple question , for it concern not different street so much as different stream of thought . if she go by the Strand she would force herself to think out the problem of the future , or some mathematical problem ; if she go by the river she would certainly begin to think about thing that do not   exist the forest , the ocean beach , the leafy solitude , the magnanimous hero . no , no , no ! a thousand time no ! it would not   do ; there be something repulsive in such thought at present ; she must take something else ; she be out of that mood at present . and then she think of Mary ; the thought give her confidence , even pleasure of a sad sort , as if the triumph of Ralph and Mary prove that the fault of her failure lie with herself and not with life . an indistinct idea that the sight of Mary might be of help , combine with her natural trust in she , suggest a visit ; for , surely , her liking be of a kind that imply like upon Mary 's side also . after a moment 's hesitation she decide , although she seldom act upon impulse , to act upon this one , and turn down a side street and find Mary 's door . but her reception be not encouraging ; clearly Mary do not   want to see she , have no help to impart , and the half - form desire to confide in she be quench immediately . she be slightly amuse at her own delusion , look rather absent - minded , and swing her glove to and fro , as if dole out the few minute accurately before she could say good - by . 

 those few minute might very well be spend in ask for information as to the exact position of the Suffrage Bill , or in expound her own very sensible view of the situation . but there be a tone in her voice , or a shade in her opinion , or a swing of her glove which serve to irritate Mary Datchet , whose manner become increasingly direct , abrupt , and even antagonistic . she become conscious of a wish to make Katharine realize the importance of this work , which she discuss so coolly , as though she , too , have sacrifice what Mary herself have sacrifice . the swinging of the glove cease , and Katharine , after ten minute , begin to make movement preliminary to departure . at the sight of this , Mary be aware she be abnormally aware of thing to - night of another very strong desire ; Katharine be not to be allow to go , to disappear into the free , happy world of irresponsible individual . she must be make to realize to feel . 

 " I do not   quite see , " she say , as if Katharine have challenge she explicitly , " how , thing be as they be , any one can help try , at least , to do something . " 

 " no . but how be thing ? " 

 Mary press her lip , and smile ironically ; she have Katharine at her mercy ; she could , if she like , discharge upon her head wagon - load of revolt proof of the state of thing ignore by the casual , the amateur , the looker - on , the cynical observer of life at a distance . and yet she hesitate . as usual , when she find herself in talk with Katharine , she begin to feel rapid alternation of opinion about she , arrow of sensation strike strangely through the envelope of personality , which shelter we so conveniently from our fellow . what an egoist , how aloof she be ! and yet , not in her word , perhaps , but in her voice , in her face , in her attitude , there be sign of a soft brood spirit , of a sensibility unblunted and profound , play over her thought and deed , and invest her manner with an habitual gentleness . the argument and phrase of Mr. Clacton fall flat against such armor . 

 " you will be marry , and you will have other thing to think of , " she say inconsequently , and with an accent of condescension . she be not go to make Katharine understand in a second , as she would , all she herself have learn at the cost of such pain . no . Katharine be to be happy ; Katharine be to be ignorant ; Mary be to keep this knowledge of the impersonal life for herself . the thought of her morning 's renunciation sting her conscience , and she try to expand once more into that impersonal condition which be so lofty and so painless . she must check this desire to be an individual again , whose wish be in conflict with those of other people . she repent of her bitterness . 

 Katharine now renew her sign of leave - taking ; she have draw on one of her glove , and look about she as if in search of some trivial saying to end with . be not   there some picture , or clock , or chest of drawer which might be single out for notice ? something peaceable and friendly to end the uncomfortable interview ? the green - shaded lamp burn in the corner , and illumined book and pen and blot - paper . the whole aspect of the place start another train of thought and strike she as enviably free ; in such a room one could work one could have a life of one 's own . 

 " I think you be very lucky , " she observe . " I envy you , live alone and have your own thing " and engage in this exalt way , which have no recognition or engagement - ring , she add in her own mind . 

 Mary 's lip part slightly . she could not conceive in what respect Katharine , who speak sincerely , could envy she . 

 " I do not   think you have   get any reason to envy I , " she say . 

 " perhaps one always envy other people , " Katharine observe vaguely . 

 " well , but you have   get everything that any one can want . " 

 Katharine remain silent . she gaze into the fire quietly , and without a trace of self - consciousness . the hostility which she have divine in Mary 's tone have completely disappear , and she forget that she have be upon the point of go . 

 " well , I suppose I have , " she say at length . " and yet I sometimes think " she pause ; she do not know how to express what she mean . 

 " it come over I in the Tube the other day , " she resume , with a smile ; " what be it that make these people go one way rather than the other ? it be not love ; it be not reason ; I think it must be some idea . perhaps , Mary , our affection be the shadow of an idea . perhaps there be not   any such thing as affection in itself .... " she speak half - mockingly , ask her question , which she scarcely trouble to frame , not of Mary , or of any one in particular . 

 but the word seem to Mary Datchet shallow , supercilious , cold - blooded , and cynical all in one . all her natural instinct be rouse in revolt against they . 

 " I be the opposite way of thinking , you see , " she say . 

 " yes ; I know you be , " Katharine reply , look at she as if now she be about , perhaps , to explain something very important . 

 Mary could not help feel the simplicity and good faith that lie behind Katharine 's word . 

 " I think affection be the only reality , " she say . 

 " yes , " say Katharine , almost sadly . she understand that Mary be think of Ralph , and she feel it impossible to press she to reveal more of this exalt condition ; she could only respect the fact that , in some few case , life arrange itself thus satisfactorily and pass on . she rise to her foot accordingly . but Mary exclaim , with unmistakable earnestness , that she must not go ; that they meet so seldom ; that she want to talk to she so much .... Katharine be surprised at the earnestness with which she speak . it seem to she that there could be no indiscretion in mention Ralph by name . 

 seat herself " for ten minute , " she say : " by the way , Mr. Denham tell I he be go to give up the Bar and live in the country . have he go ? he be begin to tell I about it , when we be interrupt . " 

 " he think of it , " say Mary briefly . the color at once come to her face . 

 " it would be a very good plan , " say Katharine in her decide way . 

 " you think so ? " 

 " yes , because he would do something worth while ; he would write a book . my father always say that he be the most remarkable of the young man who write for he . " 

 Mary bent low over the fire and stir the coal between the bar with a poker . Katharine 's mention of Ralph have rouse within she an almost irresistible desire to explain to she the true state of the case between herself and Ralph . she know , from the tone of her voice , that in speak of Ralph she have no desire to probe Mary 's secret , or to insinuate any of her own . moreover , she like Katharine ; she trust she ; she feel a respect for she . the first step of confidence be comparatively simple ; but a further confidence have reveal itself , as Katharine speak , which be not so simple , and yet it impress itself upon she as a necessity ; she must tell Katharine what it be clear that she have no conception of she must tell Katharine that Ralph be in love with she . 

 " I do not   know what he mean to do , " she say hurriedly , seek time against the pressure of her own conviction . " I have   not see he since Christmas . " 

 Katharine reflect that this be odd ; perhaps , after all , she have misunderstood the position . she be in the habit of assume , however , that she be rather unobservant of the fine shade of feeling , and she note her present failure as another proof that she be a practical , abstract - minded person , well fit to deal with figure than with the feeling of man and woman . anyhow , William Rodney would say so . 

 " and now " she say . 

 " oh , please stay ! " Mary exclaim , put out her hand to stop she . directly Katharine move she feel , inarticulately and violently , that she could not bear to let she go . if Katharine go , her only chance of speak be lose ; her only chance of say something tremendously important be lose . half a dozen word be sufficient to wake Katharine 's attention , and put flight and further silence beyond her power . but although the word come to her lip , her throat close upon they and drive they back . after all , she consider , why should she speak ? because it be right , her instinct tell she ; right to expose oneself without reservation to other human being . she flinch from the thought . it ask too much of one already strip bare . something she must keep of her own . but if she do keep something of her own ? immediately she figure an immured life , continue for an immense period , the same feeling live for ever , neither dwindle nor change within the ring of a thick stone wall . the imagination of this loneliness frighten she , and yet to speak to lose her loneliness , for it have already become dear to she , be beyond her power . 

 her hand go down to the hem of Katharine 's skirt , and , finger a line of fur , she bend her head as if to examine it . 

 " I like this fur , " she say , " I like your clothe . and you must not   think that I be go to marry Ralph , " she continue , in the same tone , " because he do not   care for I at all . he care for some one else . " her head remain bent , and her hand still rest upon the skirt . 

 " it be a shabby old dress , " say Katharine , and the only sign that Mary 's word have reach she be that she speak with a little jerk . 

 " you do not   mind my tell you that ? " say Mary , raise herself . 

 " no , no , " say Katharine ; " but you be mistaken , be not   you ? " she be , in truth , horribly uncomfortable , dismayed , indeed , disillusion . she dislike the turn thing have take quite intensely . the indecency of it afflict she . the suffering imply by the tone appal she . she look at Mary furtively , with eye that be full of apprehension . but if she have hop to find that these word have be speak without understanding of their meaning , she be at once disappointed . Mary lie back in her chair , frown slightly , and look , Katharine think , as if she have live fifteen year or so in the space of a few minute . 

 " there be some thing , do not   you think , that one can not   be mistake about ? " Mary say , quietly and almost coldly . " that be what puzzle I about this question of be in love . I have   always pride myself upon be reasonable , " she add . " I do not   think I could have feel this I mean if the other person do not . I be foolish . I let myself pretend . " here she pause . " for , you see , Katharine , " she proceed , rouse herself and speak with great energy , " I be in love . there be no doubt about that .... I be tremendously in love ... with Ralph . " the little forward shake of her head , which shake a lock of hair , together with her bright color , give she an appearance at once proud and defiant . 

 Katharine think to herself , " that be how it feel then . " she hesitate , with a feeling that it be not for she to speak ; and then say , in a low tone , " you have   get that . " 

 " yes , " say Mary ; " I have   get that . one would not   not be in love .... but I do not   mean to talk about that ; I only want you to know . there be another thing I want to tell you ... " she pause . " I have not   any authority from Ralph to say it ; but I be sure of this he be in love with you . " 

 Katharine look at she again , as if her first glance must have be delude , for , surely , there must be some outward sign that Mary be talk in an excited , or bewilder , or fantastic manner . no ; she still frown , as if she seek her way through the clause of a difficult argument , but she still look more like one who reason than one who feel . 

 " that prove that you be mistake utterly mistaken , " say Katharine , speak reasonably , too . she have no need to verify the mistake by a glance at her own recollection , when the fact be so clearly stamp upon her mind that if Ralph have any feeling towards she it be one of critical hostility . she do not give the matter another thought , and Mary , now that she have state the fact , do not seek to prove it , but try to explain to herself , rather than to Katharine , her motif in make the statement . 

 she have nerve herself to do what some large and imperious instinct demand she do ; she have be sweep on the breast of a wave beyond her reckoning . 

 " I have   tell you , " she say , " because I want you to help I . I do not   want to be jealous of you . and I be I be fearfully jealous . the only way , I think , be to tell you . " 

 she hesitate , and grope in her endeavor to make her feeling clear to herself . 

 " if I tell you , then we can talk ; and when I be jealous , I can tell you . and if I be tempt to do something frightfully mean , I can tell you ; you could make I tell you . I find talk so difficult ; but loneliness frighten I . I should shut it up in my mind . yes , that be what I be afraid of . go about with something in my mind all my life that never change . I find it so difficult to change . when I think a thing 's wrong I never stop think it wrong , and Ralph be quite right , I see , when he say that there be no such thing as right and wrong ; no such thing , I mean , as judge people " 

 " Ralph Denham say that ? " say Katharine , with considerable indignation . in order to have produce such suffering in Mary , it seem to she that he must have behave with extreme callousness . it seem to she that he have discard the friendship , when it suit his convenience to do so , with some falsely philosophical theory which make his conduct all the bad . she be go on to express herself thus , have not Mary at once interrupt she . 

 " no , no , " she say ; " you do not   understand . if there be any fault it be mine entirely ; after all , if one choose to run risk " 

 her voice falter into silence . it be bear in upon she how completely in run her risk she have lose her prize , lose it so entirely that she have no long the right , in talk of Ralph , to presume that her knowledge of he supplant all other knowledge . she no long completely possess her love , since his share in it be doubtful ; and now , to make thing yet more bitter , her clear vision of the way to face life be render tremulous and uncertain , because another be witness of it . feel her desire for the old unshared intimacy too great to be bear without tear , she rise , walk to the farth end of the room , hold the curtain apart , and stand there master for a moment . the grief itself be not ignoble ; the sting of it lie in the fact that she have be lead to this act of treachery against herself . trap , cheat , rob , first by Ralph and then by Katharine , she seem all dissolve in humiliation , and bereft of anything she could call she own . tear of weakness well up and roll down her cheek . but tear , at least , she could control , and would this instant , and then , turn , she would face Katharine , and retrieve what could be retrieve of the collapse of her courage . 

 she turn . Katharine have not move ; she be lean a little forward in her chair and look into the fire . something in the attitude remind Mary of Ralph . so he would sit , lean forward , look rather fixedly in front of he , while his mind go far away , explore , speculating , until he break off with his , " well , Mary ? " and the silence , that have be so full of romance to she , give way to the most delightful talk that she have ever know . 

 something unfamiliar in the pose of the silent figure , something still , solemn , significant about it , make she hold her breath . she pause . her thought be without bitterness . she be surprise by her own quiet and confidence . she come back silently , and sit once more by Katharine 's side . Mary have no wish to speak . in the silence she seem to have lose her isolation ; she be at once the sufferer and the pitiful spectator of suffering ; she be happy than she have ever be ; she be more bereft ; she be reject , and she be immensely belove . attempt to express these sensation be vain , and , moreover , she could not help believe that , without any word on her side , they be share . thus for some time long they sit silent , side by side , while Mary finger the fur on the skirt of the old dress . 





 CHAPTER XXII 

 the fact that she would be late in keep her engagement with William be not the only reason which send Katharine almost at race speed along the Strand in the direction of his room . punctuality might have be achieve by take a cab , have she not wish the open air to fan into flame the glow kindle by Mary 's word . for among all the impression of the evening 's talk one be of the nature of a revelation and subdue the rest to insignificance . thus one look ; thus one speak ; such be love . 

 " she sit up straight and look at I , and then she say , ' I be in love , ' " Katharine muse , try to set the whole scene in motion . it be a scene to dwell on with so much wonder that not a grain of pity occur to she ; it be a flame blaze suddenly in the dark ; by its light Katharine perceive far too vividly for her comfort the mediocrity , indeed the entirely fictitious character of her own feeling so far as they pretend to correspond with Mary 's feeling . she make up her mind to act instantly upon the knowledge thus gain , and cast her mind in amazement back to the scene upon the heath , when she have yield , heaven know why , for reason which seem now imperceptible . so in broad daylight one might revisit the place where one have grope and turn and succumb to utter bewilderment in a fog . 

 " it be all so simple , " she say to herself . " there can not   be any doubt . I have   only get to speak now . I have   only get to speak , " she go on say , in time to her own footstep , and completely forget Mary Datchet . 

 William Rodney , have come back early from the office than he expect , sit down to pick out the melody in " the Magic Flute " upon the piano . Katharine be late , but that be nothing new , and , as she have no particular liking for music , and he feel in the mood for it , perhaps it be as well . this defect in Katharine be the more strange , William reflect , because , as a rule , the woman of her family be unusually musical . her cousin , Cassandra Otway , for example , have a very fine taste in music , and he have charming recollection of she in a light fantastic attitude , play the flute in the morning - room at Stogdon House . he recall with pleasure the amusing way in which her nose , long like all the otway nose , seem to extend itself into the flute , as if she be some inimitably graceful specie of musical mole . the little picture suggest very happily her melodious and whimsical temperament . the enthusiasm of a young girl of distinguished upbringing appeal to William , and suggest a thousand way in which , with his training and accomplishment , he could be of service to she . she ought to be give the chance of hear good music , as it be play by those who have inherit the great tradition . moreover , from one or two remark let fall in the course of conversation , he think it possible that she have what Katharine profess to lack , a passionate , if untaught , appreciation of literature . he have lend she his play . meanwhile , as Katharine be certain to be late , and " the Magic Flute " be nothing without a voice , he feel inclined to spend the time of wait in write a letter to Cassandra , exhort she to read Pope in preference to Dostoevsky , until her feeling for form be more highly developed . he set himself down to compose this piece of advice in a shape which be light and playful , and yet do no injury to a cause which he have near at heart , when he hear Katharine upon the stair . a moment later it be plain that he have be mistake , it be not Katharine ; but he could not settle himself to his letter . his temper have change from one of urbane contentment indeed of delicious expansion to one of uneasiness and expectation . the dinner be bring in , and have to be set by the fire to keep hot . it be now a quarter of an hour beyond the specify time . he bethink he of a piece of news which have depress he in the early part of the day . owe to the illness of one of his fellow - clerk , it be likely that he would get no holiday until later in the year , which would mean the postponement of their marriage . but this possibility , after all , be not so disagreeable as the probability which force itself upon he with every tick of the clock that Katharine have completely forget her engagement . such thing have happen less frequently since Christmas , but what if they be go to begin to happen again ? what if their marriage should turn out , as she have say , a farce ? he acquit she of any wish to hurt he wantonly , but there be something in her character which make it impossible for she to help hurt people . be she cold ? be she self - absorb ? he try to fit she with each of these description , but he have to own that she puzzle he . 

 " there be so many thing that she do not   understand , " he reflect , glance at the letter to Cassandra which he have begin and lay aside . what prevent he from finish the letter which he have so much enjoy begin ? the reason be that Katharine might , at any moment , enter the room . the thought , imply his bondage to she , irritate he acutely . it occur to he that he would leave the letter lie open for she to see , and he would take the opportunity of tell she that he have send his play to Cassandra for she to criticize . possibly , but not by any mean certainly , this would annoy she and as he reach the doubtful comfort of this conclusion , there be a knock on the door and Katharine come in . they kiss each other coldly and she make no apology for be late . nevertheless , her mere presence move he strangely ; but he be determined that this should not weaken his resolution to make some kind of stand against she ; to get at the truth about she . he let she make her own disposition of clothe and busy himself with the plate . 

 " I have   get a piece of news for you , Katharine , " he say directly they sit down to table ; " I shall not   get my holiday in April . we shall have to put off our marriage . " 

 he rap the word out with a certain degree of briskness . Katharine start a little , as if the announcement disturb her thought . 

 " that will not   make any difference , will it ? I mean the lease be not   sign , " she reply . " but why ? what have happen ? " 

 he tell she , in an off - hand way , how one of his fellow - clerk have break down , and might have to be away for month , six month even , in which case they would have to think over their position . he say it in a way which strike she , at last , as oddly casual . she look at he . there be no outward sign that he be annoy with she . be she well dress ? she think sufficiently so . perhaps she be late ? she look for a clock . 

 " it be a good thing we do not   take the house then , " she repeat thoughtfully . 

 " it will mean , too , I be afraid , that I shall not   be as free for a considerable time as I have be , " he continue . she have time to reflect that she gain something by all this , though it be too soon to determine what . but the light which have be burn with such intensity as she come along be suddenly overcloud , as much by his manner as by his news . she have be prepare to meet opposition , which be simple to encounter compare with she do not know what it be that she have to encounter . the meal pass in quiet , well - control talk about indifferent thing . music be not a subject about which she know anything , but she like he to tell her thing ; and could , she muse , as he talk , fancy the evening of married life spend thus , over the fire ; spend thus , or with a book , perhaps , for then she would have time to read her book , and to grasp firmly with every muscle of her unused mind what she long to know . the atmosphere be very free . suddenly William break off . she look up apprehensively , brush aside these thought with annoyance . 

 " where should I address a letter to Cassandra ? " he ask she . it be obvious again that William have some meaning or other to - night , or be in some mood . " we have   strike up a friendship , " he add . 

 " she be at home , I think , " Katharine reply . 

 " they keep she too much at home , " say William . " why do not   you ask she to stay with you , and let she hear a little good music ? I will just finish what I be say , if you do not   mind , because I be particularly anxious that she should hear to - morrow . " 

 Katharine sink back in her chair , and Rodney take the paper on his knee , and go on with his sentence . " Style , you know , be what we tend to neglect " ; but he be far more conscious of Katharine 's eye upon he than of what he be say about style . he know that she be look at he , but whether with irritation or indifference he could not guess . 

 in truth , she have fall sufficiently into his trap to feel uncomfortably rouse and disturb and unable to proceed on the line lay down for herself . this indifferent , if not hostile , attitude on William 's part make it impossible to break off without animosity , largely and completely . infinitely preferable be Mary 's state , she think , where there be a simple thing to do and one do it . in fact , she could not help suppose that some littleness of nature have a part in all the refinement , reserve , and subtlety of feeling for which her friend and family be so distinguished . for example , although she like Cassandra well enough , her fantastic method of life strike she as purely frivolous ; now it be socialism , now it be silkworm , now it be music which last she suppose be the cause of William 's sudden interest in she . never before have William waste the minute of her presence in write his letter . with a curious sense of light opening where all , hitherto , have be opaque , it dawn upon she that , after all , possibly , yes , probably , nay , certainly , the devotion which she have almost wearily take for grant exist in a much slighter degree than she have suspect , or exist no long . she look at he attentively as if this discovery of hers must show trace in his face . never have she see so much to respect in his appearance , so much that attract she by its sensitiveness and intelligence , although she see these quality as if they be those one respond to , dumbly , in the face of a stranger . the head bend over the paper , thoughtful as usual , have now a composure which seem somehow to place it at a distance , like a face see talk to some one else behind glass . 

 he write on , without raise his eye . she would have speak , but could not bring herself to ask he for sign of affection which she have no right to claim . the conviction that he be thus strange to she fill she with despondency , and illustrate quite beyond doubt the infinite loneliness of human being . she have never feel the truth of this so strongly before . she look away into the fire ; it seem to she that even physically they be now scarcely within speaking distance ; and spiritually there be certainly no human be with whom she could claim comradeship ; no dream that satisfy she as she be use to be satisfy ; nothing remain in whose reality she could believe , save those abstract idea figure , law , star , fact , which she could hardly hold to for lack of knowledge and a kind of shame . 

 when Rodney own to himself the folly of this prolong silence , and the meanness of such device , and look up ready to seek some excuse for a good laugh , or opening for a confession , he be disconcert by what he see . Katharine seem equally oblivious of what be bad or of what be good in he . her expression suggest concentration upon something entirely remote from her surrounding . the carelessness of her attitude seem to he rather masculine than feminine . his impulse to break up the constraint be chill , and once more the exasperating sense of his own impotency return to he . he could not help contrast Katharine with his vision of the engaging , whimsical Cassandra ; Katharine undemonstrative , inconsiderate , silent , and yet so notable that he could never do without her good opinion . 

 she veer round upon he a moment later , as if , when her train of thought be end , she become aware of his presence . 

 " have you finish your letter ? " she ask . he think he hear faint amusement in her tone , but not a trace of jealousy . 

 " no , I be not go to write any more to - night , " he say . " I be not in the mood for it for some reason . I can not   say what I want to say . " 

 " Cassandra will not   know if it be well write or badly write , " Katharine remark . 

 " I be not so sure about that . I should say she have a good deal of literary feeling . " 

 " perhaps , " say Katharine indifferently . " you have   be neglect my education lately , by the way . I wish you would read something . let I choose a book . " so speak , she go across to his bookshelf and begin look in a desultory way among his book . anything , she think , be well than bickering or the strange silence which drive home to she the distance between they . as she pull one book forward and then another she think ironically of her own certainty not an hour ago ; how it have vanish in a moment , how she be merely mark time as good she could , not know in the least where they stand , what they feel , or whether William love she or not . More and more the condition of Mary 's mind seem to her wonderful and enviable if , indeed , it could be quite as she figure it if , indeed , simplicity exist for any one of the daughter of woman . 

 " Swift , " she say , at last , take out a volume at haphazard to settle this question at least . " let we have some Swift . " 

 Rodney take the book , hold it in front of he , insert one finger between the page , but say nothing . his face wear a queer expression of deliberation , as if he be weigh one thing with another , and would not say anything until his mind be make up . 

 Katharine , take her chair beside he , note his silence and look at he with sudden apprehension . what she hop or fear , she could not have say ; a most irrational and indefensible desire for some assurance of his affection be , perhaps , uppermost in her mind . Peevishness , complaint , exact cross - examination she be use to , but this attitude of compose quiet , which seem to come from the consciousness of power within , puzzle she . she do not know what be go to happen next . 

 at last William speak . 

 " I think it be a little odd , do not   you ? " he say , in a voice of detach reflection . " Most people , I mean , would be seriously upset if their marriage be put off for six month or so . but we be not ; now how do you account for that ? " 

 she look at he and observe his judicial attitude as of one hold far aloof from emotion . 

 " I attribute it , " he go on , without wait for she to answer , " to the fact that neither of we be in the least romantic about the other . that may be partly , no doubt , because we have   know each other so long ; but I be inclined to think there be more in it than that . there be something temperamental . I think you be a trifle cold , and I suspect I be a trifle self - absorb . if that be so it go a long way to explain our odd lack of illusion about each other . I be not say that the most satisfactory marriage be not   found upon this sort of understanding . but certainly it strike I as odd this morning , when Wilson tell I , how little upset I feel . by the way , you be sure we have not   commit ourselves to that house ? " 

 " I have   keep the letter , and I will go through they to - morrow ; but I be certain we be on the safe side . " 

 " thank . as to the psychological problem , " he continue , as if the question interest he in a detach way , " there be no doubt , I think , that either of we be capable of feel what , for reason of simplicity , I call romance for a third person at least , I have   little doubt in my own case . " 

 it be , perhaps , the first time in all her knowledge of he that Katharine have know William enter thus deliberately and without sign of emotion upon a statement of his own feeling . he be will not to discourage such intimate discussion by a little laugh or turn of the conversation , as much as to say that man , or man of the world , find such topic a little silly , or in doubtful taste . his obvious wish to explain something puzzle she , interested she , and neutralize the wound to her vanity . for some reason , too , she feel more at ease with he than usual ; or her ease be more the ease of equality she could not stop to think of that at the moment though . his remark interest she too much for the light that they throw upon certain problem of her own . 

 " what be this romance ? " she muse . 

 " ah , that be the question . I have   never come across a definition that satisfy I , though there be some very good one " he glance in the direction of his book . 

 " it be not altogether know the other person , perhaps it be ignorance , " she hazard . 

 " some authority say it be a question of distance romance in literature , that be " 

 " possibly , in the case of art . but in the case of people it may be " she hesitate . 

 " have you no personal experience of it ? " he ask , let his eye rest upon she swiftly for a moment . 

 " I believe it be influence I enormously , " she say , in the tone of one absorb by the possibility of some view just present to they ; " but in my life there be so little scope for it , " she add . she review her daily task , the perpetual demand upon she for good sense , self - control , and accuracy in a house contain a romantic mother . ah , but her romance be not   that romance . it be a desire , an echo , a sound ; she could drape it in color , see it in form , hear it in music , but not in word ; no , never in word . she sigh , tease by desire so incoherent , so incommunicable . 

 " but be not   it curious , " William resume , " that you should neither feel it for I , nor I for you ? " 

 Katharine agree that it be curious very ; but even more curious to she be the fact that she be discuss the question with William . it reveal possibility which open a prospect of a new relationship altogether . somehow it seem to she that he be help she to understand what she have never understand ; and in her gratitude she be conscious of a most sisterly desire to help he , too sisterly , save for one pang , not quite to be subdue , that for he she be without romance . 

 " I think you might be very happy with some one you love in that way , " she say . 

 " you assume that romance survive a close knowledge of the person one love ? " 

 he ask the question formally , to protect himself from the sort of personality which he dread . the whole situation need the most careful management lest it should degenerate into some degrading and disturbing exhibition such as the scene , which he could never think of without shame , upon the heath among the dead leaf . and yet each sentence bring he relief . he be come to understand something or other about his own desire hitherto undefined by he , the source of his difficulty with Katharine . the wish to hurt she , which have urge he to begin , have completely leave he , and he feel that it be only Katharine now who could help he to be sure . he must take his time . there be so many thing that he could not say without the great difficulty that name , for example , Cassandra . nor could he move his eye from a certain spot , a fiery glen surround by high mountain , in the heart of the coal . he wait in suspense for Katharine to continue . she have say that he might be very happy with some one he love in that way . 

 " I do not   see why it should not   last with you , " she resume . " I can imagine a certain sort of person " she pause ; she be aware that he be listen with the great intentness , and that his formality be merely the cover for an extreme anxiety of some sort . there be some person then some woman who could it be ? Cassandra ? ah , possibly 

 " a person , " she add , speak in the most matter - of - fact tone she could command , " like Cassandra Otway , for instance . Cassandra be the most interesting of the Otways with the exception of Henry . even so , I like Cassandra well . she have more than mere cleverness . she be a character a person by herself . " 

 " those dreadful insect ! " burst from William , with a nervous laugh , and a little spasm go through he as Katharine notice . it be Cassandra then . automatically and dully she reply , " you could insist that she confine herself to to something else .... but she care for music ; I believe she write poetry ; and there can be no doubt that she have a peculiar charm " 

 she cease , as if define to herself this peculiar charm . after a moment 's silence William jerk out : 

 " I think she affectionate ? " 

 " extremely affectionate . she worship Henry . when you think what a house that be Uncle Francis always in one mood or another " 

 " dear , dear , dear , " William mutter . 

 " and you have so much in common . " 

 " my dear Katharine ! " William exclaim , fling himself back in his chair , and uproot his eye from the spot in the fire . " I really do not   know what we be talk about .... I assure you .... " 

 he be cover with an extreme confusion . 

 he withdraw the finger that be still thrust between the page of Gulliver , open the book , and run his eye down the list of chapter , as though he be about to select the one most suitable for read aloud . as Katharine watch he , she be seize with preliminary symptom of his own panic . at the same time she be convince that , should he find the right page , take out his spectacle , clear his throat , and open his lip , a chance that would never come again in all their life would be lose to they both . 

 " we be talk about thing that interest we both very much , " she say . " shall not   we go on talk , and leave Swift for another time ? I do not   feel in the mood for Swift , and it be a pity to read any one when that be the case particularly swift . " 

 the presence of wise literary speculation , as she calculate , restore William 's confidence in his security , and he replace the book in the bookcase , keep his back turn to she as he do so , and take advantage of this circumstance to summon his thought together . 

 but a second of introspection have the alarming result of show he that his mind , when look at from within , be no long familiar ground . he feel , that be to say , what he have never consciously feel before ; he be reveal to himself as other than he be will not to think he ; he be afloat upon a sea of unknown and tumultuous possibility . he pace once up and down the room , and then fling himself impetuously into the chair by Katharine 's side . he have never feel anything like this before ; he put himself entirely into her hand ; he cast off all responsibility . he very nearly exclaim aloud : 

 " you have   stir up all these odious and violent emotion , and now you must do the good you can with they . " 

 her near presence , however , have a calming and reassuring effect upon his agitation , and he be conscious only of an implicit trust that , somehow , he be safe with she , that she would see he through , find out what it be that he want , and procure it for he . 

 " I wish to do whatever you tell I to do , " he say . " I put myself entirely in your hand , Katharine . " 

 " you must try to tell I what you feel , " she say . 

 " my dear , I feel a thousand thing every second . I do not   know , I be sure , what I feel . that afternoon on the heath it be then then " he break off ; he do not tell she what have happen then . " your ghastly good sense , as usual , have convince I for the moment but what the truth be , Heaven only know ! " he exclaim . 

 " be not   it the truth that you be , or might be , in love with Cassandra ? " she say gently . 

 William bow his head . after a moment 's silence he murmur : 

 " I believe you be right , Katharine . " 

 she sigh , involuntarily . she have be hop all this time , with an intensity that increase second by second against the current of her word , that it would not in the end come to this . after a moment of surprising anguish , she summon her courage to tell he how she wish only that she might help he , and have frame the first word of her speech when a knock , terrific and startling to people in their overwrought condition , sound upon the door . 

 " Katharine , I worship you , " he urge , half in a whisper . 

 " yes , " she reply , withdraw with a little shiver , " but you must open the door . " 





 CHAPTER XXIII 

 when Ralph Denham enter the room and see Katharine seat with she back to he , he be conscious of a change in the grade of the atmosphere such as a traveler meet with sometimes upon the road , particularly after sunset , when , without warn , he run from clammy chill to a hoard of unspent warmth in which the sweetness of hay and beanfield be cherish , as if the sun still shine although the moon be up . he hesitate ; he shudder ; he walk elaborately to the window and lay aside his coat . he balance his stick most carefully against the fold of the curtain . thus occupy with his own sensation and preparation , he have little time to observe what either of the other two be feel . such symptom of agitation as he might perceive   and they have leave their token in brightness of eye and pallor of cheek   seem to he well befit the actor in so great a drama as that of Katharine Hilbery 's daily life . beauty and passion be the breath of her be , he think . 

 she scarcely notice his presence , or only as it force she to adopt a manner of composure , which she be certainly far from feel . William , however , be even more agitated than she be , and her first instalment of promise help take the form of some commonplace upon the age of the building or the architect 's name , which give he an excuse to fumble in a drawer for certain design , which he lay upon the table between the three of they . 

 which of the three follow the design most carefully it would be difficult to tell , but it be certain that not one of the three find for the moment anything to say . year of training in a drawing - room come at length to Katharine 's help , and she say something suitable , at the same moment withdraw her hand from the table because she perceive that it tremble . William agree effusively ; Denham corroborate he , speak in rather high - pitch tone ; they thrust aside the plan , and draw near to the fireplace . 

 " I would rather live here than anywhere in the whole of London , " say Denham . 

  " and I have   get nowhere to live "   Katharine think , as she agree aloud . 

 " you could get room here , no doubt , if you want to , " Rodney reply . 

 " but I be just leave London for good I have   take that cottage I be tell you about . " the announcement seem to convey very little to either of his hearer . 

 " indeed ? that be sad .... you must give I your address . but you will not   cut yourself off altogether , surely " 

 " you will be move , too , I suppose , " Denham remark . 

 William show such visible sign of flounder that Katharine collect herself and ask : 

 " where be the cottage you have   take ? " 

 in answer she , Denham turn and look at she . as their eye meet , she realize for the first time that she be talk to Ralph Denham , and she remember , without recall any detail , that she have be speak of he quite lately , and that she have reason to think ill of he . what Mary have say she could not remember , but she feel that there be a mass of knowledge in her mind which she have not have time to examine knowledge now lie on the far side of a gulf . but her agitation flash the queer light upon her past . she must get through the matter in hand , and then think it out in quiet . she bend her mind to follow what Ralph be say . he be tell she that he have take a cottage in Norfolk , and she be say that she know , or do not know , that particular neighborhood . but after a moment 's attention her mind fly to Rodney , and she have an unusual , indeed unprecedented , sense that they be in touch and share each other 's thought . if only Ralph be not there , she would at once give way to her desire to take William 's hand , then to bend his head upon her shoulder , for this be what she want to do more than anything at the moment , unless , indeed , she wish more than anything to be alone yes , that be what she want . she be sick to death of these discussion ; she shiver at the effort to reveal her feeling . she have forget to answer . William be speak now . 

 " but what will you find to do in the country ? " she ask at random , strike into a conversation which she have only half hear , in such a way as to make both Rodney and Denham look at she with a little surprise . but directly she take up the conversation , it be William 's turn to fall silent . he at once forget to listen to what they be say , although he interpose nervously at interval , " yes , yes , yes . " as the minute pass , Ralph 's presence become more and more intolerable to he , since there be so much that he must say to Katharine ; the moment he could not talk to she , terrible doubt , unanswerable question accumulate , which he must lay before Katharine , for she alone could help he now . unless he could see she alone , it would be impossible for he ever to sleep , or to know what he have say in a moment of madness , which be not altogether mad , or be it mad ? he nod his head , and say , nervously , " yes , yes , " and look at Katharine , and think how beautiful she look ; there be no one in the world that he admire more . there be an emotion in her face which lend it an expression he have never see there . then , as he be turn over mean by which he could speak to she alone , she rise , and he be take by surprise , for he have count on the fact that she would outstay Denham . his only chance , then , of say something to she in private , be to take she downstair and walk with she to the street . while he hesitate , however , overcome with the difficulty of put one simple thought into word when all his thought be scatter about , and all be too strong for utterance , he be strike silent by something that be still more unexpected . Denham get up from his chair , look at Katharine , and say : 

 " I be go , too . shall we go together ? " 

 and before William could see any way of detain he or would it be well to detain Katharine ? he have take his hat , stick , and be hold the door open for Katharine to pass out . the most that William could do be to stand at the head of the stair and say good - night . he could not offer to go with they . he could not insist that she should stay . he watch her descend , rather slowly , owe to the dusk of the staircase , and he have a last sight of Denham 's head and of Katharine 's head near together , against the panel , when suddenly a pang of acute jealousy overcome he , and have he not remain conscious of the slipper upon his foot , he would have run after they or cry out . as it be he could not move from the spot . at the turn of the staircase Katharine turn to look back , trust to this last glance to seal their compact of good friendship . instead of return her silent greeting , William grin back at she a cold stare of sarcasm or of rage . 

 she stop dead for a moment , and then descend slowly into the court . she look to the right and to the left , and once up into the sky . she be only conscious of Denham as a block upon her thought . she measure the distance that must be traverse before she would be alone . but when they come to the Strand no cab be to be see , and Denham break the silence by say : 

 " there seem to be no cab . shall we walk on a little ? " 

 " very well , " she agree , pay no attention to he . 

 Aware of her preoccupation , or absorb in his own thought , Ralph say nothing far ; and in silence they walk some distance along the Strand . Ralph be do his good to put his thought into such order that one come before the rest , and the determination that when he speak he should speak worthily , make he put off the moment of speak till he have find the exact word and even the place that well suit he . the Strand be too busy . there be too much risk , also , of find an empty cab . without a word of explanation he turn to the left , down one of the side street lead to the river . on no account must they part until something of the very great importance have happen . he know perfectly well what he wish to say , and have arrange not only the substance , but the order in which he be to say it . now , however , that he be alone with she , not only do he find the difficulty of speak almost insurmountable , but he be aware that he be angry with she for thus disturb he , and cast , as it be so easy for a person of her advantage to do , these phantom and pitfall across his path . he be determined that he would question she as severely as he would question himself ; and make they both , once and for all , either justify her dominance or renounce it . but the long they walk thus alone , the more he be disturb by the sense of her actual presence . her skirt blow ; the feather in her hat wave ; sometimes he see she a step or two ahead of he , or have to wait for she to catch he up . 

 the silence be prolong , and at length draw her attention to he . first she be annoy that there be no cab to free she from his company ; then she recall vaguely something that Mary have say to make she think ill of he ; she could not remember what , but the recollection , combine with his masterful way why do he walk so fast down this side street ? make she more and more conscious of a person of marked , though disagreeable , force by her side . she stop and , look round she for a cab , sight one in the distance . he be thus precipitate into speech . 

 " should you mind if we walk a little far ? " he ask . " there be something I want to say to you . " 

 " very well , " she reply , guess that his request have something to do with Mary Datchet . 

 " it be quieter by the river , " he say , and instantly he cross over . " I want to ask you merely this , " he begin . but he pause so long that she could see his head against the sky ; the slope of his thin cheek and his large , strong nose be clearly mark against it . while he pause , word that be quite different from those he intend to use present themselves . 

 " I have   make you my standard ever since I see you . I have   dream about you ; I have   think of nothing but you ; you represent to I the only reality in the world . " 

 his word , and the queer strained voice in which he speak they , make it appear as if he address some person who be not the woman beside he , but some one far away . 

 " and now thing have come to such a pass that , unless I can speak to you openly , I believe I shall go mad . I think of you as the most beautiful , the true thing in the world , " he continue , fill with a sense of exaltation , and feel that he have no need now to choose his word with pedantic accuracy , for what he want to say be suddenly become plain to he . 

 " I see you everywhere , in the star , in the river ; to I you be everything that exist ; the reality of everything . life , I tell you , would be impossible without you . and now I want " 

 she have hear he so far with a feeling that she have drop some material word which make sense of the rest . she could hear no more of this unintelligible ramble without check he . she feel that she be overhear what be mean for another . 

 " I do not   understand , " she say . " you be say thing that you do not   mean . " 

 " I mean every word I say , " he reply , emphatically . he turn his head towards she . she recover the word she be search for while he speak . " Ralph Denham be in love with you . " they come back to she in Mary Datchet 's voice . her anger blaze up in she . 

 " I see Mary Datchet this afternoon , " she exclaim . 

 he make a movement as if he be surprised or take aback , but answer in a moment : 

 " she tell you that I have ask she to marry I , I suppose ? " 

 " no ! " Katharine exclaim , in surprise . 

 " I do though . it be the day I see you at Lincoln , " he continue . " I have mean to ask she to marry I , and then I look out of the window and see you . after that I do not   want to ask any one to marry I . but I do it ; and she know I be lie , and refuse I . I think then , and still think , that she care for I . I behave very badly . I do not   defend myself . " 

 " no , " say Katharine , " I should hope not . there be no defence that I can think of . if any conduct be wrong , that be . " she speak with an energy that be direct even more against herself than against he . " it seem to I , " she continue , with the same energy , " that people be bind to be honest . there be no excuse for such behavior . " she could now see plainly before her eye the expression on Mary Datchet 's face . 

 after a short pause , he say : 

 " I be not tell you that I be in love with you . I be not in love with you . " 

 " I do not   think that , " she reply , conscious of some bewilderment . 

 " I have not speak a word to you that I do not mean , " he add . 

 " tell I then what it be that you mean , " she say at length . 

 as if obey a common instinct , they both stop and , bend slightly over the balustrade of the river , look into the flow water . 

 " you say that we have   get to be honest , " Ralph begin . " very well . I will try to tell you the fact ; but I warn you , you will think I mad . it be a fact , though , that since I first see you four or five month ago I have make you , in an utterly absurd way , I expect , my ideal . I be almost ashamed to tell you what length I have   go to . it be become the thing that matter most in my life . " he check himself . " without know you , except that you be beautiful , and all that , I have   come to believe that we be in some sort of agreement ; that we be after something together ; that we see something .... I have   get into the habit of imagine you ; I be always think what you would say or do ; I walk along the street talk to you ; I dream of you . it be merely a bad habit , a schoolboy habit , day - dreaming ; it be a common experience ; half one 's friend do the same ; well , those be the fact . " 

 simultaneously , they both walk on very slowly . 

 " if you be to know I you would feel none of this , " she say . " we do not   know each other we have   always be interrupt .... be you go to tell I this that day my aunt come ? " she ask , recollect the whole scene . 

 he bow his head . 

 " the day you tell I of your engagement , " he say . 

 she think , with a start , that she be no long engage . 

 " I deny that I should cease to feel this if I know you , " he go on . " I should feel it more reasonably that be all . I should not   talk the kind of nonsense I have   talk to - night .... but it be not   nonsense . it be the truth , " he say doggedly . " it be the important thing . you can force I to talk as if this feeling for you be an hallucination , but all our feeling be that . the good of they be half illusion . still , " he add , as if argue to himself , " if it be not   as real a feeling as I be capable of , I should not   be change my life on your account . " 

 " what do you mean ? " she inquire . 

 " I tell you . I be take a cottage . I be give up my profession . " 

 " on my account ? " she ask , in amazement . 

 " yes , on your account , " he reply . he explain his meaning no far . 

 " but I do not   know you or your circumstance , " she say at last , as he remain silent . 

 " you have no opinion about I one way or the other ? " 

 " yes , I suppose I have an opinion " she hesitate . 

 he control his wish to ask she to explain herself , and much to his pleasure she go on , appear to search her mind . 

 " I think that you criticize I perhaps dislike I . I think of you as a person who judge " 

 " no ; I be a person who feel , " he say , in a low voice . 

 " tell I , then , what have make you do this ? " she ask , after a break . 

 he tell she in an orderly way , betoken careful preparation , all that he have mean to say at first ; how he stand with regard to his brother and sister ; what his mother have say , and his sister Joan have refrain from say ; exactly how many pound stand in his name at the bank ; what prospect his brother have of earn a livelihood in America ; how much of their income go on rent , and other detail know to he by heart . she listen to all this , so that she could have pass an examination in it by the time Waterloo Bridge be in sight ; and yet she be no more listen to it than she be count the paving - stone at her foot . she be feel happy than she have feel in her life . if Denham could have see how visibly book of algebraic symbol , page all speckle with dot and dash and twisted bar , come before her eye as they trod the Embankment , his secret joy in her attention might have be disperse . she go on , say , " yes , I see .... but how would that help you ? ... your brother have pass his examination ? " so sensibly , that he have constantly to keep his brain in check ; and all the time she be in fancy look up through a telescope at white shadow - cleft disk which be other world , until she feel herself possess of two body , one walk by the river with Denham , the other concentrate to a silver globe aloft in the fine blue space above the scum of vapor that be cover the visible world . she look at the sky once , and see that no star be keen enough to pierce the flight of watery cloud now course rapidly before the west wind . she look down hurriedly again . there be no reason , she assure herself , for this feeling of happiness ; she be not free ; she be not alone ; she be still bind to earth by a million fibre ; every step take her nearer home . nevertheless , she exult as she have never exult before . the air be fresher , the light more distinct , the cold stone of the balustrade cold and hard , when by chance or purpose she strike her hand against it . no feeling of annoyance with Denham remain ; he certainly do not hinder any flight she might choose to make , whether in the direction of the sky or of her home ; but that her condition be due to he , or to anything that he have say , she have no consciousness at all . 

 they be now within sight of the stream of cab and omnibus cross to and from the Surrey side of the river ; the sound of the traffic , the hooting of motor - horn , and the light chime of tram - bell sound more and more distinctly , and , with the increase of noise , they both become silent . with a common instinct they slacken their pace , as if to lengthen the time of semi - privacy allow they . to Ralph , the pleasure of these last yard of the walk with Katharine be so great that he could not look beyond the present moment to the time when she should have leave he . he have no wish to use the last moment of their companionship in add fresh word to what he have already say . since they have stop talk , she have become to he not so much a real person , as the very woman he dream of ; but his solitary dream have never produce any such keenness of sensation as that which he feel in her presence . he himself be also strangely transfigure . he have complete mastery of all his faculty . for the first time he be in possession of his full power . the vista which open before he seem to have no perceptible end . but the mood have none of the restlessness or feverish desire to add one delight to another which have hitherto mark , and somewhat spoilt , the most rapturous of his imagining . it be a mood that take such clear - eyed account of the condition of human life that he be not disturb in the least by the gliding presence of a taxicab , and without agitation he perceive that Katharine be conscious of it also , and turn her head in that direction . their halting step acknowledge the desirability of engage the cab ; and they stop simultaneously , and sign to it . 

 " then you will let I know your decision as soon as you can ? " he ask , with his hand on the door . 

 she hesitate for a moment . she could not immediately recall what the question be that she have to decide . 

 " I will write , " she say vaguely . " no , " she add , in a second , bethink she of the difficulty of write anything decide upon a question to which she have pay no attention , " I do not   see how to manage it . " 

 she stand look at Denham , consider and hesitate , with her foot upon the step . he guess her difficulty ; he know in a second that she have hear nothing ; he know everything that she feel . 

 " there be only one place to discuss thing satisfactorily that I know of , " he say quickly ; " that be kew . " 

 " kew ? " 

 " kew , " he repeat , with immense decision . he shut the door and give her address to the driver . she instantly be convey away from he , and her cab join the knot stream of vehicle , each mark by a light , and indistinguishable one from the other . he stand watch for a moment , and then , as if sweep by some fierce impulse , from the spot where they have stand , he turn , cross the road at a rapid pace , and disappear . 

 he walk on upon the impetus of this last mood of almost supernatural exaltation until he reach a narrow street , at this hour empty of traffic and passenger . here , whether it be the shop with their shutter window , the smooth and silvered curve of the wood pavement , or a natural ebb of feeling , his exaltation slowly ooze and desert he . he be now conscious of the loss that follow any revelation ; he have lose something in speak to Katharine , for , after all , be the Katharine whom he love the same as the real Katharine ? she have transcend she entirely at moment ; her skirt have blow , her feather wave , her voice speak ; yes , but how terrible sometimes the pause between the voice of one 's dream and the voice that come from the object of one 's dream ! he feel a mixture of disgust and pity at the figure cut by human being when they try to carry out , in practice , what they have the power to conceive . how small both he and Katharine have appear when they issue from the cloud of thought that envelop they ! he recall the small , inexpressive , commonplace word in which they have try to communicate with each other ; he repeat they over to himself . by repeat Katharine 's word , he come in a few moment to such a sense of her presence that he worship she more than ever . but she be engage to be marry , he remember with a start . the strength of his feeling be reveal to he instantly , and he give himself up to an irresistible rage and sense of frustration . the image of Rodney come before he with every circumstance of folly and indignity . that little pink - cheek dancing - master to marry Katharine ? that gibber ass with the face of a monkey on an organ ? that pose , vain , fantastical fop ? with his tragedy and his comedy , his innumerable spite and pride and pettiness ? Lord ! marry Rodney ! she must be as great a fool as he be . his bitterness take possession of he , and as he sit in the corner of the underground carriage , he look as stark an image of unapproachable severity as could be imagine . directly he reach home he sit down at his table , and begin to write Katharine a long , wild , mad letter , beg she for both their sake to break with Rodney , implore she not to do what would destroy for ever the one beauty , the one truth , the one hope ; not to be a traitor , not to be a deserter , for if she be and he wind up with a quiet and brief assertion that , whatever she do or leave undo , he would believe to be the good , and accept from she with gratitude . he cover sheet after sheet , and hear the early cart start for London before he go to bed . 





 CHAPTER XXIV 

 the first sign of spring , even such as make themselves feel towards the middle of February , not only produce little white and violet flower in the more sheltered corner of wood and garden , but bring to birth thought and desire comparable to those faintly colored and sweetly scented petal in the mind of man and woman . life freeze by age , so far as the present be concern , to a hard surface , which neither reflect nor yield , at this season become soft and fluid , reflect the shape and color of the present , as well as the shape and color of the past . in the case of Mrs. Hilbery , these early spring day be chiefly upsetting inasmuch as they cause a general quickening of her emotional power , which , as far as the past be concern , have never suffer much diminution . but in the spring her desire for expression invariably increase . she be haunt by the ghost of phrase . she give herself up to a sensual delight in the combination of word . she seek they in the page of her favorite author . she make they for herself on scrap of paper , and roll they on her tongue when there seem no occasion for such eloquence . she be uphold in these excursion by the certainty that no language could outdo the splendor of her father 's memory , and although her effort do not notably further the end of his biography , she be under the impression of live more in his shade at such time than at other . no one can escape the power of language , let alone those of english birth bring up from childhood , as Mrs. Hilbery have be , to disport themselves now in the Saxon plainness , now in the latin splendor of the tongue , and store with memory , as she be , of old poet exuberate in an infinity of vocable . even Katharine be slightly affect against her well judgment by her mother 's enthusiasm . not that her judgment could altogether acquiesce in the necessity for a study of Shakespeare 's sonnet as a preliminary to the fifth chapter of her grandfather 's biography . begin with a perfectly frivolous jest , Mrs. Hilbery have evolve a theory that Anne Hathaway have a way , among other thing , of write Shakespeare 's sonnet ; the idea , strike out to enliven a party of professor , who forward a number of privately print manual within the next few day for her instruction , have submerge she in a flood of Elizabethan literature ; she have come half to believe in her joke , which be , she say , at least as good as other people 's fact , and all her fancy for the time be center upon Stratford - on - Avon . she have a plan , she tell Katharine , when , rather later than usual , Katharine come into the room the morning after her walk by the river , for visit Shakespeare 's tomb . any fact about the poet have become , for the moment , of far great interest to she than the immediate present , and the certainty that there be exist in England a spot of ground where Shakespeare have undoubtedly stand , where his very bone lie directly beneath one 's foot , be so absorbing to she on this particular occasion that she greet her daughter with the exclamation : 

 " d'you think he ever pass this house ? " 

 the question , for the moment , seem to Katharine to have reference to Ralph Denham . 

 " on his way to Blackfriars , I mean , " Mrs. Hilbery continue , " for you know the late discovery be that he own a house there . " 

 Katharine still look about she in perplexity , and Mrs. Hilbery add : 

 " which be a proof that he be not   as poor as they have   sometimes say . I should like to think that he have enough , though I do not   in the least want he to be rich . " 

 then , perceive her daughter 's expression of perplexity , Mrs. Hilbery burst out laugh . 

 " my dear , I be not talk about your William , though that be another reason for like he . I be talk , I be think , I be dream of MY William William Shakespeare , of course . be not   it odd , " she muse , stand at the window and tap gently upon the pane , " that for all one can see , that dear old thing in the blue bonnet , cross the road with her basket on her arm , have never hear that there be such a person ? yet it all go on : lawyer hurry to their work , cabman squabble for their fare , little boy roll their hoop , little girl throw bread to the gull , as if there be not   a Shakespeare in the world . I should like to stand at that crossing all day long and say : ' People , read Shakespeare ! ' " 

 Katharine sit down at her table and open a long dusty envelope . as Shelley be mention in the course of the letter as if he be alive , it have , of course , considerable value . her immediate task be to decide whether the whole letter should be print , or only the paragraph which mention Shelley 's name , and she reach out for a pen and hold it in readiness to do justice upon the sheet . her pen , however , remain in the air . almost surreptitiously she slip a clean sheet in front of she , and her hand , descend , begin draw square box halve and quarter by straight line , and then circle which undergo the same process of dissection . 

 " Katharine ! I have   hit upon a brilliant idea ! " Mrs. Hilbery exclaim " to lay out , say , a hundred pound or so on copy of Shakespeare , and give they to work man . some of your clever friend who get up meeting might help we , Katharine . and that might lead to a playhouse , where we could all take part . you would be rosalind but you have   a dash of the old nurse in you . your father 's Hamlet , come to year of discretion ; and I be well , I be a bit of they all ; I be quite a large bit of the fool , but the fool in Shakespeare say all the clever thing . now who shall William be ? a hero ? Hotspur ? Henry the Fifth ? no , William 's get a touch of Hamlet in he , too . I can fancy that William talk to himself when he be alone . ah , Katharine , you must say very beautiful thing when you be together ! " she add wistfully , with a glance at her daughter , who have tell she nothing about the dinner the night before . 

 " oh , we talk a lot of nonsense , " say Katharine , hide her slip of paper as her mother stand by she , and spread the old letter about Shelley in front of she . 

 " it will not   seem to you nonsense in ten year ' time , " say Mrs. Hilbery . " believe I , Katharine , you will look back on these day afterwards ; you will remember all the silly thing you have   say ; and you will find that your life have be build on they . the good of life be build on what we say when we be in love . it be not   nonsense , Katharine , " she urge , " it be the truth , it be the only truth . " 

 Katharine be on the point of interrupt her mother , and then she be on the point of confide in she . they come strangely close together sometimes . but , while she hesitate and seek for word not too direct , her mother have recourse to Shakespeare , and turn page after page , set upon find some quotation which say all this about love far , far well than she could . accordingly , Katharine do nothing but scrub one of her circle an intense black with her pencil , in the midst of which process the telephone - bell rang , and she leave the room to answer it . 

 when she return , Mrs. Hilbery have find not the passage she want , but another of exquisite beauty as she justly observe , look up for a second to ask Katharine who that be ? 

 " Mary Datchet , " Katharine reply briefly . 

 " ah I half wish I would call you Mary , but it would not   have go with Hilbery , and it would not   have go with Rodney . now this be not   the passage I want .   I never can find what I want .   but it be spring ; it be the daffodil ; it be the green field ; it be the bird . " 

 she be cut short in her quotation by another imperative telephone - bell . once more Katharine leave the room . 

 " my dear child , how odious the triumph of science be ! " Mrs. Hilbery exclaim on her return . " they will be link we with the moon next but who be that ? " 

 " William , " Katharine reply yet more briefly . 

 " I will forgive William anything , for I be certain that there be not   any Williams in the moon . I hope he be come to luncheon ? " 

 " he be come to tea . " 

 " well , that be well than nothing , and I promise to leave you alone . " 

 " there be no need for you to do that , " say Katharine . 

 she sweep her hand over the fade sheet , and draw herself up squarely to the table as if she refuse to waste time any long . the gesture be not lose upon her mother . it hint at the existence of something stern and unapproachable in her daughter 's character , which strike chill upon she , as the sight of poverty , or drunkenness , or the logic with which Mr. Hilbery sometimes think good to demolish her certainty of an approach millennium strike chill upon she . she go back to her own table , and put on her spectacle with a curious expression of quiet humility , address herself for the first time that morning to the task before she . the shock with an unsympathetic world have a sobering effect on she . for once , her industry surpass her daughter 's . Katharine could not reduce the world to that particular perspective in which Harriet Martineau , for instance , be a figure of solid importance , and possess of a genuine relationship to this figure or to that date . singularly enough , the sharp call of the telephone - bell still echo in her ear , and her body and mind be in a state of tension , as if , at any moment , she might hear another summon of great interest to she than the whole of the nineteenth century . she do not clearly realize what this call be to be ; but when the ear have get into the habit of listening , they go on listen involuntarily , and thus Katharine spend the great part of the morning in listen to a variety of sound in the back street of Chelsea . for the first time in her life , probably , she wish that Mrs. Hilbery would not keep so closely to her work . a quotation from Shakespeare would not have come amiss . now and again she hear a sigh from her mother 's table , but that be the only proof she give of her existence , and Katharine do not think of connect it with the square aspect of her own position at the table , or , perhaps , she would have throw she pen down and tell her mother the reason of her restlessness . the only writing she manage to accomplish in the course of the morning be one letter , address to her cousin , Cassandra Otway a ramble letter , long , affectionate , playful and command all at once . she bade Cassandra put her creature in the charge of a groom , and come to they for a week or so . they would go and hear some music together . Cassandra 's dislike of rational society , she say , be an affectation fast harden into a prejudice , which would , in the long run , isolate she from all interesting people and pursuit . she be finish the sheet when the sound she be anticipate all the time actually strike upon her ear . she jump up hastily , and slam the door with a sharpness which make Mrs. Hilbery start . where be Katharine off to ? in her preoccupied state she have not hear the bell . 

 the alcove on the stair , in which the telephone be place , be screen for privacy by a curtain of purple velvet . it be a pocket for superfluous possession , such as exist in most house which harbor the wreckage of three generation . print of great - uncle , fame for their prowess in the East , hang above chinese teapot , whose side be rivet by little gold stitch , and the precious teapot , again , stand upon bookcase contain the complete work of William Cowper and Sir Walter Scott . the thread of sound , issue from the telephone , be always color by the surrounding which receive it , so it seem to Katharine . whose voice be now go to combine with they , or to strike a discord ? 

 " whose voice ? " she ask herself , hear a man inquire , with great determination , for her number . the unfamiliar voice now ask for Miss Hilbery . out of all the welter of voice which crowd round the far end of the telephone , out of the enormous range of possibility , whose voice , what possibility , be this ? a pause give her time to ask herself this question . it be solve next moment . 

 " I have   look out the train .... early on Saturday afternoon would suit I well .... I be Ralph Denham .... but I will write it down .... " 

 with more than the usual sense of be impinge upon the point of a bayonet , Katharine reply : 

 " I think I could come . I will look at my engagement .... hold on . " 

 she drop the machine , and look fixedly at the print of the great - uncle who have not cease to gaze , with an air of amiable authority , into a world which , as yet , behold no symptom of the Indian Mutiny . and yet , gently swing against the wall , within the black tube , be a voice which recke nothing of Uncle James , of China teapot , or of red velvet curtain . she watch the oscillation of the tube , and at the same moment become conscious of the individuality of the house in which she stand ; she hear the soft domestic sound of regular existence upon staircase and floor above her head , and movement through the wall in the house next door . she have no very clear vision of Denham himself , when she lift the telephone to her lip and reply that she think Saturday would suit she . she hop that he would not say good - bye at once , although she feel no particular anxiety to attend to what he be say , and begin , even while he speak , to think of her own upper room , with its book , its paper press between the leaf of dictionary , and the table that could be clear for work . she replace the instrument , thoughtfully ; her restlessness be assuage ; she finish her letter to Cassandra without difficulty , address the envelope , and fix the stamp with her usual quick decision . 

 a bunch of anemone catch Mrs. Hilbery 's eye when they have finish luncheon . the blue and purple and white of the bowl , stand in a pool of variegate light on a polished chippendale table in the drawing - room window , make her stop dead with an exclamation of pleasure . 

 " who be lie ill in bed , Katharine ? " she demand . " which of our friend want cheer up ? who feel that they have   be forget and pass over , and that nobody want they ? whose water rate be overdue , and the cook leave in a temper without wait for her wage ? there be somebody I know " she conclude , but for the moment the name of this desirable acquaintance escape she . the good representative of the forlorn company whose day would be brighten by a bunch of anemone be , in Katharine 's opinion , the widow of a general living in the Cromwell Road . in default of the actually destitute and starving , whom she would much have prefer , Mrs. Hilbery be force to acknowledge her claim , for though in comfortable circumstance , she be extremely dull , unattractive , connect in some oblique fashion with literature , and have be touch to the verge of tear , on one occasion , by an afternoon call . 

 it happen that Mrs. Hilbery have an engagement elsewhere , so that the task of take the flower to the Cromwell Road fall upon Katharine . she take her letter to Cassandra with she , mean to post it in the first pillar - box she come to . when , however , she be fairly out of door , and constantly invite by pillar - box and post - office to slip her envelope down their scarlet throat , she forbore . she make absurd excuse , as that she do not wish to cross the road , or that she be certain to pass another post - office in a more central position a little far on . the long she hold the letter in her hand , however , the more persistently certain question press upon she , as if from a collection of voice in the air . these invisible people wish to be inform whether she be engage to William Rodney , or be the engagement break off ? be it right , they ask , to invite Cassandra for a visit , and be William Rodney in love with she , or likely to fall in love ? then the questioner pause for a moment , and resume as if another side of the problem have just come to their notice . what do Ralph Denham mean by what he say to you last night ? do you consider that he be in love with you ? be it right to consent to a solitary walk with he , and what advice be you go to give he about his future ? have William Rodney cause to be jealous of your conduct , and what do you propose to do about Mary Datchet ? what be you go to do ? what do honor require you to do ? they repeat . 

 " Good Heavens ! " Katharine exclaim , after listen to all these remark , " I suppose I ought to make up my mind . " 

 but the debate be a formal skirmishing , a pastime to gain breathing - space . like all people bring up in a tradition , Katharine be able , within ten minute or so , to reduce any moral difficulty to its traditional shape and solve it by the traditional answer . the book of wisdom lie open , if not upon her mother 's knee , upon the knee of many uncle and aunt . she have only to consult they , and they would at once turn to the right page and read out an answer exactly suited to one in her position . the rule which should govern the behavior of an unmarried woman be write in red ink , grave upon marble , if , by some freak of nature , it should fall out that the unmarried woman have not the same writing score upon her heart . she be ready to believe that some people be fortunate enough to reject , accept , resign , or lie down their life at the bidding of traditional authority ; she could envy they ; but in her case the question become phantom directly she try seriously to find an answer , which prove that the traditional answer would be of no use to she individually . yet it have serve so many people , she think , glance at the row of house on either side of she , where family , whose income must be between a thousand and fifteen - hundred a year live , and keep , perhaps , three servant , and drape their window with curtain which be always thick and generally dirty , and must , she think , since you could only see a look - glass gleaming above a sideboard on which a dish of apple be set , keep the room inside very dark . but she turn her head away , observe that this be not a method of think the matter out . 

 the only truth which she could discover be the truth of what she herself feel a frail beam when compare with the broad illumination shed by the eye of all the people who be in agreement to see together ; but have reject the visionary voice , she have no choice but to make this her guide through the dark mass which confront she . she try to follow her beam , with an expression upon her face which would have make any passer - by think she reprehensibly and almost ridiculously detach from the surround scene . one would have feel alarmed lest this young and striking woman be about to do something eccentric . but her beauty save she from the bad fate that can befall a pedestrian ; people look at she , but they do not laugh . to seek a true feeling among the chaos of the unfeeling or half - feeling of life , to recognize it when find , and to accept the consequence of the discovery , draw line upon the smooth brow , while it quicken the light of the eye ; it be a pursuit which be alternately bewildering , debasing , and exalt , and , as Katharine speedily find , her discovery give her equal cause for surprise , shame , and intense anxiety . much depend , as usual , upon the interpretation of the word love ; which word come up again and again , whether she consider Rodney , Denham , Mary Datchet , or herself ; and in each case it seem to stand for something different , and yet for something unmistakable and something not to be pass by . for the more she look into the confusion of life which , instead of run parallel , have suddenly intersect each other , the more distinctly she seem to convince herself that there be no other light on they than be shed by this strange illumination , and no other path save the one upon which it throw its beam . her blindness in the case of Rodney , her attempt to match his true feeling with her false feeling , be a failure never to be sufficiently condemn ; indeed , she could only pay it the tribute of leave it a black and naked landmark unburie by attempt at oblivion or excuse . 

 with this to humiliate there be much to exalt . she think of three different scene ; she think of Mary sit upright and say , " I be in love I be in love " ; she think of Rodney lose his self - consciousness among the dead leaf , and speak with the abandonment of a child ; she think of Denham lean upon the stone parapet and talk to the distant sky , so that she think he mad . her mind , pass from Mary to Denham , from William to Cassandra , and from Denham to herself if , as she rather doubt , Denham 's state of mind be connect with herself seem to be trace out the line of some symmetrical pattern , some arrangement of life , which invest , if not herself , at least the other , not only with interest , but with a kind of tragic beauty . she have a fantastic picture of they uphold splendid palace upon their bent back . they be the lantern - bearer , whose light , scatter among the crowd , weave a pattern , dissolving , join , meet again in combination . half form such conception as these in her rapid walk along the dreary street of South Kensington , she determine that , whatever else might be obscure , she must further the object of Mary , Denham , William , and Cassandra . the way be not apparent . no course of action seem to she indubitably right . all she achieve by her thinking be the conviction that , in such a cause , no risk be too great ; and that , far from make any rule for herself or other , she would let difficulty accumulate unsolved , situation widen their jaw unsatiate , while she maintain a position of absolute and fearless independence . so she could well serve the people who love . 

 read in the light of this exaltation , there be a new meaning in the word which her mother have pencil upon the card attach to the bunch of anemone . the door of the house in the Cromwell Road open ; gloomy vista of passage and staircase be reveal ; such light as there be seem to be concentrate upon a silver salver of visit - card , whose black border suggest that the widow 's friend have all suffer the same bereavement . the parlor - maid could hardly be expect to fathom the meaning of the grave tone in which the young lady proffer the flower , with Mrs. Hilbery 's love ; and the door shut upon the offering . 

 the sight of a face , the slam of a door , be both rather destructive of exaltation in the abstract ; and , as she walk back to Chelsea , Katharine have her doubt whether anything would come of her resolve . if you can not make sure of people , however , you can hold fairly fast to figure , and in some way or other her thought about such problem as she be will not to consider work in happily with her mood as to her friend ' life . she reach home rather late for tea . 

 on the ancient dutch chest in the hall she perceive one or two hat , coat , and walking - stick , and the sound of voice reach she as she stand outside the drawing - room door . her mother give a little cry as she come in ; a cry which convey to Katharine the fact that she be late , that the teacup and milk - jug be in a conspiracy of disobedience , and that she must immediately take her place at the head of the table and pour out tea for the guest . Augustus Pelham , the diarist , like a calm atmosphere in which to tell his story ; he like attention ; he like to elicit little fact , little story , about the past and the great dead , from such distinguished character as Mrs. Hilbery for the nourishment of his diary , for whose sake he frequent tea - table and eat yearly an enormous quantity of butter toast . he , therefore , welcome Katharine with relief , and she have merely to shake hand with Rodney and to greet the american lady who have come to be show the relic , before the talk start again on the broad line of reminiscence and discussion which be familiar to she . 

 yet , even with this thick veil between they , she could not help look at Rodney , as if she could detect what have happen to he since they meet . it be in vain . his clothe , even the white slip , the pearl in his tie , seem to intercept her quick glance , and to proclaim the futility of such inquiry of a discreet , urbane gentleman , who balance his cup of tea and poise a slice of bread and butter on the edge of the saucer . he would not meet her eye , but that could be account for by his activity in serve and help , and the polite alacrity with which he be answer the question of the american visitor . 

 it be certainly a sight to daunt any one come in with a head full of theory about love . the voice of the invisible questioner be reinforce by the scene round the table , and sound with a tremendous self - confidence , as if they have behind they the common sense of twenty generation , together with the immediate approval of Mr. Augustus Pelham , Mrs. Vermont Bankes , William Rodney , and , possibly , Mrs. Hilbery herself . Katharine set her tooth , not entirely in the metaphorical sense , for her hand , obey the impulse towards definite action , lay firmly upon the table beside she an envelope which she have be grasp all this time in complete forgetfulness . the address be uppermost , and a moment later she see William 's eye rest upon it as he rise to fulfil some duty with a plate . his expression instantly change . he do what he be on the point of do , and then look at Katharine with a look which reveal enough of his confusion to show she that he be not entirely represent by his appearance . in a minute or two he prove himself at a loss with Mrs. Vermont Bankes , and Mrs. Hilbery , aware of the silence with her usual quickness , suggest that , perhaps , it be now time that Mrs. Bankes should be show " our thing . " 

 Katharine accordingly rise , and lead the way to the little inner room with the picture and the book . Mrs. Bankes and Rodney follow she . 

 she turn on the light , and begin directly in her low , pleasant voice : " this table be my grandfather 's writing - table . Most of the later poem be write at it . and this be his pen the last pen he ever use . " she take it in her hand and pause for the right number of second . " here , " she continue , " be the original manuscript of the ' Ode to Winter . ' the early manuscript be far less correct than the later one , as you will see directly .... oh , do take it yourself , " she add , as Mrs. Bankes ask , in an awestruck tone of voice , for that privilege , and begin a preliminary unbuttoning of her white kid glove . 

 " you be wonderfully like your grandfather , Miss Hilbery , " the american lady observe , gaze from Katharine to the portrait , " especially about the eye . come , now , I expect she write poetry herself , do not   she ? " she ask in a jocular tone , turn to William . " quite one 's ideal of a poet , be it not , Mr. Rodney ? I can not tell you what a privilege I feel it to be stand just here with the poet 's granddaughter . you must know we think a great deal of your grandfather in America , Miss Hilbery . we have society for read he aloud . what ! his very own slipper ! " lay aside the manuscript , she hastily grasp the old shoe , and remain for a moment dumb in contemplation of they . 

 while Katharine go on steadily with her duty as show - woman , Rodney examine intently a row of little drawing which he know by heart already . his disordered state of mind make it necessary for he to take advantage of these little respite , as if he have be out in a high wind and must straighten his dress in the first shelter he reach . his calm be only superficial , as he know too well ; it do not exist much below the surface of tie , waistcoat , and white slip . 

 on get out of bed that morning he have fully make up his mind to ignore what have be say the night before ; he have be convince , by the sight of Denham , that his love for Katharine be passionate , and when he address she early that morning on the telephone , he have mean his cheerful but authoritative tone to convey to she the fact that , after a night of madness , they be as indissolubly engage as ever . but when he reach his office his torment begin . he find a letter from Cassandra wait for he . she have read his play , and have take the very first opportunity to write and tell he what she think of it . she know , she write , that her praise mean absolutely nothing ; but still , she have sit up all night ; she think this , that , and the other ; she be full of enthusiasm most elaborately scratch out in place , but enough be write plain to gratify William 's vanity exceedingly . she be quite intelligent enough to say the right thing , or , even more charmingly , to hint at they . in other way , too , it be a very charming letter . she tell he about her music , and about a Suffrage meeting to which Henry have take she , and she assert , half seriously , that she have learn the greek alphabet , and find it " fascinating . " the word be underline . have she laugh when she draw that line ? be she ever serious ? do not   the letter show the most engaging compound of enthusiasm and spirit and whimsicality , all taper into a flame of girlish freakishness , which flit , for the rest of the morning , as a will - o'-the - wisp , across Rodney 's landscape . he could not resist begin an answer to she there and then . he find it particularly delightful to shape a style which should express the bowing and curtsying , advance and retreating , which be characteristic of one of the many million partnership of man and woman . Katharine never trod that particular measure , he could not help reflect ; Katharine Cassandra ; Cassandra Katharine they alternate in his consciousness all day long . it be all very well to dress oneself carefully , compose one 's face , and start off punctually at half - past four to a tea - party in Cheyne Walk , but Heaven only know what would come of it all , and when Katharine , after sit silent with her usual immobility , wantonly draw from her pocket and slap down on the table beneath his eye a letter address to Cassandra herself , his composure desert he . what do she mean by her behavior ? 

 he look up sharply from his row of little picture . Katharine be dispose of the american lady in far too arbitrary a fashion . surely the victim herself must see how foolish her enthusiasm appear in the eye of the poet 's granddaughter . Katharine never make any attempt to spare people 's feeling , he reflect ; and , be himself very sensitive to all shade of comfort and discomfort , he cut short the auctioneer 's catalog , which Katharine be reel off more and more absent - mindedly , and take Mrs. Vermont Bankes , with a queer sense of fellowship in suffering , under his own protection . 

 but within a few minute the american lady have complete her inspection , and incline her head in a little nod of reverential farewell to the poet and his shoe , she be escort downstairs by Rodney . Katharine stay by herself in the little room . the ceremony of ancestor - worship have be more than usually oppressive to she . moreover , the room be become crowd beyond the bound of order . only that morning a heavily insure proof - sheet have reach they from a collector in Australia , which record a change of the poet 's mind about a very famous phrase , and , therefore , have claim to the honor of glaze and framing . but be there room for it ? must it be hang on the staircase , or should some other relic give place to do it honor ? feel unable to decide the question , Katharine glance at the portrait of her grandfather , as if to ask his opinion . the artist who have paint it be now out of fashion , and by dint of show it to visitor , Katharine have almost cease to see anything but a glow of faintly pleasing pink and brown tint , enclose within a circular scroll of gilt laurel - leaf . the young man who be her grandfather look vaguely over her head . the sensual lip be slightly part , and give the face an expression of behold something lovely or miraculous vanishing or just rise upon the rim of the distance . the expression repeat itself curiously upon Katharine 's face as she gaze up into his . they be the same age , or very nearly so . she wonder what he be look for ; be there wave beat upon a shore for he , too , she wonder , and hero rid through the leaf - hang forest ? for perhaps the first time in her life she think of he as a man , young , unhappy , tempestuous , full of desire and fault ; for the first time she realize he for herself , and not from her mother 's memory . he might have be her brother , she think . it seem to she that they be akin , with the mysterious kinship of blood which make it seem possible to interpret the sight which the eye of the dead behold so intently , or even to believe that they look with we upon our present joy and sorrow . he would have understand , she think , suddenly ; and instead of lay her wither flower upon his shrine , she bring he her own perplexity perhaps a gift of great value , should the dead be conscious of gift , than flower and incense and adoration . doubt , questioning , and despondency she feel , as she look up , would be more welcome to he than homage , and he would hold they but a very small burden if she give he , also , some share in what she suffer and achieve . the depth of her own pride and love be not more apparent to she than the sense that the dead ask neither flower nor regret , but a share in the life which they have give she , the life which they have live . 

 Rodney find she a moment later sit beneath her grandfather 's portrait . she lay her hand on the seat next she in a friendly way , and say : 

 " come and sit down , William . how glad I be you be here ! I feel myself get ruder and ruder . " 

 " you be not good at hide your feeling , " he return dryly . 

 " oh , do not   scold I I have   have a horrid afternoon . " she tell he how she have take the flower to Mrs. McCormick , and how South Kensington impress she as the preserve of officer ' widow . she describe how the door have open , and what gloomy avenue of bust and palm - tree and umbrella have be reveal to she . she speak lightly , and succeed in put he at his ease . indeed , he rapidly become too much at his ease to persist in a condition of cheerful neutrality . he feel his composure slip from he . Katharine make it seem so natural to ask she to help he , or advise he , to say straight out what he have in his mind . the letter from Cassandra be heavy in his pocket . there be also the letter to Cassandra lie on the table in the next room . the atmosphere seem charge with Cassandra . but , unless Katharine begin the subject of her own accord , he could not even hint he must ignore the whole affair ; it be the part of a gentleman to preserve a bearing that be , as far as he could make it , the bearing of an undoubting lover . at interval he sigh deeply . he talk rather more quickly than usual about the possibility that some of the opera of Mozart would be play in the summer . he have receive a notice , he say , and at once produce a pocket - book stuff with paper , and begin shuffle they in search . he hold a thick envelope between his finger and thumb , as if the notice from the opera company have become in some way inseparably attach to it . 

 " a letter from Cassandra ? " say Katharine , in the easy voice in the world , look over his shoulder . " I have   just write to ask she to come here , only I forgot to post it . " 

 he hand she the envelope in silence . she take it , extract the sheet , and read the letter through . 

 the reading seem to Rodney to take an intolerably long time . 

 " yes , " she observe at length , " a very charming letter . " 

 Rodney 's face be half turn away , as if in bashfulness . her view of his profile almost move she to laughter . she glance through the page once more . 

 " I see no harm , " William blurt out , " in help she with Greek , for example if she really care for that sort of thing . " 

 " there be no reason why she should not   care , " say Katharine , consult the page once more . " in fact ah , here it be ' the greek alphabet be absolutely fascinating . ' obviously she do care . " 

 " well , Greek may be rather a large order . I be think chiefly of English . her criticism of my play , though they be too generous , evidently immature she can not   be more than twenty - two , I suppose ? they certainly show the sort of thing one want : real feeling for poetry , understanding , not form , of course , but it be at the root of everything after all . there would be no harm in lend her book ? " 

 " no . certainly not . " 

 " but if it hum lead to a correspondence ? I mean , Katharine , I take it , without go into matter which seem to I a little morbid , I mean , " he flounder , " you , from your point of view , feel that there be nothing disagreeable to you in the notion ? if so , you have   only to speak , and I never think of it again . " 

 she be surprise by the violence of her desire that he never should think of it again . for an instant it seem to her impossible to surrender an intimacy , which might not be the intimacy of love , but be certainly the intimacy of true friendship , to any woman in the world . Cassandra would never understand he she be not good enough for he . the letter seem to she a letter of flattery a letter address to his weakness , which it make she angry to think be know to another . for he be not weak ; he have the rare strength of do what he promise she have only to speak , and he would never think of Cassandra again . 

 she pause . Rodney guess the reason . he be amazed . 

 " she love I , " he think . the woman he admire more than any one in the world , love he , as he have give up hope that she would ever love he . and now that for the first time he be sure of her love , he resent it . he feel it as a fetter , an encumbrance , something which make they both , but he in particular , ridiculous . he be in her power completely , but his eye be open and he be no long her slave or her dupe . he would be her master in future . the instant prolong itself as Katharine realize the strength of her desire to speak the word that should keep William for ever , and the baseness of the temptation which assail she to make the movement , or speak the word , which he have often beg she for , which she be now near enough to feel . she hold the letter in her hand . she sit silent . 

 at this moment there be a stir in the other room ; the voice of Mrs. Hilbery be hear talk of proof - sheet rescue by miraculous providence from butcher 's ledger in Australia ; the curtain separate one room from the other be draw apart , and Mrs. Hilbery and Augustus Pelham stand in the doorway . Mrs. Hilbery stop short . she look at her daughter , and at the man her daughter be to marry , with her peculiar smile that always seem to tremble on the brink of satire . 

 " the good of all my treasure , Mr. Pelham ! " she exclaim . " do not   move , Katharine . sit still , William . Mr. Pelham will come another day . " 

 Mr. Pelham look , smile , bow , and , as his hostess have move on , follow she without a word . the curtain be draw again either by he or by Mrs. Hilbery . 

 but her mother have settle the question somehow . Katharine doubt no long . 

 " as I tell you last night , " she say , " I think it be your duty , if there be a chance that you care for Cassandra , to discover what your feeling be for she now . it be your duty to she , as well as to I . but we must tell my mother . we can not   go on pretend . " 

 " that be entirely in your hand , of course , " say Rodney , with an immediate return to the manner of a formal man of honor . 

 " very well , " say Katharine . 

 directly he leave she she would go to her mother , and explain that the engagement be at an end or it might be well that they should go together ? 

 " but , Katharine , " Rodney begin , nervously attempt to stuff Cassandra 's sheet back into their envelope ; " if Cassandra should Cassandra you have   ask Cassandra to stay with you . " 

 " yes ; but I have   not post the letter . " 

 he cross his knee in a discomfited silence . by all his code it be impossible to ask a woman with whom he have just break off his engagement to help he to become acquainted with another woman with a view to his fall in love with she . if it be announce that their engagement be over , a long and complete separation would inevitably follow ; in those circumstance , letter and gift be return ; after year of distance the sever couple meet , perhaps at an evening party , and touch hand uncomfortably with an indifferent word or two . he would be cast off completely ; he would have to trust to his own resource . he could never mention Cassandra to Katharine again ; for month , and doubtless year , he would never see Katharine again ; anything might happen to she in his absence . 

 Katharine be almost as well aware of his perplexity as he be . she know in what direction complete generosity point the way ; but pride for to remain engaged to Rodney and to cover his experiment hurt what be nobler in she than mere vanity fight for its life . 

 " I be to give up my freedom for an indefinite time , " she think , " in order that William may see Cassandra here at his ease . he be not the courage to manage it without my help he be too much of a coward to tell I openly what he want . he hat the notion of a public breach . he want to keep we both . " 

 when she reach this point , Rodney pocket the letter and elaborately look at his watch . although the action mean that he resign Cassandra , for he know his own incompetence and distrust himself entirely , and lose Katharine , for whom his feeling be profound though unsatisfactory , still it appear to he that there be nothing else leave for he to do . he be force to go , leave Katharine free , as he have say , to tell her mother that the engagement be at an end . but to do what plain duty require of an honorable man , cost an effort which only a day or two ago would have be inconceivable to he . that a relationship such as he have glance at with desire could be possible between he and Katharine , he would have be the first , two day ago , to deny with indignation . but now his life have change ; his attitude have change ; his feeling be different ; new aim and possibility have be show he , and they have an almost irresistible fascination and force . the training of a life of thirty - five year have not leave he defenceless ; he be still master of his dignity ; he rise , with a mind make up to an irrevocable farewell . 

 " I leave you , then , " he say , stand up and hold out his hand with an effort that leave he pale , but lend he dignity , " to tell your mother that our engagement be end by your desire . " 

 she take his hand and hold it . 

 " you do not   trust I ? " she say . 

 " I do , absolutely , " he reply . 

 " no . you do not   trust I to help you .... I could help you ? " 

 " I be hopeless without your help ! " he exclaim passionately , but withdraw his hand and turn his back . when he face she , she think that she see he for the first time without disguise . 

 " it be useless to pretend that I do not   understand what you be offer , Katharine . I admit what you say . speak to you perfectly frankly , I believe at this moment that I do love your cousin ; there be a chance that , with your help , I might but no , " he break off , " it be impossible , it be wrong I be infinitely to blame for have allow this situation to arise . " 

 " sit beside I . let us consider sensibly " 

 " your sense have be our undoing " he groan . 

 " I accept the responsibility . " 

 " ah , but can I allow that ? " he exclaim . " it would mean for we must face it , Katharine that we let our engagement stand for the time nominally ; in fact , of course , your freedom would be absolute . " 

 " and yours too . " 

 " yes , we should both be free . let we say that I see Cassandra once , twice , perhaps , under these condition ; and then if , as I think certain , the whole thing prove a dream , we tell your mother instantly . why not tell she now , indeed , under pledge of secrecy ? " 

 " why not ? it would be over London in ten minute , besides , she would never even remotely understand . " 

 " your father , then ? this secrecy be detestable it be dishonorable . " 

 " my father would understand even less than my mother . " 

 " ah , who could be expect to understand ? " Rodney groan ; " but it be from your point of view that we must look at it . it be not only ask too much , it be put you into a position a position in which I could not endure to see my own sister . " 

 " we be not brother and sister , " she say impatiently , " and if we can not   decide , who can ? I be not talk nonsense , " she proceed . " I have   do my good to think this out from every point of view , and I have   come to the conclusion that there be risk which have to be take , though I do not   deny that they hurt horribly . " 

 " Katharine , you mind ? you will mind too much . " 

 " no I shall not , " she say stoutly . " I shall mind a good deal , but I be prepared for that ; I shall get through it , because you will help I . you will both help I . in fact , we will help each other . that be a christian doctrine , be not   it ? " 

 " it sound more like paganism to I , " Rodney groan , as he review the situation into which her christian doctrine be plunge they . 

 and yet he could not deny that a divine relief possess he , and that the future , instead of wear a lead - color mask , now blossom with a thousand varied gaiety and excitement . he be actually to see Cassandra within a week or perhaps less , and he be more anxious to know the date of her arrival than he could own even to himself . it seem base to be so anxious to pluck this fruit of Katharine 's unexampled generosity and of his own contemptible baseness . and yet , though he use these word automatically , they have now no meaning . he be not debase in his own eye by what he have do , and as for praise Katharine , be they not partner , conspirator , people bent upon the same quest together , so that to praise the pursuit of a common end as an act of generosity be meaningless . he take her hand and press it , not in thank so much as in an ecstasy of comradeship . 

 " we will help each other , " he say , repeat her word , seek her eye in an enthusiasm of friendship . 

 her eye be grave but dark with sadness as they rest on he . " he be already go , " she think , " far away he think of I no more . " and the fancy come to she that , as they sit side by side , hand in hand , she could hear the earth pour from above to make a barrier between they , so that , as they sit , they be separate second by second by an impenetrable wall . the process , which affect she as that of be seal away and for ever from all companionship with the person she care for most , come to an end at last , and by common consent they unclasp their finger , Rodney touch her with his lip , as the curtain part , and Mrs. Hilbery peer through the opening with her benevolent and sarcastic expression to ask whether Katharine could remember be it Tuesday or Wednesday , and do she dine in Westminster ? 

 " Dearest William , " she say , pause , as if she could not resist the pleasure of encroach for a second upon this wonderful world of love and confidence and romance . " Dearest child , " she add , disappear with an impulsive gesture , as if she force herself to draw the curtain upon a scene which she refuse all temptation to interrupt . 





 CHAPTER XXV 

 at a quarter - past three in the afternoon of the following Saturday Ralph Denham sit on the bank of the lake in Kew Gardens , divide the dial - plate of his watch into section with his forefinger . the just and inexorable nature of time itself be reflect in his face . he might have be compose a hymn to the unhasting and unreste march of that divinity . he seem to greet the lapse of minute after minute with stern acquiescence in the inevitable order . his expression be so severe , so serene , so immobile , that it seem obvious that for he at least there be a grandeur in the depart hour which no petty irritation on his part be to mar , although the wasting time waste also high private hope of his own . 

 his face be no bad index to what go on within he . he be in a condition of mind rather too exalted for the triviality of daily life . he could not accept the fact that a lady be fifteen minute late in keep her appointment without see in that accident the frustration of his entire life . look at his watch , he seem to look deep into the spring of human existence , and by the light of what he see there alter his course towards the north and the midnight .... yes , one 's voyage must be make absolutely without companion through ice and black water towards what goal ? here he lay his finger upon the half - hour , and decide that when the minute - hand reach that point he would go , at the same time answer the question put by another of the many voice of consciousness with the reply that there be undoubtedly a goal , but that it would need the most relentless energy to keep anywhere in its direction . still , still , one go on , the tick second seem to assure he , with dignity , with open eye , with determination not to accept the second - rate , not to be tempt by the unworthy , not to yield , not to compromise . twenty - five minute past three be now mark upon the face of the watch . the world , he assure himself , since Katharine Hilbery be now half an hour behind her time , offer no happiness , no rest from struggle , no certainty . in a scheme of thing utterly bad from the start the only unpardonable folly be that of hope . raise his eye for a moment from the face of his watch , he rest they upon the opposite bank , reflectively and not without a certain wistfulness , as if the sternness of their gaze be still capable of mitigation . soon a look of the deep satisfaction fill they , though , for a moment , he do not move . he watch a lady who come rapidly , and yet with a trace of hesitation , down the broad grass - walk towards he . she do not see he . distance lend her figure an indescribable height , and romance seem to surround she from the float of a purple veil which the light air fill and curve from her shoulder . 

 " here she come , like a ship in full sail , " he say to himself , half remember some line from a play or poem where the heroine bear down thus with feather fly and air salute she . the greenery and the high presence of the tree surround she as if they stand forth at she come . he rise , and she see he ; her little exclamation prove that she be glad to find he , and then that she blame herself for be late . 

 " why do you never tell I ? I do not   know there be this , " she remark , allude to the lake , the broad green space , the vista of tree , with the ruffle gold of the Thames in the distance and the ducal castle stand in its meadow . she pay the rigid tail of the ducal lion the tribute of incredulous laughter . 

 " you have   never be to kew ? " Denham remark . 

 but it appear that she have come once as a small child , when the geography of the place be entirely different , and the fauna include certainly flamingo and , possibly , camel . they stroll on , refashion these legendary garden . she be , as he feel , glad merely to stroll and loiter and let her fancy touch upon anything her eye encounter a bush , a park - keeper , a decorate goose as if the relaxation soothe she . the warmth of the afternoon , the first of spring , tempt they to sit upon a seat in a glade of beech - tree , with forest drive strike green path this way and that around they . she sigh deeply . 

 " it be so peaceful , " she say , as if in explanation of her sigh . not a single person be in sight , and the stir of the wind in the branch , that sound so seldom hear by Londoners , seem to she as if waft from fathomless ocean of sweet air in the distance . 

 while she breathe and look , Denham be engage in uncovering with the point of his stick a group of green spike half smother by the dead leaf . he do this with the peculiar touch of the botanist . in name the little green plant to she he use the Latin name , thus disguise some flower familiar even to Chelsea , and make her exclaim , half in amusement , at his knowledge . her own ignorance be vast , she confess . what do one call that tree opposite , for instance , suppose one condescend to call it by its english name ? Beech or elm or sycamore ? it chance , by the testimony of a dead leaf , to be oak ; and a little attention to a diagram which Denham proceed to draw upon an envelope soon put Katharine in possession of some of the fundamental distinction between our british tree . she then ask he to inform she about flower . to she they be variously shape and colored petal , poise , at different season of the year , upon very similar green stalk ; but to he they be , in the first instance , bulb or seed , and later , live thing endow with sex , and pore , and susceptibility which adapt themselves by all manner of ingenious device to live and beget life , and could be fashion squat or tapering , flame - colored or pale , pure or spot , by process which might reveal the secret of human existence . Denham speak with increase ardor of a hobby which have long be his in secret . no discourse could have wear a more welcome sound in Katharine 's ear . for week she have hear nothing that make such pleasant music in her mind . it waken echo in all those remote fastness of her be where loneliness have brood so long undisturbed . 

 she wish he would go on for ever talk of plant , and show she how science feel not quite blindly for the law that rule their endless variation . a law that might be inscrutable but be certainly omnipotent appeal to she at the moment , because she could find nothing like it in possession of human life . circumstance have long force she , as they force most woman in the flower of youth , to consider , painfully and minutely , all that part of life which be conspicuously without order ; she have have to consider mood and wish , degree of like or disliking , and their effect upon the destiny of people dear to she ; she have be force to deny herself any contemplation of that other part of life where thought construct a destiny which be independent of human being . as Denham speak , she follow his word and consider their bearing with an easy vigor which speak of a capacity long hoard and unspent . the very tree and the green merging into the blue distance become symbol of the vast external world which reck so little of the happiness , of the marriage or death of individual . in order to give her example of what he be say , Denham lead the way , first to the Rock Garden , and then to the Orchid House . 

 for he there be safety in the direction which the talk have take . his emphasis might come from feeling more personal than those science rouse in he , but it be disguise , and naturally he find it easy to expound and explain . nevertheless , when he see Katharine among the orchid , her beauty strangely emphasize by the fantastic plant , which seem to peer and gape at she from striped hood and fleshy throat , his ardor for botany wan , and a more complex feeling replace it . she fall silent . the orchid seem to suggest absorbing reflection . in defiance of the rule she stretch her ungloved hand and touch one . the sight of the ruby upon her finger affect he so disagreeably that he start and turn away . but next moment he control himself ; he look at she take in one strange shape after another with the contemplative , consider gaze of a person who see not exactly what be before he , but grope in region that lie beyond it . the far - away look entirely lack self - consciousness . Denham doubt whether she remember his presence . he could recall himself , of course , by a word or a movement but why ? she be happy thus . she need nothing that he could give she . and for he , too , perhaps , it be good to keep aloof , only to know that she exist , to preserve what he already have perfect , remote , and unbroken . far , she still look , stand among the orchid in that hot atmosphere , strangely illustrate some scene that he have imagine in his room at home . the sight , mingle with his recollection , keep he silent when the door be shut and they be walk on again . 

 but though she do not speak , Katharine have an uneasy sense that silence on her part be selfishness . it be selfish of she to continue , as she wish to do , a discussion of subject not remotely connect with any human being . she rouse herself to consider their exact position upon the turbulent map of the emotion . oh yes it be a question whether Ralph Denham should live in the country and write a book ; it be get late ; they must waste no more time ; Cassandra arrive to - night for dinner ; she flinch and rouse herself , and discover that she ought to be hold something in her hand . but they be empty . she hold they out with an exclamation . 

 " I have   leave my bag somewhere where ? " the garden have no point of the compass , so far as she be concern . she have be walk for the most part on grass that be all she know . even the road to the Orchid House have now split itself into three . but there be no bag in the Orchid House . it must , therefore , have be leave upon the seat . they retrace their step in the preoccupied manner of people who have to think about something that be lose . what do this bag look like ? what do it contain ? 

 " a purse a ticket some letter , paper , " Katharine count , become more agitated as she recall the list . Denham go on quickly in advance of she , and she hear he shout that he have find it before she reach the seat . in order to make sure that all be safe she spread the content on her knee . it be a queer collection , Denham thought , gaze with the deep interest . loose gold coin be tangle in a narrow strip of lace ; there be letter which somehow suggest the extreme of intimacy ; there be two or three key , and list of commission against which cross be set at interval . but she do not seem satisfied until she have make sure of a certain paper so fold that Denham could not judge what it contain . in her relief and gratitude she begin at once to say that she have be think over what Denham have tell she of his plan . 

 he cut her short . " do not   let us discuss that dreary business . " 

 " but I think " 

 " it be a dreary business . I ought never to have bother you " 

 " have you decide , then ? " 

 he make an impatient sound . " it be not a thing that matter . " 

 she could only say rather flatly , " oh ! " 

 " I mean it matter to I , but it matter to no one else . anyhow , " he continue , more amiably , " I see no reason why you should be bother with other people 's nuisance . " 

 she suppose that she have let he see too clearly her weariness of this side of life . 

 " I be afraid I have   be absent - minded , " she begin , remember how often William have bring this charge against she . 

 " you have a good deal to make you absent - minded , " he reply . 

 " yes , " she reply , flush . " no , " she contradict herself . " nothing particular , I mean . but I be think about plant . I be enjoy myself . in fact , I have   seldom enjoy an afternoon more . but I want to hear what you have   settle , if you do not   mind tell I . " 

 " oh , it be all settle , " he reply . " I be go to this infernal cottage to write a worthless book . " 

 " how I envy you , " she reply , with the utmost sincerity . 

 " well , cottage be to be have for fifteen shilling a week . " 

 " cottage be to be have yes , " she reply . " the question be " she check herself . " two room be all I should want , " she continue , with a curious sigh ; " one for eating , one for sleep . oh , but I should like another , a large one at the top , and a little garden where one could grow flower . a path so down to a river , or up to a wood , and the sea not very far off , so that one could hear the wave at night . ship just vanish on the horizon " she break off . " shall you be near the sea ? " 

 " my notion of perfect happiness , " he begin , not reply to her question , " be to live as you have   say . " 

 " well , now you can . you will work , I suppose , " she continue ; " you will work all the morning and again after tea and perhaps at night . you will not   have people always come about you to interrupt . " 

 " how far can one live alone ? " he ask . " have you try ever ? " 

 " once for three week , " she reply . " my father and mother be in Italy , and something happen so that I could not   join they . for three week I live entirely by myself , and the only person I speak to be a stranger in a shop where I lunch a man with a beard . then I go back to my room by myself and well , I do what I like . it do not   make I out an amiable character , I be afraid , " she add , " but I can not   endure live with other people . an occasional man with a beard be interesting ; he be detach ; he let I go my way , and we know we shall never meet again . therefore , we be perfectly sincere a thing not possible with one 's friend . " 

 " nonsense , " Denham reply abruptly . 

 " why ' nonsense ' ? " she inquire . 

 " because you do not   mean what you say , " he expostulate . 

 " you be very positive , " she say , laugh and look at he . how arbitrary , hot - temper , and imperious he be ! he have ask she to come to kew to advise he ; he then tell she that he have settle the question already ; he then proceed to find fault with she . he be the very opposite of William Rodney , she think ; he be shabby , his clothe be badly make , he be ill verse in the amenity of life ; he be tongue - tie and awkward to the verge of obliterate his real character . he be awkwardly silent ; he be awkwardly emphatic . and yet she like he . 

 " I do not   mean what I say , " she repeat good - humoredly . " well ? " 

 " I doubt whether you make absolute sincerity your standard in life , " he answer significantly . 

 she flush . he have penetrate at once to the weak spot her engagement , and have reason for what he say . he be not altogether justify now , at any rate , she be glad to remember ; but she could not enlighten he and must bear his insinuation , though from the lip of a man who have behave as he have behave their force should not have be sharp . nevertheless , what he say have its force , she muse ; partly because he seem unconscious of his own lapse in the case of Mary Datchet , and thus baffle her insight ; partly because he always speak with force , for what reason she do not yet feel certain . 

 " absolute sincerity be rather difficult , do not   you think ? " she inquire , with a touch of irony . 

 " there be people one credit even with that , " he reply a little vaguely . he be ashamed of his savage wish to hurt she , and yet it be not for the sake of hurt she , who be beyond his shaft , but in order to mortify his own incredibly reckless impulse of abandonment to the spirit which seem , at moment , about to rush he to the uttermost end of the earth . she affect he beyond the scope of his wild dream . he seem to see that beneath the quiet surface of her manner , which be almost pathetically at hand and within reach for all the trivial demand of daily life , there be a spirit which she reserve or repress for some reason either of loneliness or could it be possible of love . be it give to Rodney to see she unmasked , unrestrained , unconscious of her duty ? a creature of uncalculating passion and instinctive freedom ? no ; he refuse to believe it . it be in her loneliness that Katharine be unreserve . " I go back to my room by myself and I do what I like . " she have say that to he , and in say it have give he a glimpse of possibility , even of confidence , as if he might be the one to share her loneliness , the mere hint of which make his heart beat fast and his brain spin . he check himself as brutally as he could . he see her redden , and in the irony of her reply he hear her resentment . 

 he begin slip his smooth , silver watch in his pocket , in the hope that somehow he might help himself back to that calm and fatalistic mood which have be his when he look at its face upon the bank of the lake , for that mood must , at whatever cost , be the mood of his intercourse with Katharine . he have speak of gratitude and acquiescence in the letter which he have never send , and now all the force of his character must make good those vow in her presence . 

 she , thus challenge , try meanwhile to define her point . she wish to make Denham understand . 

 " do not   you see that if you have no relation with people it be easy to be honest with they ? " she inquire . " that be what I mean . one need not   cajole they ; one be under no obligation to they . surely you must have find with your own family that it be impossible to discuss what matter to you most because you be all herd together , because you be in a conspiracy , because the position be false " her reasoning suspend itself a little inconclusively , for the subject be complex , and she find herself in ignorance whether Denham have a family or not . Denham be agree with she as to the destructiveness of the family system , but he do not wish to discuss the problem at that moment . 

 he turn to a problem which be of great interest to he . 

 " I be convince , " he say , " that there be case in which perfect sincerity be possible case where there be no relationship , though the people live together , if you like , where each be free , where there be no obligation upon either side . " 

 " for a time perhaps , " she agree , a little despondently . " but obligation always grow up . there be feeling to be consider . People be not   simple , and though they may mean to be reasonable , they end " in the condition in which she find herself , she mean , but add lamely " in a muddle . " 

 " because , " Denham instantly intervene , " they do not   make themselves understand at the beginning . I could undertake , at this instant , " he continue , with a reasonable intonation which do much credit to his self - control , " to lay down term for a friendship which should be perfectly sincere and perfectly straightforward . " 

 she be curious to hear they , but , besides feel that the topic conceal danger well know to she than to he , she be remind by his tone of his curious abstract declaration upon the Embankment . anything that hint at love for the moment alarm she ; it be as much an infliction to she as the rubbing of a skinless wound . 

 but he go on , without wait for her invitation . 

 " in the first place , such a friendship must be unemotional , " he lay it down emphatically . " at least , on both side it must be understand that if either choose to fall in love , he or she do so entirely at his own risk . neither be under any obligation to the other . they must be at liberty to break or to alter at any moment . they must be able to say whatever they wish to say . all this must be understand . " 

 " and they gain something worth have ? " she ask . 

 " it be a risk of course it be a risk , " he reply . the word 

 be one that she have be use frequently in her argument with herself of late . 

 " but it be the only way if you think friendship worth have , " he conclude . 

 " perhaps under those condition it might be , " she say reflectively . 

 " well , " he say , " those be the term of the friendship I wish to offer you . " she have know that this be come , but , none the less , feel a little shock , half of pleasure , half of reluctance , when she hear the formal statement . 

 " I should like it , " she begin , " but " 

 " would Rodney mind ? " 

 " oh no , " she reply quickly . 

 " no , no , it be not   that , " she go on , and again come to an end . she have be touch by the unreserved and yet ceremonious way in which he have make what he call his offer of term , but if he be generous it be the more necessary for she to be cautious . they would find themselves in difficulty , she speculate ; but , at this point , which be not very far , after all , upon the road of caution , her foresight desert she . she seek for some definite catastrophe into which they must inevitably plunge . but she could think of none . it seem to she that these catastrophe be fictitious ; life go on and on life be different altogether from what people say . and not only be she at an end of her stock of caution , but it seem suddenly altogether superfluous . surely if any one could take care of himself , Ralph Denham could ; he have tell she that he do not love she . and , far , she meditate , walk on beneath the beech - tree and swing her umbrella , as in her thought she be accustom to complete freedom , why should she perpetually apply so different a standard to her behavior in practice ? why , she reflect , should there be this perpetual disparity between the thought and the action , between the life of solitude and the life of society , this astonishing precipice on one side of which the soul be active and in broad daylight , on the other side of which it be contemplative and dark as night ? be it not possible to step from one to the other , erect , and without essential change ? be this not the chance he offer she the rare and wonderful chance of friendship ? at any rate , she tell Denham , with a sigh in which he hear both impatience and relief , that she agree ; she think he right ; she would accept his term of friendship . 

 " now , " she say , " let us go and have tea . " 

 in fact , these principle have be lay down , a great lightness of spirit show itself in both of they . they be both convince that something of profound importance have be settle , and could now give their attention to their tea and the Gardens . they wander in and out of glass - house , see lily swim in tank , breathe in the scent of thousand of carnation , and compare their respective taste in the matter of tree and lake . while talk exclusively of what they see , so that any one might have overhear they , they feel that the compact between they be make firm and deep by the number of people who pass they and suspect nothing of the kind . the question of Ralph 's cottage and future be not mention again . 





 CHAPTER XXVI 

 although the old coach , with their gay panel and the guard 's horn , and the humor of the box and the vicissitude of the road , have long molder into dust so far as they be matter , and be preserve in the print page of our novelist so far as they partook of the spirit , a journey to London by express train can still be a very pleasant and romantic adventure . Cassandra Otway , at the age of twenty - two , could imagine few thing more pleasant . satiate with month of green field as she be , the first row of artisan ' villa on the outskirt of London seem to have something serious about it , which positively increase the importance of every person in the railway carriage , and even , to her impressionable mind , quicken the speed of the train and give a note of stern authority to the shriek of the engine - whistle . they be bind for London ; they must have precedence of all traffic not similarly destine . a different demeanor be necessary directly one step out upon Liverpool Street platform , and become one of those preoccupied and hasty citizen for whose need innumerable taxi - cab , motor - omnibus , and underground railway be in wait . she do she good to look dignified and preoccupy too , but as the cab carry she away , with a determination which alarm she a little , she become more and more forgetful of her station as a citizen of London , and turn her head from one window to another , pick up eagerly a building on this side or a street scene on that to feed her intense curiosity . and yet , while the drive last no one be real , nothing be ordinary ; the crowd , the Government building , the tide of man and woman wash the base of the great glass window , be all generalize , and affect she as if she see they on the stage . 

 all these feeling be sustain and partly inspire by the fact that her journey take she straight to the center of her most romantic world . a thousand time in the midst of her pastoral landscape her thought take this precise road , be admit to the house in Chelsea , and go directly upstairs to Katharine 's room , where , invisible themselves , they have the well chance of feast upon the privacy of the room 's adorable and mysterious mistress . Cassandra adore her cousin ; the adoration might have be foolish , but be save from that excess and lend an engaging charm by the volatile nature of Cassandra 's temperament . she have adore a great many thing and people in the course of twenty - two year ; she have be alternately the pride and the desperation of her teacher . she have worship architecture and music , natural history and humanity , literature and art , but always at the height of her enthusiasm , which be accompany by a brilliant degree of accomplishment , she change her mind and buy , surreptitiously , another grammar . the terrible result which governess have predict from such mental dissipation be certainly apparent now that Cassandra be twenty - two , and have never pass an examination , and daily show herself less and less capable of pass one . the more serious prediction that she could never possibly earn her living be also verify . but from all these short strand of different accomplishment Cassandra wove for herself an attitude , a cast of mind , which , if useless , be find by some people to have the not despicable virtue of vivacity and freshness . Katharine , for example , think she a most charming companion . the cousin seem to assemble between they a great range of quality which be never find united in one person and seldom in half a dozen people . where Katharine be simple , Cassandra be complex ; where Katharine be solid and direct , Cassandra be vague and evasive . in short , they represent very well the manly and the womanly side of the feminine nature , and , for foundation , there be the profound unity of common blood between they . if Cassandra adore Katharine she be incapable of adore any one without refresh her spirit with frequent draught of raillery and criticism , and Katharine enjoy her laughter at least as much as her respect . 

 respect be certainly uppermost in Cassandra 's mind at the present moment . Katharine 's engagement have appeal to her imagination as the first engagement in a circle of contemporary be apt to appeal to the imagination of the other ; it be solemn , beautiful , and mysterious ; it give both party the important air of those who have be initiate into some rite which be still conceal from the rest of the group . for Katharine 's sake Cassandra think William a most distinguished and interesting character , and welcome first his conversation and then his manuscript as the mark of a friendship which it flatter and delight she to inspire . 

 Katharine be still out when she arrive at Cheyne Walk . after greet her uncle and aunt and receiving , as usual , a present of two sovereign for " cab fare and dissipation " from Uncle Trevor , whose favorite niece she be , she change her dress and wander into Katharine 's room to await she . what a great look - glass Katharine have , she think , and how mature all the arrangement upon the dressing - table be compare to what she be use to at home . glance round , she think that the bill stick upon a skewer and stand for ornament upon the mantelpiece be astonishingly like Katharine , there be not   a photograph of William anywhere to be see . the room , with its combination of luxury and bareness , its silk dressing - gown and crimson slipper , its shabby carpet and bare wall , have a powerful air of Katharine herself ; she stand in the middle of the room and enjoy the sensation ; and then , with a desire to finger what her cousin be in the habit of fingering , Cassandra begin to take down the book which stand in a row upon the shelf above the bed . in most house this shelf be the ledge upon which the last relic of religious belief lodge themselves as if , late at night , in the heart of privacy , people , skeptical by day , find solace in sip one draught of the old charm for such sorrow or perplexity as may steal from their hiding - place in the dark . but there be no hymn - book here . by their batter cover and enigmatical content , Cassandra judge they to be old school - book belong to Uncle Trevor , and piously , though eccentrically , preserve by his daughter . there be no end , she think , to the unexpectedness of Katharine . she have once have a passion for geometry herself , and , curl upon Katharine 's quilt , she become absorb in try to remember how far she have forget what she once know . Katharine , come in a little later , find she deep in this characteristic pursuit . 

 " my dear , " Cassandra exclaim , shake the book at her cousin , " my whole life 's change from this moment ! I must write the man 's name down at once , or I shall forget " 

 whose name , what book , which life be change Katharine proceed to ascertain . she begin to lay aside her clothe hurriedly , for she be very late . 

 " may I sit and watch you ? " Cassandra ask , shut up her book . " I get ready on purpose . " 

 " oh , you be ready , be you ? " say Katharine , half turn in the midst of her operation , and look at Cassandra , who sit , clasp her knee , on the edge of the bed . 

 " there be people dining here , " she say , take in the effect of Cassandra from a new point of view . after an interval , the distinction , the irregular charm , of the small face with its long taper nose and its bright oval eye be very notable . the hair rise up off the forehead rather stiffly , and , give a more careful treatment by hairdresser and dressmaker , the light angular figure might possess a likeness to a french lady of distinction in the eighteenth century . 

 " who be come to dinner ? " Cassandra ask , anticipate further possibility of rapture . 

 " there be William , and , I believe , Aunt Eleanor and Uncle Aubrey . " 

 " I be so glad William be come . do he tell you that he send I his manuscript ? I think it be wonderful I think he be almost good enough for you , Katharine . " 

 " you shall sit next to he and tell he what you think of he . " 

 " I shall not   dare do that , " Cassandra assert . 

 " why ? you be not afraid of he , be you ? " 

 " a little because he be connect with you . " 

 Katharine smile . 

 " but then , with your well - know fidelity , consider that you be stay here at least a fortnight , you will not   have any illusion leave about I by the time you go . I give you a week , Cassandra . I shall see my power fade day by day . now it be at the climax ; but to - morrow it will have begin to fade . what be I to wear , I wonder ? find I a blue dress , Cassandra , over there in the long wardrobe . " 

 she speak disconnectedly , handle brush and comb , and pull out the little drawer in her dressing - table and leave they open . Cassandra , sit on the bed behind she , see the reflection of her cousin 's face in the look - glass . the face in the look - glass be serious and intent , apparently occupy with other thing besides the straightness of the parting which , however , be be drive as straight as a roman road through the dark hair . Cassandra be impress again by Katharine 's maturity ; and , as she envelop herself in the blue dress which fill almost the whole of the long look - glass with blue light and make it the frame of a picture , hold not only the slightly move effigy of the beautiful woman , but shape and color of object reflect from the background , Cassandra think that no sight have ever be quite so romantic . it be all in keep with the room and the house , and the city round they ; for her ear have not yet cease to notice the hum of distant wheel . 

 they go downstairs rather late , in spite of Katharine 's extreme speed in get ready . to Cassandra 's ear the buzz of voice inside the drawing - room be like the tuning up of the instrument of the orchestra . it seem to she that there be number of people in the room , and that they be stranger , and that they be beautiful and dress with the great distinction , although they prove to be mostly her relation , and the distinction of their clothing be confine , in the eye of an impartial observer , to the white waistcoat which Rodney wear . but they all rise simultaneously , which be by itself impressive , and they all exclaim , and shake hand , and she be introduce to Mr. Peyton , and the door spring open , and dinner be announce , and they file off , William Rodney offer she his slightly bent black arm , as she have secretly hop he would . in short , have the scene be look at only through her eye , it must have be describe as one of magical brilliancy . the pattern of the soup - plate , the stiff fold of the napkin , which rise by the side of each plate in the shape of arum lily , the long stick of bread tie with pink ribbon , the silver dish and the sea - color champagne glass , with the flake of gold congeal in their stem all these detail , together with a curiously pervasive smell of kid glove , contribute to her exhilaration , which must be repress , however , because she be grow up , and the world hold no more for she to marvel at . 

 the world hold no more for she to marvel at , it be true ; but it hold other people ; and each other person possess in Cassandra 's mind some fragment of what privately she call " reality . " it be a gift that they would impart if you ask they for it , and thus no dinner - party could possibly be dull , and little Mr. Peyton on her right and William Rodney on her left be in equal measure endow with the quality which seem to she so unmistakable and so precious that the way people neglect to demand it be a constant source of surprise to she . she scarcely know , indeed , whether she be talk to Mr. Peyton or to William Rodney . but to one who , by degree , assume the shape of an elderly man with a mustache , she describe how she have arrive in London that very afternoon , and how she have take a cab and drive through the street . Mr. Peyton , an editor of fifty year , bow his bald head repeatedly , with apparent understanding . at least , he understand that she be very young and pretty , and see that she be excited , though he could not gather at once from her word or remember from his own experience what there be to be excited about . " be there any bud on the tree ? " he ask . " which line do she travel by ? " 

 he be cut short in these amiable inquiry by her desire to know whether he be one of those who read , or one of those who look out of the window ? Mr. Peyton be by no mean sure which he do . he rather think he do both . he be tell that he have make a most dangerous confession . she could deduce his entire history from that one fact . he challenge she to proceed ; and she proclaim he a Liberal Member of Parliament . 

 William , nominally engage in a desultory conversation with Aunt Eleanor , hear every word , and take advantage of the fact that elderly lady have little continuity of conversation , at least with those whom they esteem for their youth and their sex , he assert his presence by a very nervous laugh . 

 Cassandra turn to he directly . she be enchant to find that , instantly and with such ease , another of these fascinating being be offer untold wealth for her extraction . 

 " there be no doubt what you do in a railway carriage , William , " she say , make use in her pleasure of his first name . " you never once look out of the window ; you read all the time . " 

 " and what fact do you deduce from that ? " Mr. Peyton ask . 

 " oh , that he be a poet , of course , " say Cassandra . " but I must confess that I know that before , so it be not   fair . I have   get your manuscript with I , " she go on , disregard Mr. Peyton in a shameless way . " I have   get all sort of thing I want to ask you about it . " 

 William incline his head and try to conceal the pleasure that her remark give he . but the pleasure be not unalloyed . however susceptible to flattery William might be , he would never tolerate it from people who show a gross or emotional taste in literature , and if Cassandra err even slightly from what he consider essential in this respect he would express his discomfort by fling out his hand and wrinkle his forehead ; he would find no pleasure in her flattery after that . 

 " first of all , " she proceed , " I want to know why you choose to write a play ? " 

 " ah ! you mean it be not dramatic ? " 

 " I mean that I do not   see what it would gain by be act . but then do Shakespeare gain ? Henry and I be always argue about Shakespeare . I be certain he be wrong , but I can not   prove it because I have   only see Shakespeare act once in Lincoln . but I be quite positive , " she insist , " that Shakespeare write for the stage . " 

 " you be perfectly right , " Rodney exclaim . " I be hop you be on that side . Henry 's wrong entirely wrong . of course , I have   fail , as all the modern fail . dear , dear , I wish I would consult you before . " 

 from this point they proceed to go over , as far as memory serve they , the different aspect of Rodney 's drama . she say nothing that jar upon he , and untrained daring have the power to stimulate experience to such an extent that Rodney be frequently see to hold his fork suspend before he , while he debate the first principle of the art . Mrs. Hilbery think to herself that she have never see he to such advantage ; yes , he be somehow different ; he remind she of some one who be dead , some one who be distinguish she have forget his name . 

 Cassandra 's voice rise high in its excitement . 

 " you have   not read ' the Idiot ' ! " she exclaim . 

 " I have   read ' War and Peace ' , " William reply , a little testily . 

 " ' WAR and PEACE ' ! " she echo , in a tone of derision . 

 " I confess I do not   understand the Russians . " 

 " shake hand ! shake hand ! " boom Uncle Aubrey from across the table . " neither do I. and I hazard the opinion that they do not   themselves . " 

 the old gentleman have rule a large part of the Indian Empire , but he be in the habit of say that he have rather have write the work of Dickens . the table now take possession of a subject much to its liking . Aunt Eleanor show premonitory sign of pronounce an opinion . although she have blunt her taste upon some form of philanthropy for twenty - five year , she have a fine natural instinct for an upstart or a pretender , and know to a hairbreadth what literature should be and what it should not be . she be bear to the knowledge , and scarcely think it a matter to be proud of . 

 " insanity be not a fit subject for fiction , " she announce positively . 

 " there be the well - know case of Hamlet , " Mr. Hilbery interpose , in his leisurely , half - humorous tone . 

 " ah , but poetry 's different , Trevor , " say Aunt Eleanor , as if she have special authority from Shakespeare to say so . " different altogether . and I have   never think , for my part , that Hamlet be as mad as they make out . what be your opinion , Mr. Peyton ? " for , as there be a minister of literature present in the person of the editor of an esteemed review , she defer to he . 

 Mr. Peyton leant a little back in his chair , and , put his head rather on one side , observe that that be a question that he have never be able to answer entirely to his satisfaction . there be much to be say on both side , but as he consider upon which side he should say it , Mrs. Hilbery break in upon his judicious meditation . 

 " lovely , lovely Ophelia ! " she exclaim . " what a wonderful power it be poetry ! I wake up in the morning all bedraggle ; there be a yellow fog outside ; little Emily turn on the electric light when she bring I my tea , and say , ' oh , ma'am , the water 's frozen in the cistern , and cook 's cut her finger to the bone . ' and then I open a little green book , and the bird be sing , the star shin , the flower twinkle " she look about she as if these presence have suddenly manifest themselves round her dining - room table . 

 " have the cook cut her finger badly ? " Aunt Eleanor demand , address herself naturally to Katharine . 

 " oh , the cook 's finger be only my way of put it , " say Mrs. Hilbery . " but if she have cut her arm off , Katharine would have sew it on again , " she remark , with an affectionate glance at her daughter , who look , she think , a little sad . " but what horrid , horrid thought , " she wind up , lay down her napkin and push her chair back . " come , let we find something more cheerful to talk about upstairs . " 

 Upstairs in the drawing - room Cassandra find fresh source of pleasure , first in the distinguished and expectant look of the room , and then in the chance of exercise her divining - rod upon a new assortment of human being . but the low tone of the woman , their meditative silence , the beauty which , to she at least , shine even from black satin and the knob of amber which encircle elderly neck , change her wish to chatter to a more subdue desire merely to watch and to whisper . she enter with delight into an atmosphere in which private matter be be interchange freely , almost in monosyllable , by the old woman who now accept she as one of themselves . her expression become very gentle and sympathetic , as if she , too , be full of solicitude for the world which be somehow be care for , manage and deprecate by Aunt Maggie and Aunt Eleanor . after a time she perceive that Katharine be outside the community in some way , and , suddenly , she throw aside her wisdom and gentleness and concern and begin to laugh . 

 " what be you laugh at ? " Katharine ask . 

 a joke so foolish and unfilial be not   worth explain . 

 " it be nothing ridiculous in the bad of taste , but still , if you half shut your eye and look " Katharine half shut her eye and look , but she look in the wrong direction , and Cassandra laugh more than ever , and be still laugh and do she good to explain in a whisper that Aunt Eleanor , through half - shut eye , be like the parrot in the cage at Stogdon House , when the gentleman come in and Rodney walk straight up to they and want to know what they be laugh at . 

 " I utterly refuse to tell you ! " Cassandra reply , stand up straight , clasp her hand in front of she , and face he . her mockery be delicious to he . he have not even for a second the fear that she have be laugh at he . she be laugh because life be so adorable , so enchanting . 

 " ah , but you be cruel to make I feel the barbarity of my sex , " he reply , draw his foot together and press his finger - tip upon an imaginary opera - hat or malacca cane . " we have   be discuss all sort of dull thing , and now I shall never know what I want to know more than anything in the world . " 

 " you do not   deceive we for a minute ! " she cry . " not for a second . we both know that you have   be enjoy yourself immensely . have not   he , Katharine ? " 

 " no , " she reply , " I think he be speak the truth . he do not   care much for politic . " 

 her word , though speak simply , produce a curious change in the light , sparkle atmosphere . William at once lose his look of animation and say seriously : 

 " I det politic . " 

 " I do not   think any man have the right to say that , " say Cassandra , almost severely . 

 " I agree . I mean that I det politician , " he correct himself quickly . 

 " you see , I believe Cassandra be what they call a Feminist , " Katharine go on . " or rather , she be a Feminist six month ago , but it be no good supposing that she be now what she be then . that be one of her great charm in my eye . one never can tell . " she smile at she as an eld sister might smile . 

 " Katharine , you make one feel so horribly small ! " Cassandra exclaim . 

 " no , no , that be not what she mean , " Rodney interpose . " I quite agree that woman have an immense advantage over we there . one miss a lot by attempt to know thing thoroughly . " 

 " he know Greek thoroughly , " say Katharine . " but then he also know a good deal about painting , and a certain amount about music . he be very cultivated perhaps the most cultivate person I know . " 

 " and poetry , " Cassandra add . 

 " yes , I be forget his play , " Katharine remark , and turn her head as though she see something that need her attention in a far corner of the room , she leave they . 

 for a moment they stand silent , after what seem a deliberate introduction to each other , and Cassandra watch she cross the room . 

 " Henry , " she say next moment , " would say that a stage ought to be no big than this drawing - room . he want there to be sing and dancing as well as act only all the opposite of Wagner you understand ? " 

 they sit down , and Katharine , turn when she reach the window , see William with his hand raise in gesticulation and his mouth open , as if ready to speak the moment Cassandra cease . 

 Katharine 's duty , whether it be to pull a curtain or move a chair , be either forget or discharge , but she continue to stand by the window without do anything . the elderly people be all group together round the fire . they seem an independent , middle - aged community busy with its own concern . they be tell story very well and listen to they very graciously . but for she there be no obvious employment . 

 " if anybody say anything , I shall say that I be look at the river , " she think , for in her slavery to her family tradition , she be ready to pay for her transgression with some plausible falsehood . she push aside the blind and look at the river . but it be a dark night and the water be barely visible . cab be pass , and couple be loiter slowly along the road , keep as close to the railing as possible , though the tree have as yet no leaf to cast shadow upon their embrace . Katharine , thus withdraw , feel her loneliness . the evening have be one of pain , offer she , minute after minute , plainer proof that thing would fall out as she have foresee . she have face tone , gesture , glance ; she know , with she back to they , that William , even now , be plunge deeply and deep into the delight of unexpected understanding with Cassandra . he have almost tell she that he be find it infinitely well than he could have believe . she look out of the window , sternly determine to forget private misfortune , to forget herself , to forget individual life . with her eye upon the dark sky , voice reach she from the room in which she be stand . she hear they as if they come from people in another world , a world antecedent to her world , a world that be the prelude , the antechamber to reality ; it be as if , lately dead , she hear the living talking . the dream nature of our life have never be more apparent to she , never have life be more certainly an affair of four wall , whose object exist only within the range of light and fire , beyond which lie nothing , or nothing more than darkness . she seem physically to have step beyond the region where the light of illusion still make it desirable to possess , to love , to struggle . and yet her melancholy bring she no serenity . she still hear the voice within the room . she be still torment by desire . she wish to be beyond their range . she wish inconsistently enough that she could find herself drive rapidly through the street ; she be even anxious to be with some one who , after a moment 's groping , take a definite shape and solidify into the person of Mary Datchet . she draw the curtain so that the drapery meet in deep fold in the middle of the window . 

 " ah , there she be , " say Mr. Hilbery , who be stand sway affably from side to side , with his back to the fire . " come here , Katharine . I could not   see where you would get to our child , " he observe parenthetically , " have their us I want you to go to my study , Katharine ; go to the third shelf on the right - hand side of the door ; take down ' Trelawny 's Recollections of Shelley ' ; bring it to I . then , Peyton , you will have to admit to the assemble company that you have be mistake . " 

 " ' Trelawny 's Recollections of Shelley . ' the third shelf on the right of the door , " Katharine repeat . after all , one do not check child in their play , or rouse sleeper from their dream . she pass William and Cassandra on her way to the door . 

 " Stop , Katharine , " say William , speak almost as if he be conscious of she against his will . " let I go . " he rise , after a second 's hesitation , and she understand that it cost he an effort . she kneel one knee upon the sofa where Cassandra sit , look down at her cousin 's face , which still move with the speed of what she have be say . 

 " be you happy ? " she ask . 

 " oh , my dear ! " Cassandra exclaim , as if no further word be need . " of course , we disagree about every subject under the sun , " she exclaim , " but I think he be the clever man I have   ever meet and you be the most beautiful woman , " she add , look at Katharine , and as she look her face lose its animation and become almost melancholy in sympathy with Katharine 's melancholy , which seem to Cassandra the last refinement of her distinction . 

 " ah , but it be only ten o'clock , " say Katharine darkly . 

 " as late as that ! well ? " she do not understand . 

 " at twelve my horse turn into rat and off I go . the illusion fade . but I accept my fate . I make hay while the sun shin . " Cassandra look at she with a puzzled expression . 

 " here be Katharine talk about rat , and hay , and all sort of odd thing , " she say , as William return to they . he have be quick . " can you make she out ? " 

 Katharine perceive from his little frown and hesitation that he do not find that particular problem to his taste at present . she stand upright at once and say in a different tone : 

 " I really be off , though . I wish you would explain if they say anything , William . I shall not   be late , but I have   get to see some one . " 

 " at this time of night ? " Cassandra exclaim . 

 " whom have you get to see ? " William demand . 

 " a friend , " she remark , half turn her head towards he . she know that he wish she to stay , not , indeed , with they , but in their neighborhood , in case of need . 

 " Katharine have a great many friend , " say William rather lamely , sit down once more , as Katharine leave the room . 

 she be soon drive quickly , as she have wish to drive , through the lamp - light street . she like both light and speed , and the sense of be out of door alone , and the knowledge that she would reach Mary in her high , lonely room at the end of the drive . she climb the stone step quickly , remark the queer look of her blue silk skirt and blue shoe upon the stone , dusty with the boot of the day , under the light of an occasional jet of flickering gas . 

 the door be open in a second by Mary herself , whose face show not only surprise at the sight of her visitor , but some degree of embarrassment . she greet she cordially , and , as there be no time for explanation , Katharine walk straight into the sitting - room , and find herself in the presence of a young man who be lie back in a chair and hold a sheet of paper in his hand , at which he be look as if he expect to go on immediately with what he be in the middle of say to Mary Datchet . the apparition of an unknown lady in full evening dress seem to disturb he . he take his pipe from his mouth , rise stiffly , and sit down again with a jerk . 

 " have you be din out ? " Mary ask . 

 " be you work ? " Katharine inquire simultaneously . 

 the young man shake his head , as if he disown his share in the question with some irritation . 

 " well , not exactly , " Mary reply . " Mr. Basnett have bring some paper to show I . we be go through they , but we would almost do .... tell we about your party . " 

 Mary have a ruffle appearance , as if she have be run her finger through her hair in the course of her conversation ; she be dress more or less like a russian peasant girl . she sit down again in a chair which look as if it have be her seat for some hour ; the saucer which stand upon the arm contain the ash of many cigarette . Mr. Basnett , a very young man with a fresh complexion and a high forehead from which the hair be comb straight back , be one of that group of " very able young man " suspect by Mr. Clacton , justly as it turn out , of an influence upon Mary Datchet . he have come down from one of the Universities not long ago , and be now charge with the reformation of society . in connection with the rest of the group of very able young man he have draw up a scheme for the education of labor , for the amalgamation of the middle class and the work class , and for a joint assault of the two body , combine in the Society for the Education of Democracy , upon Capital . the scheme have already reach the stage in which it be permissible to hire an office and engage a secretary , and he have be depute to expound the scheme to Mary , and make she an offer of the secretaryship , to which , as a matter of principle , a small salary be attach . since seven o'clock that evening he have be read out loud the document in which the faith of the new reformer be expounded , but the reading be so frequently interrupt by discussion , and it be so often necessary to inform Mary " in strict confidence " of the private character and evil design of certain individual and society that they be still only half - way through the manuscript . neither of they realize that the talk have already last three hour . in their absorption they have forget even to feed the fire , and yet both Mr. Basnett in his exposition , and Mary in her interrogation , carefully preserve a kind of formality calculate to check the desire of the human mind for irrelevant discussion . her question frequently begin , " be I to understand " and his reply invariably represent the view of some one call " we . " 

 by this time Mary be almost persuade that she , too , be include in the " we , " and agree with Mr. Basnett in believe that " our " view , " our " society , " our " policy , stand for something quite definitely segregated from the main body of society in a circle of superior illumination . 

 the appearance of Katharine in this atmosphere be extremely incongruous , and have the effect of make Mary remember all sort of thing that she have be glad to forget . 

 " you have   be din out ? " she ask again , look , with a little smile , at the blue silk and the pearl - sew shoe . 

 " no , at home . be you start something new ? " Katharine hazard , rather hesitatingly , look at the paper . 

 " we be , " Mr. Basnett reply . he say no more . 

 " I be think of leave our friend in Russell Square , " Mary explain . 

 " I see . and then you will do something else . " 

 " well , I be afraid I like work , " say Mary . 

 " Afraid , " say Mr. Basnett , convey the impression that , in his opinion , no sensible person could be afraid of like to work . 

 " yes , " say Katharine , as if he have state this opinion aloud . " I should like to start something something off one 's own bat that be what I should like . " 

 " yes , that be the fun , " say Mr. Basnett , look at she for the first time rather keenly , and refill his pipe . 

 " but you can not   limit work that be what I mean , " say Mary . " I mean there be other sort of work . no one work hard than a woman with little child . " 

 " quite so , " say Mr. Basnett . " it be precisely the woman with baby we want to get hold of . " he glance at his document , roll it into a cylinder between his finger , and gaze into the fire . Katharine feel that in this company anything that one say would be judge upon its merit ; one have only to say what one thought , rather barely and tersely , with a curious assumption that the number of thing that could properly be think about be strictly limited . and Mr. Basnett be only stiff upon the surface ; there be an intelligence in his face which attract her intelligence . 

 " when will the public know ? " she ask . 

 " what d'you mean about we ? " Mr. Basnett ask , with a little smile . 

 " that depend upon many thing , " say Mary . the conspirator look pleased , as if Katharine 's question , with the belief in their existence which it imply , have a warm effect upon they . 

 " in start a society such as we wish to start   we can not   say any more at present , " Mr. Basnett begin , with a little jerk of his head , " there be two thing to remember the Press and the public . other society , which shall be nameless , have go under because they have   appeal only to crank . if you do not   want a mutual admiration society , which die as soon as you have   all discover each other 's fault , you must nobble the Press . you must appeal to the public . " 

 " that be the difficulty , " say Mary thoughtfully . 

 " that be where she come in , " say Mr. Basnett , jerk his head in Mary 's direction . " she be the only one of we who be a capitalist . she can make a whole - time job of it . I be tie to an office ; I can only give my spare time . be you , by any chance , on the look - out for a job ? " he ask Katharine , with a queer mixture of distrust and deference . 

 " marriage be her job at present , " Mary reply for she . 

 " oh , I see , " say Mr. Basnett . he make allowance for that ; he and his friend have face the question of sex , along with all other , and assign it an honorable place in their scheme of life . Katharine feel this beneath the roughness of his manner ; and a world entrust to the guardianship of Mary Datchet and Mr. Basnett seem to she a good world , although not a romantic or beautiful place or , to put it figuratively , a place where any line of blue mist softly link tree to tree upon the horizon . for a moment she think she see in his face , bend now over the fire , the feature of that original man whom we still recall every now and then , although we know only the clerk , barrister , Governmental official , or workingman variety of he . not that Mr. Basnett , give his day to commerce and his spare time to social reform , would long carry about he any trace of his possibility of completeness ; but , for the moment , in his youth and ardor , still speculative , still uncrampe , one might imagine he the citizen of a nobler state than our . Katharine turn over her small stock of information , and wonder what their society might be go to attempt . then she remember that she be hinder their business , and rise , still think of this society , and thus think , she say to Mr. Basnett : 

 " well , you will ask I to join when the time come , I hope . " 

 he nod , and take his pipe from his mouth , but , be unable to think of anything to say , he put it back again , although he would have be glad if she have stay . 

 against her wish , Mary insist upon take she downstair , and then , as there be no cab to be see , they stand in the street together , look about they . 

 " go back , " Katharine urge she , think of Mr. Basnett with his paper in his hand . 

 " you can not   wander about the street alone in those clothe , " say Mary , but the desire to find a cab be not her true reason for stand beside Katharine for a minute or two . unfortunately for her composure , Mr. Basnett and his paper seem to she an incidental diversion of life 's serious purpose compare with some tremendous fact which manifest itself as she stand alone with Katharine . it may have be their common womanhood . 

 " have you see Ralph ? " she ask suddenly , without preface . 

 " yes , " say Katharine directly , but she do not remember when or where she have see he . it take she a moment or two to remember why Mary should ask she if she have see Ralph . 

 " I believe I be jealous , " say Mary . 

 " Nonsense , Mary , " say Katharine , rather distractedly , take her arm and begin to walk up the street in the direction of the main road . " let I see ; we go to Kew , and we agree to be friend . yes , that be what happen . " Mary be silent , in the hope that Katharine would tell she more . but Katharine say nothing . 

 " it be not a question of friendship , " Mary exclaim , her anger rise , to her own surprise . " you know it be not . how can it be ? I have   no right to interfere " she stop . " only I would rather Ralph be not   hurt , " she conclude . 

 " I think he seem able to take care of himself , " Katharine observe . without either of they wish it , a feeling of hostility have rise between they . 

 " do you really think it be worth it ? " say Mary , after a pause . 

 " how can one tell ? " Katharine ask . 

 " have you ever care for any one ? " Mary demand rashly and foolishly . 

 " I can not   wander about London discuss my feeling here be a cab no , there be some one in it . " 

 " we do not   want to quarrel , " say Mary . 

 " ought I to have tell he that I would not   be his friend ? " Katharine ask . " shall I tell he that ? if so , what reason shall I give he ? " 

 " of course you can not   tell he that , " say Mary , control herself . 

 " I believe I shall , though , " say Katharine suddenly . 

 " I lose my temper , Katharine ; I should not   have say what I do . " 

 " the whole thing be foolish , " say Katharine , peremptorily . " that be what I say . it be not worth it . " she speak with unnecessary vehemence , but it be not direct against Mary Datchet . their animosity have completely disappear , and upon both of they a cloud of difficulty and darkness rest , obscure the future , in which they have both to find a way . 

 " no , no , it be not worth it , " Katharine repeat . " suppose , as you say , it be out of the question this friendship ; he fall in love with I . I do not   want that . still , " she add , " I believe you exaggerate ; love be not everything ; marriage itself be only one of the thing " they have reach the main thoroughfare , and stand look at the omnibus and passer - by , who seem , for the moment , to illustrate what Katharine have say of the diversity of human interest . for both of they it have become one of those moment of extreme detachment , when it seem unnecessary ever again to shoulder the burden of happiness and self - assertive existence . their neighbor be welcome to their possession . 

 " I do not   lay down any rule , " ' say Mary , recover herself first , as they turn after a long pause of this description . " all I say be that you should know what you be about for certain ; but , " she add , " I expect you do . " 

 at the same time she be profoundly perplexed , not only by what she know of the arrangement for Katharine 's marriage , but by the impression which she have of she , there on her arm , dark and inscrutable . 

 they walk back again and reach the step which lead up to Mary 's flat . here they stop and pause for a moment , say nothing . 

 " you must go in , " say Katharine , rouse herself . " he be wait all this time to go on with his reading . " she glance up at the lighted window near the top of the house , and they both look at it and wait for a moment . a flight of semicircular step run up to the hall , and Mary slowly mount the first two or three , and pause , look down upon Katharine . 

 " I think you underrate the value of that emotion , " she say slowly , and a little awkwardly . she climb another step and look down once more upon the figure that be only partly light up , stand in the street with a colorless face turn upwards . as Mary hesitate , a cab come by and Katharine turn and stop it , say as she open the door : 

 " remember , I want to belong to your society remember , " she add , have to raise her voice a little , and shut the door upon the rest of her word . 

 Mary mount the stair step by step , as if she have to lift her body up an extremely steep ascent . she have have to wrench herself forcibly away from Katharine , and every step vanquish her desire . she hold on grimly , encourage herself as though she be actually make some great physical effort in climb a height . she be conscious that Mr. Basnett , sit at the top of the stair with his document , offer her solid footing if she be capable of reach it . the knowledge give she a faint sense of exaltation . 

 Mr. Basnett raise his eye as she open the door . 

 " I will go on where I leave off , " he say . " stop I if you want anything explain . " 

 he have be re - read the document , and make pencil note in the margin while he wait , and he go on again as if there have be no interruption . Mary sit down among the flat cushion , light another cigarette , and listen with a frown upon her face . 

 Katharine leant back in the corner of the cab that carry she to Chelsea , conscious of fatigue , and conscious , too , of the sober and satisfactory nature of such industry as she have just witness . the thought of it compose and calm she . when she reach home she let herself in as quietly as she could , in the hope that the household be already go to bed . but her excursion have occupy less time than she think , and she hear sound of unmistakable liveliness upstairs . a door open , and she draw herself into a ground - floor room in case the sound mean that Mr. Peyton be take his leave . from where she stand she could see the stair , though she be herself invisible . some one be come down the stair , and now she see that it be William Rodney . he look a little strange , as if he be walk in his sleep ; his lip move as if he be act some part to himself . he come down very slowly , step by step , with one hand upon the banister to guide himself . she think he look as if he be in some mood of high exaltation , which it make she uncomfortable to witness any long unseen . she step into the hall . he give a great start upon see she and stop . 

 " Katharine ! " he exclaim . " you have   be out ? " he ask . 

 " yes .... be they still up ? " 

 he do not answer , and walk into the ground - floor room through the door which stand open . 

 " it be be more wonderful than I can tell you , " he say , " I be incredibly happy " 

 he be scarcely address she , and she say nothing . for a moment they stand at opposite side of a table say nothing . then he ask she quickly , " but tell I , how do it seem to you ? what do you think , Katharine ? be there a chance that she like I ? tell I , Katharine ! " 

 before she could answer a door open on the landing above and disturb they . it disturb William excessively . he start back , walk rapidly into the hall , and say in a loud and ostentatiously ordinary tone : 

 " good night , Katharine . go to bed now . I shall see you soon . I hope I shall be able to come to - morrow . " 

 next moment he be go . she go upstairs and find Cassandra on the landing . she hold two or three book in her hand , and she be stoop to look at other in a little bookcase . she say that she could never tell which book she want to read in bed , poetry , biography , or metaphysic . 

 " what do you read in bed , Katharine ? " she ask , as they walk upstairs side by side . 

 " sometimes one thing sometimes another , " say Katharine vaguely . Cassandra look at she . 

 " d'you know , you be extraordinarily queer , " she say . " every one seem to I a little queer . perhaps it be the effect of London . " 

 " be William queer , too ? " Katharine ask . 

 " well , I think he be a little , " Cassandra reply . " Queer , but very fascinating . I shall read Milton to - night . it be be one of the happy night of my life , Katharine , " she add , look with shy devotion at her cousin 's beautiful face . 





 CHAPTER XXVII 

 London , in the first day of spring , have bud that open and flower that suddenly shake their petal white , purple , or crimson in competition with the display in the garden bed , although these city flower be merely so many door fling wide in Bond Street and the neighborhood , invite you to look at a picture , or hear a symphony , or merely crowd and crush yourself among all sort of vocal , excitable , brightly colored human being . but , all the same , it be no mean rival to the quieter process of vegetable florescence . whether or not there be a generous motive at the root , a desire to share and impart , or whether the animation be purely that of insensate fervor and friction , the effect , while it last , certainly encourage those who be young , and those who be ignorant , to think the world one great bazaar , with banner flutter and divans heap with spoil from every quarter of the globe for their delight . 

 as Cassandra Otway go about London provide with shilling that open turnstile , or more often with large white card that disregard turnstile , the city seem to she the most lavish and hospitable of host . after visit the National Gallery , or Hertford House , or hear Brahms or Beethoven at the Bechstein Hall , she would come back to find a new person await she , in whose soul be imbed some grain of the invaluable substance which she still call reality , and still believe that she could find . the Hilberys , as the saying be , " know every one , " and that arrogant claim be certainly uphold by the number of house which , within a certain area , light their lamp at night , open their door after 3 p. m. , and admit the Hilberys to their dining - room , say , once a month . an indefinable freedom and authority of manner , share by most of the people who live in these house , seem to indicate that whether it be a question of art , music , or government , they be well within the gate , and could smile indulgently at the vast mass of humanity which be force to wait and struggle , and pay for entrance with common coin at the door . the gate open instantly to admit Cassandra . she be naturally critical of what go on inside , and incline to quote what Henry would have say ; but she often succeed in contradict Henry , in his absence , and invariably pay her partner at dinner , or the kind old lady who remember her grandmother , the compliment of believe that there be meaning in what they say . for the sake of the light in her eager eye , much crudity of expression and some untidiness of person be forgive she . it be generally feel that , give a year or two of experience , introduce to good dressmaker , and preserve from bad influence , she would be an acquisition . those elderly lady , who sit on the edge of ballroom sample the stuff of humanity between finger and thumb and breathe so evenly that the necklace , which rise and fall upon their breast , seem to represent some elemental force , such as the wave upon the ocean of humanity , conclude , a little smilingly , that she would do . they mean that she would in all probability marry some young man whose mother they respect . 

 William Rodney be fertile in suggestion . he know of little gallery , and select concert , and private performance , and somehow make time to meet Katharine and Cassandra , and to give they tea or dinner or supper in his room afterwards . each one of her fourteen day thus promise to bear some bright illumination in its sober text . but Sunday approach . the day be usually dedicate to Nature . the weather be almost kindly enough for an expedition . but Cassandra reject Hampton Court , Greenwich , Richmond , and kew in favor of the Zoological Gardens . she have once trifle with the psychology of animal , and still know something about inherit characteristic . on Sunday afternoon , therefore , Katharine , Cassandra , and William Rodney drive off to the Zoo . as their cab approach the entrance , Katharine bend forward and wave her hand to a young man who be walk rapidly in the same direction . 

 " there be Ralph Denham ! " she exclaim . " I tell he to meet we here , " she add . she have even come provide with a ticket for he . William 's objection that he would not be admit be , therefore , silence directly . but the way in which the two man greet each other be significant of what be go to happen . as soon as they have admire the little bird in the large cage William and Cassandra lag behind , and Ralph and Katharine press on rather in advance . it be an arrangement in which William take his part , and one that suit his convenience , but he be annoy all the same . he think that Katharine should have tell he that she have invite Denham to meet they . 

 " one of Katharine 's friend , " he say rather sharply . it be clear that he be irritated , and Cassandra feel for his annoyance . they be stand by the pen of some oriental hog , and she be prod the brute gently with the point of her umbrella , when a thousand little observation seem , in some way , to collect in one center . the center be one of intense and curious emotion . be they happy ? she dismiss the question as she ask it , scorn herself for apply such simple measure to the rare and splendid emotion of so unique a couple . nevertheless , her manner become immediately different , as if , for the first time , she feel consciously womanly , and as if William might conceivably wish later on to confide in she . she forget all about the psychology of animal , and the recurrence of blue eye and brown , and become instantly engross in her feeling as a woman who could administer consolation , and she hop that Katharine would keep ahead with Mr. Denham , as a child who play at be grow - up hope that her mother will not   come in just yet , and spoil the game . or be it not rather that she have cease to play at be grow - up , and be conscious , suddenly , that she be alarmingly mature and in earnest ? 

 there be still unbroken silence between Katharine and Ralph Denham , but the occupant of the different cage serve instead of speech . 

 " what have you be do since we meet ? " Ralph ask at length . 

 " do ? " she ponder . " walk in and out of other people 's house . I wonder if these animal be happy ? " she speculate , stop before a gray bear , who be philosophically play with a tassel which once , perhaps , form part of a lady 's parasol . 

 " I be afraid Rodney do not   like my coming , " Ralph remark . 

 " no . but he will soon get over that , " she reply . the detachment express by her voice puzzle Ralph , and he would have be glad if she have explain she meaning far . but he be not go to press she for explanation . each moment be to be , as far as he could make it , complete in itself , owe nothing of its happiness to explanation , borrow neither bright nor dark tint from the future . 

 " the bear seem happy , " he remark . " but we must buy they a bag of something . there be the place to buy bun . let us go and get they . " they walk to the counter pile with little paper bag , and each simultaneously produce a shilling and press it upon the young lady , who do not know whether to oblige the lady or the gentleman , but decide , from conventional reason , that it be the part of the gentleman to pay . 

 " I wish to pay , " say Ralph peremptorily , refuse the coin which Katharine tender . " I have a reason for what I do , " he add , see her smile at his tone of decision . 

 " I believe you have a reason for everything , " she agree , break the bun into part and toss they down the bear ' throat , " but I can not   believe it be a good one this time . what be your reason ? " 

 he refuse to tell she . he could not explain to she that he be offer up consciously all his happiness to she , and wish , absurdly enough , to pour every possession he have upon the blaze pyre , even his silver and gold . he wish to keep this distance between they the distance which separate the devotee from the image in the shrine . 

 circumstance conspire to make this easy than it would have be , have they be seat in a drawing - room , for example , with a tea - tray between they . he see she against a background of pale grottos and sleek hide ; camel slant their heavy - rid eye at she , giraffe fastidiously observe she from their melancholy eminence , and the pink - line trunk of elephant cautiously abstract bun from her outstretche hand . then there be the hothouse . he see she bend over python coil upon the sand , or consider the brown rock break the stagnant water of the alligator ' pool , or search some minute section of tropical forest for the golden eye of a lizard or the indrawn movement of the green frog ' flank . in particular , he see she outline against the deep green water , in which squadron of silvery fish wheel incessantly , or ogle she for a moment , press their distorted mouth against the glass , quiver their tail straight out behind they . again , there be the insect house , where she lift the blind of the little cage , and marvel at the purple circle mark upon the rich tussore wing of some lately emerged and semi - conscious butterfly , or at caterpillar immobile like the knobbed twig of a pale - skinned tree , or at slim green snake stab the glass wall again and again with their flickering cleft tongue . the heat of the air , and the bloom of heavy flower , which swam in water or rise stiffly from great red jar , together with the display of curious pattern and fantastic shape , produce an atmosphere in which human being tend to look pale and to fall silent . 

 open the door of a house which ring with the mocking and profoundly unhappy laughter of monkey , they discover William and Cassandra . William appear to be tempt some small reluctant animal to descend from an upper perch to partake of half an apple . Cassandra be read out , in her high - pitch tone , an account of this creature 's seclude disposition and nocturnal habit . she see Katharine and exclaim : 

 " here you be ! do prevent William from torture this unfortunate aye - aye . " 

 " we think we would lose you , " say William . he look from one to the other , and seem to take stock of Denham 's unfashionable appearance . he seem to wish to find some outlet for malevolence , but , fail one , he remain silent . the glance , the slight quiver of the upper lip , be not lose upon Katharine . 

 " William be not   kind to animal , " she remark . " he do not   know what they like and what they do not   like . " 

 " I take it you be well verse in these matter , Denham , " say Rodney , withdraw his hand with the apple . 

 " it be mainly a question of know how to stroke they , " Denham reply . 

 " which be the way to the Reptile House ? " Cassandra ask he , not from a genuine desire to visit the reptile , but in obedience to her new - bear feminine susceptibility , which urge she to charm and conciliate the other sex . Denham begin to give her direction , and Katharine and William move on together . 

 " I hope you have   have a pleasant afternoon , " William remark . 

 " I like Ralph Denham , " she reply . 

 " can se voit , " William return , with superficial urbanity . 

 many retort be obvious , but wish , on the whole , for peace , Katharine merely inquire : 

 " be you come back to tea ? " 

 " Cassandra and I think of have tea at a little shop in Portland Place , " he reply . " I do not   know whether you and Denham would care to join we . " 

 " I will ask he , " she reply , turn her head to look for he . but he and Cassandra be absorb in the aye - aye once more . 

 William and Katharine watch they for a moment , and each look curiously at the object of the other 's preference . but rest his eye upon Cassandra , to whose elegance the dressmaker have now do justice , William say sharply : 

 " if you come , I hope you will not   do your good to make I ridiculous . " 

 " if that be what you be afraid of I certainly shall not   come , " Katharine reply . 

 they be professedly look into the enormous central cage of monkey , and be thoroughly annoy by William , she compare he to a wretched misanthropical ape , huddle in a scrap of old shawl at the end of a pole , dart peevish glance of suspicion and distrust at his companion . her tolerance be desert she . the event of the past week have wear it thin . she be in one of those mood , perhaps not uncommon with either sex , when the other become very clearly distinguish , and of contemptible baseness , so that the necessity of association be degrading , and the tie , which at such moment be always extremely close , drag like a halter round the neck . William 's exact demand and his jealousy have pull she down into some horrible swamp of her nature where the primeval struggle between man and woman still rag . 

 " you seem to delight in hurt I , " William persist . " why do you say that just now about my behavior to animal ? " as he speak he rattle his stick against the bar of the cage , which give his word an accompaniment peculiarly exasperate to Katharine 's nerve . 

 " because it be true . you never see what any one feel , " she say . " you think of no one but yourself . " 

 " that be not true , " say William . by his determined rattling he have now collect the animate attention of some half - dozen ape . either to propitiate they , or to show his consideration for their feeling , he proceed to offer they the apple which he hold . 

 the sight , unfortunately , be so comically apt in its illustration of the picture in her mind , the ruse be so transparent , that Katharine be seize with laughter . she laugh uncontrollably . William flush red . no display of anger could have hurt his feeling more profoundly . it be not only that she be laugh at he ; the detachment of the sound be horrible . 

 " I do not   know what you be laugh at , " he mutter , and , turning , find that the other couple have rejoin they . as if the matter have be privately agree upon , the couple separate once more , Katharine and Denham pass out of the house without more than a perfunctory glance round they . Denham obey what seem to be Katharine 's wish in thus make haste . some change have come over she . he connect it with her laughter , and her few word in private with Rodney ; he feel that she have become unfriendly to he . she talk , but her remark be indifferent , and when he speak her attention seem to wander . this change of mood be at first extremely disagreeable to he ; but soon he find it salutary . the pale drizzling atmosphere of the day affect he , also . the charm , the insidious magic in which he have luxuriate , be suddenly go ; his feeling have become one of friendly respect , and to his great pleasure he find himself think spontaneously of the relief of find himself alone in his room that night . in his surprise at the suddenness of the change , and at the extent of his freedom , he bethink he of a daring plan , by which the ghost of Katharine could be more effectually exorcise than by mere abstinence . he would ask she to come home with he to tea . he would force she through the mill of family life ; he would place she in a light unsparing and reveal . his family would find nothing to admire in she , and she , he feel certain , would despise they all , and this , too , would help he . he feel himself become more and more merciless towards she . by such courageous measure any one , he think , could end the absurd passion which be the cause of so much pain and waste . he could foresee a time when his experience , his discovery , and his triumph be make available for young brother who find themselves in the same predicament . he look at his watch , and remark that the garden would soon be close . 

 " anyhow , " he add , " I think we have   see enough for one afternoon . where have the other get to ? " he look over his shoulder , and , see no trace of they , remark at once : 

 " we would well be independent of they . the good plan will be for you to come back to tea with I . " 

 " why should not   you come with I ? " she ask . 

 " because we be next door to Highgate here , " he reply promptly . 

 she assent , have very little notion whether Highgate be next door to Regent 's Park or not . she be only glad to put off her return to the family tea - table in Chelsea for an hour or two . they proceed with dog determination through the wind road of Regent 's Park , and the Sunday - stricken street of the neighborhood , in the direction of the Tube station . Ignorant of the way , she resign herself entirely to he , and find his silence a convenient cover beneath which to continue her anger with Rodney . 

 when they step out of the train into the still grayer gloom of Highgate , she wonder , for the first time , where he be take she . have he a family , or do he live alone in room ? on the whole she be inclined to believe that he be the only son of an aged , and possibly invalid , mother . she sketch lightly , upon the blank vista down which they walk , the little white house and the tremulous old lady rise from behind her tea - table to greet she with falter word about " my son 's friend , " and be on the point of ask Ralph to tell she what she might expect , when he jerk open one of the infinite number of identical wooden door , and lead she up a tile path to a porch in the Alpine style of architecture . as they listen to the shaking of the bell in the basement , she could summon no vision to replace the one so rudely destroy . 

 " I must warn you to expect a family party , " say Ralph . " they be mostly in on Sundays . we can go to my room afterwards . " 

 " have you many brother and sister ? " she ask , without conceal her dismay . 

 " six or seven , " he reply grimly , as the door open . 

 while Ralph take off his coat , she have time to notice the fern and photograph and drapery , and to hear a hum , or rather a babble , of voice talk each other down , from the sound of they . the rigidity of extreme shyness come over she . she keep as far behind Denham as she could , and walk stiffly after he into a room blaze with unshaded light , which fall upon a number of people , of different age , sit round a large dining - room table untidily strew with food , and unflinchingly light up by incandescent gas . Ralph walk straight to the far end of the table . 

 " Mother , this be Miss Hilbery , " he say . 

 a large elderly lady , bend over an unsatisfactory spirit - lamp , look up with a little frown , and observe : 

 " I beg your pardon . I think you be one of my own girl . Dorothy , " she continue on the same breath , to catch the servant before she leave the room , " we shall want some more methylated spirit unless the lamp itself be out of order . if one of you could invent a good spirit - lamp " she sigh , look generally down the table , and then begin seek among the china before she for two clean cup for the new - comer . 

 the unsparing light reveal more ugliness than Katharine have see in one room for a very long time . it be the ugliness of enormous fold of brown material , loop and festoon , of plush curtain , from which depend ball and fringe , partially conceal bookshelf swollen with black school - text . her eye be arrest by cross scabbard of fretted wood upon the dull green wall , and whereever there be a high flat eminence , some fern wave from a pot of crinkle china , or a bronze horse rear so high that the stump of a tree have to sustain his forequarter . the water of family life seem to rise and close over her head , and she munch in silence . 

 at length Mrs. Denham look up from her teacup and remark : 

 " you see , Miss Hilbery , my child all come in at different hour and want different thing .   the tray should go up if you have   do , Johnnie .   my boy Charles be in bed with a cold . what else can you expect ? stand in the wet playing football . we do try drawing - room tea , but it do not   do . " 

 a boy of sixteen , who appear to be Johnnie , grumble derisively both at the notion of drawing - room tea and at the necessity of carry a tray up to his brother . but he take himself off , be enjoin by his mother to mind what he be do , and shut the door after he . 

 " it be much nice like this , " say Katharine , apply herself with determination to the dissection of her cake ; they have give she too large a slice . she know that Mrs. Denham suspect she of critical comparison . she know that she be make poor progress with her cake . Mrs. Denham have look at she sufficiently often to make it clear to Katharine that she be ask who this young woman be , and why Ralph have bring she to tea with they . there be an obvious reason , which Mrs. Denham have probably reach by this time . outwardly , she be behave with rather rusty and laborious civility . she be make conversation about the amenity of Highgate , its development and situation . 

 " when I first marry , " she say , " Highgate be quite separate from London , Miss Hilbery , and this house , though you would not   believe it , have a view of apple orchard . that be before the Middletons build their house in front of we . " 

 " it must be a great advantage to live at the top of a hill , " say Katharine . Mrs. Denham agree effusively , as if her opinion of Katharine 's sense have rise . 

 " yes , indeed , we find it very healthy , " she say , and she go on , as people who live in the suburb so often do , to prove that it be healthy , more convenient , and less spoilt than any suburb round London . she speak with such emphasis that it be quite obvious that she express unpopular view , and that her child disagree with she . 

 " the ceiling be fall down in the pantry again , " say Hester , a girl of eighteen , abruptly . 

 " the whole house will be down one of these day , " James mutter . 

 " nonsense , " say Mrs. Denham . " it be only a little bit of plaster I do not   see how any house could be expect to stand the wear and tear you give it . " here some family joke explode , which Katharine could not follow . even Mrs. Denham laugh against her will . 

 " Miss Hilbery 's think we all so rude , " she add reprovingly . Miss Hilbery smile and shake her head , and be conscious that a great many eye rest upon she , for a moment , as if they would find pleasure in discuss she when she be go . owing , perhaps , to this critical glance , Katharine decide that Ralph Denham 's family be commonplace , unshapely , lack in charm , and fitly express by the hideous nature of their furniture and decoration . she glance along a mantelpiece range with bronze chariot , silver vas , and china ornament that be either facetious or eccentric . 

 she do not apply her judgment consciously to Ralph , but when she look at he , a moment later , she rat he low than at any other time of their acquaintanceship . 

 he have make no effort to tide over the discomfort of her introduction , and now , engage in argument with his brother , apparently forget her presence . she must have count upon his support more than she realize , for this indifference , emphasize , as it be , by the insignificant commonplace of his surrounding , awake she , not only to that ugliness , but to her own folly . she think of one scene after another in a few second , with that shudder which be almost a blush . she have believe he when he speak of friendship . she have believe in a spiritual light burn steadily and steadfastly behind the erratic disorder and incoherence of life . the light be now go out , suddenly , as if a sponge have blot it . the litter of the table and the tedious but exact conversation of Mrs. Denham remain : they strike , indeed , upon a mind bereft of all defence , and , keenly conscious of the degradation which be the result of strife whether victorious or not , she think gloomily of her loneliness , of life 's futility , of the barren prose of reality , of William Rodney , of her mother , and the unfinished book . 

 her answer to Mrs. Denham be perfunctory to the verge of rudeness , and to Ralph , who watch she narrowly , she seem far away than be compatible with her physical closeness . he glance at she , and grind out further step in his argument , determine that no folly should remain when this experience be over . next moment , a silence , sudden and complete , descend upon they all . the silence of all these people round the untidy table be enormous and hideous ; something horrible seem about to burst from it , but they endure it obstinately . a second later the door open and there be a stir of relief ; cry of " Hullo , Joan ! there be nothing leave for you to eat , " break up the oppressive concentration of so many eye upon the table - cloth , and set the water of family life dash in brisk little wave again . it be obvious that Joan have some mysterious and beneficent power upon her family . she go up to Katharine as if she have hear of she , and be very glad to see she at last . she explain that she have be visit an uncle who be ill , and that have keep she . no , she have not   have any tea , but a slice of bread would do . some one hand up a hot cake , which have be keep warm in the fender ; she sit down by her mother 's side , Mrs. Denham 's anxiety seem to relax , and every one begin eat and drink , as if tea have begin over again . hester voluntarily explain to Katharine that she be read to pass some examination , because she want more than anything in the whole world to go to Newnham . 

 " now , just let I hear you decline ' amo ' I love , " Johnnie demand . 

 " no , Johnnie , no Greek at meal - time , " say Joan , overhear he instantly . " she be up at all hour of the night over her book , Miss Hilbery , and I be sure that be not the way to pass examination , " she go on , smile at Katharine , with the worried humorous smile of the eld sister whose young brother and sister have become almost like child of her own . 

 " Joan , you do not   really think that ' amo ' be greek ? " Ralph 

 ask . 

 " do I say Greek ? well , never mind . no dead language at tea - time . my dear boy , do not   trouble to make I any toast " 

 " or if you do , surely there be the toasting - fork somewhere ? " say Mrs. Denham , still cherish the belief that the bread - knife could be spoil . " do one of you ring and ask for one , " she say , without any conviction that she would be obey . " but be Ann come to be with Uncle Joseph ? " she continue . " if so , surely they have well send Amy to we " and in the mysterious delight of learn further detail of these arrangement , and suggest more sensible plan of her own , which , from the aggrieved way in which she speak , she do not seem to expect any one to adopt , Mrs. Denham completely forget the presence of a well - dress visitor , who have to be inform about the amenity of Highgate . as soon as Joan have take her seat , an argument have spring up on either side of Katharine , as to whether the Salvation Army have any right to play hymn at street corner on Sunday morning , thereby make it impossible for James to have his sleep out , and tamper with the right of individual liberty . 

 " you see , James like to lie in bed and sleep like a hog , " say Johnnie , explain himself to Katharine , whereupon James fire up and , make she his goal , also exclaim : 

 " because sunday be my one chance in the week of have my sleep out . Johnnie mess with stink chemical in the pantry " 

 they appeal to she , and she forget her cake and begin to laugh and talk and argue with sudden animation . the large family seem to she so warm and various that she forget to censure they for their taste in pottery . but the personal question between James and Johnnie merge into some argument already , apparently , debate , so that the part have be distribute among the family , in which Ralph take the lead ; and Katharine find herself opposed to he and the champion of Johnnie 's cause , who , it appear , always lose his head and get excite in argument with Ralph . 

 " yes , yes , that be what I mean . she be get it right , " he exclaim , after Katharine have restate his case , and make it more precise . the debate be leave almost solely to Katharine and Ralph . they look into each other 's eye fixedly , like wrestler try to see what movement be come next , and while Ralph speak , Katharine bite her low lip , and be always ready with her next point as soon as he have do . they be very well match , and hold the opposite view . 

 but at the most exciting stage of the argument , for no reason that Katharine could see , all chair be push back , and one after another the Denham family get up and go out of the door , as if a bell have summon they . she be not use to the clockwork regulation of a large family . she hesitate in what she be say , and rise . Mrs. Denham and Joan have draw together and stand by the fireplace , slightly raise their skirt above their ankle , and discuss something which have an air of be very serious and very private . they appear to have forget her presence among they . Ralph stand hold the door open for she . 

 " will not   you come up to my room ? " he say . and Katharine , glance back at Joan , who smile at she in a preoccupied way , follow Ralph upstairs . she be think of their argument , and when , after the long climb , he open his door , she begin at once . 

 " the question be , then , at what point be it right for the individual to assert his will against the will of the State . " 

 for some time they continue the argument , and then the interval between one statement and the next become long and long , and they speak more speculatively and less pugnaciously , and at last fall silent . Katharine go over the argument in her mind , remember how , now and then , it have be set conspicuously on the right course by some remark offer either by James or by Johnnie . 

 " your brother be very clever , " she say . " I suppose you be in the habit of argue ? " 

 " James and Johnnie will go on like that for hour , " Ralph reply . " so will hester , if you start she upon Elizabethan dramatist . " 

 " and the little girl with the pigtail ? " 

 " molly ? she be only ten . but they be always argue among themselves . " 

 he be immensely please by Katharine 's praise of his brother and sister . he would have like to go on tell she about they , but he check himself . 

 " I see that it must be difficult to leave they , " Katharine continue . his deep pride in his family be more evident to he , at that moment , than ever before , and the idea of live alone in a cottage be ridiculous . all that brotherhood and sisterhood , and a common childhood in a common past mean , all the stability , the unambitious comradeship , and tacit understanding of family life at its good , come to his mind , and he think of they as a company , of which he be the leader , bind on a difficult , dreary , but glorious voyage . and it be Katharine who have open his eye to this , he think . 

 a little dry chirp from the corner of the room now rouse her attention . 

 " my tame rook , " he explain briefly . " a cat have bite one of its leg . " she look at the rook , and her eye go from one object to another . 

 " you sit here and read ? " she say , her eye rest upon his book . he say that he be in the habit of work there at night . 

 " the great advantage of Highgate be the view over London . at night the view from my window be splendid . " he be extremely anxious that she should appreciate his view , and she rise to see what be to be see . it be already dark enough for the turbulent haze to be yellow with the light of street lamp , and she try to determine the quarter of the city beneath she . the sight of her gaze from his window give he a peculiar satisfaction . when she turn , at length , he be still sit motionless in his chair . 

 " it must be late , " she say . " I must be go . " she settle upon the arm of the chair irresolutely , think that she have no wish to go home . William would be there , and he would find some way of make thing unpleasant for she , and the memory of their quarrel come back to she . she have notice Ralph 's coldness , too . she look at he , and from his fix stare she think that he must be work out some theory , some argument . he have think , perhaps , of some fresh point in his position , as to the bound of personal liberty . she wait , silently , think about liberty . 

 " you have   win again , " he say at last , without move . 

 " I have   win ? " she repeat , think of the argument . 

 " I wish to God I have not   ask you here , " he burst out . 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 " when you be here , it be different I be happy . you have   only to walk to the window you have   only to talk about liberty . when I see you down there among they all " he stop short . 

 " you think how ordinary I be . " 

 " I try to think so . but I think you more wonderful than ever . " 

 an immense relief , and a reluctance to enjoy that relief , conflict in her heart . 

 she slide down into the chair . 

 " I think you dislike I , " she say . 

 " God know I try , " he reply . " I have   do my good to see you as you be , without any of this damned romantic nonsense . that be why I ask you here , and it be increase my folly . when you be go I shall look out of that window and think of you . I shall waste the whole evening thinking of you . I shall waste my whole life , I believe . " 

 he speak with such vehemence that her relief disappear ; she frown ; and her tone change to one almost of severity . 

 " this be what I foretold . we shall gain nothing but unhappiness . look at I , Ralph . " he look at she . " I assure you that I be far more ordinary than I appear . Beauty mean nothing whatever . in fact , the most beautiful woman be generally the most stupid . I be not that , but I be a matter - of - fact , prosaic , rather ordinary character ; I order the dinner , I pay the bill , I do the account , I wind up the clock , and I never look at a book . " 

 " you forget " he begin , but she would not let he speak . 

 " you come and see I among flower and picture , and think I mysterious , romantic , and all the rest of it . be yourself very inexperienced and very emotional , you go home and invent a story about I , and now you can not   separate I from the person you have   imagine I to be . you call that , I suppose , be in love ; as a matter of fact it be be in delusion . all romantic people be the same , " she add . " my mother spend her life in make story about the people she be fond of . but I will not   have you do it about I , if I can help it . " 

 " you can not   help it , " he say . 

 " I warn you it be the source of all evil . " 

 " and of all good , " he add . 

 " you will find out that I be not what you think I . " 

 " perhaps . but I shall gain more than I lose . " 

 " if such gain 's worth have . " 

 they be silent for a space . 

 " that may be what we have to face , " he say . " there may be nothing else . nothing but what we imagine . " 

 " the reason of our loneliness , " she muse , and they be silent for a time . 

 " when be you to be marry ? " he ask abruptly , with a change of tone . 

 " not till September , I think . it be be put off . " 

 " you will not   be lonely then , " he say . " accord to what people say , marriage be a very queer business . they say it be different from anything else . it may be true . I have   know one or two case where it seem to be true . " he hop that she would go on with the subject . but she make no reply . he have do his good to master himself , and his voice be sufficiently indifferent , but her silence torment he . she would never speak to he of Rodney of her own accord , and her reserve leave a whole continent of her soul in darkness . 

 " it may be put off even long than that , " she say , as if by an afterthought . " some one in the office be ill , and William have to take his place . we may put it off for some time in fact . " 

 " that be rather hard on he , be not   it ? " Ralph ask . 

 " he have his work , " she reply . " he have lot of thing that interest he .... I know I have   be to that place , " she break off , point to a photograph . " but I can not   remember where it be oh , of course it be Oxford . now , what about your cottage ? " 

 " I be not go to take it . " 

 " how you change your mind ! " she smile . 

 " it be not that , " he say impatiently . " it be that I want to be where I can see you . " 

 " our compact be go to hold in spite of all I have   say ? " she ask . 

 " for ever , so far as I be concern , " he reply . 

 " you be go to go on dream and imagine and make up story about I as you walk along the street , and pretend that we be rid in a forest , or land on an island " 

 " no . I shall think of you order dinner , pay bill , do the account , show old lady the relic " 

 " that be well , " she say . " you can think of I to - morrow morning look up date in the ' Dictionary of National Biography . ' " 

 " and forget your purse , " Ralph add . 

 at this she smile , but in another moment her smile fade , either because of his word or of the way in which he speak they . she be capable of forget thing . he see that . but what more do he see ? be he not look at something she have never show to anybody ? be it not something so profound that the notion of his see it almost shock she ? her smile fade , and for a moment she seem upon the point of speak , but look at he in silence , with a look that seem to ask what she could not put into word , she turn and bid he good night . 





 CHAPTER XXVIII 

 like a strain of music , the effect of Katharine 's presence slowly die from the room in which Ralph sit alone . the music have cease in the rapture of its melody . he strain to catch the faint linger echo ; for a moment the memory lull he into peace ; but soon it fail , and he pace the room so hungry for the sound to come again that he be conscious of no other desire leave in life . she have go without speak ; abruptly a chasm have be cut in his course , down which the tide of his be plunge in disorder ; fall upon rock ; fling itself to destruction . the distress have an effect of physical ruin and disaster . he tremble ; he be white ; he feel exhausted , as if by a great physical effort . he sink at last into a chair stand opposite her empty one , and mark , mechanically , with his eye upon the clock , how she go far and far from he , be home now , and now , doubtless , again with Rodney . but it be long before he could realize these fact ; the immense desire for her presence churn his sens into foam , into froth , into a haze of emotion that remove all fact from his grasp , and give he a strange sense of distance , even from the material shape of wall and window by which he be surround . the prospect of the future , now that the strength of his passion be reveal to he , appal he . 

 the marriage would take place in September , she have say ; that allow he , then , six full month in which to undergo these terrible extreme of emotion . six month of torture , and after that the silence of the grave , the isolation of the insane , the exile of the damned ; at good , a life from which the chief good be knowingly and for ever exclude . an impartial judge might have assure he that his chief hope of recovery lie in this mystic temper , which identify a live woman with much that no human being long possess in the eye of each other ; she would pass , and the desire for her vanish , but his belief in what she stand for , detach from she , would remain . this line of thought offer , perhaps , some respite , and possess of a brain that have its station considerably above the tumult of the sens , he try to reduce the vague and wandering incoherency of his emotion to order . the sense of self - preservation be strong in he , and Katharine herself have strangely revive it by convince he that his family deserve and need all his strength . she be right , and for their sake , if not for his own , this passion , which could bear no fruit , must be cut off , uproot , show to be as visionary and baseless as she have maintain . the good way of achieve this be not to run away from she , but to face she , and have steep himself in her quality , to convince his reason that they be , as she assure he , not those that he imagine . she be a practical woman , a domestic wife for an inferior poet , endow with romantic beauty by some freak of unintelligent Nature . no doubt her beauty itself would not stand examination . he have the mean of settle this point at least . he possess a book of photograph from the greek statue ; the head of a goddess , if the low part be conceal , have often give he the ecstasy of be in Katharine 's presence . he take it down from the shelf and find the picture . to this he add a note from she , bid he meet she at the Zoo . he have a flower which he have pick at Kew to teach her botany . such be his relic . he place they before he , and set himself to visualize she so clearly that no deception or delusion be possible . in a second he could see she , with the sun slant across her dress , come towards he down the green walk at Kew . he make she sit upon the seat beside he . he hear her voice , so low and yet so decide in its tone ; she speak reasonably of indifferent matter . he could see her fault , and analyze her virtue . his pulse become quieter , and his brain increase in clarity . this time she could not escape he . the illusion of her presence become more and more complete . they seem to pass in and out of each other 's mind , question and answer . the utmost fullness of communion seem to be theirs . thus united , he feel himself raise to an eminence , exalt , and fill with a power of achievement such as he have never know in singleness . once more he tell over conscientiously her fault , both of face and character ; they be clearly know to he ; but they merge themselves in the flawless union that be bear of their association . they survey life to its uttermost limit . how deep it be when look at from this height ! how sublime ! how the commonest thing move he almost to tear ! thus , he forget the inevitable limitation ; he forget her absence , he think it of no account whether she marry he or another ; nothing matter , save that she should exist , and that he should love she . some word of these reflection be utter aloud , and it happen that among they be the word , " I love she . " it be the first time that he have use the word " love " to describe his feeling ; madness , romance , hallucination he have call it by these name before ; but have , apparently by accident , stumble upon the word " love , " he repeat it again and again with a sense of revelation . 

 " but I be in love with you ! " he exclaim , with something like dismay . he leant against the window - sill , look over the city as she have look . everything have become miraculously different and completely distinct . his feeling be justify and need no further explanation . but he must impart they to some one , because his discovery be so important that it concern other people too . shut the book of greek photograph , and hide his relic , he run downstairs , snatch his coat , and pass out of door . 

 the lamp be be light , but the street be dark enough and empty enough to let he walk his fast , and to talk aloud as he walk . he have no doubt where he be go . he be go to find Mary Datchet . the desire to share what he feel , with some one who understand it , be so imperious that he do not question it . he be soon in her street . he run up the stair lead to her flat two step at a time , and it never cross his mind that she might not be at home . as he ring her bell , he seem to himself to be announce the presence of something wonderful that be separate from himself , and give he power and authority over all other people . Mary come to the door after a moment 's pause . he be perfectly silent , and in the dusk his face look completely white . he follow she into her room . 

 " do you know each other ? " she say , to his extreme surprise , for he have count on find she alone . a young man rise , and say that he know Ralph by sight . 

 " we be just go through some paper , " say Mary . " Mr. Basnett have to help I , because I do not   know much about my work yet . it be the new society , " she explain . " I be the secretary . I be no long at Russell Square . " 

 the voice in which she give this information be so constrain as to sound almost harsh . 

 " what be your aim ? " say Ralph . he look neither at Mary nor at Mr. Basnett . Mr. Basnett think he have seldom see a more disagreeable or formidable man than this friend of Mary 's , this sarcastic - look , white - face Mr. Denham , who seem to demand , as if by right , an account of their proposal , and to criticize they before he have hear they . nevertheless , he explain his project as clearly as he could , and know that he wish Mr. Denham to think well of they . 

 " I see , " say Ralph , when he have do . " d'you know , Mary , " he suddenly remark , " I believe I be in for a cold . have you any quinine ? " the look which he cast at she frighten she ; it express mutely , perhaps without his own consciousness , something deep , wild , and passionate . she leave the room at once . her heart beat fast at the knowledge of Ralph 's presence ; but it beat with pain , and with an extraordinary fear . she stand listen for a moment to the voice in the next room . 

 " of course , I agree with you , " she hear Ralph say , in this strange voice , to Mr. Basnett . " but there be more that might be do . have you see Judson , for instance ? you should make a point of get he . " 

 Mary return with the quinine . 

 " Judson 's address ? " Mr. Basnett inquire , pull out his notebook and prepare to write . for twenty minute , perhaps , he write down name , address , and other suggestion that Ralph dictate to he . then , when Ralph fall silent , Mr. Basnett feel that his presence be not desire , and thank Ralph for his help , with a sense that he be very young and ignorant compare with he , he say good - bye . 

 " Mary , " say Ralph , directly Mr. Basnett have shut the door and they be alone together . " Mary , " he repeat . but the old difficulty of speak to Mary without reserve prevent he from continue . his desire to proclaim his love for Katharine be still strong in he , but he have feel , directly he see Mary , that he could not share it with she . the feeling increase as he sit talk to Mr. Basnett . and yet all the time he be think of Katharine , and marvel at his love . the tone in which he speak Mary 's name be harsh . 

 " what be it , Ralph ? " she ask , startle by his tone . she look at he anxiously , and her little frown show that she be try painfully to understand he , and be puzzle . he could feel her groping for his meaning , and he be annoy with she , and think how he have always find her slow , painstaking , and clumsy . he have behave badly to she , too , which make his irritation the more acute . without wait for he to answer , she rise as if his answer be indifferent to she , and begin to put in order some paper that Mr. Basnett have leave on the table . she hum a scrap of a tune under her breath , and move about the room as if she be occupy in make thing tidy , and have no other concern . 

 " you will stay and dine ? " she say casually , return to her seat . 

 " no , " Ralph reply . she do not press he far . they sit side by side without speak , and Mary reach her hand for her work basket , and take out her sewing and thread a needle . 

 " that be a clever young man , " Ralph observe , refer to Mr. Basnett . 

 " I be glad you think so . it be tremendously interesting work , and consider everything , I think we have   do very well . but I be inclined to agree with you ; we ought to try to be more conciliatory . we be absurdly strict . it be difficult to see that there may be sense in what one 's opponent say , though they be one 's opponent . Horace Basnett be certainly too uncompromising . I must not   forget to see that he write that letter to Judson . you be too busy , I suppose , to come on to our committee ? " she speak in the most impersonal manner . 

 " I may be out of town , " Ralph reply , with equal distance of manner . 

 " our executive meet every week , of course , " she observe . " but some of our member do not   come more than once a month . member of Parliament be the bad ; it be a mistake , I think , to ask they . " 

 she go on sewing in silence . 

 " you have   not take your quinine , " she say , look up and see the tabloid upon the mantelpiece . 

 " I do not   want it , " say Ralph shortly . 

 " well , you know well , " she reply tranquilly . 

 " Mary , I be a brute ! " he exclaim . " here I come and waste your time , and do nothing but make myself disagreeable . " 

 " a cold come on do make one feel wretched , " she reply . 

 " I have   not get a cold . that be a lie . there be nothing the matter with I . I be mad , I suppose . I ought to have have the decency to keep away . but I want to see you I want to tell you I be in love , Mary . " he speak the word , but , as he speak it , it seem rob of substance . 

 " in love , be you ? " she say quietly . " I be glad , Ralph . " 

 " I suppose I be in love . anyhow , I be out of my mind . I can not   think , I can not   work , I do not   care a hang for anything in the world . Good Heavens , Mary ! I be in torment ! one moment I be happy ; next I be miserable . I hate she for half an hour ; then I would give my whole life to be with she for ten minute ; all the time I do not   know what I feel , or why I feel it ; it be insanity , and yet it be perfectly reasonable . can you make any sense of it ? can you see what be happen ? I be rave , I know ; do not   listen , Mary ; go on with your work . " 

 he rise and begin , as usual , to pace up and down the room . he know that what he have just say bore very little resemblance to what he feel , for Mary 's presence act upon he like a very strong magnet , draw from he certain expression which be not those he make use of when he speak to himself , nor do they represent his deep feeling . he feel a little contempt for himself at have speak thus ; but somehow he have be force into speech . 

 " do sit down , " say Mary suddenly . " you make I so " she speak with unusual irritability , and Ralph , notice it with surprise , sit down at once . 

 " you have not   tell I her name you would rather not , I suppose ? " 

 " her name ? Katharine Hilbery . " 

 " but she be engage " 

 " to Rodney . they be to be marry in September . " 

 " I see , " say Mary . but in truth the calm of his manner , now that he be sit down once more , wrapt she in the presence of something which she feel to be so strong , so mysterious , so incalculable , that she scarcely dare to attempt to intercept it by any word or question that she be able to frame . she look at Ralph blankly , with a kind of awe in her face , her lip slightly part , and her brow raise . he be apparently quite unconscious of her gaze . then , as if she could look no long , she leant back in her chair , and half close her eye . the distance between they hurt she terribly ; one thing after another come into her mind , tempt she to assail Ralph with question , to force he to confide in she , and to enjoy once more his intimacy . but she reject every impulse , for she could not speak without do violence to some reserve which have grow between they , put they a little far from each other , so that he seem to her dignified and remote , like a person she no long know well . 

 " be there anything that I could do for you ? " she ask gently , and even with courtesy , at length . 

 " you could see she no , that be not what I want ; you must not   bother about I , Mary . " he , too , speak very gently . 

 " I be afraid no third person can do anything to help , " she add . 

 " no , " he shake his head . " Katharine be say to - day how lonely we be . " she see the effort with which he speak Katharine 's name , and believe that he force himself to make amend now for his concealment in the past . at any rate , she be conscious of no anger against he ; but rather of a deep pity for one condemn to suffer as she have suffer . but in the case of Katharine it be different ; she be indignant with Katharine . 

 " there be always work , " she say , a little aggressively . 

 Ralph move directly . 

 " do you want to be work now ? " he ask . 

 " no , no . it be Sunday , " she reply . " I be think of Katharine . she do not   understand about work . she be never have to . she do not   know what work be . I have   only find out myself quite lately . but it be the thing that save one I be sure of that . " 

 " there be other thing , be not   there ? " he hesitate . 

 " nothing that one can count upon , " she return . " after all , other people " she stop , but force herself to go on . " where should I be now if I have not   get to go to my office every day ? thousand of people would tell you the same thing thousand of woman . I tell you , work be the only thing that save I , Ralph . " he set his mouth , as if her word rain blow on he ; he look as if he have make up his mind to bear anything she might say , in silence . he have deserve it , and there would be relief in have to bear it . but she break off , and rise as if to fetch something from the next room . before she reach the door she turn back , and stand face he , self - possess , and yet defiant and formidable in her composure . 

 " it be all turn out splendidly for I , " she say . " it will for you , too . I be sure of that . because , after all , Katharine be worth it . " 

 " Mary ! " he exclaim . but her head be turn away , and he could not say what he wish to say . " Mary , you be splendid , " he conclude . she face he as he speak , and give he her hand . she have suffer and relinquish , she have see her future turn from one of infinite promise to one of barrenness , and yet , somehow , over what she scarcely know , and with what result she could hardly foretell , she have conquer . with Ralph 's eye upon she , smile straight back at he serenely and proudly , she know , for the first time , that she have conquer . she let he kiss her hand . 

 the street be empty enough on Sunday night , and if the Sabbath , and the domestic amusement proper to the Sabbath , have not keep people indoor , a high strong wind might very probably have do so . Ralph Denham be aware of a tumult in the street much in accordance with his own sensation . the gust , sweep along the Strand , seem at the same time to blow a clear space across the sky in which star appear , and for a short time the quick - peede silver moon rid through cloud , as if they be wave of water surge round she and over she . they swamp she , but she emerge ; they break over she and cover she again ; she issue forth indomitable . in the country field all the wreckage of winter be be disperse ; the dead leaf , the withered bracken , the dry and discolored grass , but no bud would be break , nor would the new stalk that show above the earth take any harm , and perhaps to - morrow a line of blue or yellow would show through a slit in their green . but the whirl of the atmosphere alone be in Denham 's mood , and what of star or blossom appear be only as a light gleam for a second upon heap wave fast follow each other . he have not be able to speak to Mary , though for a moment he have come near enough to be tantalize by a wonderful possibility of understanding . but the desire to communicate something of the very great importance possess he completely ; he still wish to bestow this gift upon some other human being ; he seek their company . More by instinct than by conscious choice , he take the direction which lead to Rodney 's room . he knock loudly upon his door ; but no one answer . he ring the bell . it take he some time to accept the fact that Rodney be out . when he could no long pretend that the sound of the wind in the old building be the sound of some one rise from his chair , he run downstairs again , as if his goal have be alter and only just reveal to he . he walk in the direction of Chelsea . 

 but physical fatigue , for he have not din and have tramp both far and fast , make he sit for a moment upon a seat on the Embankment . one of the regular occupant of those seat , an elderly man who have drink himself , probably , out of work and lodging , drift up , beg a match , and sit down beside he . it be a windy night , he say ; time be hard ; some long story of bad luck and injustice follow , tell so often that the man seem to be talk to himself , or , perhaps , the neglect of his audience have long make any attempt to catch their attention seem scarcely worth while . when he begin to speak Ralph have a wild desire to talk to he ; to question he ; to make he understand . he do , in fact , interrupt he at one point ; but it be useless . the ancient story of failure , ill - luck , undeserved disaster , go down the wind , disconnected syllable fly past Ralph 's ear with a queer alternation of loudness and faintness as if , at certain moment , the man 's memory of his wrong revive and then flag , die down at last into a grumble of resignation , which seem to represent a final lapse into the accustomed despair . the unhappy voice afflict Ralph , but it also anger he . and when the elderly man refuse to listen and mumble on , an odd image come to his mind of a lighthouse besiege by the fly body of lose bird , who be dash senseless , by the gale , against the glass . he have a strange sensation that he be both lighthouse and bird ; he be steadfast and brilliant ; and at the same time he be whirl , with all other thing , senseles against the glass . he get up , leave his tribute of silver , and press on , with the wind against he . the image of the lighthouse and the storm full of bird persist , take the place of more definite thought , as he walk past the Houses of Parliament and down Grosvenor Road , by the side of the river . in his state of physical fatigue , detail merge themselves in the vaster prospect , of which the fly gloom and the intermittent light of lamp - post and private house be the outward token , but he never lose his sense of walk in the direction of Katharine 's house . he take it for grant that something would then happen , and , as he walk on , his mind become more and more full of pleasure and expectancy . within a certain radius of her house the street come under the influence of her presence . each house have an individuality know to Ralph , because of the tremendous individuality of the house in which she live . for some yard before reach the Hilberys ' door he walk in a trance of pleasure , but when he reach it , and push the gate of the little garden open , he hesitate . he do not know what to do next . there be no hurry , however , for the outside of the house hold pleasure enough to last he some time long . he cross the road , and leant against the balustrade of the Embankment , fix his eye upon the house . 

 light burn in the three long window of the drawing - room . the space of the room behind become , in Ralph 's vision , the center of the dark , fly wilderness of the world ; the justification for the welter of confusion surround it ; the steady light which cast its beam , like those of a lighthouse , with search composure over the trackless waste . in this little sanctuary be gather together several different people , but their identity be dissolve in a general glory of something that might , perhaps , be call civilization ; at any rate , all dryness , all safety , all that stand up above the surge and preserve a consciousness of its own , be center in the drawing - room of the Hilberys . its purpose be beneficent ; and yet so far above his level as to have something austere about it , a light that cast itself out and yet keep itself aloof . then he begin , in his mind , to distinguish different individual within , consciously refuse as yet to attack the figure of Katharine . his thought linger over Mrs. Hilbery and Cassandra ; and then he turn to Rodney and Mr. Hilbery . physically , he see they bath in that steady flow of yellow light which fill the long oblong of the window ; in their movement they be beautiful ; and in their speech he figure a reserve of meaning , unspoken , but understand . at length , after all this half - conscious selection and arrangement , he allow himself to approach the figure of Katharine herself ; and instantly the scene be flood with excitement . he do not see she in the body ; he seem curiously to see she as a shape of light , the light itself ; he seem , simplified and exhausted as he be , to be like one of those lose bird fascinate by the lighthouse and hold to the glass by the splendor of the blaze . 

 these thought drive he to tramp a beat up and down the pavement before the Hilberys ' gate . he do not trouble himself to make any plan for the future . something of an unknown kind would decide both the come year and the come hour . now and again , in his vigil , he seek the light in the long window , or glance at the ray which gild a few leaf and a few blade of grass in the little garden . for a long time the light burn without change . he have just reach the limit of his beat and be turn , when the front door open , and the aspect of the house be entirely change . a black figure come down the little pathway and pause at the gate . Denham understand instantly that it be Rodney . without hesitation , and conscious only of a great friendliness for any one come from that light room , he walk straight up to he and stop he . in the flurry of the wind Rodney be take aback , and for the moment try to press on , mutter something , as if he suspect a demand upon his charity . 

 " Goodness , Denham , what be you do here ? " he exclaim , recognize he . 

 Ralph mumble something about be on his way home . they walk on together , though Rodney walk quick enough to make it plain that he have no wish for company . 

 he be very unhappy . that afternoon Cassandra have repulse he ; he have try to explain to she the difficulty of the situation , and to suggest the nature of his feeling for she without say anything definite or anything offensive to she . but he have lose his head ; under the goad of Katharine 's ridicule he have say too much , and Cassandra , superb in her dignity and severity , have refuse to hear another word , and threaten an immediate return to her home . his agitation , after an evening spend between the two woman , be extreme . moreover , he could not help suspect that Ralph be wander near the Hilberys ' house , at this hour , for reason connect with Katharine . there be probably some understanding between they not that anything of the kind matter to he now . he be convince that he have never care for any one save Cassandra , and Katharine 's future be no concern of his . aloud , he say , shortly , that he be very tired and wish to find a cab . but on Sunday night , on the Embankment , cab be hard to come by , and Rodney find himself constrain to walk some distance , at any rate , in Denham 's company . Denham maintain his silence . Rodney 's irritation lapse . he find the silence oddly suggestive of the good masculine quality which he much respect , and have at this moment great reason to need . after the mystery , difficulty , and uncertainty of deal with the other sex , intercourse with one 's own be apt to have a composing and even ennoble influence , since plain speaking be possible and subterfuge of no avail . Rodney , too , be much in need of a confidant ; Katharine , despite her promise of help , have fail he at the critical moment ; she have go off with Denham ; she be , perhaps , torment Denham as she have torment he . how grave and stable he seem , speak little , and walk firmly , compare with what Rodney know of his own torment and indecision ! he begin to cast about for some way of tell the story of his relation with Katharine and Cassandra that would not lower he in Denham 's eye . it then occur to he that , perhaps , Katharine herself have confide in Denham ; they have something in common ; it be likely that they have discuss he that very afternoon . the desire to discover what they have say of he now come uppermost in his mind . he recall Katharine 's laugh ; he remember that she have go , laugh , to walk with Denham . 

 " do you stay long after we would leave ? " he ask abruptly . 

 " no . we go back to my house . " 

 this seem to confirm Rodney 's belief that he have be discuss . he turn over the unpalatable idea for a while , in silence . 

 " woman be incomprehensible creature , Denham ! " he then exclaim . 

 " um , " say Denham , who seem to himself possess of complete understanding , not merely of woman , but of the entire universe . he could read Rodney , too , like a book . he know that he be unhappy , and he pity he , and wish to help he . 

 " you say something and they fly into a passion . or for no reason at all , they laugh . I take it that no amount of education will " the remainder of the sentence be lose in the high wind , against which they have to struggle ; but Denham understand that he refer to Katharine 's laughter , and that the memory of it be still hurt he . in comparison with Rodney , Denham feel himself very secure ; he see Rodney as one of the lose bird dash senseless against the glass ; one of the fly body of which the air be full . but he and Katharine be alone together , aloft , splendid , and luminous with a twofold radiance . he pity the unstable creature beside he ; he feel a desire to protect he , expose without the knowledge which make his own way so direct . they be unite as the adventurous be united , though one reach the goal and the other perishe by the way . 

 " you could not   laugh at some one you care for . " 

 this sentence , apparently address to no other human being , reach Denham 's ear . the wind seem to muffle it and fly away with it directly . have Rodney speak those word ? 

 " you love she . " be that his own voice , which seem to sound in the air several yard in front of he ? 

 " I have   suffer torture , Denham , torture ! " 

 " yes , yes , I know that . " 

 " she be laugh at I . " 

 " never to I . " 

 the wind blow a space between the word blow they so far away that they seem unspoken . 

 " how I have   love she ! " 

 this be certainly speak by the man at Denham 's side . the voice have all the mark of Rodney 's character , and recall , with ; strange vividness , his personal appearance . Denham could see he against the blank building and tower of the horizon . he see he dignified , exalted , and tragic , as he might have appear think of Katharine alone in his room at night . 

 " I be in love with Katharine myself . that be why I be here to - night . " 

 Ralph speak distinctly and deliberately , as if Rodney 's confession have make this statement necessary . 

 Rodney exclaim something inarticulate . 

 " ah , I have   always know it , " he cry , " I have   know it from the first . you will marry she ! " 

 the cry have a note of despair in it . again the wind intercept their word . they say no more . at length they draw up beneath a lamp - post , simultaneously . 

 " my God , Denham , what fool we both be ! " Rodney exclaim . they look at each other , queerly , in the light of the lamp . fool ! they seem to confess to each other the extreme depth of their folly . for the moment , under the lamp - post , they seem to be aware of some common knowledge which do away with the possibility of rivalry , and make they feel more sympathy for each other than for any one else in the world . give simultaneously a little nod , as if in confirmation of this understanding , they part without speak again . 





 CHAPTER XXIX 

 between twelve and one that Sunday night Katharine lie in bed , not asleep , but in that twilight region where a detached and humorous view of our own lot be possible ; or if we must be serious , our seriousness be temper by the swift oncome of slumber and oblivion . she see the form of Ralph , William , Cassandra , and herself , as if they be all equally unsubstantial , and , in put off reality , have gain a kind of dignity which rest upon each impartially . thus rid of any uncomfortable warmth of partisanship or load of obligation , she be drop off to sleep when a light tap sound upon her door . a moment later Cassandra stand beside she , hold a candle and speak in the low tone proper to the time of night . 

 " be you awake , Katharine ? " 

 " yes , I be awake . what be it ? " 

 she rouse herself , sit up , and ask what in Heaven 's name Cassandra be do ? 

 " I could not   sleep , and I think I would come and speak to you only for a moment , though . I be go home to - morrow . " 

 " home ? why , what have happen ? " 

 " something happen to - day which make it impossible for I to stay here . " 

 Cassandra speak formally , almost solemnly ; the announcement be clearly prepare and mark a crisis of the utmost gravity . she continue what seem to be part of a set speech . 

 " I have decide to tell you the whole truth , Katharine . William allow himself to behave in a way which make I extremely uncomfortable to - day . " 

 Katharine seem to waken completely , and at once to be in control of herself . 

 " at the Zoo ? " she ask . 

 " no , on the way home . when we have tea . " 

 as if foresee that the interview might be long , and the night chilly , Katharine advise Cassandra to wrap herself in a quilt . Cassandra do so with unbroken solemnity . 

 " there be a train at eleven , " she say . " I shall tell Aunt Maggie that I have to go suddenly .... I shall make Violet 's visit an excuse . but , after think it over , I do not   see how I can go without tell you the truth . " 

 she be careful to abstain from look in Katharine 's direction . there be a slight pause . 

 " but I do not   see the least reason why you should go , " say Katharine eventually . her voice sound so astonishingly equable that Cassandra glance at she . it be impossible to suppose that she be either indignant or surprised ; she seem , on the contrary , sit up in bed , with her arm clasp round her knee and a little frown on her brow , to be think closely upon a matter of indifference to she . 

 " because I can not   allow any man to behave to I in that way , " Cassandra reply , and she add , " particularly when I know that he be engaged to some one else . " 

 " but you like he , do not   you ? " Katharine inquire . 

 " that be get nothing to do with it , " Cassandra exclaim indignantly . " I consider his conduct , under the circumstance , most disgraceful . " 

 this be the last of the sentence of her premeditated speech ; and have speak it she be leave unprovided with any more to say in that particular style . when Katharine remark : 

 " I should say it have everything to do with it , " Cassandra 's self - possession desert she . 

 " I do not   understand you in the least , Katharine . how can you behave as you behave ? ever since I come here I have   be amazed by you ! " 

 " you have   enjoy yourself , have not   you ? " Katharine ask . 

 " yes , I have , " Cassandra admit . 

 " anyhow , my behavior have not   spoil your visit . " 

 " no , " Cassandra allow once more . she be completely at a loss . in her forecast of the interview she have take it for grant that Katharine , after an outburst of incredulity , would agree that Cassandra must return home as soon as possible . but Katharine , on the contrary , accept her statement at once , seem neither shocked nor surprised , and merely look rather more thoughtful than usual . from be a mature woman charge with an important mission , Cassandra shrink to the stature of an inexperienced child . 

 " do you think I have   be very foolish about it ? " she ask . 

 Katharine make no answer , but still sit deliberate silently , and a certain feeling of alarm take possession of Cassandra . perhaps her word have strike far deep than she have think , into depth beyond her reach , as so much of Katharine be beyond her reach . she think suddenly that she have be play with very dangerous tool . 

 look at she at length , Katharine ask slowly , as if she find the question very difficult to ask . 

 " but do you care for William ? " 

 she mark the agitation and bewilderment of the girl 's expression , and how she look away from she . 

 " do you mean , be I in love with he ? " Cassandra ask , breathe quickly , and nervously move her hand . 

 " yes , in love with he , " Katharine repeat . 

 " how can I love the man you be engaged to marry ? " Cassandra burst out . 

 " he may be in love with you . " 

 " I do not   think you have   any right to say such thing , Katharine , " Cassandra exclaim . " why do you say they ? do not   you mind in the least how William behave to other woman ? if I be engage , I could not   bear it ! " 

 " we be not engage , " say Katharine , after a pause . 

 " Katharine ! " Cassandra cry . 

 " no , we be not engage , " Katharine repeat . " but no one know it but ourselves . " 

 " but why I do not   understand you be not engage ! " Cassandra say again . " oh , that explain it ! you be not in love with he ! you do not   want to marry he ! " 

 " we be not   in love with each other any long , " say Katharine , as if dispose of something for ever and ever . 

 " how queer , how strange , how unlike other people you be , Katharine , " Cassandra say , her whole body and voice seem to fall and collapse together , and no trace of anger or excitement remain , but only a dreamy quietude . 

 " you be not in love with he ? " 

 " but I love he , " say Katharine . 

 Cassandra remain bow , as if by the weight of the revelation , for some little while long . nor do Katharine speak . her attitude be that of some one who wish to be conceal as much as possible from observation . she sigh profoundly ; she be absolutely silent , and apparently overcome by her thought . 

 " d'you know what time it be ? " she say at length , and shake her pillow , as if make ready for sleep . 

 Cassandra rise obediently , and once more take up her candle . perhaps the white dressing - gown , and the loosened hair , and something unseeing in the expression of the eye give she a likeness to a woman walk in her sleep . Katharine , at least , think so . 

 " there be no reason why I should go home , then ? " Cassandra say , pause . " unless you want I to go , Katharine ? what do you want I to do ? " 

 for the first time their eye meet . 

 " you want we to fall in love , " Cassandra exclaim , as if she read the certainty there . but as she look she see a sight that surprise she . the tear rise slowly in Katharine 's eye and stand there , brim but contain the tear of some profound emotion , happiness , grief , renunciation ; an emotion so complex in its nature that to express it be impossible , and Cassandra , bend her head and receive the tear upon her cheek , accept they in silence as the consecration of her love . 

 " please , miss , " say the maid , about eleven o'clock on the follow morning , " Mrs. Milvain be in the kitchen . " 

 a long wicker basket of flower and branch have arrive from the country , and Katharine , kneel upon the floor of the drawing - room , be sort they while Cassandra watch she from an arm - chair , and absent - mindedly make spasmodic offer of help which be not accept . the maid 's message have a curious effect upon Katharine . 

 she rise , walk to the window , and , the maid be go , say emphatically and even tragically : 

 " you know what that mean . " 

 Cassandra have understand nothing . 

 " Aunt Celia be in the kitchen , " Katharine repeat . 

 " why in the kitchen ? " Cassandra ask , not unnaturally . 

 " probably because she be discover something , " Katharine reply . Cassandra 's thought fly to the subject of her preoccupation . 

 " about we ? " she inquire . 

 " Heaven know , " Katharine reply . " I shall not   let she stay in the kitchen , though . I shall bring she up here . " 

 the sternness with which this be say suggest that to bring Aunt Celia upstairs be , for some reason , a disciplinary measure . 

 " for goodness ' sake , Katharine , " Cassandra exclaim , jump from her chair and show sign of agitation , " do not   be rash . do not   let her suspect . remember , nothing be certain " 

 Katharine assure she by nod her head several time , but the manner in which she leave the room be not calculate to inspire complete confidence in her diplomacy . 

 Mrs. Milvain be sit , or rather perch , upon the edge of a chair in the servant ' room . whether there be any sound reason for her choice of a subterranean chamber , or whether it correspond with the spirit of her quest , Mrs. Milvain invariably come in by the back door and sit in the servant ' room when she be engage in confidential family transaction . the ostensible reason she give be that neither Mr. nor Mrs. Hilbery should be disturb . but , in truth , Mrs. Milvain depend even more than most elderly woman of her generation upon the delicious emotion of intimacy , agony , and secrecy , and the additional thrill provide by the basement be one not lightly to be forfeit . she protest almost plaintively when Katharine propose to go upstairs . 

 " I have   something that I want to say to you in private , " she say , hesitate reluctantly upon the threshold of her ambush . 

 " the drawing - room be empty " 

 " but we might meet your mother upon the stair . we might disturb your father , " Mrs. Milvain object , take the precaution to speak in a whisper already . 

 but as Katharine 's presence be absolutely necessary to the success of the interview , and as Katharine obstinately recede up the kitchen stair , Mrs. Milvain have no course but to follow she . she glance furtively about she as she proceed upstairs , draw her skirt together , and step with circumspection past all door , whether they be open or shut . 

 " nobody will overhear we ? " she murmur , when the comparative sanctuary of the drawing - room have be reach . " I see that I have interrupt you , " she add , glance at the flower strew upon the floor . a moment later she inquire , " be some one sit with you ? " notice a handkerchief that Cassandra have drop in her flight . 

 " Cassandra be help I to put the flower in water , " say Katharine , and she speak so firmly and clearly that Mrs. Milvain glance nervously at the main door and then at the curtain which divide the little room with the relic from the drawing - room . 

 " ah , Cassandra be still with you , " she remark . " and do William send you those lovely flower ? " 

 Katharine sit down opposite her aunt and say neither yes nor no . she look past she , and it might have be think that she be consider very critically the pattern of the curtain . another advantage of the basement , from Mrs. Milvain 's point of view , be that it make it necessary to sit very close together , and the light be dim compare with that which now pour through three window upon Katharine and the basket of flower , and give even the slight angular figure of Mrs. Milvain herself a halo of gold . 

 " they be from Stogdon House , " say Katharine abruptly , with a little jerk of her head . 

 Mrs. Milvain feel that it would be easy to tell her niece what she wish to say if they be actually in physical contact , for the spiritual distance between they be formidable . Katharine , however , make no overture , and Mrs. Milvain , who be possess of rash but heroic courage , plunge without preface : 

 " People be talk about you , Katharine . that be why I have come this morning . you forgive I for say what I would much rather not say ? what I say be only for your own sake , my child . " 

 " there be nothing to forgive yet , Aunt Celia , " say Katharine , with apparent good humor . 

 " People be say that William go everywhere with you and Cassandra , and that he be always pay her attention . at the Markhams ' dance he sit out five dance with she . at the zoo they be see alone together . they leave together . they never come back here till seven in the evening . but that be not all . they say his manner be very marked he be quite different when she be there . " 

 Mrs. Milvain , whose word have run themselves together , and whose voice have raise its tone almost to one of protest , here cease , and look intently at Katharine , as if to judge the effect of her communication . a slight rigidity have pass over Katharine 's face . her lip be press together ; her eye be contract , and they be still fix upon the curtain . these superficial change cover an extreme inner loathing such as might follow the display of some hideous or indecent spectacle . the indecent spectacle be her own action beheld for the first time from the outside ; her aunt 's word make she realize how infinitely repulsive the body of life be without its soul . 

 " well ? " she say at length . 

 Mrs. Milvain make a gesture as if to bring she close , but it be not return . 

 " we all know how good you be how unselfish how you sacrifice yourself to other . but you have   be too unselfish , Katharine . you have make Cassandra happy , and she have take advantage of your goodness . " 

 " I do not   understand , Aunt Celia , " say Katharine . " what have Cassandra do ? " 

 " Cassandra have behave in a way that I could not have think possible , " say Mrs. Milvain warmly . " she have be utterly selfish utterly heartless . I must speak to she before I go . " 

 " I do not   understand , " Katharine persist . 

 Mrs. Milvain look at she . be it possible that Katharine really doubt ? that there be something that Mrs. Milvain herself do not understand ? she brace herself , and pronounce the tremendous word : 

 " Cassandra have steal William 's love . " 

 still the word seem to have curiously little effect . 

 " do you mean , " say Katharine , " that he have fall in love with she ? " 

 " there be way of make man fall in love with one , Katharine . " 

 Katharine remain silent . the silence alarm Mrs. Milvain , and she begin hurriedly : 

 " nothing would have make I say these thing but your own good . I have not wish to interfere ; I have not wish to give you pain . I be a useless old woman . I have no child of my own . I only want to see you happy , Katharine . " 

 again she stretch forth her arm , but they remain empty . 

 " you be not go to say these thing to Cassandra , " say Katharine suddenly . " you have   say they to I ; that be enough . " 

 Katharine speak so low and with such restraint that Mrs. Milvain have to strain to catch her word , and when she hear they she be daze by they . 

 " I have   make you angry ! I know I should ! " she exclaim . she quiver , and a kind of sob shake she ; but even to have make Katharine angry be some relief , and allow she to feel some of the agreeable sensation of martyrdom . 

 " yes , " say Katharine , stand up , " I be so angry that I do not   want to say anything more . I think you would well go , Aunt Celia . we do not   understand each other . " 

 at these word Mrs. Milvain look for a moment terribly apprehensive ; she glance at her niece 's face , but read no pity there , whereupon she fold her hand upon a black velvet bag which she carry in an attitude that be almost one of prayer . whatever divinity she pray to , if pray she do , at any rate she recover her dignity in a singular way and face her niece . 

 " married love , " she say slowly and with emphasis upon every word , " be the most sacred of all love . the love of husband and wife be the most holy we know . that be the lesson Mamma 's child learn from she ; that be what they can never forget . I have try to speak as she would have wish her daughter to speak . you be her grandchild . " 

 Katharine seem to judge this defence upon its merit , and then to convict it of falsity . 

 " I do not   see that there be any excuse for your behavior , " she say . 

 at these word Mrs. Milvain rise and stand for a moment beside her niece . she have never meet with such treatment before , and she do not know with what weapon to break down the terrible wall of resistance offer she by one who , by virtue of youth and beauty and sex , should have be all tear and supplication . but Mrs. Milvain herself be obstinate ; upon a matter of this kind she could not admit that she be either beat or mistaken . she behold herself the champion of married love in its purity and supremacy ; what her niece stand for she be quite unable to say , but she be fill with the grave suspicion . the old woman and the young woman stand side by side in unbroken silence . Mrs. Milvain could not make up her mind to withdraw while her principle tremble in the balance and her curiosity remain unappeased . she ransack her mind for some question that should force Katharine to enlighten she , but the supply be limited , the choice difficult , and while she hesitate the door open and William Rodney come in . he carry in his hand an enormous and splendid bunch of white and purple flower , and , either not see Mrs. Milvain , or disregard she , he advance straight to Katharine , and present the flower with the word : 

 " these be for you , Katharine . " 

 Katharine take they with a glance that Mrs. Milvain do not fail to intercept . but with all her experience , she do not know what to make of it . she watch anxiously for further illumination . William greet she without obvious sign of guilt , and , explain that he have a holiday , both he and Katharine seem to take it for grant that his holiday should be celebrate with flower and spend in Cheyne Walk . a pause follow ; that , too , be natural ; and Mrs. Milvain begin to feel that she lay herself open to a charge of selfishness if she stay . the mere presence of a young man have alter her disposition curiously , and fill she with a desire for a scene which should end in an emotional forgiveness . she would have give much to clasp both nephew and niece in her arm . but she could not flatter herself that any hope of the customary exaltation remain . 

 " I must go , " she say , and she be conscious of an extreme flatness of spirit . 

 neither of they say anything to stop she . William politely escort she downstair , and somehow , amongst her protest and embarrassment , Mrs. Milvain forget to say good - bye to Katharine . she depart , murmur word about mass of flower and a drawing - room always beautiful even in the depth of winter . 

 William come back to Katharine ; he find she standing where he have leave she . 

 " I have   come to be forgive , " he say . " our quarrel be perfectly hateful to I . I have   not sleep all night . you be not angry with I , be you , Katharine ? " 

 she could not bring herself to answer he until she have rid her mind of the impression that her aunt have make on she . it seem to she that the very flower be contaminate , and Cassandra 's pocket - handkerchief , for Mrs. Milvain have use they for evidence in her investigation . 

 " she be be spy upon we , " she say , " follow we about London , overhear what people be say " 

 " Mrs. Milvain ? " Rodney exclaim . " what have she tell you ? " 

 his air of open confidence entirely vanish . 

 " oh , people be say that you be in love with Cassandra , and that you do not   care for I . " 

 " they have see we ? " he ask . 

 " everything we have   do for a fortnight have be see . " 

 " I tell you that would happen ! " he exclaim . 

 he walk to the window in evident perturbation . Katharine be too indignant to attend to he . she be sweep away by the force of her own anger . Clasping Rodney 's flower , she stand upright and motionless . 

 Rodney turn away from the window . 

 " it be all be a mistake , " he say . " I blame myself for it . I should have know well . I let you persuade I in a moment of madness . I beg you to forget my insanity , Katharine . " 

 " she wish even to persecute Cassandra ! " Katharine burst out , not listen to he . " she threaten to speak to she . she be capable of it she be capable of anything ! " 

 " Mrs. Milvain be not tactful , I know , but you exaggerate , Katharine . People be talk about we . she be right to tell we . it only confirm my own feeling the position be monstrous . " 

 at length Katharine realize some part of what he mean . 

 " you do not   mean that this influence you , William ? " she ask in amazement . 

 " it do , " he say , flush . " it be intensely disagreeable to I . I can not   endure that people should gossip about we . and then there be your cousin Cassandra " he pause in embarrassment . 

 " I come here this morning , Katharine , " he resume , with a change of voice , " to ask you to forget my folly , my bad temper , my inconceivable behavior . I come , Katharine , to ask whether we can not   return to the position we be in before this this season of lunacy . will you take I back , Katharine , once more and for ever ? " 

 no doubt her beauty , intensify by emotion and enhance by the flower of bright color and strange shape which she carry work upon Rodney , and have its share in bestow upon she the old romance . but a less noble passion work in he , too ; he be inflame by jealousy . his tentative offer of affection have be rudely and , as he think , completely repulse by Cassandra on the precede day . Denham 's confession be in his mind . and ultimately , Katharine 's dominion over he be of the sort that the fever of the night can not exorcise . 

 " I be as much to blame as you be yesterday , " she say gently , disregard his question . " I confess , William , the sight of you and Cassandra together make I jealous , and I could not   control myself . I laugh at you , I know . " 

 " you jealous ! " William exclaim . " I assure you , Katharine , you have   not the slight reason to be jealous . Cassandra dislike I , so far as she feel about I at all . I be foolish enough to try to explain the nature of our relationship . I could not   resist tell she what I suppose myself to feel for she . she refuse to listen , very rightly . but she leave I in no doubt of her scorn . " 

 Katharine hesitate . she be confused , agitated , physically tired , and have already to reckon with the violent feeling of dislike arouse by her aunt which still vibrate through all the rest of her feeling . she sink into a chair and drop her flower upon her lap . 

 " she charm I , " Rodney continue . " I think I love she . but that be a thing of the past . it be all over , Katharine . it be a dream an hallucination . we be both equally to blame , but no harm be do if you believe how truly I care for you . say you believe I ! " 

 he stand over she , as if in readiness to seize the first sign of her assent . precisely at that moment , owing , perhaps , to her vicissitude of feeling , all sense of love leave she , as in a moment a mist lift from the earth . and when the mist depart a skeleton world and blankness alone remain a terrible prospect for the eye of the living to behold . he see the look of terror in her face , and without understand its origin , take her hand in his . with the sense of companionship return a desire , like that of a child for shelter , to accept what he have to offer she and at that moment it seem that he offer she the only thing that could make it tolerable to live . she let he press his lip to her cheek , and leant her head upon his arm . it be the moment of his triumph . it be the only moment in which she belong to he and be dependent upon his protection . 

 " yes , yes , yes , " he murmur , " you accept I , Katharine . you love I . " 

 for a moment she remain silent . he then hear she murmur : 

 " Cassandra love you more than I do . " 

 " Cassandra ? " he whisper . 

 " she love you , " Katharine repeat . she raise herself and repeat the sentence yet a third time . " she love you . " 

 William slowly raise himself . he believe instinctively what Katharine say , but what it mean to he he be unable to understand . could Cassandra love he ? could she have tell Katharine that she love he ? the desire to know the truth of this be urgent , unknown though the consequence might be . the thrill of excitement associate with the thought of Cassandra once more take possession of he . no long be it the excitement of anticipation and ignorance ; it be the excitement of something great than a possibility , for now he know she and have measure of the sympathy between they . but who could give he certainty ? could Katharine , Katharine who have lately lain in his arm , Katharine herself the most admire of woman ? he look at she , with doubt , and with anxiety , but say nothing . 

 " yes , yes , " she say , interpret his wish for assurance , " it be true . I know what she feel for you . " 

 " she love I ? " 

 Katharine nod . 

 " ah , but who know what I feel ? how can I be sure of my feeling myself ? ten minute ago I ask you to marry I . I still wish it I do not   know what I wish " 

 he clench his hand and turn away . he suddenly face she and demand : " tell I what you feel for Denham . " 

 " for Ralph Denham ? " she ask . " yes ! " she exclaim , as if she have find the answer to some momentarily perplex question . " you be jealous of I , William ; but you be not in love with I . I be jealous of you . therefore , for both our sake , I say , speak to Cassandra at once . " 

 he try to compose himself . he walk up and down the room ; he pause at the window and survey the flower strew upon the floor . meanwhile his desire to have Katharine 's assurance confirm become so insistent that he could no long deny the overmaster strength of his feeling for Cassandra . 

 " you be right , " he exclaim , come to a standstill and rap his knuckle sharply upon a small table carry one slender vase . " I love Cassandra . " 

 as he say this , the curtain hang at the door of the little room part , and Cassandra herself step forth . 

 " I have overhear every word ! " she exclaim . 

 a pause succeed this announcement . Rodney make a step forward and say : 

 " then you know what I wish to ask you . give I your answer " 

 she put her hand before her face ; she turn away and seem to shrink from both of they . 

 " what Katharine say , " she murmur . " but , " she add , raise her head with a look of fear from the kiss with which he greet her admission , " how frightfully difficult it all be ! our feeling , I mean yours and mine and Katharine 's . Katharine , tell I , be we do right ? " 

 " right of course we be do right , " William answer she , " if , after what you have   hear , you can marry a man of such incomprehensible confusion , such deplorable " 

 " do not , William , " Katharine interpose ; " Cassandra have hear we ; she can judge what we be ; she know well than we could tell she . " 

 but , still hold William 's hand , question and desire well up in Cassandra 's heart . have she do wrong in listening ? why do Aunt Celia blame she ? do Katharine think she right ? above all , do William really love she , for ever and ever , well than any one ? 

 " I must be first with he , Katharine ! " she exclaim . " I can not   share he even with you . " 

 " I shall never ask that , " say Katharine . she move a little away from where they sit and begin half - consciously sort her flower . 

 " but you have   share with I , " Cassandra say . " why can not   I share with you ? why be I so mean ? I know why it be , " she add . " we understand each other , William and I. you have   never understand each other . you be too different . " 

 " I have   never admire anybody more , " William interpose . 

 " it be not that " Cassandra try to enlighten he " it be understanding . " 

 " have I never understand you , Katharine ? have I be very selfish ? " 

 " yes , " Cassandra interpose . " you have   ask she for sympathy , and she be not sympathetic ; you have   want she to be practical , and she be not practical . you have   be selfish ; you have   be exact and so have Katharine but it be not   anybody 's fault . " 

 Katharine have listen to this attempt at analysis with keen attention . Cassandra 's word seem to rub the old blurred image of life and freshen it so marvelously that it look new again . she turn to William . 

 " it be quite true , " she say . " it be nobody 's fault . " 

 " there be many thing that he will always come to you for , " Cassandra continue , still read from her invisible book . " I accept that , Katharine . I shall never dispute it . I want to be generous as you have   be generous . but be in love make it more difficult for I . " 

 they be silent . at length William break the silence . 

 " one thing I beg of you both , " he say , and the old nervousness of manner return as he glance at Katharine . " we will never discuss these matter again . it be not that I be timid and conventional , as you think , Katharine . it be that it spoil thing to discuss they ; it unsettle people 's mind ; and now we be all so happy " 

 Cassandra ratify this conclusion so far as she be concern , and William , after receive the exquisite pleasure of her glance , with its absolute affection and trust , look anxiously at Katharine . 

 " yes , I be happy , " she assure he . " and I agree . we will never talk about it again . " 

 " oh , Katharine , Katharine ! " Cassandra cry , hold out her arm while the tear run down her cheek . 





 CHAPTER XXX 

 the day be so different from other day to three people in the house that the common routine of household life the maid wait at table , Mrs. Hilbery write a letter , the clock striking , and the door opening , and all the other sign of long - establish civilization appear suddenly to have no meaning save as they lull Mr. and Mrs. Hilbery into the belief that nothing unusual have take place . it chance that Mrs. Hilbery be depressed without visible cause , unless a certain crudeness verging upon coarseness in the temper of her favorite Elizabethans could be hold responsible for the mood . at any rate , she have shut up " the Duchess of Malfi " with a sigh , and wish to know , so she tell Rodney at dinner , whether there be not   some young writer with a touch of the great spirit somebody who make you believe that life be BEAUTIFUL ? she get little help from Rodney , and after sing her plaintive requiem for the death of poetry by herself , she charm herself into good spirit again by remember the existence of Mozart . she beg Cassandra to play to she , and when they go upstairs Cassandra open the piano directly , and do she good to create an atmosphere of unmixed beauty . at the sound of the first note Katharine and Rodney both feel an enormous sense of relief at the license which the music give they to loosen their hold upon the mechanism of behavior . they lapse into the depth of thought . Mrs. Hilbery be soon spirit away into a perfectly congenial mood , that be half reverie and half slumber , half delicious melancholy and half pure bliss . Mr. Hilbery alone attend . he be extremely musical , and make Cassandra aware that he listen to every note . she play she good , and win his approval . lean slightly forward in his chair , and turn his little green stone , he weigh the intention of her phrase approvingly , but stop she suddenly to complain of a noise behind he . the window be unhaspe . he sign to Rodney , who cross the room immediately to put the matter right . he stay a moment long by the window than be , perhaps , necessary , and have do what be need , draw his chair a little close than before to Katharine 's side . the music go on . under cover of some exquisite run of melody , he leant towards she and whisper something . she glance at her father and mother , and a moment later leave the room , almost unobserved , with Rodney . 

 " what be it ? " she ask , as soon as the door be shut . 

 Rodney make no answer , but lead she downstair into the dining - room on the ground floor . even when he have shut the door he say nothing , but go straight to the window and part the curtain . he beckon to Katharine . 

 " there he be again , " he say . " look , there under the lamp - post . " 

 Katharine look . she have no idea what Rodney be talk about . a vague feeling of alarm and mystery possess she . she see a man stand on the opposite side of the road face the house beneath a lamp - post . as they look the figure turn , walk a few step , and come back again to his old position . it seem to she that he be look fixedly at she , and be conscious of her gaze on he . she know , in a flash , who the man be who be watch they . she draw the curtain abruptly . 

 " Denham , " say Rodney . " he be there last night too . " he speak sternly . his whole manner have become full of authority . Katharine feel almost as if he accuse she of some crime . she be pale and uncomfortably agitated , as much by the strangeness of Rodney 's behavior as by the sight of Ralph Denham . 

 " if he choose to come " she say defiantly . 

 " you can not   let he wait out there . I shall tell he to come in . " Rodney speak with such decision that when he raise his arm Katharine expect he to draw the curtain instantly . she catch his hand with a little exclamation . 

 " wait ! " she cry . " I do not   allow you . " 

 " you can not   wait , " he reply . " you have   go too far . " his hand remain upon the curtain . " why do not   you admit , Katharine , " he break out , look at she with an expression of contempt as well as of anger , " that you love he ? be you go to treat he as you treat I ? " 

 she look at he , wonder , in spite of all her perplexity , at the spirit that possess he . 

 " I forbid you to draw the curtain , " she say . 

 he reflect , and then take his hand away . 

 " I have   no right to interfere , " he conclude . " I will leave you . or , if you like , we will go back to the drawing - room . " 

 " no . I can not   go back , " she say , shake her head . she bend her head in thought . 

 " you love he , Katharine , " Rodney say suddenly . his tone have lose something of its sternness , and might have be use to urge a child to confess its fault . she raise her eye and fix they upon he . 

 " I love he ? " she repeat . he nod . she search his face , as if for further confirmation of his word , and , as he remain silent and expectant , turn away once more and continue her thought . he observe she closely , but without stir , as if he give her time to make up her mind to fulfil her obvious duty . the strain of Mozart reach they from the room above . 

 " now , " she say suddenly , with a sort of desperation , rise from her chair and seem to command Rodney to fulfil his part . he draw the curtain instantly , and she make no attempt to stop he . their eye at once seek the same spot beneath the lamp - post . 

 " he be not there ! " she exclaim . 

 no one be there . William throw the window up and look out . the wind rush into the room , together with the sound of distant wheel , footstep hurry along the pavement , and the cry of siren hoot down the river . 

 " Denham ! " William cry . 

 " Ralph ! " say Katharine , but she speak scarcely louder than she might have speak to some one in the same room . with their eye fix upon the opposite side of the road , they do not notice a figure close to the railing which divide the garden from the street . but Denham have cross the road and be stand there . they be startle by his voice close at hand . 

 " Rodney ! " 

 " there you be ! come in , Denham . " Rodney go to the front door and open it . " here he be , " he say , bring Ralph with he into the dining - room where Katharine stand , with she back to the open window . their eye meet for a second . Denham look half daze by the strong light , and , button in his overcoat , with his hair ruffle across his forehead by the wind , he seem like somebody rescue from an open boat out at sea . William promptly shut the window and draw the curtain . he act with a cheerful decision as if he be master of the situation , and know exactly what he mean to do . 

 " you be the first to hear the news , Denham , " he say . " Katharine be not   go to marry I , after all . " 

 " where shall I put " Ralph begin vaguely , hold out his hat and glance about he ; he balance it carefully against a silver bowl that stand upon the sideboard . he then sit himself down rather heavily at the head of the oval dinner - table . Rodney stand on one side of he and Katharine on the other . he appear to be preside over some meeting from which most of the member be absent . meanwhile , he wait , and his eye rest upon the glow of the beautifully polished mahogany table . 

 " William be engaged to Cassandra , " say Katharine briefly . 

 at that Denham look up quickly at Rodney . Rodney 's expression change . he lose his self - possession . he smile a little nervously , and then his attention seem to be catch by a fragment of melody from the floor above . he seem for a moment to forget the presence of the other . he glance towards the door . 

 " I congratulate you , " say Denham . 

 " yes , yes . we be all mad quite out of our mind , Denham , " he say . " it be partly Katharine 's do partly mine . " he look oddly round the room as if he wish to make sure that the scene in which he play a part have some real existence . " quite mad , " he repeat . " even Katharine " his gaze rest upon she finally , as if she , too , have change from his old view of she . he smile at she as if to encourage she . " Katharine shall explain , " he say , and give a little nod to Denham , he leave the room . 

 Katharine sit down at once , and leant her chin upon her hand . so long as Rodney be in the room the proceeding of the evening have seem to be in his charge , and have be mark by a certain unreality . now that she be alone with Ralph she feel at once that a constraint have be take from they both . she feel that they be alone at the bottom of the house , which rise , story upon story , upon the top of they . 

 " why be you wait out there ? " she ask . 

 " for the chance of see you , " he reply . 

 " you would have wait all night if it have not   be for William . it be windy too . you must have be cold . what could you see ? nothing but our window . " 

 " it be worth it . I hear you call I . " 

 " I call you ? " she have call unconsciously . 

 " they be engage this morning , " she tell he , after a pause . 

 " you be glad ? " he ask . 

 she bend her head . " yes , yes , " she sigh . " but you do not   know how good he be what he be do for I " Ralph make a sound of understanding . " you wait there last night too ? " she ask . 

 " yes . I can wait , " Denham reply . 

 the word seem to fill the room with an emotion which Katharine connect with the sound of distant wheel , the footstep hurry along the pavement , the cry of siren hoot down the river , the darkness and the wind . she see the upright figure stand beneath the lamp - post . 

 " wait in the dark , " she say , glance at the window , as if he see what she be see . " ah , but it be different " she break off . " I be not the person you think I . until you realize that it be impossible " 

 place her elbow on the table , she slide her ruby ring up and down her finger abstractedly . she frown at the row of leather - bind book opposite she . Ralph look keenly at she . very pale , but sternly concentrate upon her meaning , beautiful but so little aware of herself as to seem remote from he also , there be something distant and abstract about she which exalt he and chill he at the same time . 

 " no , you be right , " he say . " I do not   know you . I have   never know you . " 

 " yet perhaps you know I well than any one else , " she muse . 

 some detach instinct make she aware that she be gaze at a book which belong by right to some other part of the house . she walk over to the shelf , take it down , and return to her seat , place the book on the table between they . Ralph open it and look at the portrait of a man with a voluminous white shirt - collar , which form the frontispiece . 

 " I say I do know you , Katharine , " he affirm , shut the book . " it be only for moment that I go mad . " 

 " do you call two whole night a moment ? " 

 " I swear to you that now , at this instant , I see you precisely as you be . no one have ever know you as I know you .... could you have take down that book just now if I have not   know you ? " 

 " that be true , " she reply , " but you can not   think how I be divide how I be at my ease with you , and how I be bewildered . the unreality the dark the wait outside in the wind yes , when you look at I , not see I , and I do not   see you either .... but I do see , " she go on quickly , change her position and frown again , " heap of thing , only not you . " 

 " tell I what you see , " he urge . 

 but she could not reduce her vision to word , since it be no single shape color upon the dark , but rather a general excitement , an atmosphere , which , when she try to visualize it , take form as a wind scour the flank of northern hill and flash light upon cornfield and pool . 

 " impossible , " she sigh , laugh at the ridiculous notion of put any part of this into word . 

 " try , Katharine , " Ralph urge she . 

 " but I can not   I be talk a sort of nonsense the sort of nonsense one talk to oneself . " she be dismay by the expression of longing and despair upon his face . " I be think about a mountain in the North of England , " she attempt . " it be too silly I will not   go on . " 

 " we be there together ? " he press she . 

 " no . I be alone . " she seem to be disappoint the desire of a child . his face fall . 

 " you be always alone there ? " 

 " I can not   explain . " she could not explain that she be essentially alone there . " it be not a mountain in the North of England . it be an imagination a story one tell oneself . you have yours too ? " 

 " you be with I in mine . you be the thing I make up , you see . " 

 " oh , I see , " she sigh . " that be why it be so impossible . " she turn upon he almost fiercely . " you must try to stop it , " she say . 

 " I will not , " he reply roughly , " because I " he stop . he realize that the moment have come to impart that news of the utmost importance which he have try to impart to Mary Datchet , to Rodney upon the Embankment , to the drunken tramp upon the seat . how should he offer it to Katharine ? he look quickly at she . he see that she be only half attentive to he ; only a section of she be expose to he . the sight rouse in he such desperation that he have much ado to control his impulse to rise and leave the house . her hand lie loosely curl upon the table . he seize it and grasp it firmly as if to make sure of her existence and of his own . " because I love you , Katharine , " he say . 

 some roundness or warmth essential to that statement be absent from his voice , and she have merely to shake her head very slightly for he to drop her hand and turn away in shame at his own impotence . he think that she have detect his wish to leave she . she have discern the break in his resolution , the blankness in the heart of his vision . it be true that he have be happy out in the street , think of she , than now that he be in the same room with she . he look at she with a guilty expression on his face . but her look express neither disappointment nor reproach . her pose be easy , and she seem to give effect to a mood of quiet speculation by the spinning of her ruby ring upon the polished table . Denham forget his despair in wonder what thought now occupy she . 

 " you do not   believe I ? " he say . his tone be humble , and make her smile at he . 

 " as far as I understand you but what should you advise I to do with this ring ? " she ask , hold it out . 

 " I should advise you to let I keep it for you , " he reply , in the same tone of half - humorous gravity . 

 " after what you have   say , I can hardly trust you unless you will unsay what you have   say ? " 

 " very well . I be not in love with you . " 

 " but I think you be in love with I .... as I be with you , " she add casually enough . " at least , " she say slip her ring back to its old position , " what other word describe the state we be in ? " 

 she look at he gravely and inquiringly , as if in search of help . 

 " it be when I be with you that I doubt it , not when I be alone , " he state . 

 " so I think , " she reply . 

 in order to explain to she his state of mind , Ralph recount his experience with the photograph , the letter , and the flower pick at Kew . she listen very seriously . 

 " and then you go rave about the street , " she muse . " well , it be bad enough . but my state be bad than your , because it have not   anything to do with fact . it be an hallucination , pure and simple an intoxication .... one can be in love with pure reason ? " she hazard . " because if you be in love with a vision , I believe that that be what I be in love with . " 

 this conclusion seem fantastic and profoundly unsatisfactory to Ralph , but after the astonishing variation of his own sentiment during the past half - hour he could not accuse she of fanciful exaggeration . 

 " Rodney seem to know his own mind well enough , " he say almost bitterly . the music , which have cease , have now begin again , and the melody of Mozart seem to express the easy and exquisite love of the two upstairs . 

 " Cassandra never doubt for a moment . but we " she glance at he as if to ascertain his position , " we see each other only now and then " 

 " like light in a storm " 

 " in the midst of a hurricane , " she conclude , as the window shake beneath the pressure of the wind . they listen to the sound in silence . 

 here the door open with considerable hesitation , and Mrs. Hilbery 's head appear , at first with an air of caution , but have make sure that she have admit herself to the dining - room and not to some more unusual region , she come completely inside and seem in no way take aback by the sight she see . she seem , as usual , bind on some quest of her own which be interrupt pleasantly but strangely by run into one of those queer , unnecessary ceremony that other people think fit to indulge in . 

 " please do not   let I interrupt you , Mr. " she be at a loss , as usual , for the name , and Katharine think that she do not recognize he . " I hope you have   find something nice to read , " she add , point to the book upon the table . " Byron ah , Byron . I have   know people who know Lord Byron , " she say . 

 Katharine , who have rise in some confusion , could not help smile at the thought that her mother find it perfectly natural and desirable that her daughter should be read Byron in the dining - room late at night alone with a strange young man . she bless a disposition that be so convenient , and feel tenderly towards her mother and her mother 's eccentricity . but Ralph observe that although Mrs. Hilbery hold the book so close to her eye she be not read a word . 

 " my dear mother , why be not   you in bed ? " Katharine exclaim , change astonishingly in the space of a minute to her usual condition of authoritative good sense . " why be you wander about ? " 

 " I be sure I should like your poetry well than I like Lord Byron 's , " say Mrs. Hilbery , address Ralph Denham . 

 " Mr. Denham do not   write poetry ; he have write article for father , for the Review , " Katharine say , as if prompt her memory . 

 " oh dear ! how dull ! " Mrs. Hilbery exclaim , with a sudden laugh that rather puzzle her daughter . 

 Ralph find that she have turn upon he a gaze that be at once very vague and very penetrate . 

 " but I be sure you read poetry at night . I always judge by the expression of the eye , " Mrs. Hilbery continue .   " the window of the soul , " she add parenthetically .   " I do not   know much about the law , " she go on , " though many of my relation be lawyer . some of they look very handsome , too , in their wig . but I think I do know a little about poetry , " she add . " and all the thing that be not   write down , but but " she wave her hand , as if to indicate the wealth of unwritten poetry all about they . " the night and the star , the dawn come up , the barge swim past , the sun set .... ah dear , " she sigh , " well , the sunset be very lovely too . I sometimes think that poetry be not   so much what we write as what we feel , Mr. Denham . " 

 during this speech of her mother 's Katharine have turn away , and Ralph feel that Mrs. Hilbery be talk to he apart , with a desire to ascertain something about he which she veil purposely by the vagueness of her word . he feel curiously encourage and hearten by the beam in her eye rather than by her actual word . from the distance of her age and sex she seem to be wave to he , hail he as a ship sink beneath the horizon might wave its flag of greeting to another set out upon the same voyage . he bend his head , say nothing , but with a curious certainty that she have read an answer to her inquiry that satisfy she . at any rate , she ramble off into a description of the Law Courts which turn to a denunciation of English justice , which , accord to she , imprison poor man who could not   pay their debt . " tell I , shall we ever do without it all ? " she ask , but at this point Katharine gently insist that her mother should go to bed . look back from half - way up the staircase , Katharine seem to see Denham 's eye watch she steadily and intently with an expression that she have guess in they when he stand look at the window across the road . 





 CHAPTER XXXI 

 the tray which bring Katharine 's cup of tea the next morning bring , also , a note from her mother , announce that it be her intention to catch an early train to Stratford - on - avon that very day . 

 " please find out the good way of get there , " the note run , " and wire to dear Sir John Burdett to expect I , with my love . I have   be dream all night of you and Shakespeare , dear Katharine . " 

 this be no momentary impulse . Mrs. Hilbery have be dream of Shakespeare any time these six month , toy with the idea of an excursion to what she consider the heart of the civilized world . to stand six foot above Shakespeare 's bone , to see the very stone wear by his foot , to reflect that the old man 's old mother have very likely see Shakespeare 's daughter such thought rouse an emotion in she , which she express at unsuitable moment , and with a passion that would not have be unseemly in a pilgrim to a sacred shrine . the only strange thing be that she wish to go by herself . but , naturally enough , she be well provide with friend who live in the neighborhood of Shakespeare 's tomb , and be delighted to welcome she ; and she leave later to catch her train in the good of spirit . there be a man sell violet in the street . it be a fine day . she would remember to send Mr. Hilbery the first daffodil she see . and , as she run back into the hall to tell Katharine , she feel , she have always feel , that Shakespeare 's command to leave his bone undisturbe apply only to odious curiosity - monger not to dear Sir John and herself . leave her daughter to cogitate the theory of Anne Hathaway 's sonnet , and the bury manuscript here refer to , with the imply menace to the safety of the heart of civilization itself , she briskly shut the door of her taxi - cab , and be whirl off upon the first stage of her pilgrimage . 

 the house be oddly different without she . Katharine find the maid already in possession of her room , which they mean to clean thoroughly during her absence . to Katharine it seem as if they have brush away sixty year or so with the first flick of their damp duster . it seem to she that the work she have try to do in that room be be sweep into a very insignificant heap of dust . the china shepherdess be already shin from a bath of hot water . the writing - table might have belong to a professional man of methodical habit . 

 gather together a few paper upon which she be at work , Katharine proceed to her own room with the intention of look through they , perhaps , in the course of the morning . but she be meet on the stair by Cassandra , who follow she up , but with such interval between each step that Katharine begin to feel her purpose dwindle before they have reach the door . Cassandra leant over the banister , and look down upon the persian rug that lie on the floor of the hall . 

 " do not   everything look odd this morning ? " she inquire . " be you really go to spend the morning with those dull old letter , because if so " 

 the dull old letter , which would have turn the head of the most sober of collector , be lay upon a table , and , after a moment 's pause , Cassandra , look grave all of a sudden , ask Katharine where she should find the " history of England " by Lord Macaulay . it be downstairs in Mr. Hilbery 's study . the cousin descend together in search of it . they diverge into the drawing - room for the good reason that the door be open . the portrait of Richard Alardyce attract their attention . 

 " I wonder what he be like ? " it be a question that Katharine have often ask herself lately . 

 " oh , a fraud like the rest of they at least Henry say so , " Cassandra reply . " though I do not   believe everything Henry say , " she add a little defensively . 

 down they go into Mr. Hilbery 's study , where they begin to look among his book . so desultory be this examination that some fifteen minute fail to discover the work they be in search of . 

 " must you read Macaulay 's history , Cassandra ? " Katharine ask , with a stretch of her arm . 

 " I must , " Cassandra reply briefly . 

 " well , I be go to leave you to look for it by yourself . " 

 " oh , no , Katharine . please stay and help I . you see you see I tell William I would read a little every day . and I want to tell he that I have   begin when he come . " 

 " when do William come ? " Katharine ask , turn to the shelf again . 

 " to tea , if that suit you ? " 

 " if it suit I to be out , I suppose you mean . " 

 " oh , you be horrid .... why should not   you ? " 

 " yes ? " 

 " why should not   you be happy too ? " 

 " I be quite happy , " Katharine reply . 

 " I mean as I be . Katharine , " she say impulsively , " do let us be marry on the same day . " 

 " to the same man ? " 

 " oh , no , no . but why should not   you marry some one else ? " 

 " here be your macaulay , " say Katharine , turn round with the book in her hand . " I should say you would well begin to read at once if you mean to be educate by tea - time . " 

 " Damn Lord Macaulay ! " cry Cassandra , slap the book upon the table . " would you rather not talk ? " 

 " we have   talk enough already , " Katharine reply evasively . 

 " I know I shall not   be able to settle to Macaulay , " say Cassandra , look ruefully at the dull red cover of the prescribed volume , which , however , possess a talismanic property , since William admire it . he have advise a little serious reading for the morning hour . 

 " have you read Macaulay ? " she ask . 

 " no . William never try to educate I . " as she speak she see the light fade from Cassandra 's face , as if she have imply some other , more mysterious , relationship . she be sting with compunction . she marvel at her own rashness in have influence the life of another , as she have influence Cassandra 's life . 

 " we be not   serious , " she say quickly . 

 " but I be fearfully serious , " say Cassandra , with a little shudder , and her look show that she speak the truth . she turn and glance at Katharine as she have never glance at she before . there be fear in her glance , which dart on she and then drop guiltily . oh , Katharine have everything beauty , mind , character . she could never compete with Katharine ; she could never be safe so long as Katharine brood over she , dominate she , dispose of she . she call she cold , unseeing , unscrupulous , but the only sign she give outwardly be a curious one she reach out her hand and grasp the volume of history . at that moment the bell of the telephone rang and Katharine go to answer it . Cassandra , release from observation , drop her book and clench her hand . she suffer more fiery torture in those few minute than she have suffer in the whole of her life ; she learn more of her capacity for feel . but when Katharine reappear she be calm , and have gain a look of dignity that be new to she . 

 " be that he ? " she ask . 

 " it be Ralph Denham , " Katharine reply . 

 " I mean Ralph Denham . " 

 " why do you mean Ralph Denham ? what have William tell you about Ralph Denham ? " the accusation that Katharine be calm , callous , and indifferent be not possible in face of her present air of animation . she give Cassandra no time to frame an answer . " now , when be you and William go to be marry ? " she ask . 

 Cassandra make no reply for some moment . it be , indeed , a very difficult question to answer . in conversation the night before , William have indicate to Cassandra that , in his belief , Katharine be become engage to Ralph Denham in the dining - room . Cassandra , in the rosy light of her own circumstance , have be dispose to think that the matter must be settle already . but a letter which she have receive that morning from William , while ardent in its expression of affection , have convey to she obliquely that he would prefer the announcement of their engagement to coincide with that of Katharine 's . this document Cassandra now produce , and read aloud , with considerable excision and much hesitation . 

 " ... a thousand pity ahem I fear we shall cause a great deal of natural annoyance . if , on the other hand , what I have reason to think will happen , should happen within reasonable time , and the present position be not in any way offensive to you , delay would , in my opinion , serve all our interest well than a premature explanation , which be bind to cause more surprise than be desirable " 

 " very like William , " Katharine exclaim , have gather the drift of these remark with a speed that , by itself , disconcert Cassandra . 

 " I quite understand his feeling , " Cassandra reply . " I quite agree with they . I think it would be much well , if you intend to marry Mr. Denham , that we should wait as William say . " 

 " but , then , if I do not   marry he for month or , perhaps , not at all ? " 

 Cassandra be silent . the prospect appal she . Katharine have be telephone to Ralph Denham ; she look queer , too ; she must be , or about to become , engage to he . but if Cassandra could have overhear the conversation upon the telephone , she would not have feel so certain that it tend in that direction . it be to this effect : 

 " I be Ralph Denham speak . I be in my right sens now . " 

 " how long do you wait outside the house ? " 

 " I go home and write you a letter . I tear it up . " 

 " I shall tear up everything too . " 

 " I shall come . " 

 " yes . come to - day . " 

 " I must explain to you " 

 " yes . we must explain " 

 a long pause follow . Ralph begin a sentence , which he cancel with the word , " nothing . " suddenly , together , at the same moment , they say good - bye . and yet , if the telephone have be miraculously connect with some high atmosphere pungent with the scent of thyme and the savor of salt , Katharine could hardly have breathe in a keener sense of exhilaration . she run downstairs on the crest of it . she be amazed to find herself already commit by William and Cassandra to marry the owner of the halting voice she have just hear on the telephone . the tendency of her spirit seem to be in an altogether different direction ; and of a different nature . she have only to look at Cassandra to see what the love that result in an engagement and marriage mean . she consider for a moment , and then say : " if you do not   want to tell people yourself , I will do it for you . I know William have feeling about these matter that make it very difficult for he to do anything . " 

 " because he be fearfully sensitive about other people 's feeling , " say Cassandra . " the idea that he could upset Aunt Maggie or Uncle Trevor would make he ill for week . " 

 this interpretation of what she be use to call William 's conventionality be new to Katharine . and yet she feel it now to be the true one . 

 " yes , you be right , " she say . 

 " and then he worship beauty . he want life to be beautiful in every part of it . have you ever notice how exquisitely he finish everything ? look at the address on that envelope . every letter be perfect . " 

 whether this apply also to the sentiment express in the letter , Katharine be not so sure ; but when William 's solicitude be spend upon Cassandra it not only fail to irritate she , as it have do when she be the object of it , but appear , as Cassandra say , the fruit of his love of beauty . 

 " yes , " she say , " he love beauty . " 

 " I hope we shall have a great many child , " say Cassandra . " he love child . " 

 this remark make Katharine realize the depth of their intimacy well than any other word could have do ; she be jealous for one moment ; but the next she be humiliate . she have know William for year , and she have never once guess that he love child . she look at the queer glow of exaltation in Cassandra 's eye , through which she be behold the true spirit of a human being , and wish that she would go on talk about William for ever . Cassandra be not unwilling to gratify she . she talk on . the morning slip away . Katharine scarcely change her position on the edge of her father 's writing - table , and Cassandra never open the " history of England . " 

 and yet it must be confess that there be vast lapse in the attention which Katharine bestow upon her cousin . the atmosphere be wonderfully congenial for thought of her own . she lose herself sometimes in such deep reverie that Cassandra , pausing , could look at she for moment unperceive . what could Katharine be think about , unless it be Ralph Denham ? she be satisfied , by certain random reply , that Katharine have wander a little from the subject of William 's perfection . but Katharine make no sign . she always end these pause by say something so natural that Cassandra be delude into give fresh example of her absorb theme . then they lunch , and the only sign that Katharine give of abstraction be to forget to help the pudding . she look so like her mother , as she sit there oblivious of the tapioca , that Cassandra be startle into exclaim : 

 " how like Aunt Maggie you look ! " 

 " nonsense , " say Katharine , with more irritation than the remark seem to call for . 

 in truth , now that her mother be away , Katharine do feel less sensible than usual , but as she argue it to herself , there be much less need for sense . secretly , she be a little shake by the evidence which the morning have supply of her immense capacity for what could one call it ? ramble over an infinite variety of thought that be too foolish to be name . she be , for example , walk down a road in Northumberland in the August sunset ; at the inn she leave her companion , who be Ralph Denham , and be transport , not so much by her own foot as by some invisible mean , to the top of a high hill . here the scent , the sound among the dry heather - root , the grass - blade press upon the palm of her hand , be all so perceptible that she could experience each one separately . after this her mind make excursion into the dark of the air , or settle upon the surface of the sea , which could be discover over there , or with equal unreason it return to its couch of bracken beneath the star of midnight , and visit the snow valley of the moon . these fancy would have be in no way strange , since the wall of every mind be decorate with some such tracery , but she find herself suddenly pursue such thought with an extreme ardor , which become a desire to change her actual condition for something match the condition of her dream . then she start ; then she awake to the fact that Cassandra be look at she in amazement . 

 Cassandra would have like to feel certain that , when Katharine make no reply at all or one wide of the mark , she be make up her mind to get marry at once , but it be difficult , if this be so , to account for some remark that Katharine let fall about the future . she recur several time to the summer , as if she mean to spend that season in solitary wandering . she seem to have a plan in her mind which require Bradshaws and the name of inn . 

 Cassandra be drive finally , by her own unrest , to put on her clothe and wander out along the street of Chelsea , on the pretence that she must buy something . but , in her ignorance of the way , she become panic - stricken at the thought of be late , and no soon have she find the shop she want , than she flee back again in order to be at home when William come . he come , indeed , five minute after she have sit down by the tea - table , and she have the happiness of receive he alone . his greeting put her doubt of his affection at rest , but the first question he ask be : 

 " have Katharine speak to you ? " 

 " yes . but she say she be not engage . she do not   seem to think she be ever go to be engage . " 

 William frown , and look annoyed . 

 " they telephone this morning , and she behave very oddly . she forget to help the pudding , " Cassandra add by way of cheer he . 

 " my dear child , after what I see and hear last night , it be not a question of guess or suspecting . either she be engaged to he or " 

 he leave his sentence unfinishe , for at this point Katharine herself appear . with his recollection of the scene the night before , he be too self - conscious even to look at she , and it be not until she tell he of her mother 's visit to Stratford - on - Avon that he raise his eye . it be clear that he be greatly relieve . he look round he now , as if he feel at his ease , and Cassandra exclaim : 

 " do not   you think everything look quite different ? " 

 " you have   move the sofa ? " he ask . 

 " no . nothing be be touch , " say Katharine . " everything be exactly the same . " but as she say this , with a decision which seem to make it imply that more than the sofa be unchanged , she hold out a cup into which she have forget to pour any tea . be tell of her forgetfulness , she frown with annoyance , and say that Cassandra be demoralize she . the glance she cast upon they , and the resolute way in which she plunge they into speech , make William and Cassandra feel like child who have be catch pry . they follow she obediently , make conversation . any one come in might have judge they acquaintance meet , perhaps , for the third time . if that be so , one must have conclude that the hostess suddenly bethink she of an engagement press for fulfilment . first Katharine look at her watch , and then she ask William to tell she the right time . when tell that it be ten minute to five she rise at once , and say : 

 " then I be afraid I must go . " 

 she leave the room , hold her unfinished bread and butter in her hand . William glance at Cassandra . 

 " well , she be queer ! " Cassandra exclaim . 

 William look perturb . he know more of Katharine than Cassandra do , but even he could not tell . in a second Katharine be back again dress in outdoor thing , still hold her bread and butter in her bare hand . 

 " if I be late , do not   wait for I , " she say . " I shall have din , " and so say , she leave they . 

 " but she can not   " William exclaim , as the door shut , " not without any glove and bread and butter in her hand ! " they run to the window , and see she walk rapidly along the street towards the City . then she vanish . 

 " she must have go to meet Mr. Denham , " Cassandra exclaim . 

 " goodness know ! " William interject . 

 the incident impress they both as have something queer and ominous about it out of all proportion to its surface strangeness . 

 " it be the sort of way Aunt Maggie behave , " say Cassandra , as if in explanation . 

 William shake his head , and pace up and down the room look extremely perturb . 

 " this be what I have   be foretell , " he burst out . " once set the ordinary convention aside Thank Heaven Mrs. Hilbery be away . but there be Mr. Hilbery . how be we to explain it to he ? I shall have to leave you . " 

 " but Uncle Trevor will not   be back for hour , William ! " Cassandra implore . 

 " you never can tell . he may be on his way already . or suppose Mrs. Milvain your Aunt Celia or Mrs. Cosham , or any other of your aunt or uncle should be show in and find we alone together . you know what they be say about we already . " 

 Cassandra be equally stricken by the sight of William 's agitation , and appal by the prospect of his desertion . 

 " we might hide , " she exclaim wildly , glance at the curtain which separate the room with the relic . 

 " I refuse entirely to get under the table , " say William sarcastically . 

 she see that he be lose his temper with the difficulty of the situation . her instinct tell she that an appeal to his affection , at this moment , would be extremely ill - judged . she control herself , sit down , pour out a fresh cup of tea , and sip it quietly . this natural action , argue complete self - mastery , and show she in one of those feminine attitude which William find adorable , do more than any argument to compose his agitation . it appeal to his chivalry . he accept a cup . next she ask for a slice of cake . by the time the cake be eat and the tea drunk the personal question have lapse , and they be discuss poetry . insensibly they turn from the question of dramatic poetry in general , to the particular example which repose in William 's pocket , and when the maid come in to clear away the tea - thing , William have ask permission to read a short passage aloud , " unless it bore she ? " 

 Cassandra bend her head in silence , but she show a little of what she feel in her eye , and thus fortify , William feel confident that it would take more than Mrs. Milvain herself to rout he from his position . he read aloud . 

 meanwhile Katharine walk rapidly along the street . if call upon to explain her impulsive action in leave the tea - table , she could have trace it to no well cause than that William have glance at Cassandra ; Cassandra at William . yet , because they have glance , her position be impossible . if one forget to pour out a cup of tea they rush to the conclusion that she be engaged to Ralph Denham . she know that in half an hour or so the door would open , and Ralph Denham would appear . she could not sit there and contemplate see he with William 's and Cassandra 's eye upon they , judge their exact degree of intimacy , so that they might fix the wedding - day . she promptly decide that she would meet Ralph out of door ; she still have time to reach Lincoln 's Inn Fields before he leave his office . she hail a cab , and bade it take she to a shop for sell map which she remember in Great Queen Street , since she hardly like to be set down at his door . arrive at the shop , she buy a large scale map of Norfolk , and thus provide , hurry into Lincoln 's Inn Fields , and assure herself of the position of Messrs. Hoper and Grateley 's office . the great gas chandelier be alight in the office window . she conceive that he sit at an enormous table laden with paper beneath one of they in the front room with the three tall window . have settle his position there , she begin walk to and fro upon the pavement . nobody of his build appear . she scrutinize each male figure as it approach and pass she . each male figure have , nevertheless , a look of he , due , perhaps , to the professional dress , the quick step , the keen glance which they cast upon she as they hasten home after the day 's work . the square itself , with its immense house all so fully occupy and stern of aspect , its atmosphere of industry and power , as if even the sparrow and the child be earn their daily bread , as if the sky itself , with its gray and scarlet cloud , reflect the serious intention of the city beneath it , speak of he . here be the fit place for their meeting , she think ; here be the fit place for she to walk thinking of he . she could not help compare it with the domestic street of Chelsea . with this comparison in her mind , she extend her range a little , and turn into the main road . the great torrent of van and cart be sweep down Kingsway ; pedestrian be stream in two current along the pavement . she stand fascinated at the corner . the deep roar fill her ear ; the change tumult have the inexpressible fascination of varied life pour ceaselessly with a purpose which , as she look , seem to she , somehow , the normal purpose for which life be frame ; its complete indifference to the individual , whom it swallow up and roll onwards , fill she with at least a temporary exaltation . the blend of daylight and of lamplight make she an invisible spectator , just as it give the people who pass she a semi - transparent quality , and leave the face pale ivory oval in which the eye alone be dark . they tend the enormous rush of the current the great flow , the deep stream , the unquenchable tide . she stand unobserved and absorb , glory openly in the rapture that have run subterraneously all day . suddenly she be clutch , unwilling , from the outside , by the recollection of her purpose in come there . she have come to find Ralph Denham . she hastily turn back into Lincoln 's Inn Fields , and look for her landmark the light in the three tall window . she seek in vain . the face of the house have now merge in the general darkness , and she have difficulty in determine which she seek . Ralph 's three window give back on their ghostly glass panel only a reflection of the gray and greenish sky . she ring the bell , peremptorily , under the paint name of the firm . after some delay she be answer by a caretaker , whose pail and brush of themselves tell she that the work day be over and the worker go . nobody , save perhaps Mr. Grateley himself , be leave , she assure Katharine ; every one else have be go these ten minute . 

 the news wake Katharine completely . anxiety gain upon she . she hasten back into Kingsway , look at people who have miraculously regain their solidity . she run as far as the Tube station , overhaul clerk after clerk , solicitor after solicitor . not one of they even faintly resemble Ralph Denham . More and more plainly do she see he ; and more and more do he seem to she unlike any one else . at the door of the station she pause , and try to collect her thought . he have go to her house . by take a cab she could be there probably in advance of he . but she picture herself open the drawing - room door , and William and Cassandra look up , and Ralph 's entrance a moment later , and the glance the insinuation . no ; she could not face it . she would write he a letter and take it at once to his house . she buy paper and pencil at the bookstall , and enter an A.B.C. shop , where , by order a cup of coffee , she secure an empty table , and begin at vice to write : 

 " I come to meet you and I have miss you . I could not face William and Cassandra . they want we " here she pause . " they insist that we be engage , " she substitute , " and we could not   talk at all , or explain anything . I want " her want be so vast , now that she be in communication with Ralph , that the pencil be utterly inadequate to conduct they on to the paper ; it seem as if the whole torrent of Kingsway have to run down her pencil . she gaze intently at a notice hang on the gold - encrust wall opposite , " ... to say all kind of thing , " she add , write each word with the painstaking of a child . but , when she raise her eye again to meditate the next sentence , she be aware of a waitress , whose expression intimate that it be closing time , and , look round , Katharine see herself almost the last person leave in the shop . she take up her letter , pay her bill , and find herself once more in the street . she would now take a cab to Highgate . but at that moment it flash upon she that she could not remember the address . this check seem to let fall a barrier across a very powerful current of desire . she ransack her memory in desperation , hunt for the name , first by remember the look of the house , and then by try , in memory , to retrace the word she have write once , at least , upon an envelope . the more she press the far the word recede . be the house an Orchard Something , on the street a Hill ? she give it up . never , since she be a child , have she feel anything like this blankness and desolation . there rush in upon she , as if she be wake from some dream , all the consequence of her inexplicable indolence . she figure Ralph 's face as he turn from her door without a word of explanation , receive his dismissal as a blow from herself , a callous intimation that she do not wish to see he . she follow his departure from her door ; but it be far more easy to see he march far and fast in any direction for any length of time than to conceive that he would turn back to Highgate . perhaps he would try once more to see she in Cheyne Walk ? it be proof of the clearness with which she see he , that she start forward as this possibility occur to she , and almost raise her hand to beckon to a cab . no ; he be too proud to come again ; he reject the desire and walk on and on , on and on if only she could read the name of those visionary street down which he pass ! but her imagination betray she at this point , or mock she with a sense of their strangeness , darkness , and distance . indeed , instead of help herself to any decision , she only fill her mind with the vast extent of London and the impossibility of find any single figure that wander off this way and that way , turn to the right and to the left , choose that dingy little back street where the child be play in the road , and so she rouse herself impatiently . she walk rapidly along Holborn . soon she turn and walk as rapidly in the other direction . this indecision be not merely odious , but have something that alarm she about it , as she have be alarm slightly once or twice already that day ; she feel unable to cope with the strength of her own desire . to a person control by habit , there be humiliation as well as alarm in this sudden release of what appear to be a very powerful as well as an unreasonable force . an aching in the muscle of her right hand now show she that she be crush her glove and the map of Norfolk in a grip sufficient to crack a more solid object . she relax her grasp ; she look anxiously at the face of the passer - by to see whether their eye rest on she for a moment long than be natural , or with any curiosity . but have smooth out her glove , and do what she could to look as usual , she forget spectator , and be once more give up to her desperate desire to find Ralph Denham . it be a desire now wild , irrational , unexplained , resemble something feel in childhood . once more she blame herself bitterly for her carelessness . but find herself opposite the Tube station , she pull herself up and take counsel swiftly , as of old . it flash upon she that she would go at once to Mary Datchet , and ask she to give she Ralph 's address . the decision be a relief , not only in give she a goal , but in provide she with a rational excuse for her own action . it give she a goal certainly , but the fact of have a goal lead she to dwell exclusively upon her obsession ; so that when she ring the bell of Mary 's flat , she do not for a moment consider how this demand would strike Mary . to her extreme annoyance Mary be not at home ; a charwoman open the door . all Katharine could do be to accept the invitation to wait . she wait for , perhaps , fifteen minute , and spend they in pacing from one end of the room to the other without intermission . when she hear Mary 's key in the door she pause in front of the fireplace , and Mary find her stand upright , look at once expectant and determine , like a person who have come on an errand of such importance that it must be broach without preface . 

 Mary exclaim in surprise . 

 " yes , yes , " Katharine say , brush these remark aside , as if they be in the way . 

 " have you have tea ? " 

 " oh yes , " she say , think that she have have tea hundred of year ago , somewhere or other . 

 Mary pause , take off her glove , and , find match , proceed to light the fire . 

 Katharine check she with an impatient movement , and say : 

 " do not   light the fire for I .... I want to know Ralph Denham 's address . " 

 she be hold a pencil and prepare to write on the envelope . she wait with an imperious expression . 

 " the Apple Orchard , Mount Ararat Road , Highgate , " Mary say , speak slowly and rather strangely . 

 " oh , I remember now ! " Katharine exclaim , with irritation at her own stupidity . " I suppose it would not   take twenty minute to drive there ? " she gather up her purse and glove and seem about to go . 

 " but you will not   find he , " say Mary , pause with a match in her hand . Katharine , who have already turn towards the door , stop and look at she . 

 " why ? where be he ? " she ask . 

 " he will not   have leave his office . " 

 " but he have leave the office , " she reply . " the only question be will he have reach home yet ? he go to see I at Chelsea ; I try to meet he and miss he . he will have find no message to explain . so I must find he as soon as possible . " 

 Mary take in the situation at her leisure . 

 " but why not telephone ? " she say . 

 Katharine immediately drop all that she be hold ; her strained expression relaxed , and exclaim , " of course ! why do not   I think of that ! " she seize the telephone receiver and give her number . Mary look at she steadily , and then leave the room . at length Katharine hear , through all the superimpose weight of London , the mysterious sound of foot in her own house mount to the little room , where she could almost see the picture and the book ; she listen with extreme intentness to the preparatory vibration , and then establish her identity . 

 " have Mr. Denham call ? " 

 " yes , miss . " 

 " do he ask for I ? " 

 " yes . we say you be out , miss . " 

 " do he leave any message ? " 

 " no . he go away . about twenty minute ago , miss . " 

 Katharine hang up the receiver . she walk the length of the room in such acute disappointment that she do not at first perceive Mary 's absence . then she call in a harsh and peremptory tone : 

 " Mary . " 

 Mary be take off her outdoor thing in the bedroom . she hear Katharine call she . " yes , " she say , " I shall not   be a moment . " but the moment prolong itself , as if for some reason Mary find satisfaction in make herself not only tidy , but seemly and ornament . a stage in her life have be accomplish in the last month which leave its trace for ever upon her bearing . Youth , and the bloom of youth , have recede , leave the purpose of her face to show itself in the hollower cheek , the firm lip , the eye no long spontaneously observe at random , but narrow upon an end which be not near at hand . this woman be now a serviceable human being , mistress of her own destiny , and thus , by some combination of idea , fit to be adorn with the dignity of silver chain and glow brooch . she come in at her leisure and ask : " well , do you get an answer ? " 

 " he have leave Chelsea already , " Katharine reply . 

 " still , he will not   be home yet , " say Mary . 

 Katharine be once more irresistibly draw to gaze upon an imaginary map of London , to follow the twist and turn of unnamed street . 

 " I will ring up his home and ask whether he be back . " Mary cross to the telephone and , after a series of brief remark , announce : 

 " no . his sister say he have not   come back yet . " 

 " ah ! " she apply her ear to the telephone once more . " they have   have a message . he will not   be back to dinner . " 

 " then what be he go to do ? " 

 very pale , and with her large eye fix not so much upon Mary as upon vista of unresponde blankness , Katharine address herself also not so much to Mary as to the unrelenting spirit which now appear to mock she from every quarter of her survey . 

 after wait a little time Mary remark indifferently : 

 " I really do not   know . " slackly lie back in her armchair , she watch the little flame begin to creep among the coal indifferently , as if they , too , be very distant and indifferent . 

 Katharine look at she indignantly and rise . 

 " possibly he may come here , " Mary continue , without alter the abstract tone of her voice . " it would be worth your while to wait if you want to see he to - night . " she bent forward and touch the wood , so that the flame slip in between the interstice of the coal . 

 Katharine reflect . " I will wait half an hour , " she say . 

 Mary rise , go to the table , spread out her paper under the green - shaded lamp and , with an action that be become a habit , twist a lock of hair round and round in her finger . once she look unperceived at her visitor , who never move , who sit so still , with eye so intent , that you could almost fancy that she be watch something , some face that never look up at she . Mary find herself unable to go on writing . she turn her eye away , but only to be aware of the presence of what Katharine look at . there be ghost in the room , and one , strangely and sadly , be the ghost of herself . the minute go by . 

 " what would be the time now ? " say Katharine at last . the half - hour be not quite spend . 

 " I be go to get dinner ready , " say Mary , rise from her table . 

 " then I will go , " say Katharine . 

 " why do not   you stay ? where be you go ? " 

 Katharine look round the room , convey her uncertainty in her glance . 

 " perhaps I might find he , " she muse . 

 " but why should it matter ? you will see he another day . " 

 Mary speak , and intend to speak , cruelly enough . 

 " I be wrong to come here , " Katharine reply . 

 their eye meet with antagonism , and neither flinch . 

 " you have a perfect right to come here , " Mary answer . 

 a loud knock at the door interrupt they . Mary go to open it , and return with some note or parcel , Katharine look away so that Mary might not read her disappointment . 

 " of course you have a right to come , " Mary repeat , lay the note upon the table . 

 " no , " say Katharine . " except that when one 's desperate one have a sort of right . I be desperate . how do I know what be happen to he now ? he may do anything . he may wander about the street all night . anything may happen to he . " 

 she speak with a self - abandonment that Mary have never see in she . 

 " you know you exaggerate ; you be talk nonsense , " she say roughly . 

 " Mary , I must talk I must tell you " 

 " you need not   tell I anything , " Mary interrupt she . " can not   I see for myself ? " 

 " no , no , " Katharine exclaim . " it be not that " 

 her look , pass beyond Mary , beyond the verge of the room and out beyond any word that come her way , wildly and passionately , convince Mary that she , at any rate , could not follow such a glance to its end . she be baffle ; she try to think herself back again into the height of her love for Ralph . press her finger upon her eyelid , she murmur : 

 " you forget that I love he too . I think I know he . I do know he . " 

 and yet , what have she know ? she could not remember it any more . she press her eyeball until they strike star and sun into her darkness . she convince herself that she be stir among ash . she desist . she be astonish at her discovery . she do not love Ralph any more . she look back daze into the room , and her eye rest upon the table with its lamp - light paper . the steady radiance seem for a second to have its counterpart within she ; she shut her eye ; she open they and look at the lamp again ; another love burn in the place of the old one , or so , in a momentary glance of amazement , she guess before the revelation be over and the old surrounding assert themselves . she leant in silence against the mantelpiece . 

 " there be different way of love , " she murmur , half to herself , at length . 

 Katharine make no reply and seem unaware of her word . she seem absorb in her own thought . 

 " perhaps he be wait in the street again to - night , " she exclaim . " I will go now . I might find he . " 

 " it be far more likely that he will come here , " say Mary , and Katharine , after consider for a moment , say : 

 " I will wait another half - hour . " 

 she sink down into her chair again , and take up the same position which Mary have compare to the position of one watch an unseeing face . she watch , indeed , not a face , but a procession , not of people , but of life itself : the good and bad ; the meaning ; the past , the present , and the future . all this seem apparent to she , and she be not ashamed of her extravagance so much as exalt to one of the pinnacle of existence , where it behove the world to do her homage . no one but she herself know what it mean to miss Ralph Denham on that particular night ; into this inadequate event crowd feeling that the great crisis of life might have fail to call forth . she have miss he , and know the bitterness of all failure ; she desire he , and know the torment of all passion . it do not matter what trivial accident lead to this culmination . nor do she care how extravagant she appear , nor how openly she show her feeling . 

 when the dinner be ready Mary tell she to come , and she come submissively , as if she let Mary direct her movement for she . they eat and drink together almost in silence , and when Mary tell she to eat more , she eat more ; when she be tell to drink wine , she drink it . nevertheless , beneath this superficial obedience , Mary know that she be follow her own thought unhindered . she be not inattentive so much as remote ; she look at once so unseeing and so intent upon some vision of her own that Mary gradually feel more than protective she become actually alarmed at the prospect of some collision between Katharine and the force of the outside world . directly they have do , Katharine announce her intention of go . 

 " but where be you go to ? " Mary ask , desire vaguely to hinder she . 

 " oh , I be go home no , to Highgate perhaps . " 

 Mary see that it would be useless to try to stop she . all she could do be to insist upon come too , but she meet with no opposition ; Katharine seem indifferent to her presence . in a few minute they be walk along the Strand . they walk so rapidly that Mary be delude into the belief that Katharine know where she be go . she herself be not attentive . she be glad of the movement along lamp - light street in the open air . she be finger , painfully and with fear , yet with strange hope , too , the discovery which she have stumble upon unexpectedly that night . she be free once more at the cost of a gift , the good , perhaps , that she could offer , but she be , thank Heaven , in love no long . she be tempt to spend the first instalment of her freedom in some dissipation ; in the pit of the coliseum , for example , since they be now pass the door . why not go in and celebrate her independence of the tyranny of love ? or , perhaps , the top of an omnibus bind for some remote place such as Camberwell , or Sidcup , or the Welsh Harp would suit she well . she notice these name paint on little board for the first time for week . or should she return to her room , and spend the night work out the detail of a very enlightened and ingenious scheme ? of all possibility this appeal to she most , and bring to mind the fire , the lamplight , the steady glow which have seem light in the place where a more passionate flame have once burn . 

 now Katharine stop , and Mary wake to the fact that instead of have a goal she have evidently none . she pause at the edge of the crossing , and look this way and that , and finally make as if in the direction of Haverstock Hill . 

 " look here where be you go ? " Mary cry , catch she by the hand . " we must take that cab and go home . " she hail a cab and insist that Katharine should get in , while she direct the driver to take they to Cheyne Walk . 

 Katharine submit . " very well , " she say . " we may as well go there as anywhere else . " 

 a gloom seem to have fall on she . she lie back in her corner , silent and apparently exhausted . Mary , in spite of her own preoccupation , be strike by her pallor and her attitude of dejection . 

 " I be sure we shall find he , " she say more gently than she have yet speak . 

 " it may be too late , " Katharine reply . without understand she , Mary begin to pity she for what she be suffer . 

 " nonsense , " she say , take her hand and rub it . " if we do not   find he there we shall find he somewhere else . " 

 " but suppose he be walk about the street for hour and hour ? " 

 she leant forward and look out of the window . 

 " he may refuse ever to speak to I again , " she say in a low voice , almost to herself . 

 the exaggeration be so immense that Mary do not attempt to cope with it , save by keep hold of Katharine 's wrist . she half expect that Katharine might open the door suddenly and jump out . perhaps Katharine perceive the purpose with which her hand be hold . 

 " do not   be frightened , " she say , with a little laugh . " I be not go to jump out of the cab . it would not   do much good after all . " 

 upon this , Mary ostentatiously withdraw her hand . 

 " I ought to have apologize , " Katharine continue , with an effort , " for bring you into all this business ; I have not   tell you half , either . I be no long engage to William Rodney . he be to marry Cassandra Otway . it be all arrange all perfectly right .... and after he have wait in the street for hour and hour , William make I bring he in . he be stand under the lamp - post watch our window . he be perfectly white when he come into the room . William leave we alone , and we sit and talk . it seem age and age ago , now . be it last night ? have I be out long ? what be the time ? " she spring forward to catch sight of a clock , as if the exact time have some important bearing on her case . 

 " only half - past eight ! " she exclaim . " then he may be there still . " she leant out of the window and tell the cabman to drive fast . 

 " but if he be not there , what shall I do ? where could I find he ? the street be so crowded . " 

 " we shall find he , " Mary repeat . 

 Mary have no doubt but that somehow or other they would find he . but suppose they do find he ? she begin to think of Ralph with a sort of strangeness , in her effort to understand how he could be capable of satisfy this extraordinary desire . once more she think herself back to her old view of he and could , with an effort , recall the haze which surround his figure , and the sense of confused , heighten exhilaration which lie all about his neighborhood , so that for month at a time she have never exactly hear his voice or see his face or so it now seem to she . the pain of her loss shoot through she . nothing would ever make up not success , or happiness , or oblivion . but this pang be immediately follow by the assurance that now , at any rate , she know the truth ; and Katharine , she think , steal a look at she , do not know the truth ; yes , Katharine be immensely to be pity . 

 the cab , which have be catch in the traffic , be now liberate and speed on down Sloane Street . Mary be conscious of the tension with which Katharine mark its progress , as if her mind be fix upon a point in front of they , and marked , second by second , their approach to it . she say nothing , and in silence Mary begin to fix her mind , in sympathy at first , and later in forgetfulness of her companion , upon a point in front of they . she imagine a point distant as a low star upon the horizon of the dark . there for she too , for they both , be the goal for which they be strive , and the end for the ardor of their spirit be the same : but where it be , or what it be , or why she feel convinced that they be unite in search of it , as they drive swiftly down the street of London side by side , she could not have say . 

 " at last , " Katharine breathe , as the cab draw up at the door . she jump out and scan the pavement on either side . Mary , meanwhile , rang the bell . the door open as Katharine assure herself that no one of the people within view have any likeness to Ralph . on see she , the maid say at once : 

 " Mr. Denham call again , miss . he have be wait for you for some time . " 

 Katharine vanish from Mary 's sight . the door shut between they , and Mary walk slowly and thoughtfully up the street alone . 

 Katharine turn at once to the dining - room . but with her finger upon the handle , she hold back . perhaps she realize that this be a moment which would never come again . perhaps , for a second , it seem to she that no reality could equal the imagination she have form . perhaps she be restrain by some vague fear or anticipation , which make her dread any exchange or interruption . but if these doubt and fear or this supreme bliss restrain she , it be only for a moment . in another second she have turn the handle and , bite her lip to control herself , she open the door upon Ralph Denham . an extraordinary clearness of sight seem to possess she on behold he . so little , so single , so separate from all else he appear , who have be the cause of these extreme agitation and aspiration . she could have laugh in his face . but , gain upon this clearness of sight against her will , and to her dislike , be a flood of confusion , of relief , of certainty , of humility , of desire no long to strive and to discriminate , yield to which , she let herself sink within his arm and confess her love . 





 CHAPTER XXXII 

 nobody ask Katharine any question next day . if cross - examined she might have say that nobody speak to she . she work a little , write a little , order the dinner , and sit , for long than she know , with her head on her hand pierce whatever lie before she , whether it be a letter or a dictionary , as if it be a film upon the deep prospect that reveal themselves to her kindling and brood eye . she rise once , and go to the bookcase , take out her father 's greek dictionary and spread the sacred page of symbol and figure before she . she smooth the sheet with a mixture of affectionate amusement and hope . would other eye look on they with her one day ? the thought , long intolerable , be now just bearable . 

 she be quite unaware of the anxiety with which her movement be watch and her expression scan . Cassandra be careful not to be catch look at she , and their conversation be so prosaic that be it not for certain jolt and jerk between the sentence , as if the mind be keep with difficulty to the rail , Mrs. Milvain herself could have detect nothing of a suspicious nature in what she overheard . 

 William , when he come in late that afternoon and find Cassandra alone , have a very serious piece of news to impart . he have just pass Katharine in the street and she have fail to recognize he . 

 " that do not   matter with I , of course , but suppose it happen with somebody else ? what would they think ? they would suspect something merely from her expression . she look she look " he hesitate " like some one walk in her sleep . " 

 to Cassandra the significant thing be that Katharine have go out without tell she , and she interpret this to mean that she have go out to meet Ralph Denham . but to her surprise William draw no comfort from this probability . 

 " once throw convention aside , " he begin , " once do the thing that people do not   do " and the fact that you be go to meet a young man be no long proof of anything , except , indeed , that people will talk . 

 Cassandra see , not without a pang of jealousy , that he be extremely solicitous that people should not talk about Katharine , as if his interest in she be still proprietary rather than friendly . as they be both ignorant of Ralph 's visit the night before they have not that reason to comfort themselves with the thought that matter be hasten to a crisis . these absence of Katharine 's , moreover , leave they expose to interruption which almost destroy their pleasure in be alone together . the rainy evening make it impossible to go out ; and , indeed , accord to William 's code , it be considerably more damning to be see out of door than surprise within . they be so much at the mercy of bell and door that they could hardly talk of Macaulay with any conviction , and William prefer to defer the second act of his tragedy until another day . 

 under these circumstance Cassandra show herself at her good . she sympathize with William 's anxiety and do she utmost to share they ; but still , to be alone together , to be run risk together , to be partner in the wonderful conspiracy , be to she so enthral that she be always forget discretion , break out into exclamation and admiration which finally make William believe that , although deplorable and upsetting , the situation be not without its sweetness . 

 when the door do open , he start , but brave the forthcoming revelation . it be not Mrs. Milvain , however , but Katharine herself who enter , closely follow by Ralph Denham . with a set expression which show what an effort she be make , Katharine encounter their eye , and say , " we be not go to interrupt you , " she lead Denham behind the curtain which hang in front of the room with the relic . this refuge be none of her willing , but confront with wet pavement and only some belate museum or Tube station for shelter , she be force , for Ralph 's sake , to face the discomfort of her own house . under the street lamp she have think he look both tired and strained . 

 thus separate , the two couple remain occupy for some time with their own affair . only the low murmur penetrate from one section of the room to the other . at length the maid come in to bring a message that Mr. Hilbery would not be home for dinner . it be true that there be no need that Katharine should be inform , but William begin to inquire Cassandra 's opinion in such a way as to show that , with or without reason , he wish very much to speak to she . 

 from motif of her own Cassandra dissuade he . 

 " but do not   you think it be a little unsociable ? " he hazard . " why not do something amusing ? go to the play , for instance ? why not ask Katharine and Ralph , eh ? " the coupling of their name in this manner cause Cassandra 's heart to leap with pleasure . 

 " do not   you think they must be ? " she begin , but William hastily take she up . 

 " oh , I know nothing about that . I only think we might amuse ourselves , as your uncle 's out . " 

 he proceed on his embassy with a mixture of excitement and embarrassment which cause he to turn aside with his hand on the curtain , and to examine intently for several moment the portrait of a lady , optimistically say by Mrs. Hilbery to be an early work of Sir Joshua Reynolds . then , with some unnecessary fumbling , he draw aside the curtain , and with his eye fix upon the ground , repeat his message and suggest that they should all spend the evening at the play . Katharine accept the suggestion with such cordiality that it be strange to find she of no clear mind as to the precise spectacle she wish to see . she leave the choice entirely to Ralph and William , who , take counsel fraternally over an evening paper , find themselves in agreement as to the merit of a music - hall . this be arrange , everything else follow easily and enthusiastically . Cassandra have never be to a music - hall . Katharine instruct she in the peculiar delight of an entertainment where Polar bear follow directly upon lady in full evening dress , and the stage be alternately a garden of mystery , a milliner 's band - box , and a fry - fish shop in the Mile End Road . whatever the exact nature of the program that night , it fulfil the high purpose of dramatic art , so far , at least , as four of the audience be concern . 

 no doubt the actor and the author would have be surprised to learn in what shape their effort reach those particular eye and ear ; but they could not have deny that the effect as a whole be tremendous . the hall resound with brass and string , alternately of enormous pomp and majesty , and then of sweetest lamentation . the red and cream of the background , the lyre and harp and urn and skull , the protuberance of plaster , the fringe of scarlet plush , the sinking and blazing of innumerable electric light , could scarcely have be surpass for decorative effect by any craftsman of the ancient or modern world . 

 then there be the audience itself , bare - shoulder , tufte and garlanded in the stall , decorous but festal in the balcony , and frankly fit for daylight and street life in the gallery . but , however they differ when look at separately , they share the same huge , lovable nature in the bulk , which murmur and sway and quiver all the time the dancing and juggling and love - making go on in front of it , slowly laugh and reluctantly leave off laugh , and applaud with a helter - skelter generosity which sometimes become unanimous and overwhelming . once William see Katharine lean forward and clap her hand with an abandonment that startle he . her laugh ring out with the laughter of the audience . 

 for a second he be puzzle , as if this laughter disclose something that he have never suspect in she . but then Cassandra 's face catch his eye , gaze with astonishment at the buffoon , not laugh , too deeply intent and surprised to laugh at what she see , and for some moment he watch she as if she be a child . 

 the performance come to an end , the illusion die out first here and then there , as some rise to put on their coat , other stand upright to salute " God save the king , " the musician fold their music and encase their instrument , and the light sink one by one until the house be empty , silent , and full of great shadow . look back over her shoulder as she follow Ralph through the swing door , Cassandra marvel to see how the stage be already entirely without romance . but , she wonder , do they really cover all the seat in brown holland every night ? 

 the success of this entertainment be such that before they separate another expedition have be plan for the next day . the next day be Saturday ; therefore both William and Ralph be free to devote the whole afternoon to an expedition to Greenwich , which Cassandra have never see , and Katharine confuse with Dulwich . on this occasion Ralph be their guide . he bring they without accident to Greenwich . 

 what exigency of state or fantasy of imagination first give birth to the cluster of pleasant place by which London be surround be matter of indifference now that they have adapt themselves so admirably to the need of people between the age of twenty and thirty with Saturday afternoon to spend . indeed , if ghost have any interest in the affection of those who succeed they they must reap their rich harvest when the fine weather come again and the lover , the sightseer , and the holiday - maker pour themselves out of train and omnibus into their old pleasure - ground . it be true that they go , for the most part , unthanke by name , although upon this occasion William be ready to give such discriminating praise as the dead architect and painter receive seldom in the course of the year . they be walk by the river bank , and Katharine and Ralph , lag a little behind , catch fragment of his lecture . Katharine smile at the sound of his voice ; she listen as if she find it a little unfamiliar , intimately though she know it ; she test it . the note of assurance and happiness be new . William be very happy . she learn every hour what source of his happiness she have neglect . she have never ask he to teach she anything ; she have never consent to read Macaulay ; she have never express her belief that his play be second only to the work of Shakespeare . she follow dreamily in their wake , smile and delight in the sound which convey , she know , the rapturous and yet not servile assent of Cassandra . 

 then she murmur , " how can Cassandra " but change her sentence to the opposite of what she mean to say and end , " how could she herself have be so blind ? " but it be unnecessary to follow out such riddle when the presence of Ralph supply she with more interesting problem , which somehow become involved with the little boat cross the river , the majestic and careworn City , and the steamer homecome with their treasury , or start in search of it , so that infinite leisure would be necessary for the proper disentanglement of one from the other . he stop , moreover , and begin inquire of an old boatman as to the tide and the ship . in thus talk he seem different , and even look different , she think , against the river , with the steeple and tower for background . his strangeness , his romance , his power to leave her side and take part in the affair of man , the possibility that they should together hire a boat and cross the river , the speed and wildness of this enterprise fill her mind and inspire she with such rapture , half of love and half of adventure , that William and Cassandra be startle from their talk , and Cassandra exclaim , " she look as if she be offer up a sacrifice ! very beautiful , " she add quickly , though she repress , in deference to William , her own wonder that the sight of Ralph Denham talk to a boatman on the bank of the Thames could move any one to such an attitude of adoration . 

 that afternoon , what with tea and the curiosity of the Thames tunnel and the unfamiliarity of the street , pass so quickly that the only method of prolong it be to plan another expedition for the following day . Hampton Court be decide upon , in preference to Hampstead , for though Cassandra have dream as a child of the brigand of Hampstead , she have now transfer her affection completely and for ever to William III . accordingly , they arrive at Hampton Court about lunch - time on a fine Sunday morning . such unity mark their expression of admiration for the red - brick building that they might have come there for no other purpose than to assure each other that this palace be the stateliest palace in the world . they walk up and down the Terrace , four abreast , and fancy themselves the owner of the place , and calculate the amount of good to the world produce indubitably by such a tenancy . 

 " the only hope for we , " say Katharine , " be that William shall die , and Cassandra shall be give room as the widow of a distinguished poet . " 

 " or " Cassandra begin , but check herself from the liberty of envisage Katharine as the widow of a distinguished lawyer . upon this , the third day of junketing , it be tiresome to have to restrain oneself even from such innocent excursion of fancy . she dare not question William ; he be inscrutable ; he never seem even to follow the other couple with curiosity when they separate , as they frequently do , to name a plant , or examine a fresco . Cassandra be constantly study their back . she notice how sometimes the impulse to move come from Katharine , and sometimes from Ralph ; how , sometimes , they walk slow , as if in profound intercourse , and sometimes fast , as if in passionate . when they come together again nothing could be more unconcerned than their manner . 

 " we have be wonder whether they ever catch a fish ... " or , " we must leave time to visit the Maze . " then , to puzzle she far , William and Ralph fill in all interstice of meal - time or railway journey with perfectly good - temper argument ; or they discuss politic , or they tell story , or they do sum together upon the back of old envelope to prove something . she suspect that Katharine be absent - minded , but it be impossible to tell . there be moment when she feel so young and inexperienced that she almost wish herself back with the silkworm at Stogdon House , and not embark upon this bewildering intrigue . 

 these moment , however , be only the necessary shadow or chill which prove the substance of her bliss , and do not damage the radiance which seem to rest equally upon the whole party . the fresh air of spring , the sky wash of cloud and already shed warmth from its blue , seem the reply vouchsafe by nature to the mood of her choose spirit . these choose spirit be to be find also among the deer , dumbly bask , and among the fish , set still in mid - stream , for they be mute sharer in a benignant state not need any exposition by the tongue . no word that Cassandra could come by express the stillness , the brightness , the air of expectancy which lie upon the orderly beauty of the grass walk and gravel path down which they go walk four abreast that Sunday afternoon . silently the shadow of the tree lie across the broad sunshine ; silence wrapt her heart in its fold . the quiver stillness of the butterfly on the half - open flower , the silent grazing of the deer in the sun , be the sight her eye rest upon and receive as the image of her own nature lay open to happiness and tremble in its ecstasy . 

 but the afternoon wear on , and it become time to leave the garden . as they drive from Waterloo to Chelsea , Katharine begin to have some compunction about her father , which , together with the opening of office and the need of work in they on Monday , make it difficult to plan another festival for the following day . Mr. Hilbery have take their absence , so far , with paternal benevolence , but they could not trespass upon it indefinitely . indeed , have they know it , he be already suffer from their absence , and long for their return . 

 he have no dislike of solitude , and Sunday , in particular , be pleasantly adapt for letter - writing , pay call , or a visit to his club . he be leave the house on some such suitable expedition towards tea - time when he find himself stop on his own doorstep by his sister , Mrs. Milvain . she should , on hear that no one be at home , have withdraw submissively , but instead she accept his half - hearted invitation to come in , and he find himself in the melancholy position of be force to order tea for she and sit in the drawing - room while she drink it . she speedily make it plain that she be only thus exact because she have come on a matter of business . he be by no mean exhilarate at the news . 

 " Katharine be out this afternoon , " he remark . " why not come round later and discuss it with she with we both , eh ? " 

 " my dear Trevor , I have particular reason for wish to talk to you alone .... where be Katharine ? " 

 " she be out with her young man , naturally . Cassandra play the part of chaperone very usefully . a charming young woman that a great favorite of mine . " he turn his stone between his finger , and conceive different method of lead Celia away from her obsession , which , he suppose , must have reference to the domestic affair of Cyril as usual . 

 " with Cassandra , " Mrs. Milvain repeat significantly . " with Cassandra . " 

 " yes , with Cassandra , " Mr. Hilbery agree urbanely , please at the diversion . " I think they say they be go to Hampton Court , and I rather believe they be take a protege of mine , Ralph Denham , a very clever fellow , too , to amuse Cassandra . I think the arrangement very suitable . " he be prepared to dwell at some length upon this safe topic , and trust that Katharine would come in before he have do with it . 

 " Hampton Court always seem to I an ideal spot for engaged couple . there be the Maze , there be a nice place for have tea I forget what they call it and then , if the young man know his business he contrive to take his lady upon the river . full of possibility full . Cake , Celia ? " Mr. Hilbery continue . " I respect my dinner too much , but that can not   possibly apply to you . you have   never observe that feast , so far as I can remember . " 

 her brother 's affability do not deceive Mrs. Milvain ; it slightly sadden she ; she well know the cause of it . blind and infatuate as usual ! 

 " who be this Mr. Denham ? " she ask . 

 " Ralph Denham ? " say Mr. Hilbery , in relief that her mind have take this turn . " a very interesting young man . I have   a great belief in he . he be an authority upon our mediaeval institution , and if he be not   force to earn his living he would write a book that very much want write " 

 " he be not well off , then ? " Mrs. Milvain interpose . 

 " have not   a penny , I be afraid , and a family more or less dependent on he . " 

 " a mother and sister ? his father be dead ? " 

 " yes , his father die some year ago , " say Mr. Hilbery , who be prepared to draw upon his imagination , if necessary , to keep Mrs. Milvain supply with fact about the private history of Ralph Denham since , for some inscrutable reason , the subject take her fancy . 

 " his father have be dead some time , and this young man have to take his place " 

 " a legal family ? " Mrs. Milvain inquire . " I fancy I have   see the name somewhere . " 

 Mr. Hilbery shake his head . " I should be incline to doubt whether they be altogether in that walk of life , " he observe . " I fancy that Denham once tell I that his father be a corn merchant . perhaps he say a stockbroker . he come to grief , anyhow , as stockbroker have a way of do . I have   a great respect for Denham , " he add . the remark sound to his ear unfortunately conclusive , and he be afraid that there be nothing more to be say about Denham . he examine the tip of his finger carefully . " Cassandra be grow into a very charming young woman , " he start afresh . " charming to look at , and charming to talk to , though her historical knowledge be not altogether profound . another cup of tea ? " 

 Mrs. Milvain have give her cup a little push , which seem to indicate some momentary displeasure . but she do not want any more tea . 

 " it be Cassandra that I have come about , " she begin . " I be very sorry to say that Cassandra be not at all what you think she , Trevor . she have impose upon your and Maggie 's goodness . she have behave in a way that would have seem incredible in this house of all house be it not for other circumstance that be still more incredible . " 

 Mr. Hilbery look take aback , and be silent for a second . 

 " it all sound very black , " he remark urbanely , continue his examination of his finger - nail . " but I own I be completely in the dark . " 

 Mrs. Milvain become rigid , and emit her message in little short sentence of extreme intensity . 

 " who have Cassandra go out with ? William Rodney . who have Katharine go out with ? Ralph Denham . why be they for ever meet each other round street corner , and go to music - hall , and take cab late at night ? why will Katharine not tell I the truth when I question she ? I understand the reason now . Katharine have entangle herself with this unknown lawyer ; she have see fit to condone Cassandra 's conduct . " 

 there be another slight pause . 

 " ah , well , Katharine will no doubt have some explanation to give I , " Mr. Hilbery reply imperturbably . " it be a little too complicated for I to take in all at once , I confess and , if you will not   think I rude , Celia , I think I will be get along towards Knightsbridge . " 

 Mrs. Milvain rise at once . 

 " she have condone Cassandra 's conduct and entangle herself with Ralph Denham , " she repeat . she stand very erect with the dauntless air of one testify to the truth regardless of consequence . she know from past discussion that the only way to counter her brother 's indolence and indifference be to shoot her statement at he in a compress form once finally upon leave the room . have speak thus , she restrain herself from add another word , and leave the house with the dignity of one inspire by a great ideal . 

 she have certainly frame her remark in such a way as to prevent her brother from pay his call in the region of Knightsbridge . he have no fear for Katharine , but there be a suspicion at the back of his mind that Cassandra might have be , innocently and ignorantly , lead into some foolish situation in one of their unshepherded dissipation . his wife be an erratic judge of the convention ; he himself be lazy ; and with Katharine absorb , very naturally here he recall , as well as he could , the exact nature of the charge . " she have condone Cassandra 's conduct and entangle herself with Ralph Denham . " from which it appear that Katharine be not absorb , or which of they be it that have entangle herself with Ralph Denham ? from this maze of absurdity Mr. Hilbery see no way out until Katharine herself come to his help , so that he apply himself , very philosophically on the whole , to a book . 

 no soon have he hear the young people come in and go upstairs than he send a maid to tell Miss Katharine that he wish to speak to she in the study . she be slip fur loosely onto the floor in the drawing - room in front of the fire . they be all gather round , reluctant to part . the message from her father surprise Katharine , and the other catch from her look , as she turn to go , a vague sense of apprehension . 

 Mr. Hilbery be reassure by the sight of she . he congratulate himself , he pride himself , upon possess a daughter who have a sense of responsibility and an understanding of life profound beyond her year . moreover , she be look to - day unusual ; he have come to take her beauty for grant ; now he remember it and be surprise by it . he think instinctively that he have interrupt some happy hour of hers with Rodney , and apologize . 

 " I be sorry to bother you , my dear . I hear you come in , and think I would well make myself disagreeable at once as it seem , unfortunately , that father be expect to make themselves disagreeable . now , your Aunt Celia have be to see I ; your Aunt Celia have take it into her head apparently that you and Cassandra have be let we say a little foolish . this go about together these pleasant little party there be be some kind of misunderstanding . I tell she I see no harm in it , but I should just like to hear from yourself . have Cassandra be leave a little too much in the company of Mr. Denham ? " 

 Katharine do not reply at once , and Mr. Hilbery tap the coal encouragingly with the poker . then she say , without embarrassment or apology : 

 " I do not   see why I should answer Aunt Celia 's question . I have   tell she already that I will not . " 

 Mr. Hilbery be relieve and secretly amuse at the thought of the interview , although he could not license such irreverence outwardly . 

 " very good . then you authorize I to tell she that she be be mistaken , and there be nothing but a little fun in it ? you have   no doubt , Katharine , in your own mind ? Cassandra be in our charge , and I do not   intend that people should gossip about she . I suggest that you should be a little more careful in future . invite I to your next entertainment . " 

 she do not respond , as he have hop , with any affectionate or humorous reply . she meditate , ponder something or other , and he reflect that even his Katharine do not differ from other woman in the capacity to let thing be . or have she something to say ? 

 " have you a guilty conscience ? " he inquire lightly . " tell I , Katharine , " he say more seriously , strike by something in the expression of her eye . 

 " I have   be mean to tell you for some time , " she say , " I be not go to marry William . " 

 " you be not go ! " he exclaim , drop the poker in his immense surprise . " why ? when ? explain yourself , Katharine . " 

 " oh , some time ago a week , perhaps more . " Katharine speak hurriedly and indifferently , as if the matter could no long concern any one . 

 " but may I ask why have I not be tell of this what do you mean by it ? " 

 " we do not   wish to be married that be all . " 

 " this be William 's wish as well as your ? " 

 " oh , yes . we agree perfectly . " 

 Mr. Hilbery have seldom feel more completely at a loss . he think that Katharine be treat the matter with curious unconcern ; she scarcely seem aware of the gravity of what she be say ; he do not understand the position at all . but his desire to smooth everything over comfortably come to his relief . no doubt there be some quarrel , some whimsey on the part of William , who , though a good fellow , be a little exact sometimes something that a woman could put right . but though he incline to take the easy view of his responsibility , he care too much for this daughter to let thing be . 

 " I confess I find great difficulty in follow you . I should like to hear William 's side of the story , " he say irritably . " I think he ought to have speak to I in the first instance . " 

 " I would not   let he , " say Katharine . " I know it must seem to you very strange , " she add . " but I assure you , if you would wait a little until mother come back . " 

 this appeal for delay be much to Mr. Hilbery 's liking . but his conscience would not suffer it . People be talk . he could not endure that his daughter 's conduct should be in any way consider irregular . he wonder whether , in the circumstance , it would be well to wire to his wife , to send for one of his sister , to forbid William the house , to pack Cassandra off home for he be vaguely conscious of responsibility in her direction , too . his forehead be become more and more wrinkle by the multiplicity of his anxiety , which he be sorely tempt to ask Katharine to solve for he , when the door open and William Rodney appear . this necessitate a complete change , not only of manner , but of position also . 

 " here be William , " Katharine exclaim , in a tone of relief . " I have   tell father we be not engage , " she say to he . " I have   explain that I prevent you from tell he . " 

 William 's manner be mark by the utmost formality . he bow very slightly in the direction of Mr. Hilbery , and stand erect , hold one lapel of his coat , and gaze into the center of the fire . he wait for Mr. Hilbery to speak . 

 Mr. Hilbery also assume an appearance of formidable dignity . he have rise to his foot , and now bent the top part of his body slightly forward . 

 " I should like your account of this affair , Rodney if Katharine no long prevent you from speak . " 

 William wait two second at least . 

 " our engagement be at an end , " he say , with the utmost stiffness . 

 " have this be arrive at by your joint desire ? " 

 after a perceptible pause William bend his head , and Katharine say , as if by an afterthought : 

 " oh , yes . " 

 Mr. Hilbery sway to and fro , and move his lip as if to utter remark which remain unspoken . 

 " I can only suggest that you should postpone any decision until the effect of this misunderstanding have have time to wear off . you have now know each other " he begin . 

 " there be be no misunderstanding , " Katharine interpose . " nothing at all . " she move a few pace across the room , as if she intend to leave they . her preoccupied naturalness be in strange contrast to her father 's pomposity and to William 's military rigidity . he have not once raise his eye . Katharine 's glance , on the other hand , range past the two gentleman , along the book , over the table , towards the door . she be pay the least possible attention , it seem , to what be happen . her father look at she with a sudden clouding and troubling of his expression . somehow his faith in her stability and sense be queerly shake . he no long feel that he could ultimately entrust she with the whole conduct of her own affair after a superficial show of direct they . he feel , for the first time in many year , responsible for she . 

 " look here , we must get to the bottom of this , " he say , drop his formal manner and address Rodney as if Katharine be not present . " you have   have some difference of opinion , eh ? take my word for it , most people go through this sort of thing when they be engaged . I have   see more trouble come from long engagement than from any other form of human folly . take my advice and put the whole matter out of your mind both of you . I prescribe a complete abstinence from emotion . visit some cheerful seaside resort , Rodney . " 

 he be strike by William 's appearance , which seem to he to indicate profound feeling resolutely hold in check . no doubt , he reflect , Katharine have be very try , unconsciously try , and have drive he to take up a position which be none of his willing . Mr. Hilbery certainly do not overrate William 's suffering . no minute in his life have hitherto extort from he such intensity of anguish . he be now face the consequence of his insanity . he must confess himself entirely and fundamentally other than Mr. Hilbery think he . everything be against he . even the Sunday evening and the fire and the tranquil library scene be against he . Mr. Hilbery 's appeal to he as a man of the world be terribly against he . he be no long a man of any world that Mr. Hilbery care to recognize . but some power compel he , as it have compel he to come downstairs , to make his stand here and now , alone and unhelped by any one , without prospect of reward . he fumble with various phrase ; and then jerk out : 

 " I love Cassandra . " 

 Mr. Hilbery 's face turn a curious dull purple . he look at his daughter . he nod his head , as if to convey his silent command to she to leave the room ; but either she do not notice it or prefer not to obey . 

 " you have the impudence " Mr. Hilbery begin , in a dull , low voice that he himself have never hear before , when there be a scuffling and exclaim in the hall , and Cassandra , who appear to be insist against some dissuasion on the part of another , burst into the room . 

 " Uncle Trevor , " she exclaim , " I insist upon tell you the truth ! " she fling herself between Rodney and her uncle , as if she seek to intercept their blow . as her uncle stand perfectly still , look very large and impose , and as nobody speak , she shrink back a little , and look first at Katharine and then at Rodney . " you must know the truth , " she say , a little lamely . 

 " you have the impudence to tell I this in Katharine 's presence ? " Mr. Hilbery continue , speak with complete disregard of Cassandra 's interruption . 

 " I be aware , quite aware " Rodney 's word , which be break in sense , speak after a pause , and with his eye upon the ground , nevertheless express an astonishing amount of resolution . " I be quite aware what you must think of I , " he bring out , look Mr. Hilbery directly in the eye for the first time . 

 " I could express my view on the subject more fully if we be alone , " Mr. Hilbery return . 

 " but you forget I , " say Katharine . she move a little towards Rodney , and her movement seem to testify mutely to her respect for he , and her alliance with he . " I think William have behave perfectly rightly , and , after all , it be I who be concerned I and Cassandra . " 

 Cassandra , too , give an indescribably slight movement which seem to draw the three of they into alliance together . Katharine 's tone and glance make Mr. Hilbery once more feel completely at a loss , and in addition , painfully and angrily obsolete ; but in spite of an awful inner hollowness he be outwardly compose . 

 " Cassandra and Rodney have a perfect right to settle their own affair accord to their own wish ; but I see no reason why they should do so either in my room or in my house .... I wish to be quite clear on this point , however ; you be no long engage to Rodney . " 

 he pause , and his pause seem to signify that he be extremely thankful for his daughter 's deliverance . 

 Cassandra turn to Katharine , who draw her breath as if to speak and check herself ; Rodney , too , seem to await some movement on her part ; her father glance at she as if he half anticipate some further revelation . she remain perfectly silent . in the silence they hear distinctly step descend the staircase , and Katharine go straight to the door . 

 " wait , " Mr. Hilbery command . " I wish to speak to you alone , " he add . 

 she pause , hold the door ajar . 

 " I will come back , " she say , and as she speak she open the door and go out . they could hear she immediately speak to some one outside , though the word be inaudible . 

 Mr. Hilbery be leave confront the guilty couple , who remain stand as if they do not accept their dismissal , and the disappearance of Katharine have bring some change into the situation . so , in his secret heart , Mr. Hilbery feel that it have , for he could not explain his daughter 's behavior to his own satisfaction . 

 " Uncle Trevor , " Cassandra exclaim impulsively , " do not   be angry , please . I could not   help it ; I do beg you to forgive I . " 

 her uncle still refuse to acknowledge her identity , and still talk over her head as if she do not exist . 

 " I suppose you have communicate with the Otways , " he say to Rodney grimly . 

 " Uncle Trevor , we want to tell you , " Cassandra reply for he . " we wait " she look appealingly at Rodney , who shake his head ever so slightly . 

 " yes ? what be you wait for ? " her uncle ask sharply , look at she at last . 

 the word die on her lip . it be apparent that she be strain her ear as if to catch some sound outside the room that would come to her help . he receive no answer . he listen , too . 

 " this be a most unpleasant business for all party , " he conclude , sink into his chair again , hunch his shoulder and regard the flame . he seem to speak to himself , and Rodney and Cassandra look at he in silence . 

 " why do not   you sit down ? " he say suddenly . he speak gruffly , but the force of his anger be evidently spend , or some preoccupation have turn his mood to other region . while Cassandra accept his invitation , Rodney remain stand . 

 " I think Cassandra can explain matter well in my absence , " he say , and leave the room , Mr. Hilbery give his assent by a slight nod of the head . 

 meanwhile , in the dining - room next door , Denham and Katharine be once more seat at the mahogany table . they seem to be continue a conversation break off in the middle , as if each remember the precise point at which they have be interrupt , and be eager to go on as quickly as possible . Katharine , have interpose a short account of the interview with her father , Denham make no comment , but say : 

 " anyhow , there be no reason why we should not   see each other . " 

 " or stay together . it be only marriage that be out of the question , " Katharine reply . 

 " but if I find myself come to want you more and more ? " 

 " if our lapse come more and more often ? " 

 he sigh impatiently , and say nothing for a moment . 

 " but at least , " he renew , " we have   establish the fact that my lapse be still in some odd way connect with you ; yours have nothing to do with I . Katharine , " he add , his assumption of reason break up by his agitation , " I assure you that we be in love what other people call love . remember that night . we have no doubt whatever then . we be absolutely happy for half an hour . you have no lapse until the day after ; I have no lapse until yesterday morning . we have   be happy at interval all day until I go off my head , and you , quite naturally , be bore . " 

 " ah , " she exclaim , as if the subject chafe she , " I can not   make you understand . it be not boredom I be never bored . reality reality , " she ejaculate , tap her finger upon the table as if to emphasize and perhaps explain her isolated utterance of this word . " I cease to be real to you . it be the face in a storm again the vision in a hurricane . we come together for a moment and we part . it be my fault , too . I be as bad as you be bad , perhaps . " 

 they be try to explain , not for the first time , as their weary gesture and frequent interruption show , what in their common language they have christen their " lapse " ; a constant source of distress to they , in the past few day , and the immediate reason why Ralph be on his way to leave the house when Katharine , listen anxiously , hear he and prevent he . what be the cause of these lapse ? either because Katharine look more beautiful , or more strange , because she wear something different , or say something unexpected , Ralph 's sense of her romance well up and overcome he either into silence or into inarticulate expression , which Katharine , with unintentional but invariable perversity , interrupt or contradict with some severity or assertion of prosaic fact . then the vision disappear , and Ralph express vehemently in his turn the conviction that he only love her shadow and care nothing for her reality . if the lapse be on her side it take the form of gradual detachment until she become completely absorb in her own thought , which carry she away with such intensity that she sharply resent any recall to her companion 's side . it be useless to assert that these trance be always originate by Ralph himself , however little in their later stage they have to do with he . the fact remain that she have no need of he and be very loath to be remind of he . how , then , could they be in love ? the fragmentary nature of their relationship be but too apparent . 

 thus they sit depressed to silence at the dining - room table , oblivious of everything , while Rodney pace the drawing - room overhead in such agitation and exaltation of mind as he have never conceive possible , and Cassandra remain alone with her uncle . Ralph , at length , rise and walk gloomily to the window . he press close to the pane . outside be truth and freedom and the immensity only to be apprehend by the mind in loneliness , and never communicate to another . what bad sacrilege be there than to attempt to violate what he perceive by seek to impart it ? some movement behind he make he reflect that Katharine have the power , if she choose , to be in person what he dream of her spirit . he turn sharply to implore her help , when again he be strike cold by her look of distance , her expression of intentness upon some far object . as if conscious of his look upon she she rise and come to he , stand close by his side , and look with he out into the dusky atmosphere . their physical closeness be to he a bitter enough comment upon the distance between their mind . yet distant as she be , her presence by his side transform the world . he see himself perform wonderful deed of courage ; save the drowning , rescue the forlorn . impatient with this form of egotism , he could not shake off the conviction that somehow life be wonderful , romantic , a master worth serve so long as she stand there . he have no wish that she should speak ; he do not look at she or touch she ; she be apparently deep in her own thought and oblivious of his presence . 

 the door open without their hear the sound . Mr. Hilbery look round the room , and for a moment fail to discover the two figure in the window . he start with displeasure when he see they , and observe they keenly before he appear able to make up his mind to say anything . he make a movement finally that warn they of his presence ; they turn instantly . without speak , he beckon to Katharine to come to he , and , keep his eye from the region of the room where Denham stand , he shepherd she in front of he back to the study . when Katharine be inside the room he shut the study door carefully behind he as if to secure himself from something that he dislike . 

 " now , Katharine , " he say , take up his stand in front of the fire , " you will , perhaps , have the kindness to explain " she remain silent . " what inference do you expect I to draw ? " he say sharply .... " you tell I that you be not engage to Rodney ; I see you on what appear to be extremely intimate term with another with Ralph Denham . what be I to conclude ? be you , " he add , as she still say nothing , " engage to Ralph Denham ? " 

 " no , " she reply . 

 his sense of relief be great ; he have be certain that her answer would have confirm his suspicion , but that anxiety be set at rest , he be the more conscious of annoyance with she for her behavior . 

 " then all I can say be that you have   very strange idea of the proper way to behave .... People have draw certain conclusion , nor be I surprised .... the more I think of it the more inexplicable I find it , " he go on , his anger rise as he speak . " why be I leave in ignorance of what be go on in my own house ? why be I leave to hear of these event for the first time from my sister ? most disagreeable most upsetting . how I be to explain to your Uncle Francis but I wash my hand of it . Cassandra go tomorrow . I forbid Rodney the house . as for the other young man , the soon he make himself scarce the well . after place the most implicit trust in you , Katharine " he break off , disquiet by the ominous silence with which his word be receive , and look at his daughter with the curious doubt as to her state of mind which he have feel before , for the first time , this evening . he perceive once more that she be not attend to what he say , but be listen , and for a moment he , too , listen for sound outside the room . his certainty that there be some understanding between Denham and Katharine return , but with a most unpleasant suspicion that there be something illicit about it , as the whole position between the young people seem to he gravely illicit . 

 " I will speak to Denham , " he say , on the impulse of his suspicion , move as if to go . 

 " I shall come with you , " Katharine say instantly , start forward . 

 " you will stay here , " say her father . 

 " what be you go to say to he ? " she ask . 

 " I suppose I may say what I like in my own house ? " he return . 

 " then I go , too , " she reply . 

 at these word , which seem to imply a determination to go to go for ever , Mr. Hilbery return to his position in front of the fire , and begin sway slightly from side to side without for the moment make any remark . 

 " I understand you to say that you be not engage to he , " he say at length , fix his eye upon his daughter . 

 " we be not engage , " she say . 

 " it should be a matter of indifference to you , then , whether he come here or not I will not have you listen to other thing when I be speak to you ! " he break off angrily , perceive a slight movement on her part to one side . " answer I frankly , what be your relationship with this young man ? " 

 " nothing that I can explain to a third person , " she say obstinately . 

 " I will have no more of these equivocation , " he reply . 

 " I refuse to explain , " she return , and as she say it the front door bang to . " there ! " she exclaim . " he be go ! " she flash such a look of fiery indignation at her father that he lose his self - control for a moment . 

 " for God 's sake , Katharine , control yourself ! " he cry . 

 she look for a moment like a wild animal cage in a civilized dwelling - place . she glance over the wall cover with book , as if for a second she have forget the position of the door . then she make as if to go , but her father lay his hand upon her shoulder . he compel she to sit down . 

 " these emotion have be very upsetting , naturally , " he say . his manner have regain all its suavity , and he speak with a soothe assumption of paternal authority . " you have   be place in a very difficult position , as I understand from Cassandra . now let we come to term ; we will leave these agitate question in peace for the present . meanwhile , let we try to behave like civilized being . let we read Sir Walter Scott . what d'you say to ' the Antiquary , ' eh ? or ' the Bride of Lammermoor ' ? " 

 he make his own choice , and before his daughter could protest or make her escape , she find herself be turn by the agency of Sir Walter Scott into a civilized human being . 

 yet Mr. Hilbery have grave doubt , as he read , whether the process be more than skin - deep . Civilization have be very profoundly and unpleasantly overthrow that evening ; the extent of the ruin be still undetermined ; he have lose his temper , a physical disaster not to be match for the space of ten year or so ; and his own condition urgently require soothe and renovate at the hand of the classic . his house be in a state of revolution ; he have a vision of unpleasant encounter on the staircase ; his meal would be poison for day to come ; be literature itself a specific against such disagreeable ? a note of hollowness be in his voice as he read . 





 CHAPTER XXXIII 

 consider that Mr. Hilbery live in a house which be accurately number in order with its fellow , and that he fill up form , pay rent , and have seven more year of tenancy to run , he have an excuse for lay down law for the conduct of those who live in his house , and this excuse , though profoundly inadequate , he find useful during the interregnum of civilization with which he now find himself face . in obedience to those law , Rodney disappear ; Cassandra be dispatch to catch the eleven - thirty on Monday morning ; Denham be see no more ; so that only Katharine , the lawful occupant of the upper room , remain , and Mr. Hilbery think himself competent to see that she do nothing far to compromise herself . as he bid her good morning next day he be aware that he know nothing of what she be think , but , as he reflect with some bitterness , even this be an advance upon the ignorance of the previous morning . he go to his study , write , tear up , and write again a letter to his wife , ask she to come back on account of domestic difficulty which he specify at first , but in a later draft more discreetly leave unspecified . even if she start the very moment that she get it , he reflect , she would not be home till Tuesday night , and he count lugubriously the number of hour that he would have to spend in a position of detestable authority alone with his daughter . 

 what be she do now , he wonder , as he address the envelope to his wife . he could not control the telephone . he could not play the spy . she might be make any arrangement she choose . yet the thought do not disturb he so much as the strange , unpleasant , illicit atmosphere of the whole scene with the young people the night before . his sense of discomfort be almost physical . 

 have he know it , Katharine be far enough withdraw , both physically and spiritually , from the telephone . she sit in her room with the dictionary spread their wide leaf on the table before she , and all the page which they have conceal for so many year arrange in a pile . she work with the steady concentration that be produce by the successful effort to think down some unwelcome thought by mean of another thought . have absorb the unwelcome thought , her mind go on with additional vigor , derive from the victory ; on a sheet of paper line of figure and symbol frequently and firmly write down mark the different stage of its progress . and yet it be broad daylight ; there be sound of knock and sweeping , which prove that live people be at work on the other side of the door , and the door , which could be throw open in a second , be her only protection against the world . but she have somehow rise to be mistress in her own kingdom , assume her sovereignty unconsciously . 

 step approach her unheard . it be true that they be step that linger , divagate , and mount with the deliberation natural to one past sixty whose arm , moreover , be full of leaf and blossom ; but they come on steadily , and soon a tap of laurel bough against the door arrest Katharine 's pencil as it touch the page . she do not move , however , and sit blank - eyed as if wait for the interruption to cease . instead , the door open . at first , she attach no meaning to the move mass of green which seem to enter the room independently of any human agency . then she recognize part of her mother 's face and person behind the yellow flower and soft velvet of the palm - bud . 

 " from Shakespeare 's tomb ! " exclaim Mrs. Hilbery , drop the entire mass upon the floor , with a gesture that seem to indicate an act of dedication . then she fling her arm wide and embrace her daughter . 

 " thank God , Katharine ! " she exclaim . " thank God ! " she repeat . 

 " you have   come back ? " say Katharine , very vaguely , stand up to receive the embrace . 

 although she recognize her mother 's presence , she be very far from take part in the scene , and yet feel it to be amazingly appropriate that her mother should be there , thank God emphatically for unknown blessing , and strew the floor with flower and leaf from Shakespeare 's tomb . 

 " nothing else matter in the world ! " Mrs. Hilbery continue . " name be not   everything ; it be what we feel that be everything . I do not   want silly , kind , interfere letter . I do not   want your father to tell I . I know it from the first . I pray that it might be so . " 

 " you know it ? " Katharine repeat her mother 's word softly and vaguely , look past she . " how do you know it ? " she begin , like a child , to finger a tassel hang from her mother 's cloak . 

 " the first evening you tell I , Katharine . oh , and thousand of time dinner - party talk about book the way he come into the room your voice when you speak of he . " 

 Katharine seem to consider each of these proof separately . then she say gravely : 

 " I be not go to marry William . and then there be Cassandra " 

 " yes , there be Cassandra , " say Mrs. Hilbery . " I own I be a little grudging at first , but , after all , she play the piano so beautifully . do tell I , Katharine , " she ask impulsively , " where do you go that evening she play Mozart , and you think I be asleep ? " 

 Katharine recollect with difficulty . 

 " to Mary Datchet 's , " she remember . 

 " ah ! " say Mrs. Hilbery , with a slight note of disappointment in her voice . " I have my little romance my little speculation . " she look at her daughter . Katharine falter beneath that innocent and penetrate gaze ; she flush , turn away , and then look up with very bright eye . 

 " I be not in love with Ralph Denham , " she say . 

 " do not   marry unless you be in love ! " say Mrs. Hilbery very quickly . " but , " she add , glance momentarily at her daughter , " be not   there different way , Katharine different ? " 

 " we want to meet as often as we like , but to be free , " Katharine continue . 

 " to meet here , to meet in his house , to meet in the street . " Mrs. Hilbery run over these phrase as if she be try chord that do not quite satisfy her ear . it be plain that she have her source of information , and , indeed , her bag be stuff with what she call " kind letter " from the pen of her sister - in - law . 

 " yes . or to stay away in the country , " Katharine conclude . 

 Mrs. Hilbery pause , look unhappy , and seek inspiration from the window . 

 " what a comfort he be in that shop how he take I and find the ruin at once how safe I feel with he " 

 " safe ? oh , no , he be fearfully rash he be always take risk . he want to throw up his profession and live in a little cottage and write book , though he have not   a penny of his own , and there be any number of sister and brother dependent on he . " 

 " ah , he have a mother ? " Mrs. Hilbery inquire . 

 " yes . rather a fine - look old lady , with white hair . " Katharine begin to describe her visit , and soon Mrs. Hilbery elicit the fact that not only be the house of excruciating ugliness , which Ralph bore without complaint , but that it be evident that every one depend on he , and he have a room at the top of the house , with a wonderful view over London , and a rook . 

 " a wretched old bird in a corner , with half its feather out , " she say , with a tenderness in her voice that seem to commiserate the suffering of humanity while rest assure in the capacity of Ralph Denham to alleviate they , so that Mrs. Hilbery could not help exclaim : 

 " but , Katharine , you be in love ! " at which Katharine flush , look startled , as if she have say something that she ought not to have say , and shake her head . 

 Hastily Mrs. Hilbery ask for further detail of this extraordinary house , and interpose a few speculation about the meeting between Keats and Coleridge in a lane , which tide over the discomfort of the moment , and draw Katharine on to further description and indiscretion . in truth , she find an extraordinary pleasure in be thus free to talk to some one who be equally wise and equally benignant , the mother of her early childhood , whose silence seem to answer question that be never ask . Mrs. Hilbery listen without make any remark for a considerable time . she seem to draw her conclusion rather by look at her daughter than by listen to she , and , if cross - examined , she would probably have give a highly inaccurate version of Ralph Denham 's life - history except that he be penniless , fatherless , and live at Highgate all of which be much in his favor . but by mean of these furtive glance she have assure herself that Katharine be in a state which give she , alternately , the most exquisite pleasure and the most profound alarm . 

 she could not help ejaculate at last : 

 " it be all do in five minute at a Registry Office nowadays , if you think the Church service a little florid which it be , though there be noble thing in it . " 

 " but we do not   want to be marry , " Katharine reply emphatically , and add , " why , after all , be not   it perfectly possible to live together without be marry ? " 

 again Mrs. Hilbery look discompose , and , in her trouble , take up the sheet which be lie upon the table , and begin turn they over this way and that , and mutter to herself as she glance : 

 " a plus b minus c equal ' x y z ' . it be so dreadfully ugly , Katharine . that be what I feel so dreadfully ugly . " 

 Katharine take the sheet from her mother 's hand and begin shuffle they absent - mindedly together , for her fix gaze seem to show that her thought be intent upon some other matter . 

 " well , I do not   know about ugliness , " she say at length . 

 " but he do not   ask it of you ? " Mrs. Hilbery exclaim . " not that grave young man with the steady brown eye ? " 

 " he do not   ask anything we neither of we ask anything . " 

 " if I could help you , Katharine , by the memory of what I feel " 

 " yes , tell I what you feel . " 

 Mrs. Hilbery , her eye grow blank , peer down the enormously long corridor of day at the far end of which the little figure of herself and her husband appear fantastically attire , clasp hand upon a moonlit beach , with rose swing in the dusk . 

 " we be in a little boat go out to a ship at night , " she begin . " the sun have set and the moon be rise over our head . there be lovely silver light upon the wave and three green light upon the steamer in the middle of the bay . your father 's head look so grand against the mast . it be life , it be death . the great sea be round we . it be the voyage for ever and ever . " 

 the ancient fairy - tale fall roundly and harmoniously upon Katharine 's ear . yes , there be the enormous space of the sea ; there be the three green light upon the steamer ; the cloak figure climb up on deck . and so , voyage over the green and purple water , past the cliff and the sandy lagoon and through pool crowd with the mast of ship and the steeple of church here they be . the river seem to have bring they and deposit they here at this precise point . she look admiringly at her mother , that ancient voyager . 

 " who know , " exclaim Mrs. Hilbery , continue her revery , " where we be bind for , or why , or who have send we , or what we shall find who know anything , except that love be our faith love " she croon , and the soft sound beat through the dim word be hear by her daughter as the breaking of wave solemnly in order upon the vast shore that she gaze upon . she would have be content for her mother to repeat that word almost indefinitely a soothing word when utter by another , a rivet together of the shattered fragment of the world . but Mrs. Hilbery , instead of repeat the word love , say pleadingly : 

 " and you will not   think those ugly thought again , will you , Katharine ? " at which word the ship which Katharine have be consider seem to put into harbor and have do with its seafaring . yet she be in great need , if not exactly of sympathy , of some form of advice , or , at least , of the opportunity of set forth her problem before a third person so as to renew they in her own eye . 

 " but then , " she say , ignore the difficult problem of ugliness , " you know you be in love ; but we be different . it seem , " she continue , frown a little as she try to fix the difficult feeling , " as if something come to an end suddenly give out fade an illusion as if when we think we be in love we make it up we imagine what do not   exist . that be why it be impossible that we should ever marry . always to be find the other an illusion , and go off and forget about they , never to be certain that you care , or that he be not   care for some one not you at all , the horror of change from one state to the other , be happy one moment and miserable the next that be the reason why we can not   possibly marry . at the same time , " she continue , " we can not   live without each other , because " Mrs. Hilbery wait patiently for the sentence to be complete , but Katharine fall silent and finger her sheet of figure . 

 " we have to have faith in our vision , " Mrs. Hilbery resume , glance at the figure , which distress she vaguely , and have some connection in her mind with the household account , " otherwise , as you say " she cast a lightning glance into the depth of disillusionment which be , perhaps , not altogether unknown to she . 

 " believe I , Katharine , it be the same for every one for I , too for your father , " she say earnestly , and sigh . they look together into the abyss and , as the elder of the two , she recover herself first and ask : 

 " but where be Ralph ? why be not   he here to see I ? " 

 Katharine 's expression change instantly . 

 " because he be not allow to come here , " she reply bitterly . 

 Mrs. Hilbery brush this aside . 

 " would there be time to send for he before luncheon ? " she ask . 

 Katharine look at she as if , indeed , she be some magician . once more she feel that instead of be a grown woman , use to advise and command , she be only a foot or two raise above the long grass and the little flower and entirely dependent upon the figure of indefinite size whose head go up into the sky , whose hand be in her , for guidance . 

 " I be not happy without he , " she say simply . 

 Mrs. Hilbery nod her head in a manner which indicate complete understanding , and the immediate conception of certain plan for the future . she sweep up her flower , breathe in their sweetness , and , hum a little song about a miller 's daughter , leave the room . 

 the case upon which Ralph Denham be engage that afternoon be not apparently receive his full attention , and yet the affair of the late John Leake of Dublin be sufficiently confuse to need all the care that a solicitor could bestow upon they , if the widow Leake and the five Leake child of tender age be to receive any pittance at all . but the appeal to Ralph 's humanity have little chance of be hear to - day ; he be no long a model of concentration . the partition so carefully erect between the different section of his life have be break down , with the result that though his eye be fix upon the last Will and Testament , he see through the page a certain drawing - room in Cheyne Walk . 

 he try every device that have prove effective in the past for keep up the partition of the mind , until he could decently go home ; but a little to his alarm he find himself assail so persistently , as if from outside , by Katharine , that he launch forth desperately into an imaginary interview with she . she obliterate a bookcase full of law report , and the corner and line of the room undergo a curious softening of outline like that which sometimes make a room unfamiliar at the moment of wake from sleep . by degree , a pulse or stress begin to beat at regular interval in his mind , heap his thought into wave to which word fit themselves , and without much consciousness of what he be do , he begin to write on a sheet of draft paper what have the appearance of a poem lack several word in each line . not many line have be set down , however , before he throw away his pen as violently as if that be responsible for his misdeed , and tear the paper into many separate piece . this be a sign that Katharine have assert herself and put to he a remark that could not be meet poetically . her remark be entirely destructive of poetry , since it be to the effect that poetry have nothing whatever to do with she ; all her friend spend their life in make up phrase , she say ; all his feeling be an illusion , and next moment , as if to taunt he with his impotence , she have sink into one of those dreamy state which take no account whatever of his existence . Ralph be rouse by his passionate attempt to attract her attention to the fact that he be stand in the middle of his little private room in Lincoln 's Inn Fields at a considerable distance from Chelsea . the physical distance increase his desperation . he begin pace in circle until the process sicken he , and then take a sheet of paper for the composition of a letter which , he vow before he begin it , should be send that same evening . 

 it be a difficult matter to put into word ; poetry would have do it well justice , but he must abstain from poetry . in an infinite number of half - obliterate scratch he try to convey to she the possibility that although human being be woefully ill - adapt for communication , still , such communion be the good we know ; moreover , they make it possible for each to have access to another world independent of personal affair , a world of law , of philosophy , or more strangely a world such as he have have a glimpse of the other evening when together they seem to be share something , create something , an ideal a vision fling out in advance of our actual circumstance . if this golden rim be quench , if life be no long circle by an illusion   but be it an illusion after all ? , then it would be too dismal an affair to carry to an end ; so he write with a sudden spurt of conviction which make clear way for a space and leave at least one sentence stand whole . make every allowance for other desire , on the whole this conclusion appear to he to justify their relationship . but the conclusion be mystical ; it plunge he into thought . the difficulty with which even this amount be write , the inadequacy of the word , and the need of write under they and over they other which , after all , do no well , lead he to leave off before he be at all satisfied with his production , and unable to resist the conviction that such rambling would never be fit for Katharine 's eye . he feel himself more cut off from she than ever . in idleness , and because he could do nothing far with word , he begin to draw little figure in the blank space , head mean to resemble her head , blot fringe with flame mean to represent perhaps the entire universe . from this occupation he be rouse by the message that a lady wish to speak to he . he have scarcely time to run his hand through his hair in order to look as much like a solicitor as possible , and to cram his paper into his pocket , already overcome with shame that another eye should behold they , when he realize that his preparation be needless . the lady be Mrs. Hilbery . 

 " I hope you be not dispose of somebody 's fortune in a hurry , " she remark , gaze at the document on his table , " or cut off an entail at one blow , because I want to ask you to do I a favor . and Anderson will not   keep his horse wait .   Anderson be a perfect tyrant , but he drive my dear father to the Abbey the day they bury he .   I make bold to come to you , Mr. Denham , not exactly in search of legal assistance   though I do not   know who I would rather come to , if I be in trouble , but in order to ask your help in settle some tiresome little domestic affair that have arise in my absence . I have   be to Stratford - on - Avon   I must tell you all about that one of these day , and there I get a letter from my sister - in - law , a dear kind goose who like interfere with other people 's child because she be get none of her own .   we be dreadfully afraid that she be go to lose the sight of one of her eye , and I always feel that our physical ailment be so apt to turn into mental ailment . I think Matthew Arnold say something of the same kind about Lord Byron .   but that be neither here nor there . " 

 the effect of these parenthesis , whether they be introduce for that purpose or represent a natural instinct on Mrs. Hilbery 's part to embellish the bareness of her discourse , give Ralph time to perceive that she possess all the fact of their situation and be come , somehow , in the capacity of ambassador . 

 " I do not   come here to talk about Lord Byron , " Mrs. Hilbery continue , with a little laugh , " though I know that both you and Katharine , unlike other young people of your generation , still find he worth read . " she pause . " I be so glad you have   make Katharine read poetry , Mr. Denham ! " she exclaim , " and feel poetry , and look poetry ! she can not   talk it yet , but she will oh , she will ! " 

 Ralph , whose hand be grasp and whose tongue almost refuse to articulate , somehow contrive to say that there be moment when he feel hopeless , utterly hopeless , though he give no reason for this statement on his part . 

 " but you care for she ? " Mrs. Hilbery inquire . 

 " Good God ! " he exclaim , with a vehemence which admit of no question . 

 " it be the Church of England service you both object to ? " Mrs. Hilbery inquire innocently . 

 " I do not   care a damn what service it be , " Ralph reply . 

 " you would marry she in Westminster Abbey if the bad come to the bad ? " Mrs. Hilbery inquire . 

 " I would marry she in St. Paul 's Cathedral , " Ralph reply . his doubt upon this point , which be always rouse by Katharine 's presence , have vanish completely , and his strong wish in the world be to be with she immediately , since every second he be away from she he imagine she slip far and far from he into one of those state of mind in which he be unrepresented . he wish to dominate she , to possess she . 

 " thank God ! " exclaim Mrs. Hilbery . she thank he for a variety of blessing : for the conviction with which the young man speak ; and not least for the prospect that on her daughter 's wedding - day the noble cadence , the stately period , the ancient eloquence of the marriage service would resound over the head of a distinguished congregation gather together near the very spot where her father lie quiescent with the other poet of England . the tear fill her eye ; but she remember simultaneously that her carriage be wait , and with dim eye she walk to the door . Denham follow her downstair . 

 it be a strange drive . for Denham it be without exception the most unpleasant he have ever take . his only wish be to go as straightly and quickly as possible to Cheyne Walk ; but it soon appear that Mrs. Hilbery either ignore or think fit to baffle this desire by interpose various errand of her own . she stop the carriage at post - office , and coffee - shop , and shop of inscrutable dignity where the aged attendant have to be greet as old friend ; and , catch sight of the dome of St. Paul 's above the irregular spire of Ludgate Hill , she pull the cord impulsively , and give direction that Anderson should drive they there . but Anderson have reason of his own for discourage afternoon worship , and keep his horse 's nose obstinately towards the west . after some minute , Mrs. Hilbery realize the situation , and accept it good - humoredly , apologize to Ralph for his disappointment . 

 " never mind , " she say , " we will go to St. Paul 's another day , and it may turn out , though I can not   promise that it will , that he will take we past Westminster Abbey , which would be even well . " 

 Ralph be scarcely aware of what she go on to say . her mind and body both seem to have float into another region of quick - sailing cloud rapidly pass across each other and envelop everything in a vaporous indistinctness . meanwhile he remain conscious of his own concentrated desire , his impotence to bring about anything he wish , and his increase agony of impatience . 

 suddenly Mrs. Hilbery pull the cord with such decision that even Anderson have to listen to the order which she leant out of the window to give he . the carriage pull up abruptly in the middle of Whitehall before a large building dedicate to one of our Government office . in a second Mrs. Hilbery be mount the step , and Ralph be leave in too acute an irritation by this further delay even to speculate what errand take she now to the Board of Education . he be about to jump from the carriage and take a cab , when Mrs. Hilbery reappear talk genially to a figure who remain hidden behind she . 

 " there be plenty of room for we all , " she be say . " plenty of room . we could find space for four of you , William , " she add , open the door , and Ralph find that Rodney have now join their company . the two man glance at each other . if distress , shame , discomfort in its most acute form be ever visible upon a human face , Ralph could read they all express beyond the eloquence of word upon the face of his unfortunate companion . but Mrs. Hilbery be either completely unseeing or determined to appear so . she go on talk ; she talk , it seem to both the young man , to some one outside , up in the air . she talk about Shakespeare , she apostrophize the human race , she proclaim the virtue of divine poetry , she begin to recite verse which break down in the middle . the great advantage of her discourse be that it be self - support . it nourish itself until Cheyne Walk be reach upon half a dozen grunt and murmur . 

 " now , " she say , alight briskly at her door , " here we be ! " 

 there be something airy and ironical in her voice and expression as she turn upon the doorstep and look at they , which fill both Rodney and Denham with the same misgiving at have trust their fortune to such an ambassador ; and Rodney actually hesitate upon the threshold and murmur to Denham : 

 " you go in , Denham . I ... " he be turn tail , but the door opening and the familiar look of the house assert its charm , he bolt in on the wake of the other , and the door shut upon his escape . Mrs. Hilbery lead the way upstairs . she take they to the drawing - room . the fire burn as usual , the little table be lay with china and silver . there be nobody there . 

 " ah , " she say , " Katharine be not here . she must be upstairs in her room . you have something to say to she , I know , Mr. Denham . you can find your way ? " she vaguely indicate the ceiling with a gesture of her hand . she have become suddenly serious and compose , mistress in her own house . the gesture with which she dismiss he have a dignity that Ralph never forget . she seem to make he free with a wave of her hand to all that she possess . he leave the room . 

 the Hilberys ' house be tall , possess many story and passage with closed door , all , once he have pass the drawing - room floor , unknown to Ralph . he mount as high as he could and knock at the first door he come to . 

 " may I come in ? " he ask . 

 a voice from within answer " yes . " 

 he be conscious of a large window , full of light , of a bare table , and of a long look - glass . Katharine have rise , and be stand with some white paper in her hand , which slowly flutter to the ground as she see her visitor . the explanation be a short one . the sound be inarticulate ; no one could have understand the meaning save themselves . as if the force of the world be all at work to tear they asunder they sit , clasp hand , near enough to be take even by the malicious eye of Time himself for a united couple , an indivisible unit . 

 " do not   move , do not   go , " she beg of he , when he stoop to gather the paper she have let fall . but he take they in his hand and , give she by a sudden impulse his own unfinished dissertation , with its mystical conclusion , they read each other 's composition in silence . 

 Katharine read his sheet to an end ; Ralph follow her figure as far as his mathematic would let he . they come to the end of their task at about the same moment , and sit for a time in silence . 

 " those be the paper you leave on the seat at Kew , " say Ralph at length . " you fold they so quickly that I could not   see what they be . " 

 she blush very deeply ; but as she do not move or attempt to hide her face she have the appearance of some one disarm of all defence , or Ralph liken she to a wild bird just settle with wing tremble to fold themselves within reach of his hand . the moment of exposure have be exquisitely painful the light shed startlingly vivid . she have now to get use to the fact that some one share her loneliness . the bewilderment be half shame and half the prelude to profound rejoicing . nor be she unconscious that on the surface the whole thing must appear of the utmost absurdity . she look to see whether Ralph smile , but find his gaze fix on she with such gravity that she turn to the belief that she have commit no sacrilege but enrich herself , perhaps immeasurably , perhaps eternally . she hardly dare steep herself in the infinite bliss . but his glance seem to ask for some assurance upon another point of vital interest to he . it beseech she mutely to tell he whether what she have read upon his confuse sheet have any meaning or truth to she . she bent her head once more to the paper she hold . 

 " I like your little dot with the flame round it , " she say meditatively . 

 Ralph nearly tear the page from her hand in shame and despair when he see she actually contemplate the idiotic symbol of his most confused and emotional moment . 

 he be convince that it could mean nothing to another , although somehow to he it convey not only Katharine herself but all those state of mind which have cluster round she since he first see she pour out tea on a Sunday afternoon . it represent by its circumference of smudge surround a central blot all that encircle glow which for he surround , inexplicably , so many of the object of life , soften their sharp outline , so that he could see certain street , book , and situation wear a halo almost perceptible to the physical eye . do she smile ? do she put the paper down wearily , condemn it not only for its inadequacy but for its falsity ? be she go to protest once more that he only love the vision of she ? but it do not occur to she that this diagram have anything to do with she . she say simply , and in the same tone of reflection : 

 " yes , the world look something like that to I too . " 

 he receive her assurance with profound joy . quietly and steadily there rise up behind the whole aspect of life that soft edge of fire which give its red tint to the atmosphere and crowd the scene with shadow so deep and dark that one could fancy push far into their density and still far , explore indefinitely . whether there be any correspondence between the two prospect now open before they they share the same sense of the impending future , vast , mysterious , infinitely store with undeveloped shape which each would unwrap for the other to behold ; but for the present the prospect of the future be enough to fill they with silent adoration . at any rate , their further attempt to communicate articulately be interrupt by a knock on the door , and the entrance of a maid who , with a due sense of mystery , announce that a lady wish to see Miss Hilbery , but refuse to allow her name to be give . 

 when Katharine rise , with a profound sigh , to resume her duty , Ralph go with she , and neither of they formulate any guess , on their way downstairs , as to who this anonymous lady might prove to be . perhaps the fantastic notion that she be a little black hunchback provide with a steel knife , which she would plunge into Katharine 's heart , appear to Ralph more probable than another , and he push first into the dining - room to avert the blow . then he exclaim " Cassandra ! " with such heartiness at the sight of Cassandra Otway stand by the dining - room table that she put her finger to her lip and beg he to be quiet . 

 " nobody must know I be here , " she explain in a sepulchral whisper . " I miss my train . I have be wander about London all day . I can bear it no long . Katharine , what be I to do ? " 

 Katharine push forward a chair ; Ralph hastily find wine and pour it out for she . if not actually faint , she be very near it . 

 " William 's upstairs , " say Ralph , as soon as she appear to be recover . " I will go and ask he to come down to you . " his own happiness have give he a confidence that every one else be bind to be happy too . but Cassandra have her uncle 's command and anger too vividly in her mind to dare any such defiance . she become agitated and say that she must leave the house at once . she be not in a condition to go , have they know where to send she . Katharine 's common sense , which have be in abeyance for the past week or two , still fail she , and she could only ask , " but where be your luggage ? " in the vague belief that to take lodging depend entirely upon a sufficiency of luggage . Cassandra 's reply , " I have   lose my luggage , " in no way help she to a conclusion . 

 " you have   lose your luggage , " she repeat . her eye rest upon Ralph , with an expression which seem well fit to accompany a profound thanksgiving for his existence or some vow of eternal devotion than a question about luggage . Cassandra perceive the look , and see that it be return ; her eye fill with tear . she falter in what she be say . she begin bravely again to discuss the question of lodge when Katharine , who seem to have communicate silently with Ralph , and obtain his permission , take her ruby ring from her finger and give it to Cassandra , say : " I believe it will fit you without any alteration . " 

 these word would not have be enough to convince Cassandra of what she very much wish to believe have not Ralph take the bare hand in his and demand : 

 " why do not   you tell we you be glad ? " Cassandra be so glad that the tear run down her cheek . the certainty of Katharine 's engagement not only relieve she of a thousand vague fear and self - reproach , but entirely quench that spirit of criticism which have lately impair her belief in Katharine . her old faith come back to she . she seem to behold she with that curious intensity which she have lose ; as a being who walk just beyond our sphere , so that life in their presence be a heightened process , illuminate not only ourselves but a considerable stretch of the surround world . next moment she contrast her own lot with theirs and give back the ring . 

 " I will not   take that unless William give it I himself , " she say . " keep it for I , Katharine . " 

 " I assure you everything be perfectly all right , " say Ralph . " let I tell William " 

 he be about , in spite of Cassandra 's protest , to reach the door , when Mrs. Hilbery , either warn by the parlor - maid or conscious with her usual prescience of the need for her intervention , open the door and smilingly survey they . 

 " my dear Cassandra ! " she exclaim . " how delightful to see you back again ! what a coincidence ! " she observe , in a general way . " William be upstairs . the kettle boil over . where 's Katharine , I say ? I go to look , and I find Cassandra ! " she seem to have prove something to her own satisfaction , although nobody feel certain what thing precisely it be . 

 " I find Cassandra , " she repeat . 

 " she miss her train , " Katharine interpose , see that Cassandra be unable to speak . 

 " life , " begin Mrs. Hilbery , draw inspiration from the portrait on the wall apparently , " consist in miss train and in find " but she pull herself up and remark that the kettle must have boil completely over everything . 

 to Katharine 's agitated mind it appear that this kettle be an enormous kettle , capable of deluge the house in its incessant shower of steam , the enraged representative of all those household duty which she have neglect . she run hastily up to the drawing - room , and the rest follow she , for Mrs. Hilbery put her arm round Cassandra and draw she upstairs . they find Rodney observe the kettle with uneasiness but with such absence of mind that Katharine 's catastrophe be in a fair way to be fulfil . in put the matter straight no greeting be exchange , but Rodney and Cassandra choose seat as far apart as possible , and sit down with an air of people make a very temporary lodgment . either Mrs. Hilbery be impervious to their discomfort , or choose to ignore it , or think it high time that the subject be change , for she do nothing but talk about Shakespeare 's tomb . 

 " so much earth and so much water and that sublime spirit brood over it all , " she muse , and go on to sing her strange , half - earthly song of dawn and sunset , of great poet , and the unchanged spirit of noble loving which they have teach , so that nothing change , and one age be link with another , and no one die , and we all meet in spirit , until she appear oblivious of any one in the room . but suddenly her remark seem to contract the enormously wide circle in which they be soar and to alight , airily and temporarily , upon matter of more immediate moment . 

 " Katharine and Ralph , " she say , as if to try the sound . " William and Cassandra . " 

 " I feel myself in an entirely false position , " say William desperately , thrust himself into this breach in her reflection . " I have   no right to be sit here . Mr. Hilbery tell I yesterday to leave the house . I have no intention of come back again . I shall now " 

 " I feel the same too , " Cassandra interrupt . " after what Uncle Trevor say to I last night " 

 " I have put you into a most odious position , " Rodney go on , rise from his seat , in which movement he be imitate simultaneously by Cassandra . " until I have your father 's consent I have no right to speak to you let alone in this house , where my conduct " he look at Katharine , stammer , and fall silent " where my conduct have be reprehensible and inexcusable in the extreme , " he force himself to continue . " I have explain everything to your mother . she be so generous as to try and make I believe that I have do no harm you have convince she that my behavior , selfish and weak as it be selfish and weak " he repeat , like a speaker who have lose his note . 

 two emotion seem to be struggle in Katharine ; one the desire to laugh at the ridiculous spectacle of William make she a formal speech across the tea - table , the other a desire to weep at the sight of something childlike and honest in he which touch she inexpressibly . to every one 's surprise she rise , stretch out her hand , and say : 

 " you have   nothing to reproach yourself with you have   be always " but here her voice die away , and the tear force themselves into her eye , and run down her cheek , while William , equally move , seize her hand and press it to his lip . no one perceive that the drawing - room door have open itself sufficiently to admit at least half the person of Mr. Hilbery , or see he gaze at the scene round the tea - table with an expression of the utmost disgust and expostulation . he withdraw unseen . he pause outside on the landing try to recover his self - control and to decide what course he might with most dignity pursue . it be obvious to he that his wife have entirely confuse the meaning of his instruction . she have plunge they all into the most odious confusion . he wait a moment , and then , with much preliminary rattle of the handle , open the door a second time . they have all regain their place ; some incident of an absurd nature have now set they laugh and look under the table , so that his entrance pass momentarily unperceive . Katharine , with flushed cheek , raise her head and say : 

 " well , that be my last attempt at the dramatic . " 

 " it be astonishing what a distance they roll , " say Ralph , stoop to turn up the corner of the hearthrug . 

 " do not   trouble do not   bother . we shall find it " Mrs. Hilbery begin , and then see her husband and exclaim : " oh , Trevor , we be look for Cassandra 's engagement - ring ! " 

 Mr. Hilbery look instinctively at the carpet . remarkably enough , the ring have roll to the very point where he stand . he see the ruby touch the tip of his boot . such be the force of habit that he could not refrain from stoop , with an absurd little thrill of pleasure at be the one to find what other be look for , and , pick the ring up , he present it , with a bow that be courtly in the extreme , to Cassandra . whether the making of a bow release automatically feeling of complaisance and urbanity , Mr. Hilbery find his resentment completely wash away during the second in which he bent and straighten himself . Cassandra dare to offer her cheek and receive his embrace . he nod with some degree of stiffness to Rodney and Denham , who have both rise upon see he , and now altogether sit down . Mrs. Hilbery seem to have be wait for the entrance of her husband , and for this precise moment in order to put to he a question which , from the ardor with which she announce it , have evidently be press for utterance for some time past . 

 " oh , Trevor , please tell I , what be the date of the first performance of ' Hamlet ' ? " 

 in order to answer she Mr. Hilbery have to have recourse to the exact scholarship of William Rodney , and before he have give his excellent authority for believe as he believe , Rodney feel himself admit once more to the society of the civilized and sanction by the authority of no less a person than Shakespeare himself . the power of literature , which have temporarily desert Mr. Hilbery , now come back to he , pour over the raw ugliness of human affair its soothe balm , and provide a form into which such passion as he have feel so painfully the night before could be mold so that they fall roundly from the tongue in shapely phrase , hurt nobody . he be sufficiently sure of his command of language at length to look at Katharine and again at Denham . all this talk about Shakespeare have act as a soporific , or rather as an incantation upon Katharine . she lean back in her chair at the head of the tea - table , perfectly silent , look vaguely past they all , receive the most generalized idea of human head against picture , against yellow - tint wall , against curtain of deep crimson velvet . Denham , to whom he turn next , share her immobility under his gaze . but beneath his restraint and calm it be possible to detect a resolution , a will , set now with unalterable tenacity , which make such turn of speech as Mr. Hilbery have at command appear oddly irrelevant . at any rate , he say nothing . he respect the young man ; he be a very able young man ; he be likely to get his own way . he could , he think , look at his still and very dignified head , understand Katharine 's preference , and , as he think this , he be surprise by a pang of acute jealousy . she might have marry Rodney without cause he a twinge . this man she love . or what be the state of affair between they ? an extraordinary confusion of emotion be begin to get the well of he , when Mrs. Hilbery , who have be conscious of a sudden pause in the conversation , and have look wistfully at her daughter once or twice , remark : 

 " do not   stay if you want to go , Katharine . there be the little room over there . perhaps you and Ralph " 

 " we be engage , " say Katharine , wake with a start , and look straight at her father . he be take aback by the directness of the statement ; he exclaim as if an unexpected blow have strike he . have he love she to see she sweep away by this torrent , to have she take from he by this uncontrollable force , to stand by helpless , ignore ? oh , how he love she ! how he love she ! he nod very curtly to Denham . 

 " I gather something of the kind last night , " he say . " I hope you will deserve she . " but he never look at his daughter , and stride out of the room , leave in the mind of the woman a sense , half of awe , half of amusement , at the extravagant , inconsiderate , uncivilized male , outraged somehow and go bellow to his lair with a roar which still sometimes reverberate in the most polished of drawing - room . then Katharine , look at the shut door , look down again , to hide her tear . 





 CHAPTER XXXIV 

 the lamp be light ; their luster reflect itself in the polished wood ; good wine be pass round the dinner - table ; before the meal be far advanced civilization have triumph , and Mr. Hilbery preside over a feast which come to wear more and more surely an aspect , cheerful , dignified , promise well for the future . to judge from the expression in Katharine 's eye it promise something but he check the approach sentimentality . he pour out wine ; he bid Denham help himself . 

 they go upstairs and he see Katharine and Denham abstract themselves directly Cassandra have ask whether she might not play he something some Mozart ? some Beethoven ? she sit down to the piano ; the door close softly behind they . his eye rest on the closed door for some second unwaveringly , but , by degree , the look of expectation die out of they , and , with a sigh , he listen to the music . 

 Katharine and Ralph be agree with scarcely a word of discussion as to what they wish to do , and in a moment she join he in the hall dress for walk . the night be still and moonlit , fit for walk , though any night would have seem so to they , desire more than anything movement , freedom from scrutiny , silence , and the open air . 

 " at last ! " she breathe , as the front door shut . she tell he how she have wait , fidget , think he be never come , listen for the sound of door , half expect to see he again under the lamp - post , look at the house . they turn and look at the serene front with its gold - rim window , to he the shrine of so much adoration . in spite of her laugh and the little pressure of mockery on his arm , he would not resign his belief , but with her hand rest there , her voice quicken and mysteriously move in his ear , he have not time they have not the same inclination other object draw his attention . 

 how they come to find themselves walk down a street with many lamp , corner radiant with light , and a steady succession of motor - omnibus ply both way along it , they could neither of they tell ; nor account for the impulse which lead they suddenly to select one of these wayfarer and mount to the very front seat . after curve through street of comparative darkness , so narrow that shadow on the blind be press within a few foot of their face , they come to one of those great knot of activity where the light , have draw close together , thin out again and take their separate way . they be bear on until they see the spire of the city church pale and flat against the sky . 

 " be you cold ? " he ask , as they stop by Temple Bar . 

 " yes , I be rather , " she reply , become conscious that the splendid race of light draw past her eye by the superb curve and swerve of the monster on which she sit be at an end . they have follow some such course in their thought too ; they have be bear on , victor in the forefront of some triumphal car , spectator of a pageant enact for they , master of life . but stand on the pavement alone , this exaltation leave they ; they be glad to be alone together . Ralph stand still for a moment to light his pipe beneath a lamp . 

 she look at his face isolate in the little circle of light . 

 " oh , that cottage , " she say . " we must take it and go there . " 

 " and leave all this ? " he inquire . 

 " as you like , " she reply . she think , look at the sky above Chancery Lane , how the roof be the same everywhere ; how she be now secure of all that this lofty blue and its steadfast light mean to she ; reality , be it , figure , love , truth ? 

 " I have   something on my mind , " say Ralph abruptly . " I mean I have   be think of Mary Datchet . we be very near her room now . would you mind if we go there ? " 

 she have turn before she answer he . she have no wish to see any one to - night ; it seem to she that the immense riddle be answer ; the problem have be solve ; she hold in her hand for one brief moment the globe which we spend our life in try to shape , round , whole , and entire from the confusion of chaos . to see Mary be to risk the destruction of this globe . 

 " do you treat she badly ? " she ask rather mechanically , walk on . 

 " I could defend myself , " he say , almost defiantly . " but what be the use , if one feel a thing ? I will not   be with she a minute , " he say . " I will just tell she " 

 " of course , you must tell she , " say Katharine , and now feel anxious for he to do what appear to be necessary if he , too , be to hold his globe for a moment round , whole , and entire . 

 " I wish I wish " she sigh , for melancholy come over she and obscure at least a section of her clear vision . the globe swam before she as if obscure by tear . 

 " I regret nothing , " say Ralph firmly . she leant towards he almost as if she could thus see what he see . she think how obscure he still be to she , save only that more and more constantly he appear to she a fire burn through its smoke , a source of life . 

 " go on , " she say . " you regret nothing " 

 " nothing nothing , " he repeat . 

 " what a fire ! " she think to herself . she think of he blaze splendidly in the night , yet so obscure that to hold his arm , as she hold it , be only to touch the opaque substance surround the flame that roar upwards . 

 " why nothing ? " she ask hurriedly , in order that he might say more and so make more splendid , more red , more darkly intertwine with smoke this flame rush upwards . 

 " what be you think of , Katharine ? " he ask suspiciously , notice her tone of dreaminess and the inapt word . 

 " I be think of you yes , I swear it . always of you , but you take such strange shape in my mind . you have   destroy my loneliness . be I to tell you how I see you ? no , tell I tell I from the beginning . " 

 begin with spasmodic word , he go on to speak more and more fluently , more and more passionately , feel she lean towards he , listen with wonder like a child , with gratitude like a woman . she interrupt he gravely now and then . 

 " but it be foolish to stand outside and look at the window . suppose William have not   see you . would you have go to bed ? " 

 he cap her reproof with wonderment that a woman of her age could have stand in Kingsway look at the traffic until she forget . 

 " but it be then I first know I love you ! " she exclaim . 

 " tell I from the beginning , " he beg she . 

 " no , I be a person who can not   tell thing , " she plead . " I shall say something ridiculous something about flame fire . no , I can not   tell you . " 

 but he persuade she into a broken statement , beautiful to he , charge with extreme excitement as she speak of the dark red fire , and the smoke twin round it , make he feel that he have step over the threshold into the faintly light vastness of another mind , stir with shape , so large , so dim , unveil themselves only in flash , and move away again into the darkness , engulf by it . they have walk by this time to the street in which Mary live , and be engross by what they say and partly see , pass her staircase without look up . at this time of night there be no traffic and scarcely any foot - passenger , so that they could pace slowly without interruption , arm - in - arm , raise their hand now and then to draw something upon the vast blue curtain of the sky . 

 they bring themselves by these mean , act on a mood of profound happiness , to a state of clear - sightedness where the lifting of a finger have effect , and one word speak more than a sentence . they lapse gently into silence , travel the dark path of thought side by side towards something discern in the distance which gradually possess they both . they be victor , master of life , but at the same time absorb in the flame , give their life to increase its brightness , to testify to their faith . thus they have walk , perhaps , twice or three time up and down Mary Datchet 's street before the recurrence of a light burn behind a thin , yellow blind cause they to stop without exactly know why they do so . it burn itself into their mind . 

 " that be the light in Mary 's room , " say Ralph . " she must be at home . " he point across the street . Katharine 's eye rest there too . 

 " be she alone , work at this time of night ? what be she work at ? " she wonder . " why should we interrupt she ? " she ask passionately . " what have we get to give she ? she be happy too , " she add . " she have her work . " her voice shake slightly , and the light swam like an ocean of gold behind her tear . 

 " you do not   want I to go to she ? " Ralph ask . 

 " go , if you like ; tell she what you like , " she reply . 

 he cross the road immediately , and go up the step into Mary 's house . Katharine stand where he leave she , look at the window and expect soon to see a shadow move across it ; but she see nothing ; the blind convey nothing ; the light be not move . it signal to she across the dark street ; it be a sign of triumph shin there for ever , not to be extinguish this side of the grave . she brandish her happiness as if in salute ; she dip it as if in reverence . " how they burn ! " she think , and all the darkness of London seem set with fire , roar upwards ; but her eye come back to Mary 's window and rest there satisfied . she have wait some time before a figure detach itself from the doorway and come across the road , slowly and reluctantly , to where she stand . 

 " I do not   go in I could not   bring myself , " he break off . he have stand outside Mary 's door unable to bring himself to knock ; if she have come out she would have find he there , the tear run down his cheek , unable to speak . 

 they stand for some moment , look at the illuminated blind , an expression to they both of something impersonal and serene in the spirit of the woman within , work out her plan far into the night her plan for the good of a world that none of they be ever to know . then their mind jump on and other little figure come by in procession , head , in Ralph 's view , by the figure of Sally Seal . 

 " do you remember Sally Seal ? " he ask . Katharine bend her head . 

 " your mother and Mary ? " he go on . " Rodney and Cassandra ? Old Joan up at Highgate ? " he stop in his enumeration , not find it possible to link they together in any way that should explain the queer combination which he could perceive in they , as he think of they . they appear to he to be more than individual ; to be make up of many different thing in cohesion ; he have a vision of an orderly world . 

 " it be all so easy it be all so simple , " Katherine quote , remember some word of Sally Seal 's , and wish Ralph to understand that she follow the track of his thought . she feel he try to piece together in a laborious and elementary fashion fragment of belief , unsoldered and separate , lack the unity of phrase fashion by the old believer . together they grope in this difficult region , where the unfinishe , the unfulfilled , the unwritten , the unreturne , come together in their ghostly way and wear the semblance of the complete and the satisfactory . the future emerge more splendid than ever from this construction of the present . book be to be write , and since book must be write in room , and room must have hanging , and outside the window there must be land , and an horizon to that land , and tree perhaps , and a hill , they sketch a habitation for themselves upon the outline of great office in the Strand and continue to make an account of the future upon the omnibus which take they towards Chelsea ; and still , for both of they , it swam miraculously in the golden light of a large steady lamp . 

 as the night be far advanced they have the whole of the seat on the top of the omnibus to choose from , and the road , save for an occasional couple , wear even at midnight , an air of shelter their word from the public , be desert . no long do the shadow of a man sing to the shadow of a piano . a few light in bedroom window burn but be extinguish one by one as the omnibus pass they . 

 they dismount and walk down to the river . she feel his arm stiffen beneath her hand , and know by this token that they have enter the enchant region . she might speak to he , but with that strange tremor in his voice , those eye blindly adore , whom do he answer ? what woman do he see ? and where be she walk , and who be her companion ? moment , fragment , a second of vision , and then the fly water , the wind dissipate and dissolve ; then , too , the recollection from chaos , the return of security , the earth firm , superb and brilliant in the sun . from the heart of his darkness he speak his thanksgiving ; from a region as far , as hide , she answer he . on a June night the nightingale sing , they answer each other across the plain ; they be hear under the window among the tree in the garden . pausing , they look down into the river which bear its dark tide of water , endlessly move , beneath they . they turn and find themselves opposite the house . quietly they survey the friendly place , burn its lamp either in expectation of they or because Rodney be still there talk to Cassandra . Katharine push the door half open and stand upon the threshold . the light lie in soft golden grain upon the deep obscurity of the hushed and sleep household . for a moment they wait , and then loose their hand . " good night , " he breathe . " good night , " she murmur back to he .