EMMA
BY
JANE AUSTEN
volume I
CHAPTER I
Emma Woodhouse, handsome, clever, and rich, with a comfortable home and
happy disposition, seem to unite some of the good blessing of
existence; and have live nearly twenty-one year in the world with very
little to distress or vex she.
she be the young of the two daughter of a most affectionate,
indulgent father; and have, in consequence of her sister's marriage,
be mistress of his house from a very early period. her mother have
die too long ago for she to have more than an indistinct remembrance
of her caress; and her place have be supply by an excellent woman
as governess, who have fall little short of a mother in affection.
sixteen year have Miss Taylor be in Mr. Woodhouse's family, less as a
governess than a friend, very fond of both daughter, but particularly
of Emma. between _they_ it be more the intimacy of sister. even
before Miss Taylor have cease to hold the nominal office of governess,
the mildness of her temper have hardly allow she to impose any
restraint; and the shadow of authority be now long pass away, they
have be live together as friend and friend very mutually attach,
and Emma do just what she like; highly esteem Miss Taylor's
judgment, but direct chiefly by her own.
the real evil, indeed, of Emma's situation be the power of have
rather too much her own way, and a disposition to think a little too
well of herself; these be the disadvantage which threaten alloy to
her many enjoyment. the danger, however, be at present so
unperceived, that they do not by any mean rank as misfortune with
she.
Sorrow come--a gentle sorrow--but not at all in the shape of any
disagreeable consciousness.--Miss Taylor marry. it be Miss Taylor's
loss which first bring grief. it be on the wedding-day of this
beloved friend that Emma first sit in mournful thought of any
continuance. the wedding over, and the bride-people go, her father
and herself be leave to dine together, with no prospect of a third to
cheer a long evening. her father compose himself to sleep after
dinner, as usual, and she have then only to sit and think of what she
have lose.
the event have every promise of happiness for her friend. Mr. Weston
be a man of unexceptionable character, easy fortune, suitable age, and
pleasant manner; and there be some satisfaction in consider with
what self-deny, generous friendship she have always wish and
promote the match; but it be a black morning's work for she. the
want of Miss Taylor would be feel every hour of every day. she
recall her past kindness--the kindness, the affection of sixteen
year--how she have teach and how she have play with she from five
year old--how she have devote all her power to attach and amuse she
in health--and how nurse she through the various illness of
childhood. a large debt of gratitude be owe here; but the
intercourse of the last seven year, the equal footing and perfect
unreserve which have soon follow Isabella's marriage, on their being
leave to each other, be yet a dearer, tenderer recollection. she have
be a friend and companion such as few possess: intelligent,
well-inform, useful, gentle, know all the way of the family,
interested in all its concern, and peculiarly interested in herself,
in every pleasure, every scheme of her--one to whom she could speak
every thought as it arise, and who have such an affection for she as
could never find fault.
how be she to bear the change?--it be true that her friend be go
only half a mile from they; but Emma be aware that great must be the
difference between a Mrs. Weston, only half a mile from they, and a
Miss Taylor in the house; and with all her advantage, natural and
domestic, she be now in great danger of suffer from intellectual
solitude. she dearly love her father, but he be no companion for
she. he could not meet she in conversation, rational or playful.
the evil of the actual disparity in their age (and Mr. Woodhouse have
not marry early) be much increase by his constitution and habit;
for have be a valetudinarian all his life, without activity of mind
or body, he be a much old man in way than in year; and though
everywhere belove for the friendliness of his heart and his amiable
temper, his talent could not have recommend he at any time.
her sister, though comparatively but little remove by matrimony, be
settle in London, only sixteen mile off, be much beyond her daily
reach; and many a long October and November evening must be struggle
through at Hartfield, before Christmas bring the next visit from
Isabella and her husband, and their little child, to fill the house,
and give her pleasant society again.
Highbury, the large and populous village, almost amount to a town,
to which Hartfield, in spite of its separate lawn, and shrubbery, and
name, do really belong, afford she no equal. the Woodhouses be
first in consequence there. all look up to they. she have many
acquaintance in the place, for her father be universally civil, but
not one among they who could be accept in lieu of Miss Taylor for
even half a day. it be a melancholy change; and Emma could not but
sigh over it, and wish for impossible thing, till her father awake,
and make it necessary to be cheerful. his spirit require support.
he be a nervous man, easily depressed; fond of every body that he be
use to, and hat to part with they; hat change of every kind.
Matrimony, as the origin of change, be always disagreeable; and he be
by no mean yet reconcile to his own daughter's marrying, nor could
ever speak of she but with compassion, though it have be entirely a
match of affection, when he be now oblige to part with Miss Taylor
too; and from his habit of gentle selfishness, and of be never able
to suppose that other people could feel differently from himself, he
be very much disposed to think Miss Taylor have do as sad a thing for
herself as for they, and would have be a great deal happy if she
have spend all the rest of her life at Hartfield. Emma smile and
chat as cheerfully as she could, to keep he from such thought; but
when tea come, it be impossible for he not to say exactly as he have
say at dinner,
"poor Miss Taylor!--I wish she be here again. what a pity it be that
Mr. Weston ever think of she!"
"I cannot agree with you, papa; you know I cannot. Mr. Weston be such
a good-humour, pleasant, excellent man, that he thoroughly deserve a
good wife;--and you would not have have Miss Taylor live with we for
ever, and bear all my odd humour, when she might have a house of her
own?"
"a house of she own!--but where be the advantage of a house of her own?
this be three time as large.--And you have never any odd humour, my
dear."
"how often we shall be go to see they, and they come to see
us!--we shall be always meet! _we_ must begin; we must go and pay
wedding visit very soon."
"my dear, how be I to get so far? randall be such a distance. I could
not walk half so far."
"no, papa, nobody think of your walking. we must go in the carriage,
to be sure."
"the carriage! but James will not like to put the horse to for such a
little way;--and where be the poor horse to be while we be pay
our visit?"
"they be to be put into Mr. Weston's stable, papa. you know we have
settle all that already. we talk it all over with Mr. Weston last
night. and as for James, you may be very sure he will always like
go to Randalls, because of his daughter's be housemaid there. I
only doubt whether he will ever take we anywhere else. that be your
doing, papa. you get Hannah that good place. nobody think of Hannah
till you mention she--James be so obliged to you!"
"I be very glad I do think of she. it be very lucky, for I would not
have have poor James think himself slight upon any account; and I be
sure she will make a very good servant: she be a civil, pretty-speak
girl; I have a great opinion of she. whenever I see she, she always
curtsey and ask I how I do, in a very pretty manner; and when you
have have she here to do needlework, I observe she always turn the lock
of the door the right way and never bang it. I be sure she will be an
excellent servant; and it will be a great comfort to poor Miss Taylor
to have somebody about she that she be use to see. whenever James
go over to see his daughter, you know, she will be hear of we. he
will be able to tell she how we all be."
Emma spar no exertion to maintain this happy flow of idea, and
hop, by the help of backgammon, to get her father tolerably through
the evening, and be attack by no regret but her own. the
backgammon-table be place; but a visitor immediately afterwards
walk in and make it unnecessary.
Mr. Knightley, a sensible man about seven or eight-and-thirty, be not
only a very old and intimate friend of the family, but particularly
connect with it, as the eld brother of Isabella's husband. he
live about a mile from Highbury, be a frequent visitor, and always
welcome, and at this time more welcome than usual, as come directly
from their mutual connexion in London. he have return to a late
dinner, after some day' absence, and now walk up to Hartfield to say
that all be well in Brunswick Square. it be a happy circumstance,
and animate Mr. Woodhouse for some time. Mr. Knightley have a cheerful
manner, which always do he good; and his many inquiry after "poor
Isabella" and her child be answer most satisfactorily. when
this be over, Mr. Woodhouse gratefully observe, "it be very kind of
you, Mr. Knightley, to come out at this late hour to call upon we. I
be afraid you must have have a shocking walk."
"not at all, sir. it be a beautiful moonlight night; and so mild that
I must draw back from your great fire."
"but you must have find it very damp and dirty. I wish you may not
catch cold."
"dirty, sir! look at my shoe. not a speck on they."
"well! that be quite surprising, for we have have a vast deal of rain
here. it rain dreadfully hard for half an hour while we be at
breakfast. I want they to put off the wedding."
"by the bye--I have not wish you joy. be pretty well aware of
what sort of joy you must both be feel, I have be in no hurry with
my congratulation; but I hope it all go off tolerably well. how do
you all behave? who cry most?"
"ah! poor Miss Taylor! 'tis a sad business."
"poor Mr. and Miss Woodhouse, if you please; but I cannot possibly say
'poor Miss Taylor.' I have a great regard for you and Emma; but when it
come to the question of dependence or independence!--at any rate, it
must be well to have only one to please than two."
"especially when _one_ of those two be such a fanciful, troublesome
creature!" say Emma playfully. "that be what you have in your head, I
know--and what you would certainly say if my father be not by."
"I believe it be very true, my dear, indeed," say Mr. Woodhouse, with
a sigh. "I be afraid I be sometimes very fanciful and troublesome."
"my dearest papa! you do not think I could mean _you_, or suppose Mr.
Knightley to mean _you_. what a horrible idea! oh no! I mean only
myself. Mr. Knightley love to find fault with I, you know--in a
joke--it be all a joke. we always say what we like to one another."
Mr. Knightley, in fact, be one of the few people who could see fault
in Emma Woodhouse, and the only one who ever tell she of they: and
though this be not particularly agreeable to Emma herself, she know it
would be so much less so to her father, that she would not have he
really suspect such a circumstance as she not be think perfect by
every body.
"Emma know I never flatter she," say Mr. Knightley, "but I mean no
reflection on any body. Miss Taylor have be use to have two person
to please; she will now have but one. the chance be that she must be
a gainer."
"well," say Emma, willing to let it pass--"you want to hear about the
wedding; and I shall be happy to tell you, for we all behave
charmingly. every body be punctual, every body in their good look:
not a tear, and hardly a long face to be see. oh no; we all feel that
we be go to be only half a mile apart, and be sure of meeting
every day."
"Dear Emma bear every thing so well," say her father. "but, Mr.
Knightley, she be really very sorry to lose poor Miss Taylor, and I be
sure she _will_ miss she more than she think for."
Emma turn away her head, divide between tear and smile. "it be
impossible that Emma should not miss such a companion," say Mr.
Knightley. "we should not like she so well as we do, sir, if we could
suppose it; but she know how much the marriage be to Miss Taylor's
advantage; she know how very acceptable it must be, at Miss Taylor's
time of life, to be settle in a home of her own, and how important to
she to be secure of a comfortable provision, and therefore cannot allow
herself to feel so much pain as pleasure. every friend of Miss Taylor
must be glad to have she so happily married."
"and you have forget one matter of joy to I," say Emma, "and a
very considerable one--that I make the match myself. I make the match,
you know, four year ago; and to have it take place, and be prove in
the right, when so many people say Mr. Weston would never marry again,
may comfort I for any thing."
Mr. Knightley shake his head at she. her father fondly reply, "ah!
my dear, I wish you would not make match and foretell thing, for
whatever you say always come to pass. pray do not make any more
match."
"I promise you to make none for myself, papa; but I must, indeed, for
other people. it be the great amusement in the world! and after
such success, you know!--every body say that Mr. Weston would never
marry again. oh dear, no! Mr. Weston, who have be a widower so long,
and who seem so perfectly comfortable without a wife, so constantly
occupy either in his business in town or among his friend here,
always acceptable wherever he go, always cheerful--Mr. Weston need
not spend a single evening in the year alone if he do not like it. oh
no! Mr. Weston certainly would never marry again. some people even
talk of a promise to his wife on her deathbed, and other of the son
and the uncle not let he. all manner of solemn nonsense be
talk on the subject, but I believe none of it.
"ever since the day--about four year ago--that Miss Taylor and I meet
with he in Broadway Lane, when, because it begin to drizzle, he dart
away with so much gallantry, and borrow two umbrella for we from
Farmer Mitchell's, I make up my mind on the subject. I plan the
match from that hour; and when such success have bless I in this
instance, dear papa, you cannot think that I shall leave off
match-making."
"I do not understand what you mean by 'success,'" say Mr. Knightley.
"success suppose endeavour. your time have be properly and
delicately spend, if you have be endeavour for the last four year
to bring about this marriage. a worthy employment for a young lady's
mind! but if, which I rather imagine, your make the match, as you
call it, mean only your plan it, your say to yourself one idle
day, 'I think it would be a very good thing for Miss Taylor if Mr.
Weston be to marry she,' and say it again to yourself every now
and then afterwards, why do you talk of success? where be your merit?
what be you proud of? you make a lucky guess; and _that_ be all that
can be say."
"and have you never know the pleasure and triumph of a lucky guess?--
I pity you.--I think you cleverer--for, depend upon it a lucky guess
be never merely luck. there be always some talent in it. and as to my
poor word 'success,' which you quarrel with, I do not know that I be so
entirely without any claim to it. you have draw two pretty picture;
but I think there may be a third--a something between the do-nothing
and the do-all. if I have not promote Mr. Weston's visit here, and
give many little encouragement, and smooth many little matter, it
might not have come to any thing after all. I think you must know
Hartfield enough to comprehend that."
"a straightforward, open-hearted man like Weston, and a rational,
unaffected woman like Miss Taylor, may be safely leave to manage their
own concern. you be more likely to have do harm to yourself, than
good to they, by interference."
"Emma never think of herself, if she can do good to other," rejoin
Mr. Woodhouse, understanding but in part. "but, my dear, pray do not
make any more match; they be silly thing, and break up one's family
circle grievously."
"only one more, papa; only for Mr. Elton. poor Mr. Elton! you like Mr.
Elton, papa,--i must look about for a wife for he. there be nobody in
Highbury who deserve he--and he have be here a whole year, and have
fit up his house so comfortably, that it would be a shame to have
he single any long--and I think when he be join their hand
to-day, he look so very much as if he would like to have the same
kind office do for he! I think very well of Mr. Elton, and this be
the only way I have of do he a service."
"Mr. Elton be a very pretty young man, to be sure, and a very good
young man, and I have a great regard for he. but if you want to shew
he any attention, my dear, ask he to come and dine with we some day.
that will be a much well thing. I dare say Mr. Knightley will be so
kind as to meet he."
"with a great deal of pleasure, sir, at any time," say Mr. Knightley,
laughing, "and I agree with you entirely, that it will be a much well
thing. invite he to dinner, Emma, and help he to the good of the
fish and the chicken, but leave he to chuse his own wife. depend upon
it, a man of six or seven-and-twenty can take care of himself."
CHAPTER II
Mr. Weston be a native of Highbury, and bear of a respectable family,
which for the last two or three generation have be rise into
gentility and property. he have receive a good education, but, on
succeed early in life to a small independence, have become indisposed
for any of the more homely pursuit in which his brother be engage,
and have satisfy an active, cheerful mind and social temper by
enter into the militia of his county, then embody.
Captain Weston be a general favourite; and when the chance of his
military life have introduce he to Miss Churchill, of a great
Yorkshire family, and Miss Churchill fall in love with he, nobody be
surprize, except her brother and his wife, who have never see he, and
who be full of pride and importance, which the connexion would offend.
Miss Churchill, however, be of age, and with the full command of her
fortune--though her fortune bear no proportion to the
family-estate--be not to be dissuade from the marriage, and it take
place, to the infinite mortification of Mr. and Mrs. Churchill, who
throw she off with due decorum. it be an unsuitable connexion, and
do not produce much happiness. Mrs. Weston ought to have find more
in it, for she have a husband whose warm heart and sweet temper make he
think every thing due to she in return for the great goodness of be
in love with he; but though she have one sort of spirit, she have not
the good. she have resolution enough to pursue her own will in spite of
her brother, but not enough to refrain from unreasonable regret at
that brother's unreasonable anger, nor from miss the luxury of her
former home. they live beyond their income, but still it be nothing
in comparison of Enscombe: she do not cease to love her husband, but
she want at once to be the wife of Captain Weston, and Miss Churchill
of Enscombe.
Captain Weston, who have be consider, especially by the Churchills,
as make such an amazing match, be prove to have much the bad of
the bargain; for when his wife die, after a three year' marriage, he
be rather a poor man than at first, and with a child to maintain.
from the expense of the child, however, he be soon relieve. the boy
have, with the additional soften claim of a linger illness of his
mother's, be the mean of a sort of reconciliation; and Mr. and Mrs.
Churchill, have no child of their own, nor any other young
creature of equal kindre to care for, offer to take the whole charge
of the little Frank soon after her decease. some scruple and some
reluctance the widower-father may be suppose to have feel; but as they
be overcome by other consideration, the child be give up to the
care and the wealth of the Churchills, and he have only his own comfort
to seek, and his own situation to improve as he could.
a complete change of life become desirable. he quit the militia and
engage in trade, have brother already establish in a good way in
London, which afford he a favourable opening. it be a concern
which bring just employment enough. he have still a small house in
Highbury, where most of his leisure day be spend; and between useful
occupation and the pleasure of society, the next eighteen or twenty
year of his life pass cheerfully away. he have, by that time,
realise an easy competence--enough to secure the purchase of a little
estate adjoining Highbury, which he have always long for--enough to
marry a woman as portionless even as Miss Taylor, and to live accord
to the wish of his own friendly and social disposition.
it be now some time since Miss Taylor have begin to influence his
scheme; but as it be not the tyrannic influence of youth on youth, it
have not shake his determination of never settle till he could
purchase Randalls, and the sale of Randalls be long look forward to;
but he have go steadily on, with these object in view, till they be
accomplish. he have make his fortune, buy his house, and obtain
his wife; and be begin a new period of existence, with every
probability of great happiness than in any yet pass through. he
have never be an unhappy man; his own temper have secure he from
that, even in his first marriage; but his second must shew he how
delightful a well-judging and truly amiable woman could be, and must
give he the pleasantest proof of its be a great deal well to
choose than to be choose, to excite gratitude than to feel it.
he have only himself to please in his choice: his fortune be his own;
for as to Frank, it be more than be tacitly bring up as his
uncle's heir, it have become so avow an adoption as to have he assume
the name of Churchill on come of age. it be most unlikely,
therefore, that he should ever want his father's assistance. his
father have no apprehension of it. the aunt be a capricious woman, and
govern her husband entirely; but it be not in Mr. Weston's nature to
imagine that any caprice could be strong enough to affect one so dear,
and, as he believe, so deservedly dear. he see his son every year in
London, and be proud of he; and his fond report of he as a very fine
young man have make Highbury feel a sort of pride in he too. he be
look on as sufficiently belong to the place to make his merit and
prospect a kind of common concern.
Mr. Frank Churchill be one of the boast of Highbury, and a lively
curiosity to see he prevail, though the compliment be so little
return that he have never be there in his life. his come to visit
his father have be often talk of but never achieve.
now, upon his father's marriage, it be very generally propose, as a
most proper attention, that the visit should take place. there be not
a dissentient voice on the subject, either when Mrs. Perry drink tea
with Mrs. and Miss Bates, or when Mrs. and Miss Bates return the
visit. now be the time for Mr. Frank Churchill to come among they;
and the hope strengthen when it be understand that he have write to
his new mother on the occasion. for a few day, every morning visit in
Highbury include some mention of the handsome letter Mrs. Weston have
receive. "I suppose you have hear of the handsome letter Mr. Frank
Churchill have write to Mrs. Weston? I understand it be a very
handsome letter, indeed. Mr. Woodhouse tell I of it. Mr. Woodhouse
see the letter, and he say he never see such a handsome letter in his
life."
it be, indeed, a highly prize letter. Mrs. Weston have, of course,
form a very favourable idea of the young man; and such a pleasing
attention be an irresistible proof of his great good sense, and a most
welcome addition to every source and every expression of congratulation
which her marriage have already secure. she feel herself a most
fortunate woman; and she have live long enough to know how fortunate
she might well be think, where the only regret be for a partial
separation from friend whose friendship for she have never cool, and
who could ill bear to part with she.
she know that at time she must be miss; and could not think, without
pain, of Emma's lose a single pleasure, or suffer an hour's ennui,
from the want of her companionableness: but dear Emma be of no feeble
character; she be more equal to her situation than most girl would
have be, and have sense, and energy, and spirit that might be hop
would bear she well and happily through its little difficulty and
privation. and then there be such comfort in the very easy distance
of Randalls from Hartfield, so convenient for even solitary female
walking, and in Mr. Weston's disposition and circumstance, which would
make the approach season no hindrance to their spending half the
evening in the week together.
her situation be altogether the subject of hour of gratitude to Mrs.
Weston, and of moment only of regret; and her satisfaction--her more
than satisfaction--her cheerful enjoyment, be so just and so apparent,
that Emma, well as she know her father, be sometimes take by surprize
at his be still able to pity 'poor Miss Taylor,' when they leave she
at Randalls in the centre of every domestic comfort, or see she go away
in the evening attend by her pleasant husband to a carriage of her
own. but never do she go without Mr. Woodhouse's give a gentle
sigh, and say, "ah, poor Miss Taylor! she would be very glad to
stay."
there be no recover Miss Taylor--nor much likelihood of cease to
pity she; but a few week bring some alleviation to Mr. Woodhouse.
the compliment of his neighbour be over; he be no long tease by
be wish joy of so sorrowful an event; and the wedding-cake, which
have be a great distress to he, be all eat up. his own stomach
could bear nothing rich, and he could never believe other people to be
different from himself. what be unwholesome to he he regard as
unfit for any body; and he have, therefore, earnestly try to dissuade
they from have any wedding-cake at all, and when that prove vain, as
earnestly try to prevent any body's eat it. he have be at the
pain of consult Mr. Perry, the apothecary, on the subject. Mr.
Perry be an intelligent, gentlemanlike man, whose frequent visit be
one of the comfort of Mr. Woodhouse's life; and upon be apply to,
he could not but acknowledge (though it seem rather against the bias
of inclination) that wedding-cake might certainly disagree with
many--perhaps with most people, unless take moderately. with such an
opinion, in confirmation of his own, Mr. Woodhouse hop to influence
every visitor of the newly marry pair; but still the cake be eat;
and there be no rest for his benevolent nerve till it be all go.
there be a strange rumour in Highbury of all the little Perrys be
see with a slice of Mrs. Weston's wedding-cake in their hand: but Mr.
Woodhouse would never believe it.
CHAPTER III
Mr. Woodhouse be fond of society in his own way. he like very much
to have his friend come and see he; and from various united cause,
from his long residence at Hartfield, and his good nature, from his
fortune, his house, and his daughter, he could command the visit of
his own little circle, in a great measure, as he like. he have not
much intercourse with any family beyond that circle; his horror of
late hour, and large dinner-party, make he unfit for any
acquaintance but such as would visit he on his own term. fortunately
for he, Highbury, include Randalls in the same parish, and Donwell
Abbey in the parish adjoining, the seat of Mr. Knightley, comprehend
many such. not unfrequently, through Emma's persuasion, he have some of
the chosen and the good to dine with he: but evening party be what
he prefer; and, unless he fancy himself at any time unequal to
company, there be scarcely an evening in the week in which Emma could
not make up a card-table for he.
real, long-stand regard bring the Westons and Mr. Knightley; and
by Mr. Elton, a young man live alone without like it, the privilege
of exchange any vacant evening of his own blank solitude for the
elegancie and society of Mr. Woodhouse's drawing-room, and the smile
of his lovely daughter, be in no danger of be throw away.
after these come a second set; among the most come-at-able of whom be
Mrs. and Miss Bates, and Mrs. Goddard, three lady almost always at
the service of an invitation from Hartfield, and who be fetched and
carry home so often, that Mr. Woodhouse think it no hardship for
either James or the horse. have it take place only once a year, it
would have be a grievance.
Mrs. Bates, the widow of a former vicar of Highbury, be a very old
lady, almost past every thing but tea and quadrille. she live with
her single daughter in a very small way, and be consider with all
the regard and respect which a harmless old lady, under such untoward
circumstance, can excite. her daughter enjoy a most uncommon degree
of popularity for a woman neither young, handsome, rich, nor marry.
Miss Bates stand in the very bad predicament in the world for have
much of the public favour; and she have no intellectual superiority to
make atonement to herself, or frighten those who might hate she into
outward respect. she have never boast either beauty or cleverness.
her youth have pass without distinction, and her middle of life be
devoted to the care of a fail mother, and the endeavour to make a
small income go as far as possible. and yet she be a happy woman, and
a woman whom no one name without good-will. it be her own universal
good-will and content temper which work such wonder. she love
every body, be interested in every body's happiness, quicksighte to
every body's merit; think herself a most fortunate creature, and
surround with blessing in such an excellent mother, and so many good
neighbour and friend, and a home that want for nothing. the
simplicity and cheerfulness of her nature, her contented and grateful
spirit, be a recommendation to every body, and a mine of felicity to
herself. she be a great talker upon little matter, which exactly
suit Mr. Woodhouse, full of trivial communication and harmless
gossip.
Mrs. Goddard be the mistress of a school--not of a seminary, or an
establishment, or any thing which profess, in long sentence of
refined nonsense, to combine liberal acquirement with elegant
morality, upon new principle and new system--and where young lady
for enormous pay might be screw out of health and into vanity--but a
real, honest, old-fashioned Boarding-school, where a reasonable
quantity of accomplishment be sell at a reasonable price, and where
girl might be send to be out of the way, and scramble themselves into
a little education, without any danger of come back prodigy. Mrs.
Goddard's school be in high repute--and very deservedly; for Highbury
be reckon a particularly healthy spot: she have an ample house and
garden, give the child plenty of wholesome food, let they run about
a great deal in the summer, and in winter dress their chilblain with
her own hand. it be no wonder that a train of twenty young couple
now walk after she to church. she be a plain, motherly kind of
woman, who have work hard in her youth, and now think herself
entitle to the occasional holiday of a tea-visit; and have formerly
owe much to Mr. Woodhouse's kindness, feel his particular claim on she
to leave she neat parlour, hang round with fancy-work, whenever she
could, and win or lose a few sixpence by his fireside.
these be the lady whom Emma find herself very frequently able to
collect; and happy be she, for her father's sake, in the power;
though, as far as she be herself concerned, it be no remedy for the
absence of Mrs. Weston. she be delighted to see her father look
comfortable, and very much pleased with herself for contrive thing
so well; but the quiet prosing of three such woman make she feel that
every evening so spend be indeed one of the long evening she have
fearfully anticipate.
as she sit one morning, look forward to exactly such a close of the
present day, a note be bring from Mrs. Goddard, request, in most
respectful term, to be allow to bring Miss Smith with she; a most
welcome request: for Miss Smith be a girl of seventeen, whom Emma know
very well by sight, and have long feel an interest in, on account of her
beauty. a very gracious invitation be return, and the evening no
long dread by the fair mistress of the mansion.
Harriet Smith be the natural daughter of somebody. somebody have
place she, several year back, at Mrs. Goddard's school, and somebody
have lately raise she from the condition of scholar to that of
parlour-boarder. this be all that be generally know of her history.
she have no visible friend but what have be acquire at Highbury, and
be now just return from a long visit in the country to some young
lady who have be at school there with she.
she be a very pretty girl, and her beauty happen to be of a sort
which Emma particularly admire. she be short, plump, and fair, with
a fine bloom, blue eye, light hair, regular feature, and a look of
great sweetness, and, before the end of the evening, Emma be as much
pleased with her manner as her person, and quite determined to
continue the acquaintance.
she be not strike by any thing remarkably clever in Miss Smith's
conversation, but she find she altogether very engaging--not
inconveniently shy, not unwilling to talk--and yet so far from push,
shew so proper and become a deference, seem so pleasantly
grateful for be admit to Hartfield, and so artlessly impress by
the appearance of every thing in so superior a style to what she have
be use to, that she must have good sense, and deserve encouragement.
encouragement should be give. those soft blue eye, and all those
natural grace, should not be waste on the inferior society of
Highbury and its connexion. the acquaintance she have already form
be unworthy of she. the friend from whom she have just part,
though very good sort of people, must be do her harm. they be a
family of the name of Martin, whom Emma well know by character, as
rent a large farm of Mr. Knightley, and reside in the parish of
Donwell--very creditably, she believe--she know Mr. Knightley think
highly of they--but they must be coarse and unpolished, and very unfit
to be the intimate of a girl who want only a little more knowledge
and elegance to be quite perfect. _she_ would notice she; she would
improve she; she would detach she from her bad acquaintance, and
introduce she into good society; she would form her opinion and her
manner. it would be an interesting, and certainly a very kind
undertaking; highly become her own situation in life, her leisure,
and power.
she be so busy in admire those soft blue eye, in talk and
listening, and form all these scheme in the in-between, that the
evening fly away at a very unusual rate; and the supper-table, which
always close such party, and for which she have be use to sit and
watch the due time, be all set out and ready, and move forwards to
the fire, before she be aware. with an alacrity beyond the common
impulse of a spirit which yet be never indifferent to the credit of
do every thing well and attentively, with the real good-will of a
mind delight with its own idea, do she then do all the honour of
the meal, and help and recommend the mince chicken and scallop
oyster, with an urgency which she know would be acceptable to the
early hour and civil scruple of their guest.
upon such occasion poor Mr. Woodhouses feeling be in sad warfare.
he love to have the cloth lay, because it have be the fashion of his
youth, but his conviction of supper be very unwholesome make he
rather sorry to see any thing put on it; and while his hospitality
would have welcome his visitor to every thing, his care for their
health make he grieve that they would eat.
such another small basin of thin gruel as his own be all that he
could, with thorough self-approbation, recommend; though he might
constrain himself, while the lady be comfortably clear the nicer
thing, to say:
"Mrs. Bates, let I propose your venturing on one of these egg. an
egg boil very soft be not unwholesome. Serle understand boil an
egg well than any body. I would not recommend an egg boil by any
body else; but you need not be afraid, they be very small, you
see--one of our small egg will not hurt you. Miss Bates, let Emma
help you to a _little_ bit of tart--a _very_ little bit. our be all
apple-tart. you need not be afraid of unwholesome preserve here. I
do not advise the custard. Mrs. Goddard, what say you to _half_ a
glass of wine? a _small_ half-glass, put into a tumbler of water? I do
not think it could disagree with you."
Emma allow her father to talk--but supply her visitor in a much
more satisfactory style, and on the present evening have particular
pleasure in send they away happy. the happiness of Miss Smith be
quite equal to her intention. Miss Woodhouse be so great a personage
in Highbury, that the prospect of the introduction have give as much
panic as pleasure; but the humble, grateful little girl go off with
highly gratified feeling, delight with the affability with which
Miss Woodhouse have treat she all the evening, and actually shake
hand with she at last!
CHAPTER IV
Harriet Smith's intimacy at Hartfield be soon a settle thing. quick
and decide in her way, Emma lose no time in inviting, encouraging,
and tell she to come very often; and as their acquaintance
increase, so do their satisfaction in each other. as a walk
companion, Emma have very early foresee how useful she might find she.
in that respect Mrs. Weston's loss have be important. her father
never go beyond the shrubbery, where two division of the ground
suffice he for his long walk, or his short, as the year vary; and
since Mrs. Weston's marriage her exercise have be too much confine.
she have venture once alone to Randalls, but it be not pleasant; and a
Harriet Smith, therefore, one whom she could summon at any time to a
walk, would be a valuable addition to her privilege. but in every
respect, as she see more of she, she approve she, and be confirm in
all her kind design.
Harriet certainly be not clever, but she have a sweet, docile, grateful
disposition, be totally free from conceit, and only desire to be
guide by any one she look up to. her early attachment to herself
be very amiable; and her inclination for good company, and power of
appreciate what be elegant and clever, shew that there be no want
of taste, though strength of understanding must not be expect.
altogether she be quite convinced of Harriet Smith's be exactly the
young friend she want--exactly the something which her home require.
such a friend as Mrs. Weston be out of the question. two such could
never be grant. two such she do not want. it be quite a different
sort of thing, a sentiment distinct and independent. Mrs. Weston be
the object of a regard which have its basis in gratitude and esteem.
Harriet would be love as one to whom she could be useful. for Mrs.
Weston there be nothing to be do; for Harriet every thing.
her first attempt at usefulness be in an endeavour to find out who
be the parent, but Harriet could not tell. she be ready to tell
every thing in her power, but on this subject question be vain.
Emma be oblige to fancy what she like--but she could never believe
that in the same situation _she_ should not have discover the truth.
Harriet have no penetration. she have be satisfied to hear and believe
just what Mrs. Goddard choose to tell she; and look no far.
Mrs. Goddard, and the teacher, and the girl and the affair of the
school in general, form naturally a great part of the
conversation--and but for her acquaintance with the martin of
Abbey-Mill Farm, it must have be the whole. but the martin occupy
her thought a good deal; she have spend two very happy month with
they, and now love to talk of the pleasure of her visit, and describe
the many comfort and wonder of the place. Emma encourage she
talkativeness--amuse by such a picture of another set of being, and
enjoy the youthful simplicity which could speak with so much
exultation of Mrs. Martin's have "_two_ parlour, two very good
parlour, indeed; one of they quite as large as Mrs. Goddard's
drawing-room; and of she have an upper maid who have live
five-and-twenty year with she; and of their have eight cow, two of
they Alderneys, and one a little Welch cow, a very pretty little Welch
cow indeed; and of Mrs. Martin's say as she be so fond of it, it
should be call _her_ cow; and of their have a very handsome
summer-house in their garden, where some day next year they be all to
drink tea:--a very handsome summer-house, large enough to hold a dozen
people."
for some time she be amuse, without think beyond the immediate
cause; but as she come to understand the family well, other feeling
arise. she have take up a wrong idea, fancy it be a mother and
daughter, a son and son's wife, who all live together; but when it
appear that the Mr. Martin, who bear a part in the narrative, and be
always mention with approbation for his great good-nature in do
something or other, be a single man; that there be no young Mrs.
Martin, no wife in the case; she do suspect danger to her poor little
friend from all this hospitality and kindness, and that, if she be
not take care of, she might be require to sink herself forever.
with this inspiriting notion, her question increase in number and
meaning; and she particularly lead Harriet to talk more of Mr. Martin,
and there be evidently no dislike to it. Harriet be very ready to
speak of the share he have have in their moonlight walk and merry
evening game; and dwell a good deal upon his be so very
good-humour and obliging. he have go three mile round one day in
order to bring she some walnut, because she have say how fond she be
of they, and in every thing else he be so very obliging. he have his
shepherd's son into the parlour one night on purpose to sing to she.
she be very fond of singing. he could sing a little himself. she
believe he be very clever, and understand every thing. he have a very
fine flock, and, while she be with they, he have be bid more for his
wool than any body in the country. she believe every body speak well
of he. his mother and sister be very fond of he. Mrs. Martin have
tell she one day (and there be a blush as she say it,) that it be
impossible for any body to be a well son, and therefore she be sure,
whenever he marry, he would make a good husband. not that she
_want_ he to marry. she be in no hurry at all.
"well do, Mrs. Martin!" think Emma. "you know what you be about."
"and when she have come away, Mrs. Martin be so very kind as to send
Mrs. Goddard a beautiful goose--the fine goose Mrs. Goddard have ever
see. Mrs. Goddard have dress it on a Sunday, and ask all the three
teacher, Miss Nash, and Miss Prince, and Miss Richardson, to sup with
she."
"Mr. Martin, I suppose, be not a man of information beyond the line of
his own business? he do not read?"
"oh yes!--that be, no--I do not know--but I believe he have read a good
deal--but not what you would think any thing of. he read the
Agricultural Reports, and some other book that lie in one of the
window seat--but he read all _they_ to himself. but sometimes of an
evening, before we go to card, he would read something aloud out of
the elegant extract, very entertaining. and I know he have read the
Vicar of Wakefield. he never read the Romance of the Forest, nor the
Children of the Abbey. he have never hear of such book before I
mention they, but he be determined to get they now as soon as ever he
can."
the next question was--
"what sort of look man be Mr. Martin?"
"oh! not handsome--not at all handsome. I think he very plain at
first, but I do not think he so plain now. one do not, you know,
after a time. but do you never see he? he be in Highbury every now
and then, and he be sure to ride through every week in his way to
Kingston. he have pass you very often."
"that may be, and I may have see he fifty time, but without have
any idea of his name. a young farmer, whether on horseback or on foot,
be the very last sort of person to raise my curiosity. the yeomanry
be precisely the order of people with whom I feel I can have nothing
to do. a degree or two low, and a creditable appearance might
interest I; I might hope to be useful to their family in some way or
other. but a farmer can need none of my help, and be, therefore, in
one sense, as much above my notice as in every other he be below it."
"to be sure. oh yes! it be not likely you should ever have observe
he; but he know you very well indeed--I mean by sight."
"I have no doubt of his be a very respectable young man. I know,
indeed, that he be so, and, as such, wish he well. what do you
imagine his age to be?"
"he be four-and-twenty the 8th of last June, and my birthday be the
23rd just a fortnight and a day's difference--which be very odd."
"only four-and-twenty. that be too young to settle. his mother be
perfectly right not to be in a hurry. they seem very comfortable as
they be, and if she be to take any pain to marry he, she would
probably repent it. six year hence, if he could meet with a good sort
of young woman in the same rank as his own, with a little money, it
might be very desirable."
"six year hence! dear Miss Woodhouse, he would be thirty year old!"
"well, and that be as early as most man can afford to marry, who be
not bear to an independence. Mr. Martin, I imagine, have his fortune
entirely to make--cannot be at all beforehand with the world. whatever
money he might come into when his father die, whatever his share of
the family property, it be, I dare say, all afloat, all employ in his
stock, and so forth; and though, with diligence and good luck, he may
be rich in time, it be next to impossible that he should have realise
any thing yet."
"to be sure, so it be. but they live very comfortably. they have no
indoor man, else they do not want for any thing; and Mrs. Martin talk
of take a boy another year."
"I wish you may not get into a scrape, Harriet, whenever he do
marry;--i mean, as to be acquaint with his wife--for though his
sister, from a superior education, be not to be altogether object
to, it do not follow that he might marry any body at all fit for you
to notice. the misfortune of your birth ought to make you particularly
careful as to your associate. there can be no doubt of your be a
gentleman's daughter, and you must support your claim to that station
by every thing within your own power, or there will be plenty of people
who would take pleasure in degrade you."
"yes, to be sure, I suppose there be. but while I visit at Hartfield,
and you be so kind to I, Miss Woodhouse, I be not afraid of what any
body can do."
"you understand the force of influence pretty well, Harriet; but I
would have you so firmly establish in good society, as to be
independent even of Hartfield and Miss Woodhouse. I want to see you
permanently well connected, and to that end it will be advisable to
have as few odd acquaintance as may be; and, therefore, I say that if
you should still be in this country when Mr. Martin marry, I wish you
may not be draw in by your intimacy with the sister, to be acquaint
with the wife, who will probably be some mere farmer's daughter,
without education."
"to be sure. yes. not that I think Mr. Martin would ever marry any
body but what have have some education--and be very well bring up.
however, I do not mean to set up my opinion against your--and I be
sure I shall not wish for the acquaintance of his wife. I shall always
have a great regard for the Miss Martins, especially Elizabeth, and
should be very sorry to give they up, for they be quite as well
educate as I. but if he marry a very ignorant, vulgar woman,
certainly I have well not visit she, if I can help it."
Emma watch she through the fluctuation of this speech, and see no
alarming symptom of love. the young man have be the first admirer,
but she trust there be no other hold, and that there would be no
serious difficulty, on Harriet's side, to oppose any friendly
arrangement of her own.
they meet Mr. Martin the very next day, as they be walk on the
Donwell road. he be on foot, and after look very respectfully at
she, look with most unfeigned satisfaction at her companion. Emma
be not sorry to have such an opportunity of survey; and walk a few
yard forward, while they talk together, soon make her quick eye
sufficiently acquaint with Mr. Robert Martin. his appearance be
very neat, and he look like a sensible young man, but his person have
no other advantage; and when he come to be contrast with gentleman,
she think he must lose all the ground he have gain in Harriet's
inclination. Harriet be not insensible of manner; she have voluntarily
notice her father's gentleness with admiration as well as wonder. Mr.
Martin look as if he do not know what manner be.
they remain but a few minute together, as Miss Woodhouse must not be
keep wait; and Harriet then come run to she with a smile face,
and in a flutter of spirit, which Miss Woodhouse hop very soon to
compose.
"only think of our happen to meet him!--How very odd! it be quite a
chance, he say, that he have not go round by Randalls. he do not
think we ever walk this road. he think we walk towards Randalls
most day. he have not be able to get the Romance of the Forest yet.
he be so busy the last time he be at Kingston that he quite forget
it, but he go again to-morrow. so very odd we should happen to meet!
well, Miss Woodhouse, be he like what you expect? what do you think
of he? do you think he so very plain?"
"he be very plain, undoubtedly--remarkably plain:--but that be nothing
compare with his entire want of gentility. I have no right to expect
much, and I do not expect much; but I have no idea that he could be so
very clownish, so totally without air. I have imagine he, I confess,
a degree or two nearer gentility."
"to be sure," say Harriet, in a mortified voice, "he be not so genteel
as real gentleman."
"I think, Harriet, since your acquaintance with we, you have be
repeatedly in the company of some such very real gentleman, that you
must yourself be strike with the difference in Mr. Martin. at
Hartfield, you have have very good specimen of well educate, well breed
man. I should be surprize if, after see they, you could be in
company with Mr. Martin again without perceive he to be a very
inferior creature--and rather wonder at yourself for have ever
think he at all agreeable before. do not you begin to feel that
now? be not you strike? I be sure you must have be strike by his
awkward look and abrupt manner, and the uncouthness of a voice which I
hear to be wholly unmodulated as I stand here."
"certainly, he be not like Mr. Knightley. he have not such a fine air
and way of walk as Mr. Knightley. I see the difference plain
enough. but Mr. Knightley be so very fine a man!"
"Mr. Knightley's air be so remarkably good that it be not fair to
compare Mr. Martin with _he_. you might not see one in a hundred with
_gentleman_ so plainly write as in Mr. Knightley. but he be not the
only gentleman you have be lately use to. what say you to Mr.
Weston and Mr. Elton? compare Mr. Martin with either of _they_.
compare their manner of carry themselves; of walk; of speak;
of be silent. you must see the difference."
"oh yes!--there be a great difference. but Mr. Weston be almost an old
man. Mr. Weston must be between forty and fifty."
"which make his good manner the more valuable. the old a person
grow, Harriet, the more important it be that their manner should not
be bad; the more glaring and disgust any loudness, or coarseness, or
awkwardness become. what be passable in youth be detestable in later
age. Mr. Martin be now awkward and abrupt; what will he be at Mr.
Weston's time of life?"
"there be no saying, indeed," reply Harriet rather solemnly.
"but there may be pretty good guessing. he will be a completely gross,
vulgar farmer, totally inattentive to appearance, and think of
nothing but profit and loss."
"will he, indeed? that will be very bad."
"how much his business engross he already be very plain from the
circumstance of his forgetting to inquire for the book you recommend.
he be a great deal too full of the market to think of any thing
else--which be just as it should be, for a thriving man. what have he
to do with book? and I have no doubt that he _will_ thrive, and be a
very rich man in time--and his be illiterate and coarse need not
disturb _us_."
"I wonder he do not remember the book"--was all Harriet's answer, and
speak with a degree of grave displeasure which Emma think might be
safely leave to itself. she, therefore, say no more for some time.
her next beginning be,
"in one respect, perhaps, Mr. Elton's manner be superior to Mr.
Knightley's or Mr. Weston's. they have more gentleness. they might be
more safely hold up as a pattern. there be an openness, a quickness,
almost a bluntness in Mr. Weston, which every body like in _he_,
because there be so much good-humour with it--but that would not do to
be copy. neither would Mr. Knightley's downright, decide,
command sort of manner, though it suit _he_ very well; his figure,
and look, and situation in life seem to allow it; but if any young man
be to set about copy he, he would not be sufferable. on the
contrary, I think a young man might be very safely recommend to take
Mr. Elton as a model. Mr. Elton be good-humour, cheerful, obliging,
and gentle. he seem to I to be grow particularly gentle of late. I
do not know whether he have any design of ingratiate himself with
either of we, Harriet, by additional softness, but it strike I that
his manner be soft than they use to be. if he mean any thing, it
must be to please you. do not I tell you what he say of you the
other day?"
she then repeat some warm personal praise which she have draw from
Mr. Elton, and now do full justice to; and Harriet blush and smile,
and say she have always think Mr. Elton very agreeable.
Mr. Elton be the very person fix on by Emma for drive the young
farmer out of Harriet's head. she think it would be an excellent
match; and only too palpably desirable, natural, and probable, for she
to have much merit in plan it. she fear it be what every body
else must think of and predict. it be not likely, however, that any
body should have equal she in the date of the plan, as it have
enter her brain during the very first evening of Harriet's come to
Hartfield. the long she consider it, the great be her sense of
its expediency. Mr. Elton's situation be most suitable, quite the
gentleman himself, and without low connexion; at the same time, not of
any family that could fairly object to the doubtful birth of Harriet.
he have a comfortable home for she, and Emma imagine a very sufficient
income; for though the vicarage of Highbury be not large, he be know
to have some independent property; and she think very highly of he
as a good-humour, well-mean, respectable young man, without any
deficiency of useful understanding or knowledge of the world.
she have already satisfy herself that he think Harriet a beautiful
girl, which she trust, with such frequent meeting at Hartfield, be
foundation enough on his side; and on Harriet's there could be little
doubt that the idea of be prefer by he would have all the usual
weight and efficacy. and he be really a very pleasing young man, a
young man whom any woman not fastidious might like. he be reckon
very handsome; his person much admire in general, though not by she,
there be a want of elegance of feature which she could not dispense
with:--but the girl who could be gratify by a Robert Martin's riding
about the country to get walnut for her might very well be conquer
by Mr. Elton's admiration.
CHAPTER V
"I do not know what your opinion may be, Mrs. Weston," say Mr.
Knightley, "of this great intimacy between Emma and Harriet Smith, but
I think it a bad thing."
"a bad thing! do you really think it a bad thing?--why so?"
"I think they will neither of they do the other any good."
"you surprize I! Emma must do Harriet good: and by supply she with
a new object of interest, Harriet may be say to do Emma good. I have
be see their intimacy with the great pleasure. how very
differently we feel!--not think they will do each other any good! this
will certainly be the beginning of one of our quarrel about Emma, Mr.
Knightley."
"perhaps you think I be come on purpose to quarrel with you, know
Weston to be out, and that you must still fight your own battle."
"Mr. Weston would undoubtedly support I, if he be here, for he
think exactly as I do on the subject. we be speak of it only
yesterday, and agree how fortunate it be for Emma, that there
should be such a girl in Highbury for she to associate with. Mr.
Knightley, I shall not allow you to be a fair judge in this case. you
be so much use to live alone, that you do not know the value of a
companion; and, perhaps no man can be a good judge of the comfort a
woman feel in the society of one of her own sex, after be use to
it all her life. I can imagine your objection to Harriet Smith. she
be not the superior young woman which Emma's friend ought to be. but
on the other hand, as Emma want to see she well inform, it will be
an inducement to she to read more herself. they will read together.
she mean it, I know."
"Emma have be mean to read more ever since she be twelve year
old. I have see a great many list of her drawing-up at various time
of book that she mean to read regularly through--and very good list
they be--very well choose, and very neatly arrange--sometimes
alphabetically, and sometimes by some other rule. the list she draw up
when only fourteen--I remember think it do her judgment so much
credit, that I preserve it some time; and I dare say she may have make
out a very good list now. but I have do with expect any course of
steady reading from Emma. she will never submit to any thing require
industry and patience, and a subjection of the fancy to the
understanding. where Miss Taylor fail to stimulate, I may safely
affirm that Harriet Smith will do nothing.--you never could persuade
she to read half so much as you wished.--you know you could not."
"I dare say," reply Mrs. Weston, smile, "that I think so
_then_;--but since we have part, I can never remember Emma's omitting
to do any thing I wish."
"there be hardly any desiring to refresh such a memory as
_that_,"--said Mr. Knightley, feelingly; and for a moment or two he have
do. "but I," he soon add, "who have have no such charm throw over
my sens, must still see, hear, and remember. Emma be spoil by
be the cleverest of her family. at ten year old, she have the
misfortune of be able to answer question which puzzle her sister
at seventeen. she be always quick and assured: Isabella slow and
diffident. and ever since she be twelve, Emma have be mistress of
the house and of you all. in her mother she lose the only person able
to cope with she. she inherit her mother's talent, and must have
be under subjection to she."
"I should have be sorry, Mr. Knightley, to be dependent on _your_
recommendation, have I quit Mr. Woodhouse's family and want another
situation; I do not think you would have speak a good word for I to
any body. I be sure you always think I unfit for the office I hold."
"yes," say he, smile. "you be well place _here_; very fit for a
wife, but not at all for a governess. but you be prepare yourself
to be an excellent wife all the time you be at Hartfield. you might
not give Emma such a complete education as your power would seem to
promise; but you be receive a very good education from _she_, on
the very material matrimonial point of submit your own will, and
do as you be bid; and if Weston have ask I to recommend he a
wife, I should certainly have name Miss Taylor."
"thank you. there will be very little merit in make a good wife to
such a man as Mr. Weston."
"why, to own the truth, I be afraid you be rather throw away, and
that with every disposition to bear, there will be nothing to be bear.
we will not despair, however. Weston may grow cross from the
wantonness of comfort, or his son may plague he."
"I hope not _that_.--it be not likely. no, Mr. Knightley, do not
foretell vexation from that quarter."
"not I, indeed. I only name possibility. I do not pretend to Emma's
genius for foretelling and guess. I hope, with all my heart, the
young man may be a Weston in merit, and a Churchill in fortune.--but
Harriet Smith--I have not half do about Harriet Smith. I think she
the very bad sort of companion that Emma could possibly have. she
know nothing herself, and look upon Emma as know every thing. she
be a flatterer in all her way; and so much the bad, because
undesigne. her ignorance be hourly flattery. how can Emma imagine
she have any thing to learn herself, while Harriet be present such a
delightful inferiority? and as for Harriet, I will venture to say that
_she_ cannot gain by the acquaintance. Hartfield will only put she out
of conceit with all the other place she belong to. she will grow
just refine enough to be uncomfortable with those among whom birth and
circumstance have place her home. I be much mistaken if Emma's
doctrine give any strength of mind, or tend at all to make a girl
adapt herself rationally to the variety of her situation in
life.--they only give a little polish."
"I either depend more upon Emma's good sense than you do, or be more
anxious for her present comfort; for I cannot lament the acquaintance.
how well she look last night!"
"oh! you would rather talk of her person than her mind, would you?
very well; I shall not attempt to deny Emma's be pretty."
"Pretty! say beautiful rather. can you imagine any thing nearer
perfect beauty than Emma altogether--face and figure?"
"I do not know what I could imagine, but I confess that I have seldom
see a face or figure more pleasing to I than her. but I be a
partial old friend."
"such an eye!--the true hazle eye--and so brilliant! regular feature,
open countenance, with a complexion! oh! what a bloom of full health,
and such a pretty height and size; such a firm and upright figure!
there be health, not merely in her bloom, but in her air, her head, her
glance. one hear sometimes of a child be 'the picture of health;'
now, Emma always give I the idea of be the complete picture of
grow-up health. she be loveliness itself. Mr. Knightley, be not she?"
"I have not a fault to find with her person," he reply. "I think she
all you describe. I love to look at she; and I will add this praise,
that I do not think she personally vain. consider how very handsome
she be, she appear to be little occupy with it; her vanity lie
another way. Mrs. Weston, I be not to be talk out of my dislike of
Harriet Smith, or my dread of its do they both harm."
"and I, Mr. Knightley, be equally stout in my confidence of its not
do they any harm. with all dear Emma's little fault, she be an
excellent creature. where shall we see a well daughter, or a kind
sister, or a true friend? no, no; she have quality which may be
trust; she will never lead any one really wrong; she will make no
last blunder; where Emma err once, she be in the right a hundred
time."
"very well; I will not plague you any more. Emma shall be an angel,
and I will keep my spleen to myself till Christmas bring John and
Isabella. John love Emma with a reasonable and therefore not a blind
affection, and Isabella always think as he do; except when he be not
quite frightened enough about the child. I be sure of have their
opinion with I."
"I know that you all love she really too well to be unjust or unkind;
but excuse I, Mr. Knightley, if I take the liberty (I consider myself,
you know, as have somewhat of the privilege of speech that Emma's
mother might have have) the liberty of hint that I do not think any
possible good can arise from Harriet Smith's intimacy be make a
matter of much discussion among you. pray excuse I; but suppose any
little inconvenience may be apprehend from the intimacy, it cannot be
expect that Emma, accountable to nobody but her father, who perfectly
approve the acquaintance, should put an end to it, so long as it be a
source of pleasure to herself. it have be so many year my province
to give advice, that you cannot be surprize, Mr. Knightley, at this
little remain of office."
"not at all," cry he; "I be much oblige to you for it. it be very
good advice, and it shall have a well fate than your advice have often
find; for it shall be attend to."
"Mrs. John Knightley be easily alarmed, and might be make unhappy about
her sister."
"be satisfied," say he, "I will not raise any outcry. I will keep my
ill-humour to myself. I have a very sincere interest in Emma.
Isabella do not seem more my sister; have never excite a great
interest; perhaps hardly so great. there be an anxiety, a curiosity in
what one feel for Emma. I wonder what will become of she!"
"so do I," say Mrs. Weston gently, "very much."
"she always declare she will never marry, which, of course, mean just
nothing at all. but I have no idea that she have yet ever see a man
she care for. it would not be a bad thing for she to be very much in
love with a proper object. I should like to see Emma in love, and in
some doubt of a return; it would do she good. but there be nobody
hereabout to attach she; and she go so seldom from home."
"there do, indeed, seem as little to tempt she to break she
resolution at present," say Mrs. Weston, "as can well be; and while
she be so happy at Hartfield, I cannot wish she to be form any
attachment which would be create such difficulty on poor Mr.
Woodhouse's account. I do not recommend matrimony at present to Emma,
though I mean no slight to the state, I assure you."
part of her meaning be to conceal some favourite thought of her own
and Mr. Weston's on the subject, as much as possible. there be
wish at Randalls respect Emma's destiny, but it be not desirable
to have they suspect; and the quiet transition which Mr. Knightley
soon afterwards make to "what do Weston think of the weather; shall
we have rain?" convince she that he have nothing more to say or surmise
about Hartfield.
CHAPTER VI
Emma could not feel a doubt of have give Harriet's fancy a proper
direction and raise the gratitude of her young vanity to a very good
purpose, for she find she decidedly more sensible than before of Mr.
Elton's be a remarkably handsome man, with most agreeable manner;
and as she have no hesitation in follow up the assurance of his
admiration by agreeable hint, she be soon pretty confident of
create as much like on Harriet's side, as there could be any
occasion for. she be quite convinced of Mr. Elton's be in the
fairest way of fall in love, if not in love already. she have no
scruple with regard to he. he talk of Harriet, and praise she so
warmly, that she could not suppose any thing want which a little
time would not add. his perception of the strike improvement of
Harriet's manner, since her introduction at Hartfield, be not one of
the least agreeable proof of his grow attachment.
"you have give Miss Smith all that she require," say he; "you have
make she graceful and easy. she be a beautiful creature when she come
to you, but, in my opinion, the attraction you have add be
infinitely superior to what she receive from nature."
"I be glad you think I have be useful to she; but Harriet only want
draw out, and receive a few, very few hint. she have all the
natural grace of sweetness of temper and artlessness in herself. I
have do very little."
"if it be admissible to contradict a lady," say the gallant Mr.
Elton--
"I have perhaps give she a little more decision of character, have
teach she to think on point which have not fall in her way before."
"exactly so; that be what principally strike I. so much superadded
decision of character! Skilful have be the hand!"
"great have be the pleasure, I be sure. I never meet with a
disposition more truly amiable."
"I have no doubt of it." and it be speak with a sort of sigh
animation, which have a vast deal of the lover. she be not less
please another day with the manner in which he second a sudden wish
of her, to have Harriet's picture.
"do you ever have your likeness take, Harriet?" say she: "do you
ever sit for your picture?"
Harriet be on the point of leave the room, and only stopt to say,
with a very interesting naivete,
"oh! dear, no, never."
no soon be she out of sight, than Emma exclaim,
"what an exquisite possession a good picture of she would be! I would
give any money for it. I almost long to attempt her likeness myself.
you do not know it I dare say, but two or three year ago I have a great
passion for take likeness, and attempt several of my friend, and
be think to have a tolerable eye in general. but from one cause or
another, I give it up in disgust. but really, I could almost venture,
if Harriet would sit to I. it would be such a delight to have she
picture!"
"let I entreat you," cry Mr. Elton; "it would indeed be a delight!
let I entreat you, Miss Woodhouse, to exercise so charming a talent in
favour of your friend. I know what your drawing be. how could you
suppose I ignorant? be not this room rich in specimen of your
landscape and flower; and have not Mrs. Weston some inimitable
figure-piece in her drawing-room, at Randalls?"
yes, good man!--thought Emma--but what have all that to do with taking
likeness? you know nothing of draw. donot pretend to be in
rapture about mine. keep your rapture for Harriet's face. "well, if
you give I such kind encouragement, Mr. Elton, I believe I shall try
what I can do. Harriet's feature be very delicate, which make a
likeness difficult; and yet there be a peculiarity in the shape of the
eye and the line about the mouth which one ought to catch."
"exactly so--the shape of the eye and the line about the mouth--I have
not a doubt of your success. pray, pray attempt it. as you will do
it, it will indeed, to use your own word, be an exquisite possession."
"but I be afraid, Mr. Elton, Harriet will not like to sit. she think
so little of her own beauty. do not you observe her manner of
answer I? how completely it mean, 'why should my picture be
draw?'"
"oh! yes, I observe it, I assure you. it be not lose on I. but
still I cannot imagine she would not be persuade."
Harriet be soon back again, and the proposal almost immediately make;
and she have no scruple which could stand many minute against the
earnest pressing of both the other. Emma wish to go to work
directly, and therefore produce the portfolio contain her various
attempt at portrait, for not one of they have ever be finish, that
they might decide together on the good size for Harriet. her many
beginning be display. miniature, half-length, whole-length,
pencil, crayon, and water-colour have be all try in turn. she have
always want to do every thing, and have make more progress both in
drawing and music than many might have do with so little labour as
she would ever submit to. she play and sang;--and draw in almost
every style; but steadiness have always be want; and in nothing have
she approach the degree of excellence which she would have be glad
to command, and ought not to have fail of. she be not much deceive
as to her own skill either as an artist or a musician, but she be not
unwilling to have other deceive, or sorry to know her reputation for
accomplishment often high than it deserve.
there be merit in every drawing--in the least finish, perhaps the
most; her style be spirit; but have there be much less, or have
there be ten time more, the delight and admiration of her two
companion would have be the same. they be both in ecstasy. a
likeness please every body; and Miss Woodhouse's performance must be
capital.
"no great variety of face for you," say Emma. "I have only my own
family to study from. there be my father--another of my father--but
the idea of sit for his picture make he so nervous, that I could
only take he by stealth; neither of they very like therefore. Mrs.
Weston again, and again, and again, you see. dear Mrs. Weston! always
my kind friend on every occasion. she would sit whenever I ask
she. there be my sister; and really quite her own little elegant
figure!--and the face not unlike. I should have make a good likeness
of she, if she would have sit long, but she be in such a hurry to
have I draw she four child that she would not be quiet. then, here
come all my attempt at three of those four children;--there they be,
Henry and John and Bella, from one end of the sheet to the other, and
any one of they might do for any one of the rest. she be so eager to
have they draw that I could not refuse; but there be no making
child of three or four year old stand still you know; nor can it be
very easy to take any likeness of they, beyond the air and complexion,
unless they be coarser feature than any of mama's child ever be.
here be my sketch of the fourth, who be a baby. I take he as he be
sleep on the sofa, and it be as strong a likeness of his cockade as
you would wish to see. he have nestle down his head most conveniently.
thatbe very like. I be rather proud of little George. the corner of
the sofa be very good. then here be my last,"--unclose a pretty
sketch of a gentleman in small size, whole-length--"my last and my
good--my brother, Mr. John Knightley.--This do not want much of be
finish, when I put it away in a pet, and vow I would never take
another likeness. I could not help be provoke; for after all my
pain, and when I have really make a very good likeness of it--(Mrs.
Weston and I be quite agree in think it _very_ like)--only too
handsome--too flattering--but that be a fault on the right side--after
all this, come poor dear Isabella's cold approbation of--"yes, it be a
little like--but to be sure it do not do he justice." we have have a
great deal of trouble in persuade he to sit at all. it be make a
great favour of; and altogether it be more than I could bear; and so I
never would finish it, to have it apologise over as an unfavourable
likeness, to every morning visitor in Brunswick Square;--and, as I
say, I do then forswear ever draw any body again. but for
Harriet's sake, or rather for my own, and as there be no husband and
wife in the case _at_ _present_, I will break my resolution now."
Mr. Elton seem very properly strike and delight by the idea, and
be repeat, "no husband and wife in the case at present indeed, as
you observe. exactly so. no husband and wife," with so interesting
a consciousness, that Emma begin to consider whether she have not well
leave they together at once. but as she want to be draw, the
declaration must wait a little long.
she have soon fix on the size and sort of portrait. it be to be a
whole-length in water-colour, like Mr. John Knightley's, and be
destine, if she could please herself, to hold a very honourable
station over the mantelpiece.
the sitting begin; and Harriet, smile and blushing, and afraid of not
keep her attitude and countenance, present a very sweet mixture of
youthful expression to the steady eye of the artist. but there be no
do any thing, with Mr. Elton fidget behind she and watch every
touch. she give he credit for station himself where he might gaze
and gaze again without offence; but be really oblige to put an end to
it, and request he to place himself elsewhere. it then occur to
she to employ he in reading.
"if he would be so good as to read to they, it would be a kindness
indeed! it would amuse away the difficulty of her part, and lessen
the irksomeness of Miss Smith's."
Mr. Elton be only too happy. Harriet listen, and Emma draw in
peace. she must allow he to be still frequently come to look; any
thing less would certainly have be too little in a lover; and he be
ready at the small intermission of the pencil, to jump up and see
the progress, and be charmed.--there be no be displeased with such
an encourager, for his admiration make he discern a likeness almost
before it be possible. she could not respect his eye, but his love
and his complaisance be unexceptionable.
the sitting be altogether very satisfactory; she be quite enough
pleased with the first day's sketch to wish to go on. there be no
want of likeness, she have be fortunate in the attitude, and as she
mean to throw in a little improvement to the figure, to give a little
more height, and considerably more elegance, she have great confidence
of its being in every way a pretty drawing at last, and of its filling
its destine place with credit to they both--a stand memorial of the
beauty of one, the skill of the other, and the friendship of both; with
as many other agreeable association as Mr. Elton's very promising
attachment be likely to add.
Harriet be to sit again the next day; and Mr. Elton, just as he ought,
entreat for the permission of attend and read to they again.
"by all mean. we shall be most happy to consider you as one of the
party."
the same civility and courtesy, the same success and satisfaction,
take place on the morrow, and accompany the whole progress of the
picture, which be rapid and happy. every body who see it be pleased,
but Mr. Elton be in continual rapture, and defend it through every
criticism.
"Miss Woodhouse have give her friend the only beauty she
wanted,"--observe Mrs. Weston to he--not in the least suspecting that
she be address a lover.--"the expression of the eye be most
correct, but Miss Smith have not those eyebrow and eyelash. it be
the fault of her face that she have they not."
"do you think so?" reply he. "I cannot agree with you. it appear
to I a most perfect resemblance in every feature. I never see such a
likeness in my life. we must allow for the effect of shade, you know."
"you have make she too tall, Emma," say Mr. Knightley.
Emma know that she have, but would not own it; and Mr. Elton warmly
add,
"oh no! certainly not too tall; not in the least too tall. consider,
she be sit down--which naturally present a different--which in
short give exactly the idea--and the proportion must be preserve,
you know. proportion, fore-shortening.--oh no! it give one exactly
the idea of such a height as Miss Smith's. exactly so indeed!"
"it be very pretty," say Mr. Woodhouse. "so prettily do! just as
your drawing always be, my dear. I do not know any body who draw so
well as you do. the only thing I do not thoroughly like be, that she
seem to be sit out of door, with only a little shawl over her
shoulder--and it make one think she must catch cold."
"but, my dear papa, it be suppose to be summer; a warm day in summer.
look at the tree."
"but it be never safe to sit out of door, my dear."
"you, sir, may say any thing," cry Mr. Elton, "but I must confess
that I regard it as a most happy thought, the placing of Miss Smith out
of door; and the tree be touch with such inimitable spirit! any
other situation would have be much less in character. the naivete of
Miss Smith's manner--and altogether--oh, it be most admirable! I
cannot keep my eye from it. I never see such a likeness."
the next thing want be to get the picture frame; and here be a
few difficulty. it must be do directly; it must be do in London;
the order must go through the hand of some intelligent person whose
taste could be depend on; and Isabella, the usual doer of all
commission, must not be apply to, because it be December, and Mr.
Woodhouse could not bear the idea of she stir out of her house in
the fog of December. but no soon be the distress know to Mr.
Elton, than it be remove. his gallantry be always on the alert.
"might he be trust with the commission, what infinite pleasure should
he have in execute it! he could ride to London at any time. it be
impossible to say how much he should be gratify by be employ on
such an errand."
"he be too good!--she could not endure the thought!--she would not
give he such a troublesome office for the world,"--brought on the
desire repetition of entreaty and assurances,--and a very few
minute settle the business.
Mr. Elton be to take the drawing to London, chuse the frame, and give
the direction; and Emma think she could so pack it as to ensure its
safety without much incommode he, while he seem mostly fearful of
not be incommode enough.
"what a precious deposit!" say he with a tender sigh, as he receive
it.
"this man be almost too gallant to be in love," think Emma. "I
should say so, but that I suppose there may be a hundred different way
of be in love. he be an excellent young man, and will suit Harriet
exactly; it will be an 'exactly so,' as he say himself; but he do
sigh and languish, and study for compliment rather more than I could
endure as a principal. I come in for a pretty good share as a second.
but it be his gratitude on Harriet's account."
CHAPTER VII
the very day of Mr. Elton's go to London produce a fresh occasion
for Emma's service towards her friend. Harriet have be at Hartfield,
as usual, soon after breakfast; and, after a time, have go home to
return again to dinner: she return, and soon than have be talk
of, and with an agitated, hurried look, announce something
extraordinary to have happen which she be long to tell. half a
minute bring it all out. she have hear, as soon as she get back to
Mrs. Goddard's, that Mr. Martin have be there an hour before, and
find she be not at home, nor particularly expect, have leave a
little parcel for she from one of his sister, and go away; and on
open this parcel, she have actually find, besides the two song
which she have lend Elizabeth to copy, a letter to herself; and this
letter be from he, from Mr. Martin, and contain a direct proposal
of marriage. "who could have think it? she be so surprized she do
not know what to do. yes, quite a proposal of marriage; and a very
good letter, at least she think so. and he write as if he really
love she very much--but she do not know--and so, she be come as fast
as she could to ask Miss Woodhouse what she should do.--" Emma be
half-ashamed of her friend for seem so pleased and so doubtful.
"upon my word," she cry, "the young man be determined not to lose any
thing for want of ask. he will connect himself well if he can."
"will you read the letter?" cry Harriet. "pray do. Iwould rather you
would."
Emma be not sorry to be press. she read, and be surprize. the
style of the letter be much above her expectation. there be not
merely no grammatical error, but as a composition it would not have
disgrace a gentleman; the language, though plain, be strong and
unaffected, and the sentiment it convey very much to the credit of
the writer. it be short, but express good sense, warm attachment,
liberality, propriety, even delicacy of feeling. she pause over it,
while Harriet stand anxiously watch for her opinion, with a "well,
well," and be at last force to add, "be it a good letter? or be it
too short?"
"yes, indeed, a very good letter," reply Emma rather slowly--"so good
a letter, Harriet, that every thing consider, I think one of his
sister must have help he. I can hardly imagine the young man whom
I see talk with you the other day could express himself so well, if
leave quite to his own power, and yet it be not the style of a woman;
no, certainly, it be too strong and concise; not diffuse enough for a
woman. no doubt he be a sensible man, and I suppose may have a natural
talent for--think strongly and clearly--and when he take a pen in
hand, his thought naturally find proper word. it be so with some
man. yes, I understand the sort of mind. vigorous, decide, with
sentiment to a certain point, not coarse. a well write letter,
Harriet (return it,) than I have expect."
"well," say the still wait Harriet;--"well--and--and what shall I
do?"
"what shall you do! in what respect? do you mean with regard to this
letter?"
"yes."
"but what be you in doubt of? you must answer it of course--and
speedily."
"yes. but what shall I say? Dear Miss Woodhouse, do advise I."
"oh no, no! the letter have much well be all your own. you will
express yourself very properly, I be sure. there be no danger of your
not be intelligible, which be the first thing. your meaning must be
unequivocal; no doubt or demur: and such expression of gratitude and
concern for the pain you be inflict as propriety require, will
present themselves unbidden to _your_ mind, I be persuade. you need
not be prompt to write with the appearance of sorrow for his
disappointment."
"you think I ought to refuse he then," say Harriet, look down.
"ought to refuse he! my dear Harriet, what do you mean? be you in any
doubt as to that? I think--but I beg your pardon, perhaps I have be
under a mistake. I certainly have be misunderstand you, if you
feel in doubt as to the _purport_ of your answer. I have imagine you
be consult I only as to the wording of it."
Harriet be silent. with a little reserve of manner, Emma continue:
"you mean to return a favourable answer, I collect."
"no, I do not; that is, I do not mean--what shall I do? what would you
advise I to do? pray, dear Miss Woodhouse, tell I what I ought to do."
"I shall not give you any advice, Harriet. I will have nothing to do
with it. this be a point which you must settle with your feeling."
"I have no notion that he like I so very much," say Harriet,
contemplate the letter. for a little while Emma persevere in her
silence; but begin to apprehend the bewitching flattery of that
letter might be too powerful, she think it well to say,
"I lay it down as a general rule, Harriet, that if a woman _doubt_ as
to whether she should accept a man or not, she certainly ought to
refuse he. if she can hesitate as to 'yes,' she ought to say 'no'
directly. it be not a state to be safely enter into with doubtful
feeling, with half a heart. I think it my duty as a friend, and
old than yourself, to say thus much to you. but do not imagine that
I want to influence you."
"oh! no, I be sure you be a great deal too kind to--but if you would
just advise I what I have good do--no, no, I do not mean that--as you
say, one's mind ought to be quite make up--one should not be
hesitate--it be a very serious thing.--it will be safe to say 'no,'
perhaps.--do you think I have well say 'no?'"
"not for the world," say Emma, smile graciously, "would I advise you
either way. you must be the good judge of your own happiness. if you
prefer Mr. Martin to every other person; if you think he the most
agreeable man you have ever be in company with, why should you
hesitate? you blush, harriet.--doe any body else occur to you at this
moment under such a definition? Harriet, Harriet, do not deceive
yourself; do not be run away with by gratitude and compassion. at this
moment whom be you think of?"
the symptom be favourable.--instead of answer, Harriet turn
away confused, and stand thoughtfully by the fire; and though the
letter be still in her hand, it be now mechanically twist about
without regard. Emma wait the result with impatience, but not
without strong hope. at last, with some hesitation, Harriet said--
"Miss Woodhouse, as you will not give I your opinion, I must do as
well as I can by myself; and I have now quite determine, and really
almost make up my mind--to refuse Mr. Martin. do you think I be right?"
"perfectly, perfectly right, my dear Harriet; you be do just
what you ought. while you be at all in suspense I keep my feeling
to myself, but now that you be so completely decide I have no
hesitation in approve. Dear Harriet, I give myself joy of this. it
would have grieve I to lose your acquaintance, which must have be
the consequence of your marry Mr. Martin. while you be in the
small degree wavering, I say nothing about it, because I would not
influence; but it would have be the loss of a friend to I. I could
not have visit Mrs. Robert Martin, of Abbey-Mill Farm. now I be
secure of you for ever."
Harriet have not surmise her own danger, but the idea of it strike she
forcibly.
"you could not have visit I!" she cry, look aghast. "no, to be
sure you could not; but I never think of that before. that would
have be too dreadful!--what an escape!--dear Miss Woodhouse, I would
not give up the pleasure and honour of be intimate with you for any
thing in the world."
"indeed, Harriet, it would have be a severe pang to lose you; but it
must have be. you would have throw yourself out of all good
society. I must have give you up."
"dear me!--how should I ever have bear it! it would have kill I
never to come to Hartfield any more!"
"dear affectionate creature!--_you_ banish to Abbey-Mill farm!--_you_
confine to the society of the illiterate and vulgar all your life! I
wonder how the young man could have the assurance to ask it. he must
have a pretty good opinion of himself."
"I do not think he be conceited either, in general," say Harriet, her
conscience oppose such censure; "at least, he be very good natured,
and I shall always feel much oblige to he, and have a great regard
for--but that be quite a different thing from--and you know, though he
may like I, it do not follow that I should--and certainly I must
confess that since my visit here I have see people--and if one
come to compare they, person and manner, there be no comparison at
all, _one_ be so very handsome and agreeable. however, I do really
think Mr. Martin a very amiable young man, and have a great opinion of
he; and his be so much attach to I--and his writing such a
letter--but as to leave you, it be what I would not do upon any
consideration."
"thank you, thank you, my own sweet little friend. we will not be
part. a woman be not to marry a man merely because she be ask, or
because he be attach to she, and can write a tolerable letter."
"oh no;--and it be but a short letter too."
Emma feel the bad taste of her friend, but let it pass with a "very
true; and it would be a small consolation to she, for the clownish
manner which might be offend she every hour of the day, to know that
her husband could write a good letter."
"oh! yes, very. nobody care for a letter; the thing be, to be always
happy with pleasant companion. I be quite determined to refuse he.
but how shall I do? what shall I say?"
Emma assure she there would be no difficulty in the answer, and
advise its be write directly, which be agree to, in the hope of
her assistance; and though Emma continue to protest against any
assistance be want, it be in fact give in the formation of every
sentence. the look over his letter again, in reply to it, have
such a soften tendency, that it be particularly necessary to brace
she up with a few decisive expression; and she be so very much
concern at the idea of make he unhappy, and think so much of
what his mother and sister would think and say, and be so anxious
that they should not fancy her ungrateful, that Emma believe if the
young man have come in her way at that moment, he would have be
accept after all.
this letter, however, be write, and seal, and send. the business
be finish, and Harriet safe. she be rather low all the evening,
but Emma could allow for her amiable regret, and sometimes relieve
they by speak of her own affection, sometimes by bring forward
the idea of Mr. Elton.
"I shall never be invite to Abbey-mill again," be say in rather a
sorrowful tone.
"nor, if you be, could I ever bear to part with you, my Harriet. you
be a great deal too necessary at Hartfield to be spar to Abbey-Mill."
"and I be sure I should never want to go there; for I be never happy
but at Hartfield."
some time afterwards it be, "I think Mrs. Goddard would be very much
surprize if she know what have happen. I be sure Miss Nash
would--for Miss Nash think her own sister very well marry, and it be
only a linen-draper."
"one should be sorry to see great pride or refinement in the teacher
of a school, Harriet. I dare say Miss Nash would envy you such an
opportunity as this of be marry. even this conquest would appear
valuable in her eye. as to any thing superior for you, I suppose she
be quite in the dark. the attention of a certain person can hardly be
among the tittle-tattle of Highbury yet. Hitherto I fancy you and I
be the only people to whom his look and manner have explain
themselves."
Harriet blush and smile, and say something about wonder that
people should like she so much. the idea of Mr. Elton be certainly
cheer; but still, after a time, she be tender-hearted again towards
the reject Mr. Martin.
"now he have get my letter," say she softly. "I wonder what they be
all do--whether his sister know--if he be unhappy, they will be
unhappy too. I hope he will not mind it so very much."
"let we think of those among our absent friend who be more cheerfully
employ," cry Emma. "at this moment, perhaps, Mr. Elton be shew
your picture to his mother and sister, tell how much more beautiful
be the original, and after be ask for it five or six time,
allow they to hear your name, your own dear name."
"my picture!--but he have leave my picture in Bond-street."
"have he so!--then I know nothing of Mr. Elton. no, my dear little
modest Harriet, depend upon it the picture will not be in Bond-street
till just before he mount his horse to-morrow. it be his companion
all this evening, his solace, his delight. it open his design to his
family, it introduce you among they, it diffuse through the party
those pleasantest feeling of our nature, eager curiosity and warm
prepossession. how cheerful, how animate, how suspicious, how busy
their imagination all be!"
Harriet smile again, and her smile grow strong.
CHAPTER VIII
Harriet sleep at Hartfield that night. for some week past she have
be spend more than half her time there, and gradually get to
have a bed-room appropriate to herself; and Emma judge it well in
every respect, safe and kind, to keep she with they as much as
possible just at present. she be oblige to go the next morning for
an hour or two to Mrs. Goddard's, but it be then to be settle that
she should return to Hartfield, to make a regular visit of some day.
while she be go, Mr. Knightley call, and sit some time with Mr.
Woodhouse and Emma, till Mr. Woodhouse, who have previously make up his
mind to walk out, be persuade by his daughter not to defer it, and
be induce by the entreaty of both, though against the scruple of
his own civility, to leave Mr. Knightley for that purpose. Mr.
Knightley, who have nothing of ceremony about he, be offer by his
short, decide answer, an amusing contrast to the protract apology
and civil hesitation of the other.
"well, I believe, if you will excuse I, Mr. Knightley, if you will not
consider I as do a very rude thing, I shall take Emma's advice and
go out for a quarter of an hour. as the sun be out, I believe I have
well take my three turn while I can. I treat you without ceremony,
Mr. Knightley. we invalid think we be privileged people."
"my dear sir, do not make a stranger of I."
"I leave an excellent substitute in my daughter. Emma will be happy to
entertain you. and therefore I think I will beg your excuse and take
my three turn--my winter walk."
"you cannot do well, sir."
"I would ask for the pleasure of your company, Mr. Knightley, but I be
a very slow walker, and my pace would be tedious to you; and, besides,
you have another long walk before you, to Donwell Abbey."
"thank you, sir, thank you; I be go this moment myself; and I think
the soon _you_ go the well. I will fetch your greatcoat and open
the garden door for you."
Mr. Woodhouse at last be off; but Mr. Knightley, instead of be
immediately off likewise, sit down again, seemingly inclined for more
chat. he begin speak of Harriet, and speak of she with more
voluntary praise than Emma have ever hear before.
"I cannot rate her beauty as you do," say he; "but she be a pretty
little creature, and I be inclined to think very well of her
disposition. her character depend upon those she be with; but in good
hand she will turn out a valuable woman."
"I be glad you think so; and the good hand, I hope, may not be
want."
"come," say he, "you be anxious for a compliment, so I will tell you
that you have improve she. you have cure she of her school-girl's
giggle; she really do you credit."
"thank you. I should be mortify indeed if I do not believe I have
be of some use; but it be not every body who will bestow praise where
they may. _you_ do not often overpower I with it."
"you be expect she again, you say, this morning?"
"almost every moment. she have be go long already than she
intend."
"something have happen to delay she; some visitor perhaps."
"Highbury gossips!--tiresome wretch!"
"Harriet may not consider every body tiresome that you would."
Emma know this be too true for contradiction, and therefore say
nothing. he presently add, with a smile,
"I do not pretend to fix on time or place, but I must tell you that I
have good reason to believe your little friend will soon hear of
something to her advantage."
"indeed! how so? of what sort?"
"a very serious sort, I assure you;" still smile.
"very serious! I can think of but one thing--who be in love with she?
who make you their confidant?"
Emma be more than half in hope of Mr. Elton's have dropt a hint.
Mr. Knightley be a sort of general friend and adviser, and she know
Mr. Elton look up to he.
"I have reason to think," he reply, "that Harriet Smith will soon
have an offer of marriage, and from a most unexceptionable
quarter:--Robert Martin be the man. her visit to Abbey-Mill, this
summer, seem to have do his business. he be desperately in love and
mean to marry she."
"he be very obliging," say Emma; "but be he sure that Harriet mean to
marry he?"
"well, well, mean to make she an offer then. will that do? he come to
the Abbey two evening ago, on purpose to consult I about it. he
know I have a thorough regard for he and all his family, and, I
believe, consider I as one of his good friend. he come to ask I
whether I think it would be imprudent in he to settle so early;
whether I think she too young: in short, whether I approve his
choice altogether; have some apprehension perhaps of her be
consider (especially since _your_ make so much of she) as in a line
of society above he. I be very much pleased with all that he say.
I never hear well sense from any one than Robert Martin. he always
speak to the purpose; open, straightforward, and very well judge.
he tell I every thing; his circumstance and plan, and what they all
propose do in the event of his marriage. he be an excellent young
man, both as son and brother. I have no hesitation in advise he to
marry. he prove to I that he could afford it; and that be the
case, I be convince he could not do well. I praise the fair lady
too, and altogether send he away very happy. if he have never esteem
my opinion before, he would have think highly of I then; and, I dare
say, leave the house think I the good friend and counsellor man ever
have. this happen the night before last. now, as we may fairly
suppose, he would not allow much time to pass before he speak to the
lady, and as he do not appear to have speak yesterday, it be not
unlikely that he should be at Mrs. Goddard's to-day; and she may be
detain by a visitor, without think he at all a tiresome wretch."
"pray, Mr. Knightley," say Emma, who have be smile to herself
through a great part of this speech, "how do you know that Mr. Martin
do not speak yesterday?"
"certainly," reply he, surprize, "I do not absolutely know it; but
it may be infer. be not she the whole day with you?"
"come," say she, "I will tell you something, in return for what you
have tell I. he do speak yesterday--that is, he write, and be
refuse."
this be oblige to be repeat before it could be believe; and Mr.
Knightley actually look red with surprize and displeasure, as he
stand up, in tall indignation, and say,
"then she be a great simpleton than I ever believe she. what be the
foolish girl about?"
"oh! to be sure," cry Emma, "it be always incomprehensible to a man
that a woman should ever refuse an offer of marriage. a man always
imagine a woman to be ready for any body who ask she."
"Nonsense! a man do not imagine any such thing. but what be the
meaning of this? Harriet Smith refuse Robert Martin? madness, if it be
so; but I hope you be mistaken."
"I see her answer!--nothing could be clear."
"you see she answer!--you write her answer too. Emma, this be your
do. you persuade she to refuse he."
"and if I do, (which, however, I be far from allow) I should not
feel that I have do wrong. Mr. Martin be a very respectable young
man, but I cannot admit he to be Harriet's equal; and be rather
surprize indeed that he should have venture to address she. by your
account, he do seem to have have some scruple. it be a pity that
they be ever get over."
"not Harriet's equal!" exclaim Mr. Knightley loudly and warmly; and
with calm asperity, add, a few moment afterwards, "no, he be not
she equal indeed, for he be as much her superior in sense as in
situation. Emma, your infatuation about that girl blind you. what
be Harriet Smith's claim, either of birth, nature or education, to
any connexion high than Robert Martin? she be the natural daughter of
nobody know whom, with probably no settled provision at all, and
certainly no respectable relation. she be know only as
parlour-boarder at a common school. she be not a sensible girl, nor a
girl of any information. she have be teach nothing useful, and be
too young and too simple to have acquire any thing herself. at her
age she can have no experience, and with her little wit, be not very
likely ever to have any that can avail she. she be pretty, and she be
good temper, and that be all. my only scruple in advise the match
be on his account, as be beneath his desert, and a bad connexion
for he. I feel that, as to fortune, in all probability he might do
much well; and that as to a rational companion or useful helpmate, he
could not do bad. but I could not reason so to a man in love, and
be willing to trust to there be no harm in she, to she have that
sort of disposition, which, in good hand, like his, might be easily
lead aright and turn out very well. the advantage of the match I feel
to be all on her side; and have not the small doubt (nor have I now)
that there would be a general cry-out upon her extreme good luck. even
_your_ satisfaction I make sure of. it cross my mind immediately
that you would not regret your friend's leave Highbury, for the sake
of her be settle so well. I remember say to myself, 'even Emma,
with all her partiality for Harriet, will think this a good match.'"
"I cannot help wonder at your knowing so little of Emma as to say
any such thing. what! think a farmer, (and with all his sense and all
his merit Mr. Martin be nothing more,) a good match for my intimate
friend! not regret she leave Highbury for the sake of marry a man
whom I could never admit as an acquaintance of my own! I wonder you
should think it possible for I to have such feeling. I assure you
mine be very different. I must think your statement by no mean fair.
you be not just to Harriet's claim. they would be estimate very
differently by other as well as myself; Mr. Martin may be the rich
of the two, but he be undoubtedly her inferior as to rank in
society.--The sphere in which she move be much above his.--It would be
a degradation."
"a degradation to illegitimacy and ignorance, to be married to a
respectable, intelligent gentleman-farmer!"
"as to the circumstance of her birth, though in a legal sense she may
be call nobody, it will not hold in common sense. she be not to pay
for the offence of other, by be hold below the level of those with
whom she be bring up.--there can scarcely be a doubt that her father
be a gentleman--and a gentleman of fortune.--her allowance be very
liberal; nothing have ever be grudge for her improvement or
comfort.--that she be a gentleman's daughter, be indubitable to I;
that she associate with gentleman's daughter, no one, I apprehend,
will deny.--She be superior to Mr. Robert Martin."
"whoever might be her parent," say Mr. Knightley, "whoever may have
have the charge of she, it do not appear to have be any part of
their plan to introduce she into what you would call good society.
after receive a very indifferent education she be leave in Mrs.
Goddard's hand to shift as she can;--to move, in short, in Mrs.
Goddard's line, to have Mrs. Goddard's acquaintance. her friend
evidently think this good enough for she; and it _be_ good enough.
she desire nothing well herself. till you choose to turn she into a
friend, her mind have no distaste for her own set, nor any ambition
beyond it. she be as happy as possible with the martin in the
summer. she have no sense of superiority then. if she have it now, you
have give it. you have be no friend to Harriet Smith, Emma. Robert
Martin would never have proceed so far, if he have not feel persuade
of she not be disinclined to he. I know he well. he have too much
real feeling to address any woman on the haphazard of selfish passion.
and as to conceit, he be the farth from it of any man I know.
depend upon it he have encouragement."
it be most convenient to Emma not to make a direct reply to this
assertion; she choose rather to take up her own line of the subject
again.
"you be a very warm friend to Mr. Martin; but, as I say before, be
unjust to Harriet. Harriet's claim to marry well be not so
contemptible as you represent they. she be not a clever girl, but she
have well sense than you be aware of, and do not deserve to have
her understanding speak of so slightingly. waive that point,
however, and suppose she to be, as you describe she, only pretty and
good-natured, let I tell you, that in the degree she possess they,
they be not trivial recommendation to the world in general, for she
be, in fact, a beautiful girl, and must be think so by ninety-nine
people out of an hundred; and till it appear that man be much more
philosophic on the subject of beauty than they be generally suppose;
till they do fall in love with well-inform mind instead of handsome
face, a girl, with such loveliness as Harriet, have a certainty of
be admire and seek after, of have the power of chuse from
among many, consequently a claim to be nice. her good-nature, too, be
not so very slight a claim, comprehend, as it do, real, thorough
sweetness of temper and manner, a very humble opinion of herself, and a
great readiness to be pleased with other people. I be very much
mistaken if your sex in general would not think such beauty, and such
temper, the high claim a woman could possess."
"upon my word, Emma, to hear you abuse the reason you have, be almost
enough to make I think so too. well be without sense, than misapply
it as you do."
"to be sure!" cry she playfully. "I know _that_ be the feeling of
you all. I know that such a girl as Harriet be exactly what every man
delight in--what at once bewitch his sens and satisfy his
judgment. oh! Harriet may pick and chuse. be you, yourself, ever to
marry, she be the very woman for you. and be she, at seventeen, just
enter into life, just begin to be know, to be wonder at
because she do not accept the first offer she receive? no--pray let
she have time to look about she."
"I have always think it a very foolish intimacy," say Mr. Knightley
presently, "though I have keep my thought to myself; but I now
perceive that it will be a very unfortunate one for Harriet. you will
puff she up with such idea of her own beauty, and of what she have a
claim to, that, in a little while, nobody within her reach will be good
enough for she. vanity work on a weak head, produce every sort of
mischief. nothing so easy as for a young lady to raise she
expectation too high. Miss Harriet Smith may not find offer of
marriage flow in so fast, though she be a very pretty girl. man of
sense, whatever you may chuse to say, do not want silly wife. man of
family would not be very fond of connect themselves with a girl of
such obscurity--and most prudent man would be afraid of the
inconvenience and disgrace they might be involve in, when the mystery
of her parentage come to be reveal. let she marry Robert Martin, and
she be safe, respectable, and happy for ever; but if you encourage she
to expect to marry greatly, and teach she to be satisfied with nothing
less than a man of consequence and large fortune, she may be a
parlour-boarder at Mrs. Goddard's all the rest of her life--or, at
least, (for Harriet Smith be a girl who will marry somebody or other,)
till she grow desperate, and be glad to catch at the old
writing-master's son."
"we think so very differently on this point, Mr. Knightley, that there
can be no use in canvass it. we shall only be make each other
more angry. but as to my _let_ her marry Robert Martin, it be
impossible; she have refuse he, and so decidedly, I think, as must
prevent any second application. she must abide by the evil of have
refuse he, whatever it may be; and as to the refusal itself, I will
not pretend to say that I might not influence she a little; but I
assure you there be very little for I or for any body to do. his
appearance be so much against he, and his manner so bad, that if she
ever be disposed to favour he, she be not now. I can imagine, that
before she have see any body superior, she might tolerate he. he be
the brother of her friend, and he take pain to please she; and
altogether, have see nobody well (that must have be his great
assistant) she might not, while she be at Abbey-Mill, find he
disagreeable. but the case be alter now. she know now what
gentleman be; and nothing but a gentleman in education and manner have
any chance with Harriet."
"Nonsense, errant nonsense, as ever be talk!" cry Mr.
Knightley.--"Robert Martin's manner have sense, sincerity, and
good-humour to recommend they; and his mind have more true gentility
than Harriet Smith could understand."
Emma make no answer, and try to look cheerfully unconcerned, but be
really feel uncomfortable and want he very much to be go. she
do not repent what she have do; she still think herself a well
judge of such a point of female right and refinement than he could be;
but yet she have a sort of habitual respect for his judgment in general,
which make her dislike have it so loudly against she; and to have he
sit just opposite to she in angry state, be very disagreeable.
some minute pass in this unpleasant silence, with only one attempt
on Emma's side to talk of the weather, but he make no answer. he be
think. the result of his thought appear at last in these word.
"Robert Martin have no great loss--if he can but think so; and I hope it
will not be long before he do. your view for Harriet be well know
to yourself; but as you make no secret of your love of match-making, it
be fair to suppose that view, and plan, and project you have;--and
as a friend I shall just hint to you that if Elton be the man, I think
it will be all labour in vain."
Emma laugh and disclaim. he continue,
"depend upon it, Elton will not do. Elton be a very good sort of man,
and a very respectable vicar of Highbury, but not at all likely to make
an imprudent match. he know the value of a good income as well as any
body. Elton may talk sentimentally, but he will act rationally. he be
as well acquainted with his own claim, as you can be with Harriet's.
he know that he be a very handsome young man, and a great favourite
wherever he go; and from his general way of talk in unreserved
moment, when there be only man present, I be convinced that he do
not mean to throw himself away. I have hear he speak with great
animation of a large family of young lady that his sister be
intimate with, who have all twenty thousand pound apiece."
"I be very much oblige to you," say Emma, laugh again. "if I have
set my heart on Mr. Elton's marry Harriet, it would have be very
kind to open my eye; but at present I only want to keep Harriet to
myself. I have do with match-making indeed. I could never hope to
equal my own doing at Randalls. I shall leave off while I be well."
"good morning to you,"--said he, rise and walk off abruptly. he
be very much vex. he feel the disappointment of the young man, and
be mortify to have be the mean of promote it, by the sanction
he have give; and the part which he be persuade Emma have take in the
affair, be provoke he exceedingly.
Emma remain in a state of vexation too; but there be more
indistinctness in the cause of she's, than in his. she do not always
feel so absolutely satisfied with herself, so entirely convinced that
her opinion be right and her adversary's wrong, as Mr. Knightley.
he walk off in more complete self-approbation than he leave for she.
she be not so materially cast down, however, but that a little time
and the return of Harriet be very adequate restorative. Harriet's
stay away so long be begin to make she uneasy. the possibility
of the young manbe come to Mrs. Goddard's that morning, and meeting
with Harriet and plead his own cause, give alarming idea. the
dread of such a failure after all become the prominent uneasiness; and
when Harriet appear, and in very good spirit, and without have any
such reason to give for her long absence, she feel a satisfaction which
settle she with her own mind, and convince she, that let Mr.
Knightley think or say what he would, she have do nothing which
woman's friendship and woman's feeling would not justify.
he have frighten she a little about Mr. Elton; but when she consider
that Mr. Knightley could not have observe he as she have do, neither
with the interest, nor (she must be allow to tell herself, in spite
of Mr. Knightley's pretension) with the skill of such an observer on
such a question as herself, that he have speak it hastily and in anger,
she be able to believe, that he have rather say what he wish
resentfully to be true, than what he know any thing about. he
certainly might have hear Mr. Elton speak with more unreserve than she
have ever do, and Mr. Elton might not be of an imprudent,
inconsiderate disposition as to money matter; he might naturally be
rather attentive than otherwise to they; but then, Mr. Knightley do
not make due allowance for the influence of a strong passion at war
with all interested motif. Mr. Knightley see no such passion, and of
course think nothing of its effect; but she see too much of it to
feel a doubt of its overcome any hesitation that a reasonable
prudence might originally suggest; and more than a reasonable, become
degree of prudence, she be very sure do not belong to Mr. Elton.
Harriet's cheerful look and manner establish her: she come back, not
to think of Mr. Martin, but to talk of Mr. Elton. Miss Nash have be
tell she something, which she repeat immediately with great
delight. Mr. Perry have be to Mrs. Goddard's to attend a sick child,
and Miss Nash have see he, and he have tell Miss Nash, that as he be
come back yesterday from Clayton Park, he have meet Mr. Elton, and
find to his great surprize, that Mr. Elton be actually on his road to
London, and not mean to return till the morrow, though it be the
whist-club night, which he have be never know to miss before; and Mr.
Perry have remonstrate with he about it, and tell he how shabby it
be in he, their good player, to absent himself, and try very much
to persuade he to put off his journey only one day; but it would not
do; Mr. Elton have be determine to go on, and have say in a _very_
_particular_ way indeed, that he be go on business which he would
not put off for any inducement in the world; and something about a very
enviable commission, and be the bearer of something exceedingly
precious. Mr. Perry could not quite understand he, but he be very
sure there must be a _lady_ in the case, and he tell he so; and Mr.
Elton only look very conscious and smile, and ride off in great
spirit. Miss Nash have tell she all this, and have talk a great deal
more about Mr. Elton; and say, look so very significantly at she,
"that she do not pretend to understand what his business might be, but
she only know that any woman whom Mr. Elton could prefer, she should
think the lucky woman in the world; for, beyond a doubt, Mr. Elton
have not his equal for beauty or agreeableness."
CHAPTER ix
Mr. Knightley might quarrel with she, but Emma could not quarrel with
herself. he be so much displeased, that it be long than usual
before he come to Hartfield again; and when they do meet, his grave
look shewed that she be not forgive. she be sorry, but could not
repent. on the contrary, her plan and proceeding be more and more
justified and endear to she by the general appearance of the next
few day.
the Picture, elegantly frame, come safely to hand soon after Mr.
Elton's return, and be hang over the mantelpiece of the common
sitting-room, he get up to look at it, and sigh out his half
sentence of admiration just as he ought; and as for Harriet's
feeling, they be visibly form themselves into as strong and
steady an attachment as her youth and sort of mind admit. Emma be
soon perfectly satisfied of Mr. Martin's be no otherwise remember,
than as he furnish a contrast with Mr. Elton, of the utmost advantage
to the latter.
her view of improve her little friend's mind, by a great deal of
useful reading and conversation, have never yet lead to more than a few
first chapter, and the intention of go on to-morrow. it be much
easy to chat than to study; much pleasanter to let her imagination
range and work at Harriet's fortune, than to be labour to enlarge
her comprehension or exercise it on sober fact; and the only literary
pursuit which engage Harriet at present, the only mental provision she
be make for the evening of life, be the collect and transcribe
all the riddle of every sort that she could meet with, into a thin
quarto of hot-press paper, make up by her friend, and ornament with
cipher and trophy.
in this age of literature, such collection on a very grand scale be
not uncommon. Miss Nash, head-teacher at Mrs. Goddard's, have write
out at least three hundred; and Harriet, who have take the first hint
of it from she, hop, with Miss Woodhouse's help, to get a great many
more. Emma assist with her invention, memory and taste; and as
Harriet write a very pretty hand, it be likely to be an arrangement of
the first order, in form as well as quantity.
Mr. Woodhouse be almost as much interested in the business as the
girl, and try very often to recollect something worth their putting
in. "so many clever riddle as there use to be when he be young--he
wonder he could not remember they! but he hop he should in time."
and it always end in "Kitty, a fair but frozen maid."
his good friend Perry, too, whom he have speak to on the subject, do
not at present recollect any thing of the riddle kind; but he have
desire Perry to be upon the watch, and as he go about so much,
something, he think, might come from that quarter.
it be by no mean his daughter's wish that the intellect of Highbury
in general should be put under requisition. Mr. Elton be the only one
whose assistance she ask. he be invite to contribute any really
good enigma, charade, or conundrum that he might recollect; and she
have the pleasure of see he most intently at work with his
recollection; and at the same time, as she could perceive, most
earnestly careful that nothing ungallant, nothing that do not breathe
a compliment to the sex should pass his lip. they owe to he their
two or three politest puzzle; and the joy and exultation with which at
last he recall, and rather sentimentally recite, that well-know
charade,
my first doth affliction denote,
which my second be destin'd to feel
and my whole be the good antidote
that affliction to soften and heal.--
make she quite sorry to acknowledge that they have transcribe it some
page ago already.
"why will not you write one yourself for we, Mr. Elton?" say she;
"that be the only security for its freshness; and nothing could be
easy to you."
"oh no! he have never write, hardly ever, any thing of the kind in his
life. the stupid fellow! he be afraid not even Miss Woodhouse"--he
stopt a moment--"or Miss Smith could inspire he."
the very next day however produce some proof of inspiration. he
call for a few moment, just to leave a piece of paper on the table
contain, as he say, a charade, which a friend of his have address
to a young lady, the object of his admiration, but which, from his
manner, Emma be immediately convince must be his own.
"I do not offer it for Miss Smith's collection," say he. "be my
friend's, I have no right to expose it in any degree to the public eye,
but perhaps you may not dislike look at it."
the speech be more to Emma than to Harriet, which Emma could
understand. there be deep consciousness about he, and he find it
easy to meet her eye than her friend's. he be go the next
moment:--after another moment's pause,
"take it," say Emma, smile, and push the paper towards
harriet--"it be for you. take your own."
but Harriet be in a tremor, and could not touch it; and Emma, never
loth to be first, be oblige to examine it herself.
to Miss--
CHARADE.
my first display the wealth and pomp of king,
lord of the earth! their luxury and ease.
another view of man, my second bring,
behold he there, the monarch of the sea!
but ah! united, what reverse we have!
Man's boasted power and freedom, all be fly;
Lord of the earth and sea, he bend a slave,
and woman, lovely woman, reign alone.
thy ready wit the word will soon supply,
may its approval beam in that soft eye!
she cast her eye over it, ponder, catch the meaning, read it through
again to be quite certain, and quite mistress of the line, and then
pass it to Harriet, sit happily smile, and say to herself,
while Harriet be puzzle over the paper in all the confusion of hope
and dulness, "very well, Mr. Elton, very well indeed. I have read
bad charade. _courtship_--a very good hint. I give you credit for
it. this be feel your way. this be say very plainly--'pray,
Miss Smith, give I leave to pay my address to you. approve my
charade and my intention in the same glance.'
may its approval beam in that soft eye!
Harriet exactly. Soft be the very word for her eye--of all epithet,
the justest that could be give.
thy ready wit the word will soon supply.
Humph--Harriet's ready wit! all the well. a man must be very much in
love, indeed, to describe she so. ah! Mr. Knightley, I wish you have
the benefit of this; I think this would convince you. for once in your
life you would be oblige to own yourself mistaken. an excellent
charade indeed! and very much to the purpose. thing must come to a
crisis soon now.
she be oblige to break off from these very pleasant observation,
which be otherwise of a sort to run into great length, by the
eagerness of Harriet's wonder question.
"what can it be, Miss woodhouse?--what can it be? I have not an idea--I
cannot guess it in the least. what can it possibly be? do try to find
it out, Miss Woodhouse. do help I. I never see any thing so hard.
be it kingdom? I wonder who the friend be--and who could be the young
lady. do you think it be a good one? can it be woman?
and woman, lovely woman, reign alone.
can it be Neptune?
behold he there, the monarch of the sea!
or a trident? or a mermaid? or a shark? oh, no! shark be only one
syllable. it must be very clever, or he would not have bring it.
oh! Miss Woodhouse, do you think we shall ever find it out?"
"mermaid and shark! nonsense! my dear Harriet, what be you think
of? where would be the use of his bring we a charade make by a
friend upon a mermaid or a shark? give I the paper and listen.
for Miss ------, read Miss Smith.
my first display the wealth and pomp of king,
lord of the earth! their luxury and ease.
that be _court_.
another view of man, my second bring;
behold he there, the monarch of the sea!
that be _ship_;--plain as it can be.--now for the cream.
but ah! united, (_courtship_, you know,) what reverse we have!
Man's boasted power and freedom, all be fly.
Lord of the earth and sea, he bend a slave,
and woman, lovely woman, reign alone.
a very proper compliment!--and then follow the application, which I
think, my dear Harriet, you cannot find much difficulty in
comprehend. read it in comfort to yourself. there can be no doubt
of its be write for you and to you."
Harriet could not long resist so delightful a persuasion. she read the
concluding line, and be all flutter and happiness. she could not
speak. but she be not want to speak. it be enough for she to
feel. Emma speak for she.
"there be so pointed, and so particular a meaning in this compliment,"
say she, "that I cannot have a doubt as to Mr. Elton's intention.
you be his object--and you will soon receive the complete proof of
it. I think it must be so. I think I could not be so deceived;
but now, it be clear; the state of his mind be as clear and decide, as
my wish on the subject have be ever since I know you. yes,
Harriet, just so long have I be want the very circumstance to
happen what have happen. I could never tell whether an attachment
between you and Mr. Elton be most desirable or most natural. its
probability and its eligibility have really so equalled each other! I
be very happy. I congratulate you, my dear Harriet, with all my heart.
this be an attachment which a woman may well feel pride in create.
this be a connexion which offer nothing but good. it will give you
every thing that you want--consideration, independence, a proper
home--it will fix you in the centre of all your real friend, close to
Hartfield and to I, and confirm our intimacy for ever. this, Harriet,
be an alliance which can never raise a blush in either of we."
"Dear Miss woodhouse!"--and "Dear Miss Woodhouse," be all that
Harriet, with many tender embrace could articulate at first; but when
they do arrive at something more like conversation, it be
sufficiently clear to her friend that she see, feel, anticipate, and
remember just as she ought. Mr. Elton's superiority have very ample
acknowledgment.
"whatever you say be always right," cry Harriet, "and therefore I
suppose, and believe, and hope it must be so; but otherwise I could not
have imagine it. it be so much beyond any thing I deserve. Mr.
Elton, who might marry any body! there cannot be two opinion about
_he_. he be so very superior. only think of those sweet verses--'To
Miss ------.' dear I, how clever!--could it really be mean for I?"
"I cannot make a question, or listen to a question about that. it be a
certainty. receive it on my judgment. it be a sort of prologue to the
play, a motto to the chapter; and will be soon follow by
matter-of-fact prose."
"it be a sort of thing which nobody could have expect. I be sure, a
month ago, I have no more idea myself!--the strange thing do take
place!"
"when Miss Smiths and Mr. Eltons get acquaint--they do indeed--and
really it be strange; it be out of the common course that what be so
evidently, so palpably desirable--what court the pre-arrangement of
other people, should so immediately shape itself into the proper form.
you and Mr. Elton be by situation call together; you belong to one
another by every circumstance of your respective home. your marrying
will be equal to the match at Randalls. there do seem to be a
something in the air of Hartfield which give love exactly the right
direction, and send it into the very channel where it ought to flow.
the course of true love never do run smooth--
a Hartfield edition of Shakespeare would have a long note on that
passage."
"that Mr. Elton should really be in love with me,--me, of all people,
who do not know he, to speak to he, at Michaelmas! and he, the very
handsome man that ever be, and a man that every body look up to,
quite like Mr. Knightley! his company so seek after, that every body
say he need not eat a single meal by himself if he do not chuse it;
that he have more invitation than there be day in the week. and so
excellent in the Church! Miss Nash have put down all the text he have
ever preach from since he come to Highbury. dear I! when I look
back to the first time I see he! how little do I think!--the two
Abbots and I run into the front room and peep through the blind when
we hear he be go by, and Miss Nash come and scold we away, and
staid to look through herself; however, she call I back presently,
and let I look too, which be very good-natured. and how beautiful we
think he look! he be arm-in-arm with Mr. Cole."
"this be an alliance which, whoever--whatever your friend may be, must
be agreeable to they, provide at least they have common sense; and we
be not to be address our conduct to fool. if they be anxious to
see you _happily_ married, here be a man whose amiable character give
every assurance of it;--if they wish to have you settle in the same
country and circle which they have choose to place you in, here it will
be accomplish; and if their only object be that you should, in the
common phrase, be _well_ married, here be the comfortable fortune, the
respectable establishment, the rise in the world which must satisfy
they."
"yes, very true. how nicely you talk; I love to hear you. you
understand every thing. you and Mr. Elton be one as clever as the
other. this charade!--If I have study a twelvemonth, I could never
have make any thing like it."
"I think he mean to try his skill, by his manner of decline it
yesterday."
"I do think it be, without exception, the good charade I ever read."
"I never read one more to the purpose, certainly."
"it be as long again as almost all we have have before."
"I do not consider its length as particularly in its favour. such
thing in general cannot be too short."
Harriet be too intent on the line to hear. the most satisfactory
comparison be rise in her mind.
"it be one thing," say she, presently--her cheek in a glow--"to have
very good sense in a common way, like every body else, and if there be
any thing to say, to sit down and write a letter, and say just what you
must, in a short way; and another, to write verse and charade like
this."
Emma could not have desire a more spirited rejection of Mr. Martin's
prose.
"such sweet line!" continue harriet--"these two last!--but how shall
I ever be able to return the paper, or say I have find it out?--Oh!
Miss Woodhouse, what can we do about that?"
"leave it to I. you do nothing. he will be here this evening, I dare
say, and then I will give it he back, and some nonsense or other will
pass between we, and you shall not be committed.--your soft eye shall
chuse their own time for beam. trust to I."
"oh! Miss Woodhouse, what a pity that I must not write this beautiful
charade into my book! I be sure I have not get one half so good."
"leave out the two last line, and there be no reason why you should
not write it into your book."
"oh! but those two line are"--
--"The good of all. Granted;--for private enjoyment; and for private
enjoyment keep they. they be not at all the less written you know,
because you divide they. the couplet do not cease to be, nor do
its meaning change. but take it away, and all _appropriation_ cease,
and a very pretty gallant charade remain, fit for any collection.
depend upon it, he would not like to have his charade slight, much
well than his passion. a poet in love must be encourage in both
capacity, or neither. give I the book, I will write it down, and
then there can be no possible reflection on you."
Harriet submit, though her mind could hardly separate the part, so
as to feel quite sure that her friend be not write down a
declaration of love. it seem too precious an offering for any degree
of publicity.
"I shall never let that book go out of my own hand," say she.
"very well," reply Emma; "a most natural feeling; and the long it
last, the well I shall be please. but here be my father come:
you will not object to my reading the charade to he. it will be
give he so much pleasure! he love any thing of the sort, and
especially any thing that pay woman a compliment. he have the
tender spirit of gallantry towards we all!--You must let I read it
to he."
Harriet look grave.
"my dear Harriet, you must not refine too much upon this charade.--you
will betray your feeling improperly, if you be too conscious and too
quick, and appear to affix more meaning, or even quite all the meaning
which may be affix to it. do not be overpower by such a little
tribute of admiration. if he have be anxious for secrecy, he would
not have leave the paper while I be by; but he rather push it towards
I than towards you. do not let we be too solemn on the business. he
have encouragement enough to proceed, without our sigh out our soul
over this charade."
"oh! no--I hope I shall not be ridiculous about it. do as you please."
Mr. Woodhouse come in, and very soon lead to the subject again, by the
recurrence of his very frequent inquiry of "well, my dear, how do
your book go on?--have you get any thing fresh?"
"yes, papa; we have something to read you, something quite fresh. a
piece of paper be find on the table this morning--(dropt, we suppose,
by a fairy)--containe a very pretty charade, and we have just copy
it in."
she read it to he, just as he like to have any thing read, slowly and
distinctly, and two or three time over, with explanation of every
part as she proceed--and he be very much pleased, and, as she have
foresee, especially strike with the complimentary conclusion.
"Aye, thatbe very just, indeed, thatbe very properly say. very true.
'Woman, lovely woman.' it be such a pretty charade, my dear, that I can
easily guess what fairy bring it.--nobody could have write so
prettily, but you, Emma."
Emma only nod, and smiled.--after a little thinking, and a very
tender sigh, he add,
"ah! it be no difficulty to see who you take after! your dear mother
be so clever at all those thing! if I have but her memory! but I can
remember nothing;--not even that particular riddle which you have hear
I mention; I can only recollect the first stanza; and there be
several.
Kitty, a fair but frozen maid,
kindle a flame I yet deplore,
the hood-wink'd boy I call to aid,
though of his near approach afraid,
so fatal to my suit before.
and that be all that I can recollect of it--but it be very clever all
the way through. but I think, my dear, you say you have get it."
"yes, papa, it be write out in our second page. we copy it from
the elegant extract. it be Garrick's, you know."
"aye, very true.--i wish I could recollect more of it.
Kitty, a fair but frozen maid.
the name make I think of poor Isabella; for she be very near be
christen Catherine after her grandmama. I hope we shall have she
here next week. have you think, my dear, where you shall put
she--and what room there will be for the child?"
"oh! yes--she will have her own room, of course; the room she always
has;--and there be the nursery for the children,--just as usual, you
know. why should there be any change?"
"I do not know, my dear--but it be so long since she be here!--not
since last Easter, and then only for a few days.--mr. John Knightley's
be a lawyer be very inconvenient.--poor Isabella!--she be sadly
take away from we all!--and how sorry she will be when she come, not
to see Miss Taylor here!"
"she will not be surprize, papa, at least."
"I do not know, my dear. I be sure I be very much surprized when I
first hear she be go to be marry."
"we must ask Mr. and Mrs. Weston to dine with we, while Isabella be
here."
"yes, my dear, if there be time.--but--(in a very depressed tone)--she
be come for only one week. there will not be time for any thing."
"it be unfortunate that they cannot stay long--but it seem a case of
necessity. Mr. John Knightley must be in town again on the 28th, and
we ought to be thankful, papa, that we be to have the whole of the
time they can give to the country, that two or three day be not to be
take out for the Abbey. Mr. Knightley promise to give up his claim
this Christmas--though you know it be long since they be with he,
than with we."
"it would be very hard, indeed, my dear, if poor Isabella be to be
anywhere but at Hartfield."
Mr. Woodhouse could never allow for Mr. Knightley's claim on his
brother, or any body's claim on Isabella, except his own. he sit
muse a little while, and then say,
"but I do not see why poor Isabella should be oblige to go back so
soon, though he do. I think, Emma, I shall try and persuade she to
stay long with we. she and the child might stay very well."
"ah! papa--that be what you never have be able to accomplish, and I
do not think you ever will. Isabella cannot bear to stay behind her
husband."
this be too true for contradiction. unwelcome as it be, Mr.
Woodhouse could only give a submissive sigh; and as Emma see his
spirit affect by the idea of his daughter's attachment to her
husband, she immediately lead to such a branch of the subject as must
raise they.
"Harriet must give we as much of her company as she can while my
brother and sister be here. I be sure she will be pleased with the
child. we be very proud of the child, be not we, papa? I
wonder which she will think the handsome, Henry or John?"
"Aye, I wonder which she will. poor little dear, how glad they will
be to come. they be very fond of be at Hartfield, Harriet."
"I dare say they be, sir. I be sure I do not know who be not."
"Henry be a fine boy, but John be very like his mama. Henry be the
eld, he be name after I, not after his father. John, the second,
be name after his father. some people be surprize, I believe, that
the eld be not, but Isabella would have he call Henry, which I
think very pretty of she. and he be a very clever boy, indeed. they
be all remarkably clever; and they have so many pretty way. they
will come and stand by my chair, and say, 'Grandpapa, can you give I a
bit of string?' and once Henry ask I for a knife, but I tell he
knife be only make for grandpapas. I think their father be too
rough with they very often."
"he appear rough to you," say Emma, "because you be so very gentle
yourself; but if you could compare he with other papa, you would not
think he rough. he wish his boy to be active and hardy; and if
they misbehave, can give they a sharp word now and then; but he be an
affectionate father--certainly Mr. John Knightley be an affectionate
father. the child be all fond of he."
"and then their uncle come in, and toss they up to the ceiling in a
very frightful way!"
"but they like it, papa; there be nothing they like so much. it be
such enjoyment to they, that if their uncle do not lay down the rule
of their taking turn, whichever begin would never give way to the
other."
"well, I cannot understand it."
"that be the case with we all, papa. one half of the world cannot
understand the pleasure of the other."
later in the morning, and just as the girl be go to separate in
preparation for the regular four o'clock dinner, the hero of this
inimitable charade walk in again. Harriet turn away; but Emma
could receive he with the usual smile, and her quick eye soon
discern in his the consciousness of have make a push--of have
throw a die; and she imagine he be come to see how it might turn up.
his ostensible reason, however, be to ask whether Mr. Woodhouse's
party could be make up in the evening without he, or whether he should
be in the small degree necessary at Hartfield. if he be, every
thing else must give way; but otherwise his friend Cole have be say
so much about his dining with he--have make such a point of it, that he
have promise he conditionally to come.
Emma thank he, but could not allow of his disappointing his friend
on their account; her father be sure of his rubber. he re-urged--she
re-decline; and he seem then about to make his bow, when take the
paper from the table, she return it--
"oh! here be the charade you be so obliging as to leave with we;
thank you for the sight of it. we admire it so much, that I have
venture to write it into Miss Smith's collection. your friend will
not take it amiss I hope. of course I have not transcribe beyond the
first eight line."
Mr. Elton certainly do not very well know what to say. he look
rather doubtingly--rather confused; say something about
"honour,"--glanced at Emma and at Harriet, and then see the book
open on the table, take it up, and examine it very attentively. with
the view of pass off an awkward moment, Emma smilingly say,
"you must make my apology to your friend; but so good a charade must
not be confine to one or two. he may be sure of every woman's
approbation while he write with such gallantry."
"I have no hesitation in say," reply Mr. Elton, though hesitate
a good deal while he speak; "I have no hesitation in say--at least
if my friend feel at all as _i_ do--I have not the small doubt
that, could he see his little effusion honour as _i_ see it, (look
at the book again, and replace it on the table), he would consider it
as the proud moment of his life."
after this speech he be go as soon as possible. Emma could not
think it too soon; for with all his good and agreeable quality, there
be a sort of parade in his speech which be very apt to incline she
to laugh. she run away to indulge the inclination, leave the tender
and the sublime of pleasure to Harriet's share.
CHAPTER X
though now the middle of December, there have yet be no weather to
prevent the young lady from tolerably regular exercise; and on the
morrow, Emma have a charitable visit to pay to a poor sick family, who
live a little way out of Highbury.
their road to this detached cottage be down Vicarage Lane, a lane
lead at right angle from the broad, though irregular, main street
of the place; and, as may be infer, contain the blessed abode of
Mr. Elton. a few inferior dwelling be first to be pass, and then,
about a quarter of a mile down the lane rise the Vicarage, an old and
not very good house, almost as close to the road as it could be. it
have no advantage of situation; but have be very much smartene up by
the present proprietor; and, such as it be, there could be no
possibility of the two friend pass it without a slacken pace and
observe eyes.--Emma's remark was--
"there it be. there go you and your riddle-book one of these day."--
Harriet's was--
"oh, what a sweet house!--how very beautiful!--there be the yellow
curtain that Miss Nash admire so much."
"I do not often walk this way _now_," say Emma, as they proceed,
"but _then_ there will be an inducement, and I shall gradually get
intimately acquaint with all the hedge, gate, pool and pollard of
this part of Highbury."
Harriet, she find, have never in her life be within side the
Vicarage, and her curiosity to see it be so extreme, that, consider
exterior and probability, Emma could only class it, as a proof of
love, with Mr. Elton's see ready wit in she.
"I wish we could contrive it," say she; "but I cannot think of any
tolerable pretence for go in;--no servant that I want to inquire
about of his housekeeper--no message from my father."
she ponder, but could think of nothing. after a mutual silence of
some minute, Harriet thus begin again--
"I do so wonder, Miss Woodhouse, that you should not be marry, or
go to be marry! so charming as you are!"--
Emma laugh, and reply,
"my be charming, Harriet, be not quite enough to induce I to marry;
I must find other people charming--one other person at least. and I be
not only, not go to be marry, at present, but have very little
intention of ever marry at all."
"Ah!--so you say; but I cannot believe it."
"I must see somebody very superior to any one I have see yet, to be
tempt; Mr. Elton, you know, (recollect herself,) be out of the
question: and I do _not_ wish to see any such person. I would rather
not be tempt. I cannot really change for the well. if I be to
marry, I must expect to repent it."
"dear me!--it be so odd to hear a woman talk so!"--
"I have none of the usual inducement of woman to marry. be I to
fall in love, indeed, it would be a different thing! but I never have
be in love; it be not my way, or my nature; and I do not think I ever
shall. and, without love, I be sure I should be a fool to change such
a situation as mine. Fortune I do not want; employment I do not want;
consequence I do not want: I believe few married woman be half as much
mistress of their husband's house as I be of Hartfield; and never,
never could I expect to be so truly beloved and important; so always
first and always right in any man's eye as I be in my father's."
"but then, to be an old maid at last, like Miss Bates!"
"that be as formidable an image as you could present, Harriet; and if I
think I should ever be like Miss Bates! so silly--so satisfied--so
smile--so prose--so undistinguishing and unfastidious--and so apt
to tell every thing relative to every body about I, I would marry
to-morrow. but between _us_, I be convinced there never can be any
likeness, except in be unmarried."
"but still, you will be an old maid! and thatbe so dreadful!"
"never mind, Harriet, I shall not be a poor old maid; and it be poverty
only which make celibacy contemptible to a generous public! a single
woman, with a very narrow income, must be a ridiculous, disagreeable
old maid! the proper sport of boy and girl, but a single woman, of
good fortune, be always respectable, and may be as sensible and
pleasant as any body else. and the distinction be not quite so much
against the candour and common sense of the world as appear at first;
for a very narrow income have a tendency to contract the mind, and sour
the temper. those who can barely live, and who live perforce in a very
small, and generally very inferior, society, may well be illiberal and
cross. this do not apply, however, to Miss Bates; she be only too
good natured and too silly to suit I; but, in general, she be very
much to the taste of every body, though single and though poor.
Poverty certainly have not contract her mind: I really believe, if
she have only a shilling in the world, she would be very likely to give
away sixpence of it; and nobody be afraid of she: that be a great
charm."
"dear I! but what shall you do? how shall you employ yourself when you
grow old?"
"if I know myself, Harriet, mine be an active, busy mind, with a great
many independent resource; and I do not perceive why I should be more
in want of employment at forty or fifty than one-and-twenty. Woman's
usual occupation of hand and mind will be as open to I then as they
be now; or with no important variation. if I draw less, I shall read
more; if I give up music, I shall take to carpet-work. and as for
object of interest, object for the affection, which be in truth the
great point of inferiority, the want of which be really the great evil
to be avoid in _not_ marry, I shall be very well off, with all the
child of a sister I love so much, to care about. there will be
enough of they, in all probability, to supply every sort of sensation
that decline life can need. there will be enough for every hope and
every fear; and though my attachment to none can equal that of a
parent, it suit my idea of comfort well than what be warm and
blinder. my nephew and nieces!--i shall often have a niece with I."
"do you know Miss Bates's niece? that is, I know you must have see
she a hundred time--but be you acquaint?"
"oh! yes; we be always force to be acquaint whenever she come to
Highbury. by the bye, _that_ be almost enough to put one out of
conceit with a niece. heaven forbid! at least, that I should ever bore
people half so much about all the Knightleys together, as she do
about Jane Fairfax. one be sick of the very name of Jane Fairfax.
every letter from she be read forty time over; her compliment to all
friend go round and round again; and if she do but send she aunt the
pattern of a stomacher, or knit a pair of garter for her grandmother,
one hear of nothing else for a month. I wish Jane Fairfax very well;
but she tire I to death."
they be now approach the cottage, and all idle topic be
supersede. Emma be very compassionate; and the distress of the
poor be as sure of relief from her personal attention and kindness,
her counsel and her patience, as from her purse. she understand their
way, could allow for their ignorance and their temptation, have no
romantic expectation of extraordinary virtue from those for whom
education have do so little; enter into their trouble with ready
sympathy, and always give her assistance with as much intelligence as
good-will. in the present instance, it be sickness and poverty
together which she come to visit; and after remain there as long as
she could give comfort or advice, she quit the cottage with such an
impression of the scene as make she say to Harriet, as they walk away,
"these be the sight, Harriet, to do one good. how trifle they make
every thing else appear!--i feel now as if I could think of nothing but
these poor creature all the rest of the day; and yet, who can say how
soon it may all vanish from my mind?"
"very true," say Harriet. "poor creature! one can think of nothing
else."
"and really, I do not think the impression will soon be over," say
Emma, as she cross the low hedge, and tottering footstep which end
the narrow, slippery path through the cottage garden, and bring they
into the lane again. "I do not think it will," stop to look once
more at all the outward wretchedness of the place, and recall the still
great within.
"oh! dear, no," say her companion.
they walk on. the lane make a slight bend; and when that bend be
pass, Mr. Elton be immediately in sight; and so near as to give Emma
time only to say far,
"ah! Harriet, here come a very sudden trial of our stability in good
thought. well, (smile,) I hope it may be allow that if compassion
have produce exertion and relief to the sufferer, it have do all that
be truly important. if we feel for the wretched, enough to do all we
can for they, the rest be empty sympathy, only distress to
ourselves."
Harriet could just answer, "oh! dear, yes," before the gentleman join
they. the want and suffering of the poor family, however, be the
first subject on meeting. he have be go to call on they. his
visit he would now defer; but they have a very interesting parley about
what could be do and should be do. Mr. Elton then turn back to
accompany they.
"to fall in with each other on such an errand as this," think Emma;
"to meet in a charitable scheme; this will bring a great increase of
love on each side. I should not wonder if it be to bring on the
declaration. it must, if I be not here. I wish I be anywhere
else."
anxious to separate herself from they as far as she could, she soon
afterwards take possession of a narrow footpath, a little raise on one
side of the lane, leave they together in the main road. but she have
not be there two minute when she find that Harriet's habit of
dependence and imitation be bring she up too, and that, in short,
they would both be soon after she. this would not do; she immediately
stop, under pretence of have some alteration to make in the lacing
of her half-boot, and stoop down in complete occupation of the
footpath, beg they to have the goodness to walk on, and she would
follow in half a minute. they do as they be desire; and by the
time she judge it reasonable to have do with her boot, she have the
comfort of farth delay in her power, be overtake by a child from
the cottage, set out, accord to order, with her pitcher, to
fetch broth from Hartfield. to walk by the side of this child, and
talk to and question she, be the most natural thing in the world, or
would have be the most natural, have she be act just then without
design; and by this mean the other be still able to keep ahead,
without any obligation of wait for she. she gain on they,
however, involuntarily: the child's pace be quick, and theirs rather
slow; and she be the more concerned at it, from their be evidently
in a conversation which interest they. Mr. Elton be speak with
animation, Harriet listen with a very pleased attention; and Emma,
have send the child on, be begin to think how she might draw
back a little more, when they both look around, and she be oblige
to join they.
Mr. Elton be still talk, still engage in some interesting detail;
and Emma experience some disappointment when she find that he be
only give his fair companion an account of the yesterday's party at
his friend Cole's, and that she be come in herself for the Stilton
cheese, the north Wiltshire, the butter, the cellery, the beet-root,
and all the dessert.
"this would soon have lead to something well, of course," be she
console reflection; "any thing interest between those who love; and
any thing will serve as introduction to what be near the heart. if I
could but have keep long away!"
they now walk on together quietly, till within view of the vicarage
pale, when a sudden resolution, of at least get Harriet into the
house, make she again find something very much amiss about her boot,
and fall behind to arrange it once more. she then break the lace off
short, and dexterously throw it into a ditch, be presently oblige
to entreat they to stop, and acknowledge her inability to put herself
to right so as to be able to walk home in tolerable comfort.
"part of my lace be go," say she, "and I do not know how I be to
contrive. I really be a most troublesome companion to you both, but I
hope I be not often so ill-equip. Mr. Elton, I must beg leave to
stop at your house, and ask your housekeeper for a bit of ribband or
string, or any thing just to keep my boot on."
Mr. Elton look all happiness at this proposition; and nothing could
exceed his alertness and attention in conduct they into his house
and endeavour to make every thing appear to advantage. the room
they be take into be the one he chiefly occupy, and look
forwards; behind it be another with which it immediately communicate;
the door between they be open, and Emma pass into it with the
housekeeper to receive her assistance in the most comfortable manner.
she be oblige to leave the door ajar as she find it; but she fully
intend that Mr. Elton should close it. it be not closed, however,
it still remain ajar; but by engage the housekeeper in incessant
conversation, she hop to make it practicable for he to chuse his own
subject in the adjoining room. for ten minute she could hear nothing
but herself. it could be protract no long. she be then oblige
to be finish, and make her appearance.
the lover be stand together at one of the window. it have a most
favourable aspect; and, for half a minute, Emma feel the glory of
have scheme successfully. but it would not do; he have not come to
the point. he have be most agreeable, most delightful; he have tell
Harriet that he have see they go by, and have purposely follow they;
other little gallantry and allusion have be dropt, but nothing
serious.
"cautious, very cautious," think Emma; "he advance inch by inch, and
will hazard nothing till he believe himself secure."
still, however, though every thing have not be accomplish by her
ingenious device, she could not but flatter herself that it have be
the occasion of much present enjoyment to both, and must be lead
they forward to the great event.
CHAPTER XI
Mr. Elton must now be leave to himself. it be no long in Emma's
power to superintend his happiness or quicken his measure. the coming
of her sister's family be so very near at hand, that first in
anticipation, and then in reality, it become henceforth her prime
object of interest; and during the ten day of their stay at Hartfield
it be not to be expect--she do not herself expect--that any thing
beyond occasional, fortuitous assistance could be afford by she to
the lover. they might advance rapidly if they would, however; they
must advance somehow or other whether they would or no. she hardly
wish to have more leisure for they. there be people, who the more
you do for they, the less they will do for themselves.
Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley, from have be long than usual absent
from Surry, be exciting of course rather more than the usual
interest. till this year, every long vacation since their marriage have
be divide between Hartfield and Donwell Abbey; but all the holiday
of this autumn have be give to sea-bathing for the child, and it
be therefore many month since they have be see in a regular way by
their Surry connexion, or see at all by Mr. Woodhouse, who could not
be induce to get so far as London, even for poor Isabella's sake; and
who consequently be now most nervously and apprehensively happy in
forestall this too short visit.
he think much of the evil of the journey for she, and not a little
of the fatigue of his own horse and coachman who be to bring some
of the party the last half of the way; but his alarm be needless;
the sixteen mile be happily accomplish, and Mr. and Mrs. John
Knightley, their five child, and a competent number of
nursery-maid, all reach Hartfield in safety. the bustle and joy of
such an arrival, the many to be talk to, welcome, encourage, and
variously disperse and dispose of, produce a noise and confusion
which his nerve could not have bear under any other cause, nor have
endure much long even for this; but the way of Hartfield and the
feeling of her father be so respected by Mrs. John Knightley, that
in spite of maternal solicitude for the immediate enjoyment of her
little one, and for their have instantly all the liberty and
attendance, all the eating and drinking, and sleeping and play,
which they could possibly wish for, without the small delay, the
child be never allow to be long a disturbance to he, either in
themselves or in any restless attendance on they.
Mrs. John Knightley be a pretty, elegant little woman, of gentle,
quiet manner, and a disposition remarkably amiable and affectionate;
wrapt up in her family; a devoted wife, a doate mother, and so
tenderly attach to her father and sister that, but for these high
tie, a warm love might have seem impossible. she could never see
a fault in any of they. she be not a woman of strong understanding or
any quickness; and with this resemblance of her father, she inherit
also much of his constitution; be delicate in her own health,
over-careful of that of her child, have many fear and many nerve,
and be as fond of her own Mr. Wingfield in town as her father could be
of Mr. Perry. they be alike too, in a general benevolence of temper,
and a strong habit of regard for every old acquaintance.
Mr. John Knightley be a tall, gentleman-like, and very clever man;
rise in his profession, domestic, and respectable in his private
character; but with reserved manner which prevent his being
generally pleasing; and capable of be sometimes out of humour. he
be not an ill-temper man, not so often unreasonably cross as to
deserve such a reproach; but his temper be not his great perfection;
and, indeed, with such a worship wife, it be hardly possible that
any natural defect in it should not be increase. the extreme
sweetness of her temper must hurt his. he have all the clearness and
quickness of mind which she want, and he could sometimes act an
ungracious, or say a severe thing.
he be not a great favourite with his fair sister-in-law. nothing wrong
in he escape she. she be quick in feel the little injury to
Isabella, which Isabella never feel herself. perhaps she might have
pass over more have his manner be flattering to Isabella's sister,
but they be only those of a calmly kind brother and friend, without
praise and without blindness; but hardly any degree of personal
compliment could have make she regardless of that great fault of all
in her eye which he sometimes fall into, the want of respectful
forbearance towards her father. there he have not always the patience
that could have be wish. Mr. Woodhouse's peculiarity and
fidgetiness be sometimes provoke he to a rational remonstrance or
sharp retort equally ill-bestow. it do not often happen; for Mr.
John Knightley have really a great regard for his father-in-law, and
generally a strong sense of what be due to he; but it be too often
for Emma's charity, especially as there be all the pain of
apprehension frequently to be endure, though the offence come not.
the beginning, however, of every visit display none but the properest
feeling, and this be of necessity so short might be hop to pass
away in unsullied cordiality. they have not be long seat and
compose when Mr. Woodhouse, with a melancholy shake of the head and a
sigh, call his daughter's attention to the sad change at Hartfield
since she have be there last.
"ah, my dear," say he, "poor Miss Taylor--it be a grievous business."
"oh yes, sir," cry she with ready sympathy, "how you must miss she!
and dear Emma, too!--what a dreadful loss to you both!--I have be so
grieve for you.--I could not imagine how you could possibly do without
her.--It be a sad change indeed.--but I hope she be pretty well, sir."
"pretty well, my dear--I hope--pretty well.--I do not know but that the
place agree with she tolerably."
Mr. John Knightley here ask Emma quietly whether there be any
doubt of the air of Randalls.
"oh! no--none in the least. I never see Mrs. Weston well in my
life--never look so well. papa be only speak his own regret."
"very much to the honour of both," be the handsome reply.
"and do you see she, sir, tolerably often?" ask Isabella in the
plaintive tone which just suit her father.
Mr. Woodhouse hesitated.--"not near so often, my dear, as I could wish."
"oh! papa, we have miss see they but one entire day since they
marry. either in the morning or evening of every day, except one,
have we see either Mr. Weston or Mrs. Weston, and generally both,
either at Randalls or here--and as you may suppose, Isabella, most
frequently here. they be very, very kind in their visit. Mr. Weston
be really as kind as herself. papa, if you speak in that melancholy
way, you will be give Isabella a false idea of we all. every body
must be aware that Miss Taylor must be miss, but every body ought
also to be assure that Mr. and Mrs. Weston do really prevent our
miss she by any mean to the extent we ourselves anticipate--which
be the exact truth."
"just as it should be," say Mr. John Knightley, "and just as I hop
it be from your letter. her wish of shew you attention could not
be doubt, and his be a disengaged and social man make it all
easy. I have be always tell you, my love, that I have no idea of
the change be so very material to Hartfield as you apprehend; and
now you have Emma's account, I hope you will be satisfy."
"why, to be sure," say Mr. Woodhouse--"yes, certainly--I cannot deny
that Mrs. Weston, poor Mrs. Weston, do come and see we pretty often--
but then--she be always oblige to go away again."
"it would be very hard upon Mr. Weston if she do not, papa.-- you
quite forget poor Mr. Weston."
"I think, indeed," say John Knightley pleasantly, "that Mr. Weston have
some little claim. you and I, Emma, will venture to take the part of
the poor husband. I, be a husband, and you not be a wife, the
claim of the man may very likely strike we with equal force. as for
Isabella, she have be marry long enough to see the convenience of
put all the Mr. Westons aside as much as she can."
"I, my love," cry his wife, hearing and understanding only in
part.-- "be you talk about me?--I be sure nobody ought to be, or
can be, a great advocate for matrimony than I be; and if it have not
be for the misery of she leave Hartfield, I should never have
thought of Miss Taylor but as the most fortunate woman in the world;
and as to slight Mr. Weston, that excellent Mr. Weston, I think
there be nothing he do not deserve. I believe he be one of the very
well-temper man that ever exist. except yourself and your
brother, I do not know his equal for temper. I shall never forget his
fly Henry's kite for he that very windy day last Easter--and ever
since his particular kindness last September twelvemonth in writing
that note, at twelve o'clock at night, on purpose to assure I that
there be no scarlet fever at Cobham, I have be convince there could
not be a more feeling heart nor a well man in existence.--if any body
can deserve he, it must be Miss Taylor."
"where be the young man?" say John Knightley. "have he be here on
this occasion--or have he not?"
"he have not be here yet," reply Emma. "there be a strong
expectation of his come soon after the marriage, but it end in
nothing; and I have not hear he mention lately."
"but you should tell they of the letter, my dear," say her father.
"he write a letter to poor Mrs. Weston, to congratulate she, and a very
proper, handsome letter it be. she shew it to I. I think it
very well do of he indeed. whether it be his own idea you know,
one cannot tell. he be but young, and his uncle, perhaps--"
"my dear papa, he be three-and-twenty. you forget how time pass."
"three-and-twenty!--is he indeed?--well, I could not have think it--
and he be but two year old when he lose his poor mother! well, time
do fly indeed!--and my memory be very bad. however, it be an
exceed good, pretty letter, and give Mr. and Mrs. Weston a great
deal of pleasure. I remember it be write from Weymouth, and date
Sept. 28th--and begin, 'my dear Madam,' but I forget how it go on;
and it be sign 'F. C. Weston Churchill.'-- I remember that
perfectly."
"how very pleasing and proper of he!" cry the good-hearted Mrs. John
Knightley. "I have no doubt of his be a most amiable young man.
but how sad it be that he should not live at home with his father!
there be something so shocking in a child's be take away from his
parent and natural home! I never could comprehend how Mr. Weston
could part with he. to give up one's child! I really never could
think well of any body who propose such a thing to any body else."
"nobody ever do think well of the Churchills, I fancy," observe Mr.
John Knightley coolly. "but you need not imagine Mr. Weston to have
feel what you would feel in give up Henry or John. Mr. Weston be
rather an easy, cheerful-temper man, than a man of strong feeling;
he take thing as he find they, and make enjoyment of they somehow
or other, depend, I suspect, much more upon what be call society
for his comfort, that is, upon the power of eat and drink, and
playing whist with his neighbour five time a week, than upon family
affection, or any thing that home afford."
Emma could not like what border on a reflection on Mr. Weston, and
have half a mind to take it up; but she struggle, and let it pass. she
would keep the peace if possible; and there be something honourable
and valuable in the strong domestic habit, the all-sufficiency of home
to himself, whence result her brother's disposition to look down on
the common rate of social intercourse, and those to whom it be
important.--it have a high claim to forbearance.
CHAPTER XII
Mr. Knightley be to dine with they--rather against the inclination of
Mr. Woodhouse, who do not like that any one should share with he in
Isabella's first day. Emma's sense of right however have decide it;
and besides the consideration of what be due to each brother, she have
particular pleasure, from the circumstance of the late disagreement
between Mr. Knightley and herself, in procure he the proper
invitation.
she hop they might now become friend again. she think it be time
to make up. make-up indeed would not do. _she_ certainly have not
be in the wrong, and _he_ would never own that he have. concession
must be out of the question; but it be time to appear to forget that
they have ever quarrel; and she hop it might rather assist the
restoration of friendship, that when he come into the room she have one
of the child with she--the young, a nice little girl about eight
month old, who be now make her first visit to Hartfield, and very
happy to be dance about in her aunt's arm. it do assist; for though
he begin with grave look and short question, he be soon lead on to
talk of they all in the usual way, and to take the child out of her
arm with all the unceremoniousness of perfect amity. Emma feel they
be friend again; and the conviction give she at first great
satisfaction, and then a little sauciness, she could not help say,
as he be admire the baby,
"what a comfort it be, that we think alike about our nephews and
niece. as to man and woman, our opinion be sometimes very
different; but with regard to these child, I observe we never
disagree."
"if you be as much guide by nature in your estimate of man and
woman, and as little under the power of fancy and whim in your dealing
with they, as you be where these child be concern, we might
always think alike."
"to be sure--our discordancie must always arise from my being in the
wrong."
"yes," say he, smiling--"and reason good. I be sixteen year old
when you be bear."
"a material difference then," she replied--"and no doubt you be much
my superior in judgment at that period of our life; but do not the
lapse of one-and-twenty year bring our understanding a good deal
nearer?"
"yes--a good deal _nearer_."
"but still, not near enough to give I a chance of be right, if we
think differently."
"I have still the advantage of you by sixteen year' experience, and by
not be a pretty young woman and a spoiled child. come, my dear
Emma, let we be friend, and say no more about it. tell your aunt,
little Emma, that she ought to set you a well example than to be
renew old grievance, and that if she be not wrong before, she be
now."
"thatbe true," she cried--"very true. little Emma, grow up a well
woman than your aunt. be infinitely cleverer and not half so
conceited. now, Mr. Knightley, a word or two more, and I have do.
as far as good intention go, we be _both_ right, and I must say
that no effect on my side of the argument have yet prove wrong. I
only want to know that Mr. Martin be not very, very bitterly
disappoint."
"a man cannot be more so," be his short, full answer.
"ah!--indeed I be very sorry.--Come, shake hand with I."
this have just take place and with great cordiality, when John
Knightley make his appearance, and "how d'ye do, George?" and "John,
how be you?" succeed in the true english style, bury under a
calmness that seem all but indifference, the real attachment which
would have lead either of they, if requisite, to do every thing for the
good of the other.
the evening be quiet and conversable, as Mr. Woodhouse decline card
entirely for the sake of comfortable talk with his dear Isabella, and
the little party make two natural division; on one side he and his
daughter; on the other the two Mr. Knightleys; their subject totally
distinct, or very rarely mix--and Emma only occasionally join in
one or the other.
the brother talk of their own concern and pursuit, but principally
of those of the elder, whose temper be by much the most communicative,
and who be always the great talker. as a magistrate, he have
generally some point of law to consult John about, or, at least, some
curious anecdote to give; and as a farmer, as keep in hand the
home-farm at Donwell, he have to tell what every field be to bear next
year, and to give all such local information as could not fail of be
interesting to a brother whose home it have equally be the long
part of his life, and whose attachment be strong. the plan of a
drain, the change of a fence, the felling of a tree, and the
destination of every acre for wheat, turnip, or spring corn, be
enter into with as much equality of interest by John, as his cool
manner render possible; and if his willing brother ever leave he any
thing to inquire about, his inquiry even approach a tone of
eagerness.
while they be thus comfortably occupy, Mr. Woodhouse be enjoy a
full flow of happy regret and fearful affection with his daughter.
"my poor dear Isabella," say he, fondly take her hand, and
interrupting, for a few moment, her busy labour for some one of her
five children--"how long it be, how terribly long since you be here!
and how tired you must be after your journey! you must go to bed
early, my dear--and I recommend a little gruel to you before you
go.--you and I will have a nice basin of gruel together. my dear Emma,
suppose we all have a little gruel."
Emma could not suppose any such thing, know as she do, that both
the Mr. Knightleys be as unpersuadable on that article as
herself;--and two basin only be order. after a little more
discourse in praise of gruel, with some wonder at its not be
take every evening by every body, he proceed to say, with an air of
grave reflection,
"it be an awkward business, my dear, your spend the autumn at south
end instead of come here. I never have much opinion of the sea air."
"Mr. Wingfield most strenuously recommend it, sir--or we should not
have go. he recommend it for all the child, but particularly
for the weakness in little Bella's throat,--both sea air and bathing."
"ah! my dear, but Perry have many doubt about the sea do she any
good; and as to myself, I have be long perfectly convinced, though
perhaps I never tell you so before, that the sea be very rarely of use
to any body. I be sure it almost kill I once."
"come, come," cry Emma, feel this to be an unsafe subject, "I must
beg you not to talk of the sea. it make I envious and miserable;--I
who have never see it! south end be prohibit, if you please. my
dear Isabella, I have not hear you make one inquiry about Mr. Perry
yet; and he never forget you."
"oh! good Mr. Perry--how be he, sir?"
"why, pretty well; but not quite well. poor Perry be bilious, and he
have not time to take care of himself--he tell I he have not time to
take care of himself--which be very sad--but he be always want all
round the country. I suppose there be not a man in such practice
anywhere. but then there be not so clever a man any where."
"and Mrs. Perry and the child, how be they? do the child grow?
I have a great regard for Mr. Perry. I hope he will be call soon.
he will be so pleased to see my little one."
"I hope he will be here to-morrow, for I have a question or two to ask
he about myself of some consequence. and, my dear, whenever he come,
you have well let he look at little Bella's throat."
"oh! my dear sir, her throat be so much well that I have hardly any
uneasiness about it. either bathing have be of the great service
to she, or else it be to be attribute to an excellent embrocation of
Mr. Wingfield's, which we have be apply at time ever since
August."
"it be not very likely, my dear, that bathing should have be of use
to she--and if I have know you be want an embrocation, I would
have speak to--
"you seem to I to have forget Mrs. and Miss Bates," say Emma, "I
have not hear one inquiry after they."
"oh! the good batese--I be quite ashamed of myself--but you mention
they in most of your letter. I hope they be quite well. good old
Mrs. Bates--I will call upon she to-morrow, and take my children.--they
be always so pleased to see my children.-- and that excellent Miss
bates!--such thorough worthy people!-- how be they, sir?"
"why, pretty well, my dear, upon the whole. but poor Mrs. Bates have a
bad cold about a month ago."
"how sorry I be! but cold be never so prevalent as they have be
this autumn. Mr. Wingfield tell I that he have never know they more
general or heavy--except when it have be quite an influenza."
"that have be a good deal the case, my dear; but not to the degree you
mention. Perry say that cold have be very general, but not so
heavy as he have very often know they in November. Perry do not call
it altogether a sickly season."
"no, I do not know that Mr. Wingfield consider it _very_ sickly
except--
"ah! my poor dear child, the truth be, that in London it be always a
sickly season. nobody be healthy in London, nobody can be. it be a
dreadful thing to have you force to live there! so far off!--and the
air so bad!"
"no, indeed--_we_ be not at all in a bad air. our part of London be
very superior to most others!--you must not confound we with London in
general, my dear sir. the neighbourhood of Brunswick Square be very
different from almost all the rest. we be so very airy! I should be
unwilling, I own, to live in any other part of the town;--there be
hardly any other that I could be satisfied to have my child in: but
_we_ be so remarkably airy!--mr. Wingfield think the vicinity of
Brunswick Square decidedly the most favourable as to air."
"ah! my dear, it be not like Hartfield. you make the good of it--but
after you have be a week at Hartfield, you be all of you different
creature; you do not look like the same. now I cannot say, that I
think you be any of you look well at present."
"I be sorry to hear you say so, sir; but I assure you, except those
little nervous head-ache and palpitation which I be never entirely
free from anywhere, I be quite well myself; and if the child be
rather pale before they go to bed, it be only because they be a
little more tired than usual, from their journey and the happiness of
come. I hope you will think well of their look to-morrow; for I
assure you Mr. Wingfield tell I, that he do not believe he have ever
send we off altogether, in such good case. I trust, at least, that you
do not think Mr. Knightley look ill," turn her eye with
affectionate anxiety towards her husband.
"Middling, my dear; I cannot compliment you. I think Mr. John
Knightley very far from look well."
"what be the matter, sir?--Did you speak to I?" cry Mr. John
Knightley, hear his own name.
"I be sorry to find, my love, that my father do not think you look
well--but I hope it be only from be a little fatigued. I could have
wish, however, as you know, that you have see Mr. Wingfield before
you leave home."
"my dear isabella,"--exclaimed he hastily--"pray do not concern
yourself about my look. be satisfied with doctoring and coddle
yourself and the child, and let I look as I chuse."
"I do not thoroughly understand what you be tell your brother,"
cry Emma, "about your friend Mr. Graham's intending to have a bailiff
from Scotland, to look after his new estate. what will it answer?
will not the old prejudice be too strong?"
and she talk in this way so long and successfully that, when force
to give her attention again to her father and sister, she have nothing
bad to hear than Isabella's kind inquiry after Jane Fairfax; and Jane
Fairfax, though no great favourite with she in general, she be at that
moment very happy to assist in praise.
"that sweet, amiable Jane Fairfax!" say Mrs. John Knightley.-- "it be
so long since I have see she, except now and then for a moment
accidentally in town! what happiness it must be to her good old
grandmother and excellent aunt, when she come to visit they! I always
regret excessively on dear Emma's account that she cannot be more at
Highbury; but now their daughter be marry, I suppose Colonel and Mrs.
Campbell will not be able to part with she at all. she would be such a
delightful companion for Emma."
Mr. Woodhouse agree to it all, but add,
"our little friend Harriet Smith, however, be just such another pretty
kind of young person. you will like Harriet. Emma could not have a
well companion than Harriet."
"I be most happy to hear it--but only Jane Fairfax one know to be so
very accomplished and superior!--and exactly Emma's age."
this topic be discuss very happily, and other succeed of similar
moment, and pass away with similar harmony; but the evening do not
close without a little return of agitation. the gruel come and
supply a great deal to be say--much praise and many comments--
undoubting decision of its wholesomeness for every constitution, and
pretty severe Philippics upon the many house where it be never meet
with tolerable;--but, unfortunately, among the failure which the
daughter have to instance, the most recent, and therefore most
prominent, be in her own cook at South End, a young woman hire for
the time, who never have be able to understand what she mean by a
basin of nice smooth gruel, thin, but not too thin. often as she have
wish for and order it, she have never be able to get any thing
tolerable. here be a dangerous opening.
"ah!" say Mr. Woodhouse, shake his head and fix his eye on she
with tender concern.--The ejaculation in Emma's ear express, "ah!
there be no end of the sad consequence of your go to South End. it
do not bear talk of." and for a little while she hop he would
not talk of it, and that a silent rumination might suffice to restore
he to the relish of his own smooth gruel. after an interval of some
minute, however, he begin with,
"I shall always be very sorry that you go to the sea this autumn,
instead of come here."
"but why should you be sorry, sir?--I assure you, it do the child a
great deal of good."
"and, moreover, if you must go to the sea, it have well not have be
to South End. south end be an unhealthy place. Perry be surprize to
hear you have fix upon South End."
"I know there be such an idea with many people, but indeed it be quite
a mistake, sir.--We all have our health perfectly well there, never
find the least inconvenience from the mud; and Mr. Wingfield say it
be entirely a mistake to suppose the place unhealthy; and I be sure he
may be depend on, for he thoroughly understand the nature of the
air, and his own brother and family have be there repeatedly."
"you should have go to Cromer, my dear, if you go anywhere.-- Perry
be a week at Cromer once, and he hold it to be the good of all the
sea-bath place. a fine open sea, he say, and very pure air. and,
by what I understand, you might have have lodging there quite away from
the sea--a quarter of a mile off--very comfortable. you should have
consult Perry."
"but, my dear sir, the difference of the journey;--only consider how
great it would have been.--An hundred mile, perhaps, instead of forty."
"ah! my dear, as Perry say, where health be at stake, nothing else
should be consider; and if one be to travel, there be not much to
chuse between forty mile and an hundred.--better not move at all,
well stay in London altogether than travel forty mile to get into a
bad air. this be just what Perry say. it seem to he a very
ill-judge measure."
Emma's attempt to stop her father have be vain; and when he have
reach such a point as this, she could not wonder at her
brother-in-law's break out.
"Mr. Perry," say he, in a voice of very strong displeasure, "would do
as well to keep his opinion till it be ask for. why do he make it
any business of his, to wonder at what I do?--at my take my family
to one part of the coast or another?--I may be allow, I hope, the use
of my judgment as well as Mr. Perry.-- I want his direction no more
than his drug." he pause--and grow cool in a moment, add,
with only sarcastic dryness, "if Mr. Perry can tell I how to convey a
wife and five child a distance of an hundred and thirty mile with
no great expense or inconvenience than a distance of forty, I should
be as willing to prefer Cromer to south end as he could himself."
"true, true," cry Mr. Knightley, with most ready interposition--
"very true. thatbe a consideration indeed.--But John, as to what I be
tell you of my idea of move the path to Langham, of turn it
more to the right that it may not cut through the home meadow, I
cannot conceive any difficulty. I should not attempt it, if it be to
be the mean of inconvenience to the Highbury people, but if you call
to mind exactly the present line of the path. . . . the only way of
prove it, however, will be to turn to our map. I shall see you at
the Abbey to-morrow morning I hope, and then we will look they over,
and you shall give I your opinion."
Mr. Woodhouse be rather agitate by such harsh reflection on his
friend Perry, to whom he have, in fact, though unconsciously, be
attribute many of his own feeling and expressions;--but the
soothe attention of his daughter gradually remove the present
evil, and the immediate alertness of one brother, and well
recollection of the other, prevent any renewal of it.
CHAPTER XIII
there could hardly be a happy creature in the world than Mrs. John
Knightley, in this short visit to Hartfield, go about every morning
among her old acquaintance with her five child, and talk over
what she have do every evening with her father and sister. she have
nothing to wish otherwise, but that the day do not pass so swiftly.
it be a delightful visit;--perfect, in be much too short.
in general their evening be less engaged with friend than their
morning; but one complete dinner engagement, and out of the house too,
there be no avoiding, though at Christmas. Mr. Weston would take no
denial; they must all dine at Randalls one day;--even Mr. Woodhouse be
persuade to think it a possible thing in preference to a division of
the party.
how they be all to be convey, he would have make a difficulty if he
could, but as his son and daughter's carriage and horse be actually
at Hartfield, he be not able to make more than a simple question on
that head; it hardly amount to a doubt; nor do it occupy Emma long
to convince he that they might in one of the carriage find room for
Harriet also.
Harriet, Mr. Elton, and Mr. Knightley, their own especial set, be the
only person invite to meet them;--the hour be to be early, as well
as the number few; Mr. Woodhouse's habit and inclination be
consult in every thing.
the evening before this great event (for it be a very great event that
Mr. Woodhouse should dine out, on the 24th of December) have be spend
by Harriet at Hartfield, and she have go home so much indisposed with
a cold, that, but for her own earnest wish of be nurse by Mrs.
Goddard, Emma could not have allow she to leave the house. Emma
call on she the next day, and find her doom already sign with
regard to Randalls. she be very feverish and have a bad sore throat:
Mrs. Goddard be full of care and affection, Mr. Perry be talk of,
and Harriet herself be too ill and low to resist the authority which
exclude she from this delightful engagement, though she could not
speak of her loss without many tear.
Emma sit with she as long as she could, to attend she in Mrs. Goddard's
unavoidable absence, and raise her spirit by represent how much
Mr. Elton's would be depress when he know her state; and leave she at
last tolerably comfortable, in the sweet dependence of his have a
most comfortless visit, and of their all miss she very much. she
have not advance many yard from Mrs. Goddard's door, when she be meet
by Mr. Elton himself, evidently come towards it, and as they walk
on slowly together in conversation about the invalid--of whom he, on
the rumour of considerable illness, have be go to inquire, that he
might carry some report of she to Hartfield--they be overtake by
Mr. John Knightley return from the daily visit to Donwell, with his
two eld boy, whose healthy, glow face shew all the benefit of
a country run, and seem to ensure a quick despatch of the roast
mutton and rice pudding they be hasten home for. they join
company and proceed together. Emma be just describe the nature of
her friend's complaint;--"a throat very much inflame, with a great
deal of heat about she, a quick, low pulse, &c. and she be sorry to
find from Mrs. Goddard that Harriet be liable to very bad
sore-throat, and have often alarm she with they." Mr. Elton look
all alarm on the occasion, as he exclaim,
"a sore-throat!--i hope not infectious. I hope not of a putrid
infectious sort. have Perry see she? indeed you should take care of
yourself as well as of your friend. let I entreat you to run no
risk. why do not Perry see she?"
Emma, who be not really at all frightened herself, tranquillise this
excess of apprehension by assurance of Mrs. Goddard's experience and
care; but as there must still remain a degree of uneasiness which she
could not wish to reason away, which she would rather feed and assist
than not, she add soon afterwards--as if quite another subject,
"it be so cold, so very cold--and look and feel so very much like
snow, that if it be to any other place or with any other party, I
should really try not to go out to-day--and dissuade my father from
venturing; but as he have make up his mind, and do not seem to feel
the cold himself, I do not like to interfere, as I know it would be so
great a disappointment to Mr. and Mrs. Weston. but, upon my word, Mr.
Elton, in your case, I should certainly excuse myself. you appear to
I a little hoarse already, and when you consider what demand of voice
and what fatigue to-morrow will bring, I think it would be no more
than common prudence to stay at home and take care of yourself
to-night."
Mr. Elton look as if he do not very well know what answer to make;
which be exactly the case; for though very much gratify by the kind
care of such a fair lady, and not like to resist any advice of she's,
he have not really the least inclination to give up the visit;--but
Emma, too eager and busy in her own previous conception and view to
hear he impartially, or see he with clear vision, be very well
satisfied with his mutter acknowledgment of its be "very cold,
certainly very cold," and walk on, rejoice in have extricate he
from Randalls, and secure he the power of send to inquire after
Harriet every hour of the evening.
"you do quite right," say she;--"we will make your apology to Mr.
and Mrs. Weston."
but hardly have she so speak, when she find her brother be civilly
offer a seat in his carriage, if the weather be Mr. Elton's only
objection, and Mr. Elton actually accept the offer with much prompt
satisfaction. it be a do thing; Mr. Elton be to go, and never have
his broad handsome face express more pleasure than at this moment;
never have his smile be strong, nor his eye more exulting than when
he next look at she.
"well," say she to herself, "this be most strange!--after I have get
he off so well, to chuse to go into company, and leave Harriet ill
behind!--most strange indeed!--but there be, I believe, in many man,
especially single man, such an inclination--such a passion for dining
out--a dinner engagement be so high in the class of their pleasure,
their employment, their dignity, almost their duty, that any thing
give way to it--and this must be the case with Mr. Elton; a most
valuable, amiable, please young man undoubtedly, and very much in
love with Harriet; but still, he cannot refuse an invitation, he must
dine out wherever he be ask. what a strange thing love be! he can
see ready wit in Harriet, but will not dine alone for she."
soon afterwards Mr. Elton quit they, and she could not but do he
the justice of feel that there be a great deal of sentiment in his
manner of name Harriet at part; in the tone of his voice while
assure she that he should call at Mrs. Goddard's for news of her fair
friend, the last thing before he prepare for the happiness of meet
she again, when he hop to be able to give a well report; and he
sigh and smile himself off in a way that leave the balance of
approbation much in his favour.
after a few minute of entire silence between they, John Knightley
begin with--
"I never in my life see a man more intent on be agreeable than Mr.
Elton. it be downright labour to he where lady be concern. with
man he can be rational and unaffected, but when he have lady to
please, every feature work."
"Mr. Elton's manner be not perfect," reply Emma; "but where there
be a wish to please, one ought to overlook, and one do overlook a
great deal. where a man do his good with only moderate power, he
will have the advantage over negligent superiority. there be such
perfect good-temper and good-will in Mr. Elton as one cannot but value."
"yes," say Mr. John Knightley presently, with some slyness, "he seem
to have a great deal of good-will towards you."
"I!" she reply with a smile of astonishment, "be you imagine I
to be Mr. Elton's object?"
"such an imagination have cross I, I own, Emma; and if it never
occur to you before, you may as well take it into consideration now."
"Mr. Elton in love with me!--what an idea!"
"I do not say it be so; but you will do well to consider whether it be
so or not, and to regulate your behaviour accordingly. I think your
manner to he encouraging. I speak as a friend, Emma. you have well
look about you, and ascertain what you do, and what you mean to do."
"I thank you; but I assure you you be quite mistaken. Mr. Elton and I
be very good friend, and nothing more;" and she walk on, amusing
herself in the consideration of the blunder which often arise from a
partial knowledge of circumstance, of the mistake which people of
high pretension to judgment be for ever fall into; and not very
well pleased with her brother for imagine her blind and ignorant, and
in want of counsel. he say no more.
Mr. Woodhouse have so completely make up his mind to the visit, that in
spite of the increase coldness, he seem to have no idea of
shrink from it, and set forward at last most punctually with his
eld daughter in his own carriage, with less apparent consciousness
of the weather than either of the other; too full of the wonder of his
own going, and the pleasure it be to afford at Randalls to see that it
be cold, and too well wrapt up to feel it. the cold, however, be
severe; and by the time the second carriage be in motion, a few flake
of snow be find their way down, and the sky have the appearance of
be so overcharge as to want only a milder air to produce a very
white world in a very short time.
Emma soon see that her companion be not in the happy humour. the
preparing and the go abroad in such weather, with the sacrifice of
his child after dinner, be evil, be disagreeable at least,
which Mr. John Knightley do not by any mean like; he anticipate
nothing in the visit that could be at all worth the purchase; and the
whole of their drive to the vicarage be spend by he in express his
discontent.
"a man," say he, "must have a very good opinion of himself when he
ask people to leave their own fireside, and encounter such a day as
this, for the sake of come to see he. he must think himself a most
agreeable fellow; I could not do such a thing. it be the great
absurdity--actually snow at this moment!-- the folly of not allow
people to be comfortable at home--and the folly of peoplebe not stay
comfortably at home when they can! if we be oblige to go out such
an evening as this, by any call of duty or business, what a hardship we
should deem it;--and here be we, probably with rather thin clothing
than usual, set forward voluntarily, without excuse, in defiance of
the voice of nature, which tell man, in every thing give to his view
or his feeling, to stay at home himself, and keep all under shelter
that he can;--here be we set forward to spend five dull hour in
another man's house, with nothing to say or to hear that be not say
and hear yesterday, and may not be say and hear again to-morrow.
go in dismal weather, to return probably in worse;--four horse and
four servant take out for nothing but to convey five idle, shiver
creature into colder room and bad company than they might have have
at home."
Emma do not find herself equal to give the pleased assent, which no
doubt he be in the habit of receive, to emulate the "very true, my
love," which must have be usually administer by his travel
companion; but she have resolution enough to refrain from make any
answer at all. she could not be comply, she dread be
quarrelsome; her heroism reach only to silence. she allow he to
talk, and arrange the glass, and wrap herself up, without open
her lip.
they arrive, the carriage turn, the step be let down, and Mr.
Elton, spruce, black, and smile, be with they instantly. Emma
think with pleasure of some change of subject. Mr. Elton be all
obligation and cheerfulness; he be so very cheerful in his civility
indeed, that she begin to think he must have receive a different
account of Harriet from what have reach she. she have send while
dressing, and the answer have be, "much the same--not well."
"_my_ report from Mrs. Goddard's," say she presently, "be not so
pleasant as I have hoped--'not well' be _my_ answer."
his face lengthen immediately; and his voice be the voice of
sentiment as he answer.
"oh! no--I be grieve to find--I be on the point of tell you that
when I call at Mrs. Goddard's door, which I do the very last thing
before I return to dress, I be tell that Miss Smith be not well,
by no mean well, rather bad. very much grieve and concerned-- I
have flatter myself that she must be well after such a cordial as I
know have be give she in the morning."
Emma smile and answered--"my visit be of use to the nervous part of
her complaint, I hope; but not even I can charm away a sore throat; it
be a most severe cold indeed. Mr. Perry have be with she, as you
probably hear."
"yes--I imagine--that be--I do not--"
"he have be use to she in these complaint, and I hope to-morrow
morning will bring we both a more comfortable report. but it be
impossible not to feel uneasiness. such a sad loss to our party
to-day!"
"dreadful!--exactly so, indeed.--she will be miss every moment."
this be very proper; the sigh which accompany it be really
estimable; but it should have last long. Emma be rather in dismay
when only half a minute afterwards he begin to speak of other thing,
and in a voice of the great alacrity and enjoyment.
"what an excellent device," say he, "the use of a sheepskin for
carriage. how very comfortable they make it;--impossible to feel cold
with such precaution. the contrivance of modern day indeed have
render a gentleman's carriage perfectly complete. one be so fence
and guard from the weather, that not a breath of air can find its way
unpermitte. Weather become absolutely of no consequence. it be a
very cold afternoon--but in this carriage we know nothing of the
matter.--Ha! snow a little I see."
"yes," say John Knightley, "and I think we shall have a good deal of
it."
"Christmas weather," observe Mr. Elton. "quite seasonable; and
extremely fortunate we may think ourselves that it do not begin
yesterday, and prevent this day's party, which it might very possibly
have do, for Mr. Woodhouse would hardly have venture have there be
much snow on the ground; but now it be of no consequence. this be
quite the season indeed for friendly meeting. at Christmas every body
invite their friend about they, and people think little of even the
bad weather. I be snow up at a friend's house once for a week.
nothing could be pleasanter. I go for only one night, and could not
get away till that very day se'nnight."
Mr. John Knightley look as if he do not comprehend the pleasure, but
say only, coolly,
"I cannot wish to be snow up a week at Randalls."
at another time Emma might have be amuse, but she be too much
astonish now at Mr. Elton's spirit for other feeling. Harriet
seem quite forget in the expectation of a pleasant party.
"we be sure of excellent fire," continue he, "and every thing in the
great comfort. charming people, Mr. and Mrs. Weston;--Mrs. Weston
indeed be much beyond praise, and he be exactly what one value, so
hospitable, and so fond of society;--it will be a small party, but
where small party be select, they be perhaps the most agreeable of
any. Mr. Weston's dining-room do not accommodate more than ten
comfortably; and for my part, I would rather, under such circumstance,
fall short by two than exceed by two. I think you will agree with I,
(turn with a soft air to Emma,) I think I shall certainly have your
approbation, though Mr. Knightley perhaps, from be use to the large
party of London, may not quite enter into our feeling."
"I know nothing of the large party of London, sir--I never dine with
any body."
"indeed! (in a tone of wonder and pity,) I have no idea that the law have
be so great a slavery. well, sir, the time must come when you will
be pay for all this, when you will have little labour and great
enjoyment."
"my first enjoyment," reply John Knightley, as they pass through
the sweep-gate, "will be to find myself safe at Hartfield again."
CHAPTER XIV
some change of countenance be necessary for each gentleman as they
walk into Mrs. Weston's drawing-room;--mr. Elton must compose his
joyous look, and Mr. John Knightley disperse his ill-humour. Mr. Elton
must smile less, and Mr. John Knightley more, to fit they for the
place.--Emma only might be as nature prompt, and shew herself just as
happy as she be. to she it be real enjoyment to be with the Westons.
Mr. Weston be a great favourite, and there be not a creature in the
world to whom she speak with such unreserve, as to his wife; not any
one, to whom she relate with such conviction of be listen to and
understand, of be always interesting and always intelligible, the
little affair, arrangement, perplexity, and pleasure of her father
and herself. she could tell nothing of Hartfield, in which Mrs. Weston
have not a lively concern; and half an hour's uninterrupted
communication of all those little matter on which the daily happiness
of private life depend, be one of the first gratification of each.
this be a pleasure which perhaps the whole day's visit might not
afford, which certainly do not belong to the present half-hour; but
the very sight of Mrs. Weston, her smile, her touch, her voice be
grateful to Emma, and she determine to think as little as possible of
Mr. Elton's oddity, or of any thing else unpleasant, and enjoy all
that be enjoyable to the utmost.
the misfortune of Harriet's cold have be pretty well go through
before her arrival. Mr. Woodhouse have be safely seat long enough
to give the history of it, besides all the history of his own and
Isabella's come, and of Emma's be to follow, and have indeed just
get to the end of his satisfaction that James should come and see his
daughter, when the other appear, and Mrs. Weston, who have be
almost wholly engross by her attention to he, be able to turn away
and welcome her dear Emma.
Emma's project of forget Mr. Elton for a while make she rather
sorry to find, when they have all take their place, that he be close
to she. the difficulty be great of drive his strange insensibility
towards Harriet, from her mind, while he not only sit at her elbow, but
be continually obtrude his happy countenance on her notice, and
solicitously address she upon every occasion. instead of forget
he, his behaviour be such that she could not avoid the internal
suggestion of "can it really be as my brother imagine? can it be
possible for this man to be begin to transfer his affection from
Harriet to me?--Absurd and insufferable!"-- yet he would be so anxious
for she be perfectly warm, would be so interested about her father,
and so delighted with Mrs. Weston; and at last would begin admire her
drawing with so much zeal and so little knowledge as seem terribly
like a would-be lover, and make it some effort with she to preserve she
good manner. for her own sake she could not be rude; and for
Harriet's, in the hope that all would yet turn out right, she be even
positively civil; but it be an effort; especially as something be
go on amongst the other, in the most overpowering period of Mr.
Elton's nonsense, which she particularly wish to listen to. she
hear enough to know that Mr. Weston be give some information about
his son; she hear the word "my son," and "Frank," and "my son,"
repeat several time over; and, from a few other half-syllable very
much suspect that he be announce an early visit from his son; but
before she could quiet Mr. Elton, the subject be so completely past
that any reviving question from she would have be awkward.
now, it so happen that in spite of Emma's resolution of never
marrying, there be something in the name, in the idea of Mr. Frank
Churchill, which always interested she. she have frequently
thought--especially since his father's marriage with Miss Taylor--that
if she _be_ to marry, he be the very person to suit she in age,
character and condition. he seem by this connexion between the
family, quite to belong to she. she could not but suppose it to be a
match that every body who know they must think of. that Mr. and Mrs.
Weston do think of it, she be very strongly persuade; and though not
meaning to be induce by he, or by any body else, to give up a
situation which she believe more replete with good than any she could
change it for, she have a great curiosity to see he, a decide
intention of find he pleasant, of be like by he to a certain
degree, and a sort of pleasure in the idea of their being couple in
their friend' imagination.
with such sensation, Mr. Elton's civility be dreadfully ill-time;
but she have the comfort of appear very polite, while feel very
cross--and of think that the rest of the visit could not possibly
pass without bring forward the same information again, or the
substance of it, from the open-hearted Mr. Weston.--So it proved;--for
when happily release from Mr. Elton, and seat by Mr. Weston, at
dinner, he make use of the very first interval in the care of
hospitality, the very first leisure from the saddle of mutton, to say
to she,
"we want only two more to be just the right number. I should like to
see two more here,--your pretty little friend, Miss Smith, and my
son--and then I should say we be quite complete. I believe you do
not hear I tell the other in the drawing-room that we be
expect Frank. I have a letter from he this morning, and he will be
with we within a fortnight."
Emma speak with a very proper degree of pleasure; and fully assent to
his proposition of Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss Smith make their
party quite complete.
"he have be want to come to we," continue Mr. Weston, "ever since
September: every letter have be full of it; but he cannot command his
own time. he have those to please who must be please, and who (between
ourselves) be sometimes to be pleased only by a good many sacrifice.
but now I have no doubt of see he here about the second week in
January."
"what a very great pleasure it will be to you! and Mrs. Weston be so
anxious to be acquaint with he, that she must be almost as happy as
yourself."
"yes, she would be, but that she think there will be another put-off.
she do not depend upon his come so much as I do: but she do not
know the party so well as I do. the case, you see, is--(but this be
quite between ourselves: I do not mention a syllable of it in the
other room. there be secret in all family, you know)--the case be,
that a party of friend be invite to pay a visit at Enscombe in
January; and that Frank's coming depend upon their be put off. if
they be not put off, he cannot stir. but I know they will, because it
be a family that a certain lady, of some consequence, at Enscombe, have
a particular dislike to: and though it be think necessary to invite
they once in two or three year, they always be put off when it come
to the point. I have not the small doubt of the issue. I be as
confident of see Frank here before the middle of January, as I be of
be here myself: but your good friend there (nod towards the
upper end of the table) have so few vagary herself, and have be so
little use to they at Hartfield, that she cannot calculate on their
effect, as I have be long in the practice of do."
"I be sorry there should be any thing like doubt in the case," reply
Emma; "but be disposed to side with you, Mr. Weston. if you think he
will come, I shall think so too; for you know Enscombe."
"yes--I have some right to that knowledge; though I have never be at
the place in my life.--She be an odd woman!--But I never allow myself
to speak ill of she, on Frank's account; for I do believe she to be
very fond of he. I use to think she be not capable of be fond of
any body, except herself: but she have always be kind to he (in she
way--allow for little whim and caprice, and expect every thing
to be as she like). and it be no small credit, in my opinion, to he,
that he should excite such an affection; for, though I would not say it
to any body else, she have no more heart than a stone to people in
general; and the devil of a temper."
Emma like the subject so well, that she begin upon it, to Mrs. Weston,
very soon after their move into the drawing-room: wish her
joy--yet observe, that she know the first meeting must be rather
alarming.-- Mrs. Weston agree to it; but add, that she should be
very glad to be secure of undergo the anxiety of a first meeting at
the time talk of: "for I cannot depend upon his coming. I cannot be
so sanguine as Mr. Weston. I be very much afraid that it will all end
in nothing. Mr. Weston, I dare say, have be tell you exactly how
the matter stand?"
"yes--it seem to depend upon nothing but the ill-humour of Mrs.
Churchill, which I imagine to be the most certain thing in the world."
"my Emma!" reply Mrs. Weston, smile, "what be the certainty of
caprice?" then turn to Isabella, who have not be attend
before--"you must know, my dear Mrs. Knightley, that we be by no mean
so sure of see Mr. Frank Churchill, in my opinion, as his father
think. it depend entirely upon his aunt's spirit and pleasure; in
short, upon her temper. to you--to my two daughter--I may venture on
the truth. Mrs. Churchill rule at Enscombe, and be a very
odd-temper woman; and his come now, depend upon she be willing
to spare he."
"oh, Mrs. Churchill; every body know Mrs. Churchill," reply
Isabella: "and I be sure I never think of that poor young man without
the great compassion. to be constantly live with an ill-temper
person, must be dreadful. it be what we happily have never know any
thing of; but it must be a life of misery. what a blessing, that she
never have any child! poor little creature, how unhappy she would
have make they!"
Emma wish she have be alone with Mrs. Weston. she should then have
hear more: Mrs. Weston would speak to she, with a degree of unreserve
which she would not hazard with Isabella; and, she really believe,
would scarcely try to conceal any thing relative to the Churchills from
she, except those view on the young man, of which her own
imagination have already give she such instinctive knowledge. but at
present there be nothing more to be say. Mr. Woodhouse very soon
follow they into the drawing-room. to be sit long after dinner,
be a confinement that he could not endure. neither wine nor
conversation be any thing to he; and gladly do he move to those with
whom he be always comfortable.
while he talk to Isabella, however, Emma find an opportunity of
say,
"and so you do not consider this visit from your son as by any mean
certain. I be sorry for it. the introduction must be unpleasant,
whenever it take place; and the soon it could be over, the well."
"yes; and every delay make one more apprehensive of other delay.
even if this family, the Braithwaites, be put off, I be still afraid
that some excuse may be find for disappoint we. I cannot bear to
imagine any reluctance on his side; but I be sure there be a great wish
on the Churchills' to keep he to themselves. there be jealousy. they
be jealous even of his regard for his father. in short, I can feel no
dependence on his coming, and I wish Mr. Weston be less sanguine."
"he ought to come," say Emma. "if he could stay only a couple of
day, he ought to come; and one can hardly conceive a young man's not
have it in his power to do as much as that. a young _woman_, if she
fall into bad hand, may be teaze, and keep at a distance from those
she want to be with; but one cannot comprehend a young _man_be be
under such restraint, as not to be able to spend a week with his
father, if he like it."
"one ought to be at Enscombe, and know the way of the family, before
one decide upon what he can do," reply Mrs. Weston. "one ought to
use the same caution, perhaps, in judging of the conduct of any one
individual of any one family; but Enscombe, I believe, certainly must
not be judge by general rule: _she_ be so very unreasonable; and
every thing give way to she."
"but she be so fond of the nephew: he be so very great a favourite.
now, accord to my idea of Mrs. Churchill, it would be most natural,
that while she make no sacrifice for the comfort of the husband, to
whom she owe every thing, while she exercise incessant caprice
towards _he_, she should frequently be govern by the nephew, to whom
she owe nothing at all."
"my dear Emma, do not pretend, with your sweet temper, to understand
a bad one, or to lay down rule for it: you must let it go its own
way. I have no doubt of his having, at time, considerable influence;
but it may be perfectly impossible for he to know beforehand _when_ it
will be."
Emma listen, and then coolly say, "I shall not be satisfied, unless
he come."
"he may have a great deal of influence on some point," continue Mrs.
Weston, "and on other, very little: and among those, on which she be
beyond his reach, it be but too likely, may be this very circumstance
of his come away from they to visit we."
CHAPTER XV
Mr. Woodhouse be soon ready for his tea; and when he have drink his tea
he be quite ready to go home; and it be as much as his three
companion could do, to entertain away his notice of the lateness of
the hour, before the other gentleman appear. Mr. Weston be chatty
and convivial, and no friend to early separation of any sort; but at
last the drawing-room party do receive an augmentation. Mr. Elton, in
very good spirit, be one of the first to walk in. Mrs. Weston and
Emma be sit together on a sofa. he join they immediately, and,
with scarcely an invitation, seat himself between they.
Emma, in good spirit too, from the amusement afford her mind by the
expectation of Mr. Frank Churchill, be willing to forget his late
impropriety, and be as well satisfied with he as before, and on his
make Harriet his very first subject, be ready to listen with most
friendly smile.
he profess himself extremely anxious about her fair friend--her
fair, lovely, amiable friend. "do she know?--had she hear any thing
about she, since their be at Randalls?--he feel much anxiety--he
must confess that the nature of her complaint alarm he
considerably." and in this style he talk on for some time very
properly, not much attend to any answer, but altogether sufficiently
awake to the terror of a bad sore throat; and Emma be quite in charity
with he.
but at last there seem a perverse turn; it seem all at once as if
he be more afraid of its be a bad sore throat on her account, than
on Harriet's--more anxious that she should escape the infection, than
that there should be no infection in the complaint. he begin with
great earnestness to entreat she to refrain from visit the
sick-chamber again, for the present--to entreat she to _promise_ _he_
not to venture into such hazard till he have see Mr. Perry and learn
his opinion; and though she try to laugh it off and bring the subject
back into its proper course, there be no put an end to his extreme
solicitude about she. she be vex. it do appear--there be no
conceal it--exactly like the pretence of be in love with she,
instead of Harriet; an inconstancy, if real, the most contemptible and
abominable! and she have difficulty in behave with temper. he turn
to Mrs. Weston to implore her assistance, "would not she give he she
support?--would not she add her persuasion to his, to induce Miss
Woodhouse not to go to Mrs. Goddard's till it be certain that Miss
Smith's disorder have no infection? he could not be satisfied without a
promise--would not she give he her influence in procure it?"
"so scrupulous for other," he continue, "and yet so careless for
herself! she want I to nurse my cold by stay at home to-day, and
yet will not promise to avoid the danger of catch an ulcerated sore
throat herself. be this fair, Mrs. Weston?--Judge between we. have
not I some right to complain? I be sure of your kind support and aid."
Emma see Mrs. Weston's surprize, and feel that it must be great, at an
address which, in word and manner, be assume to himself the right
of first interest in she; and as for herself, she be too much provoke
and offend to have the power of directly say any thing to the
purpose. she could only give he a look; but it be such a look as she
think must restore he to his sens, and then leave the sofa,
remove to a seat by her sister, and give she all her attention.
she have not time to know how Mr. Elton take the reproof, so rapidly do
another subject succeed; for Mr. John Knightley now come into the room
from examine the weather, and open on they all with the information
of the ground be cover with snow, and of its still snow fast,
with a strong drift wind; conclude with these word to Mr.
Woodhouse:
"this will prove a spirited beginning of your winter engagement, sir.
something new for your coachman and horse to be make their way
through a storm of snow."
poor Mr. Woodhouse be silent from consternation; but every body else
have something to say; every body be either surprize or not surprize,
and have some question to ask, or some comfort to offer. Mrs. Weston
and Emma try earnestly to cheer he and turn his attention from his
son-in-law, who be pursue his triumph rather unfeelingly.
"I admire your resolution very much, sir," say he, "in venture out
in such weather, for of course you see there would be snow very soon.
every body must have see the snow come on. I admire your spirit;
and I dare say we shall get home very well. another hour or two's snow
can hardly make the road impassable; and we be two carriage; if one
be blow over in the bleak part of the common field there will be the
other at hand. I dare say we shall be all safe at Hartfield before
midnight."
Mr. Weston, with triumph of a different sort, be confess that he
have know it to be snow some time, but have not say a word, lest it
should make Mr. Woodhouse uncomfortable, and be an excuse for his
hurrying away. as to there be any quantity of snow fall or likely
to fall to impede their return, that be a mere joke; he be afraid
they would find no difficulty. he wish the road might be impassable,
that he might be able to keep they all at Randalls; and with the utmost
good-will be sure that accommodation might be find for every body,
call on his wife to agree with he, that with a little contrivance,
every body might be lodge, which she hardly know how to do, from the
consciousness of there be but two spare room in the house.
"what be to be do, my dear emma?--what be to be do?" be Mr.
Woodhouse's first exclamation, and all that he could say for some time.
to she he look for comfort; and her assurance of safety, her
representation of the excellence of the horse, and of James, and of
their have so many friend about they, revive he a little.
his eld daughter's alarm be equal to his own. the horror of be
block up at Randalls, while her child be at Hartfield, be full
in her imagination; and fancy the road to be now just passable for
adventurous people, but in a state that admit no delay, she be
eager to have it settle, that her father and Emma should remain at
Randalls, while she and her husband set forward instantly through all
the possible accumulation of drift snow that might impede they.
"you have well order the carriage directly, my love," say she; "I
dare say we shall be able to get along, if we set off directly; and if
we do come to any thing very bad, I can get out and walk. I be not at
all afraid. I should not mind walk half the way. I could change my
shoe, you know, the moment I get home; and it be not the sort of thing
that give I cold."
"indeed!" reply he. "then, my dear Isabella, it be the most
extraordinary sort of thing in the world, for in general every thing
do give you cold. Walk home!--you be prettily shod for walk
home, I dare say. it will be bad enough for the horse."
Isabella turn to Mrs. Weston for her approbation of the plan. Mrs.
Weston could only approve. Isabella then go to Emma; but Emma could
not so entirely give up the hope of their be all able to get away;
and they be still discuss the point, when Mr. Knightley, who have
leave the room immediately after his brother's first report of the snow,
come back again, and tell they that he have be out of door to
examine, and could answer for there not be the small difficulty
in their getting home, whenever they like it, either now or an hour
hence. he have go beyond the sweep--some way along the Highbury
road--the snow be nowhere above half an inch deep--in many place
hardly enough to whiten the ground; a very few flake be fall at
present, but the cloud be part, and there be every appearance of
its be soon over. he have see the coachman, and they both agree
with he in there be nothing to apprehend.
to Isabella, the relief of such tiding be very great, and they be
scarcely less acceptable to Emma on her father's account, who be
immediately set as much at ease on the subject as his nervous
constitution allow; but the alarm that have be raise could not be
appease so as to admit of any comfort for he while he continue at
Randalls. he be satisfied of there be no present danger in
return home, but no assurance could convince he that it be safe
to stay; and while the other be variously urge and recommend,
Mr. Knightley and Emma settle it in a few brief sentence: thus--
"your father will not be easy; why do not you go?"
"I be ready, if the other be."
"shall I ring the bell?"
"yes, do."
and the bell be rung, and the carriage speak for. a few minute
more, and Emma hop to see one troublesome companion deposit in his
own house, to get sober and cool, and the other recover his temper and
happiness when this visit of hardship be over.
the carriage come: and Mr. Woodhouse, always the first object on such
occasion, be carefully attend to his own by Mr. Knightley and Mr.
Weston; but not all that either could say could prevent some renewal of
alarm at the sight of the snow which have actually fall, and the
discovery of a much dark night than he have be prepare for. "he
be afraid they should have a very bad drive. he be afraid poor
Isabella would not like it. and there would be poor Emma in the
carriage behind. he do not know what they have good do. they must
keep as much together as they could;" and James be talk to, and
give a charge to go very slow and wait for the other carriage.
Isabella stept in after her father; John Knightley, forget that he
do not belong to their party, stept in after his wife very naturally;
so that Emma find, on be escort and follow into the second
carriage by Mr. Elton, that the door be to be lawfully shut on they,
and that they be to have a tete-a-tete drive. it would not have be
the awkwardness of a moment, it would have be rather a pleasure,
previous to the suspicion of this very day; she could have talk to
he of Harriet, and the three-quarter of a mile would have seem but
one. but now, she would rather it have not happen. she believe he
have be drink too much of Mr. Weston's good wine, and feel sure
that he would want to be talk nonsense.
to restrain he as much as might be, by her own manner, she be
immediately prepare to speak with exquisite calmness and gravity of
the weather and the night; but scarcely have she begin, scarcely have
they pass the sweep-gate and join the other carriage, than she
find her subject cut up--her hand seize--her attention demand, and
Mr. Elton actually make violent love to she: avail himself of the
precious opportunity, declare sentiment which must be already well
know, hop--fear--adore--ready to die if she refuse he; but
flatter himself that his ardent attachment and unequalled love and
unexampled passion could not fail of have some effect, and in short,
very much resolve on be seriously accept as soon as possible. it
really be so. without scruple--without apology--without much
apparent diffidence, Mr. Elton, the lover of Harriet, be profess
himself _she_ lover. she try to stop he; but vainly; he would go
on, and say it all. angry as she be, the thought of the moment make
her resolve to restrain herself when she do speak. she feel that half
this folly must be drunkenness, and therefore could hope that it might
belong only to the passing hour. accordingly, with a mixture of the
serious and the playful, which she hop would well suit his half and
half state, she reply,
"I be very much astonish, Mr. Elton. this to _I_! you forget
yourself--you take I for my friend--any message to Miss Smith I shall
be happy to deliver; but no more of this to _I_, if you please."
"Miss smith!--message to Miss smith!--what could she possibly mean!"--
and he repeat her word with such assurance of accent, such boastful
pretence of amazement, that she could not help reply with quickness,
"Mr. Elton, this be the most extraordinary conduct! and I can account
for it only in one way; you be not yourself, or you could not speak
either to I, or of Harriet, in such a manner. command yourself enough
to say no more, and I will endeavour to forget it."
but Mr. Elton have only drunk wine enough to elevate his spirit, not at
all to confuse his intellect. he perfectly know his own meaning; and
have warmly protest against her suspicion as most injurious, and
slightly touch upon his respect for Miss Smith as her friend,--but
acknowledge his wonder that Miss Smith should be mention at
all,--he resume the subject of his own passion, and be very urgent
for a favourable answer.
as she think less of his inebriety, she think more of his
inconstancy and presumption; and with few struggle for politeness,
reply,
"it be impossible for I to doubt any long. you have make yourself
too clear. Mr. Elton, my astonishment be much beyond any thing I can
express. after such behaviour, as I have witness during the last
month, to Miss Smith--such attention as I have be in the daily habit
of observe--to be address I in this manner--this be an
unsteadiness of character, indeed, which I have not suppose possible!
believe I, sir, I be far, very far, from gratified in be the object
of such profession."
"Good Heaven!" cry Mr. Elton, "what can be the meaning of this?--
Miss Smith!--I never think of Miss Smith in the whole course of my
existence--never pay she any attention, but as your friend: never
care whether she be dead or alive, but as your friend. if she have
fancy otherwise, her own wish have mislead she, and I be very
sorry--extremely sorry--but, Miss Smith, indeed!--oh! Miss Woodhouse!
who can think of Miss Smith, when Miss Woodhouse be near! no, upon my
honour, there be no unsteadiness of character. I have think only of
you. I protest against have pay the small attention to any one
else. every thing that I have say or do, for many week past, have
be with the sole view of mark my adoration of yourself. you
cannot really, seriously, doubt it. No!--(in an accent mean to be
insinuating)--i be sure you have see and understand I."
it would be impossible to say what Emma feel, on hear this--which
of all her unpleasant sensation be uppermost. she be too completely
overpower to be immediately able to reply: and two moment of silence
be ample encouragement for Mr. Elton's sanguine state of mind, he
try to take her hand again, as he joyously exclaimed--
"Charming Miss Woodhouse! allow I to interpret this interesting
silence. it confess that you have long understand I."
"no, sir," cry Emma, "it confess no such thing. so far from have
long understand you, I have be in a most complete error with respect
to your view, till this moment. as to myself, I be very sorry that
you should have be give way to any feelings-- nothing could be
far from my wish--your attachment to my friend Harriet--your
pursuit of she, (pursuit, it appear,) give I great pleasure, and I
have be very earnestly wish you success: but have I suppose that
she be not your attraction to Hartfield, I should certainly have
think you judge ill in make your visit so frequent. be I to
believe that you have never seek to recommend yourself particularly
to Miss smith?--that you have never think seriously of she?"
"never, madam," cry he, affront in his turn: "never, I assure you.
_I_ think seriously of Miss Smith!--Miss Smith be a very good sort of
girl; and I should be happy to see she respectably settle. I wish she
extremely well: and, no doubt, there be man who might not object
to--every body have their level: but as for myself, I be not, I think,
quite so much at a loss. I need not so totally despair of an equal
alliance, as to be address myself to Miss Smith!-- no, madam, my
visit to Hartfield have be for yourself only; and the encouragement
I received--"
"Encouragement!--I give you encouragement!--sir, you have be entirely
mistaken in suppose it. I have see you only as the admirer of my
friend. in no other light could you have be more to I than a common
acquaintance. I be exceedingly sorry: but it be well that the mistake
end where it do. have the same behaviour continue, Miss Smith might
have be lead into a misconception of your view; not be aware,
probably, any more than myself, of the very great inequality which you
be so sensible of. but, as it be, the disappointment be single, and,
I trust, will not be last. I have no thought of matrimony at
present."
he be too angry to say another word; her manner too decide to invite
supplication; and in this state of swell resentment, and mutually
deep mortification, they have to continue together a few minute long,
for the fear of Mr. Woodhouse have confine they to a foot-pace. if
there have not be so much anger, there would have be desperate
awkwardness; but their straightforward emotion leave no room for the
little zigzag of embarrassment. without know when the carriage
turn into Vicarage Lane, or when it stop, they find themselves,
all at once, at the door of his house; and he be out before another
syllable passed.--Emma then feel it indispensable to wish he a good
night. the compliment be just return, coldly and proudly; and,
under indescribable irritation of spirit, she be then convey to
Hartfield.
there she be welcome, with the utmost delight, by her father, who have
be tremble for the danger of a solitary drive from vicarage
Lane--turn a corner which he could never bear to think of--and in
strange hand--a mere common coachman--no James; and there it seem as
if her return only be want to make every thing go well: for Mr.
John Knightley, ashamed of his ill-humour, be now all kindness and
attention; and so particularly solicitous for the comfort of her
father, as to seem--if not quite ready to join he in a basin of
gruel--perfectly sensible of its be exceedingly wholesome; and the
day be conclude in peace and comfort to all their little party,
except herself.--but her mind have never be in such perturbation; and
it need a very strong effort to appear attentive and cheerful till
the usual hour of separate allow she the relief of quiet reflection.
CHAPTER XVI
the hair be curl, and the maid send away, and Emma sit down to think
and be miserable.--it be a wretched business indeed!--such an
overthrow of every thing she have be wish for!--such a development
of every thing most unwelcome!--such a blow for harriet!--that be the
bad of all. every part of it bring pain and humiliation, of some
sort or other; but, compare with the evil to Harriet, all be light;
and she would gladly have submit to feel yet more mistaken--more in
error--more disgrace by mis-judgment, than she actually be, could the
effect of her blunder have be confine to herself.
"if I have not persuade Harriet into like the man, I could have bear
any thing. he might have double his presumption to I--but poor
Harriet!"
how she could have be so deceived!--He protest that he have never
think seriously of Harriet--never! she look back as well as she
could; but it be all confusion. she have take up the idea, she
suppose, and make every thing bend to it. his manner, however, must
have be unmarke, wavering, dubious, or she could not have be so
mislead.
the picture!--how eager he have be about the picture!--and the
charade!--and an hundred other circumstances;--how clearly they have
seem to point at Harriet. to be sure, the charade, with its "ready
wit"--but then the "soft eyes"--in fact it suit neither; it be a
jumble without taste or truth. who could have see through such
thick-headed nonsense?
certainly she have often, especially of late, think his manner to
herself unnecessarily gallant; but it have pass as his way, as a mere
error of judgment, of knowledge, of taste, as one proof among other
that he have not always live in the good society, that with all the
gentleness of his address, true elegance be sometimes want; but,
till this very day, she have never, for an instant, suspect it to mean
any thing but grateful respect to she as Harriet's friend.
to Mr. John Knightley be she indebted for her first idea on the
subject, for the first start of its possibility. there be no denying
that those brother have penetration. she remember what Mr. Knightley
have once say to she about Mr. Elton, the caution he have give, the
conviction he have profess that Mr. Elton would never marry
indiscreetly; and blush to think how much truer a knowledge of his
character have be there shewn than any she have reach herself. it
be dreadfully mortifying; but Mr. Elton be prove himself, in many
respect, the very reverse of what she have mean and believe he;
proud, assume, conceited; very full of his own claim, and little
concerned about the feeling of other.
contrary to the usual course of thing, Mr. Elton's wanting to pay his
address to she have sink he in her opinion. his profession and his
proposal do he no service. she think nothing of his attachment,
and be insult by his hope. he want to marry well, and have the
arrogance to raise his eye to she, pretend to be in love; but she
be perfectly easy as to his not suffer any disappointment that need
be care for. there have be no real affection either in his language
or manner. sigh and fine word have be give in abundance; but she
could hardly devise any set of expression, or fancy any tone of voice,
less ally with real love. she need not trouble herself to pity he.
he only want to aggrandise and enrich himself; and if Miss Woodhouse
of Hartfield, the heiress of thirty thousand pound, be not quite so
easily obtain as he have fancy, he would soon try for Miss Somebody
else with twenty, or with ten.
but--that he should talk of encouragement, should consider she as aware
of his view, accept his attention, mean (in short), to marry
him!--should suppose himself she equal in connexion or mind!--look down
upon her friend, so well understand the gradation of rank below
he, and be so blind to what rise above, as to fancy himself shew no
presumption in address her!-- it be most provoking.
perhaps it be not fair to expect he to feel how very much he be her
inferior in talent, and all the elegancie of mind. the very want of
such equality might prevent his perception of it; but he must know that
in fortune and consequence she be greatly his superior. he must know
that the Woodhouses have be settle for several generation at
Hartfield, the young branch of a very ancient family--and that the
elton be nobody. the land property of Hartfield certainly be
inconsiderable, be but a sort of notch in the Donwell Abbey estate,
to which all the rest of Highbury belong; but their fortune, from
other source, be such as to make they scarcely secondary to Donwell
Abbey itself, in every other kind of consequence; and the Woodhouses
have long hold a high place in the consideration of the neighbourhood
which Mr. Elton have first enter not two year ago, to make his way as
he could, without any alliance but in trade, or any thing to recommend
he to notice but his situation and his civility.-- but he have fancy
she in love with he; that evidently must have be his dependence; and
after rave a little about the seem incongruity of gentle manner
and a conceited head, Emma be oblige in common honesty to stop and
admit that her own behaviour to he have be so complaisant and
obliging, so full of courtesy and attention, as (suppose her real
motive unperceive) might warrant a man of ordinary observation and
delicacy, like Mr. Elton, in fancy himself a very decide favourite.
if _she_ have so misinterpret his feeling, she have little right to
wonder that _he_, with self-interest to blind he, should have mistake
her.
the first error and the bad lie at her door. it be foolish, it be
wrong, to take so active a part in bring any two people together.
it be adventure too far, assume too much, make light of what
ought to be serious, a trick of what ought to be simple. she be quite
concerned and ashamed, and resolve to do such thing no more.
"here have I," say she, "actually talk poor Harriet into be very
much attach to this man. she might never have think of he but for
I; and certainly never would have think of he with hope, if I have
not assure she of his attachment, for she be as modest and humble as I
use to think he. oh! that I have be satisfied with persuade she
not to accept young Martin. there I be quite right. that be well
do of I; but there I should have stop, and leave the rest to time
and chance. I be introduce she into good company, and give she
the opportunity of please some one worth have; I ought not to have
attempt more. but now, poor girl, her peace be cut up for some time.
I have be but half a friend to she; and if she be _not_ to feel
this disappointment so very much, I be sure I have not an idea of any
body else who would be at all desirable for her;--William Coxe--oh! no,
I could not endure William Coxe--a pert young lawyer."
she stopt to blush and laugh at her own relapse, and then resume a
more serious, more dispiriting cogitation upon what have be, and might
be, and must be. the distressing explanation she have to make to
Harriet, and all that poor Harriet would be suffer, with the
awkwardness of future meeting, the difficulty of continue or
discontinue the acquaintance, of subdue feeling, conceal
resentment, and avoid eclat, be enough to occupy she in most
unmirthful reflection some time long, and she go to bed at last
with nothing settle but the conviction of she have blunder most
dreadfully.
to youth and natural cheerfulness like Emma's, though under temporary
gloom at night, the return of day will hardly fail to bring return of
spirit. the youth and cheerfulness of morning be in happy analogy,
and of powerful operation; and if the distress be not poignant enough
to keep the eye unclose, they will be sure to open to sensation of
soften pain and bright hope.
Emma get up on the morrow more disposed for comfort than she have go
to bed, more ready to see alleviation of the evil before she, and to
depend on get tolerably out of it.
it be a great consolation that Mr. Elton should not be really in love
with she, or so particularly amiable as to make it shocking to
disappoint he--that Harriet's nature should not be of that superior
sort in which the feeling be most acute and retentive--and that
there could be no necessity for any body's know what have pass
except the three principal, and especially for her father's be
give a moment's uneasiness about it.
these be very cheer thought; and the sight of a great deal of
snow on the ground do her further service, for any thing be welcome
that might justify their all three be quite asunder at present.
the weather be most favourable for she; though Christmas Day, she
could not go to church. Mr. Woodhouse would have be miserable have
his daughter attempt it, and she be therefore safe from either
exciting or receive unpleasant and most unsuitable idea. the ground
cover with snow, and the atmosphere in that unsettled state between
frost and thaw, which be of all other the most unfriendly for
exercise, every morning begin in rain or snow, and every evening
setting in to freeze, she be for many day a most honourable prisoner.
no intercourse with Harriet possible but by note; no church for she on
Sunday any more than on Christmas Day; and no need to find excuse for
Mr. Elton's absent himself.
it be weather which might fairly confine every body at home; and
though she hop and believe he to be really take comfort in some
society or other, it be very pleasant to have her father so well
satisfied with his be all alone in his own house, too wise to stir
out; and to hear he say to Mr. Knightley, whom no weather could keep
entirely from them,--
"ah! Mr. Knightley, why do not you stay at home like poor Mr. Elton?"
these day of confinement would have be, but for her private
perplexity, remarkably comfortable, as such seclusion exactly suit
her brother, whose feeling must always be of great importance to his
companion; and he have, besides, so thoroughly clear off his
ill-humour at Randalls, that his amiableness never fail he during
the rest of his stay at Hartfield. he be always agreeable and
obliging, and speak pleasantly of every body. but with all the
hope of cheerfulness, and all the present comfort of delay, there be
still such an evil hang over she in the hour of explanation with
Harriet, as make it impossible for Emma to be ever perfectly at ease.
CHAPTER XVII
Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley be not detain long at Hartfield. the
weather soon improve enough for those to move who must move; and Mr.
Woodhouse have, as usual, try to persuade his daughter to stay
behind with all her child, be oblige to see the whole party set
off, and return to his lamentation over the destiny of poor
Isabella;--which poor Isabella, pass her life with those she doate
on, full of their merit, blind to their fault, and always innocently
busy, might have be a model of right feminine happiness.
the evening of the very day on which they go bring a note from Mr.
Elton to Mr. Woodhouse, a long, civil, ceremonious note, to say, with
Mr. Elton's good compliment, "that he be propose to leave Highbury
the follow morning in his way to Bath; where, in compliance with the
press entreaty of some friend, he have engage to spend a few
week, and very much regret the impossibility he be under, from
various circumstance of weather and business, of take a personal
leave of Mr. Woodhouse, of whose friendly civility he should ever
retain a grateful sense--and have Mr. Woodhouse any command, should be
happy to attend to they."
Emma be most agreeably surprized.--Mr. Elton's absence just at this
time be the very thing to be desire. she admire he for contrive
it, though not able to give he much credit for the manner in which it
be announce. resentment could not have be more plainly speak than
in a civility to her father, from which she be so pointedly exclude.
she have not even a share in his open compliments.--Her name be not
mentioned;--and there be so strike a change in all this, and such
an ill-judge solemnity of leave-taking in his graceful
acknowledgment, as she think, at first, could not escape her
father's suspicion.
it do, however.--Her father be quite take up with the surprize of so
sudden a journey, and his fear that Mr. Elton might never get safely
to the end of it, and see nothing extraordinary in his language. it
be a very useful note, for it supply they with fresh matter for
thought and conversation during the rest of their lonely evening. Mr.
Woodhouse talk over his alarm, and Emma be in spirit to persuade
they away with all her usual promptitude.
she now resolve to keep Harriet no long in the dark. she have reason
to believe she nearly recover from her cold, and it be desirable
that she should have as much time as possible for get the well of
her other complaint before the gentleman's return. she go to Mrs.
Goddard's accordingly the very next day, to undergo the necessary
penance of communication; and a severe one it was.-- she have to destroy
all the hope which she have be so industriously feed--to appear in
the ungracious character of the one preferred--and acknowledge herself
grossly mistaken and mis-judging in all her idea on one subject, all
her observation, all her conviction, all her prophecy for the last
six week.
the confession completely renew her first shame--and the sight of
Harriet's tear make she think that she should never be in charity with
herself again.
Harriet bear the intelligence very well--blame nobody--and in every
thing testify such an ingenuousness of disposition and lowly opinion
of herself, as must appear with particular advantage at that moment to
her friend.
Emma be in the humour to value simplicity and modesty to the utmost;
and all that be amiable, all that ought to be attach, seem on
Harriet's side, not her own. Harriet do not consider herself as
have any thing to complain of. the affection of such a man as Mr.
Elton would have be too great a distinction.-- she never could have
deserve he--and nobody but so partial and kind a friend as Miss
Woodhouse would have think it possible.
her tear fall abundantly--but her grief be so truly artless, that no
dignity could have make it more respectable in Emma's eye--and she
listen to she and try to console she with all her heart and
understanding--really for the time convince that Harriet be the
superior creature of the two--and that to resemble she would be more
for her own welfare and happiness than all that genius or intelligence
could do.
it be rather too late in the day to set about be simple-minded and
ignorant; but she leave she with every previous resolution confirm of
be humble and discreet, and repress imagination all the rest of
her life. her second duty now, inferior only to her father's claim,
be to promote Harriet's comfort, and endeavour to prove her own
affection in some well method than by match-making. she get she to
Hartfield, and shew she the most unvarying kindness, strive to
occupy and amuse she, and by book and conversation, to drive Mr. Elton
from her thought.
Time, she know, must be allow for this be thoroughly do; and she
could suppose herself but an indifferent judge of such matter in
general, and very inadequate to sympathise in an attachment to Mr.
Elton in particular; but it seem to her reasonable that at Harriet's
age, and with the entire extinction of all hope, such a progress might
be make towards a state of composure by the time of Mr. Elton's return,
as to allow they all to meet again in the common routine of
acquaintance, without any danger of betraying sentiment or increase
they.
Harriet do think he all perfection, and maintain the non-existence
of any body equal to he in person or goodness--and do, in truth,
prove herself more resolutely in love than Emma have foresee; but yet
it appear to she so natural, so inevitable to strive against an
inclination of that sort _unrequited_, that she could not comprehend
its continue very long in equal force.
if Mr. Elton, on his return, make his own indifference as evident and
indubitable as she could not doubt he would anxiously do, she could not
imagine Harriet's persist to place her happiness in the sight or the
recollection of he.
their be fix, so absolutely fix, in the same place, be bad for
each, for all three. not one of they have the power of removal, or of
effecting any material change of society. they must encounter each
other, and make the good of it.
Harriet be far unfortunate in the tone of her companion at Mrs.
Goddard's; Mr. Elton be the adoration of all the teacher and great
girl in the school; and it must be at Hartfield only that she could
have any chance of hear he speak of with cool moderation or
repellent truth. where the wound have be give, there must the cure
be find if anywhere; and Emma feel that, till she see she in the way
of cure, there could be no true peace for herself.
CHAPTER XVIII
Mr. Frank Churchill do not come. when the time propose draw near,
Mrs. Weston's fear be justify in the arrival of a letter of
excuse. for the present, he could not be spar, to his "very great
mortification and regret; but still he look forward with the hope of
come to Randalls at no distant period."
Mrs. Weston be exceedingly disappointed--much more disappointed, in
fact, than her husband, though her dependence on see the young man
have be so much more sober: but a sanguine temper, though for ever
expect more good than occur, do not always pay for its hope by
any proportionate depression. it soon fly over the present failure,
and begin to hope again. for half an hour Mr. Weston be surprize
and sorry; but then he begin to perceive that Frank's come two or
three month later would be a much well plan; well time of year;
well weather; and that he would be able, without any doubt, to stay
considerably long with they than if he have come soon.
these feeling rapidly restore his comfort, while Mrs. Weston, of a
more apprehensive disposition, foresaw nothing but a repetition of
excuse and delay; and after all her concern for what her husband be
to suffer, suffer a great deal more herself.
Emma be not at this time in a state of spirit to care really about
Mr. Frank Churchillbe not come, except as a disappointment at
Randalls. the acquaintance at present have no charm for she. she
want, rather, to be quiet, and out of temptation; but still, as it
be desirable that she should appear, in general, like her usual self,
she take care to express as much interest in the circumstance, and
enter as warmly into Mr. and Mrs. Weston's disappointment, as might
naturally belong to their friendship.
she be the first to announce it to Mr. Knightley; and exclaim quite
as much as be necessary, (or, be act a part, perhaps rather
more,) at the conduct of the Churchills, in keep he away. she then
proceed to say a good deal more than she feel, of the advantage of
such an addition to their confine society in Surry; the pleasure of
look at somebody new; the gala-day to Highbury entire, which the
sight of he would have make; and end with reflection on the
Churchills again, find herself directly involve in a disagreement
with Mr. Knightley; and, to her great amusement, perceive that she be
take the other side of the question from her real opinion, and make
use of Mrs. Weston's argument against herself.
"the Churchills be very likely in fault," say Mr. Knightley, coolly;
"but I dare say he might come if he would."
"I do not know why you should say so. he wish exceedingly to come;
but his uncle and aunt will not spare he."
"I cannot believe that he have not the power of come, if he make a
point of it. it be too unlikely, for I to believe it without proof."
"how odd you be! what have Mr. Frank Churchill do, to make you
suppose he such an unnatural creature?"
"I be not suppose he at all an unnatural creature, in suspecting
that he may have learn to be above his connexion, and to care very
little for any thing but his own pleasure, from live with those who
have always set he the example of it. it be a great deal more natural
than one could wish, that a young man, bring up by those who be
proud, luxurious, and selfish, should be proud, luxurious, and selfish
too. if Frank Churchill have want to see his father, he would have
contrive it between September and January. a man at his age--what be
he?--three or four-and-twenty--cannot be without the mean of do as
much as that. it be impossible."
"thatbe easily say, and easily feel by you, who have always be your
own master. you be the bad judge in the world, Mr. Knightley, of
the difficulty of dependence. you do not know what it be to have
temper to manage."
"it be not to be conceive that a man of three or four-and-twenty
should not have liberty of mind or limb to that amount. he cannot want
money--he cannot want leisure. we know, on the contrary, that he have
so much of both, that he be glad to get rid of they at the idle
haunt in the kingdom. we hear of he for ever at some watering-place
or other. a little while ago, he be at Weymouth. this prove that he
can leave the Churchills."
"yes, sometimes he can."
"and those time be whenever he think it worth his while; whenever
there be any temptation of pleasure."
"it be very unfair to judge of any body's conduct, without an intimate
knowledge of their situation. nobody, who have not be in the interior
of a family, can say what the difficulty of any individual of that
family may be. we ought to be acquaint with Enscombe, and with Mrs.
Churchill's temper, before we pretend to decide upon what her nephew
can do. he may, at time, be able to do a great deal more than he can
at other."
"there be one thing, Emma, which a man can always do, if he chuse, and
that be, his duty; not by manoeuvre and finessing, but by vigour and
resolution. it be Frank Churchill's duty to pay this attention to his
father. he know it to be so, by his promise and message; but if he
wish to do it, it might be do. a man who feel rightly would say at
once, simply and resolutely, to Mrs. Churchill-- 'every sacrifice of
mere pleasure you will always find I ready to make to your
convenience; but I must go and see my father immediately. I know he
would be hurt by my failing in such a mark of respect to he on the
present occasion. I shall, therefore, set off to-morrow.'-- if he
would say so to she at once, in the tone of decision become a man,
there would be no opposition make to his going."
"no," say Emma, laugh; "but perhaps there might be some make to his
come back again. such language for a young man entirely dependent,
to use!--nobody but you, Mr. Knightley, would imagine it possible. but
you have not an idea of what be requisite in situation directly
opposite to your own. Mr. Frank Churchill to be make such a speech
as that to the uncle and aunt, who have bring he up, and be to
provide for him!--stande up in the middle of the room, I suppose, and
speak as loud as he could!--How can you imagine such conduct
practicable?"
"depend upon it, Emma, a sensible man would find no difficulty in it.
he would feel himself in the right; and the declaration--make, of
course, as a man of sense would make it, in a proper manner--would do
he more good, raise he higher, fix his interest strong with the
people he depend on, than all that a line of shift and expedient
can ever do. respect would be add to affection. they would feel
that they could trust he; that the nephew who have do rightly by his
father, would do rightly by they; for they know, as well as he do, as
well as all the world must know, that he ought to pay this visit to his
father; and while meanly exert their power to delay it, be in their
heart not think the well of he for submit to their whim.
respect for right conduct be feel by every body. if he would act in
this sort of manner, on principle, consistently, regularly, their
little mind would bend to his."
"I rather doubt that. you be very fond of bend little mind; but
where little mind belong to rich people in authority, I think they
have a knack of swell out, till they be quite as unmanageable as
great one. I can imagine, that if you, as you be, Mr. Knightley,
be to be transport and place all at once in Mr. Frank Churchill's
situation, you would be able to say and do just what you have be
recommend for he; and it might have a very good effect. the
Churchills might not have a word to say in return; but then, you would
have no habit of early obedience and long observance to break through.
to he who have, it might not be so easy to burst forth at once into
perfect independence, and set all their claim on his gratitude and
regard at nought. he may have as strong a sense of what would be
right, as you can have, without be so equal, under particular
circumstance, to act up to it."
"then it would not be so strong a sense. if it fail to produce equal
exertion, it could not be an equal conviction."
"oh, the difference of situation and habit! I wish you would try to
understand what an amiable young man may be likely to feel in directly
oppose those, whom as child and boy he have be look up to all his
life."
"our amiable young man be a very weak young man, if this be the first
occasion of his carry through a resolution to do right against the
will of other. it ought to have be a habit with he by this time,
of follow his duty, instead of consult expediency. I can allow
for the fear of the child, but not of the man. as he become rational,
he ought to have rouse himself and shake off all that be unworthy in
their authority. he ought to have oppose the first attempt on their
side to make he slight his father. have he begin as he ought, there
would have be no difficulty now."
"we shall never agree about he," cry Emma; "but that be nothing
extraordinary. I have not the least idea of his be a weak young
man: I feel sure that he be not. Mr. Weston would not be blind to
folly, though in his own son; but he be very likely to have a more
yielding, complying, mild disposition than would suit your notion of
man's perfection. I dare say he have; and though it may cut he off
from some advantage, it will secure he many other."
"yes; all the advantage of sit still when he ought to move, and of
lead a life of mere idle pleasure, and fancy himself extremely
expert in find excuse for it. he can sit down and write a fine
flourishing letter, full of profession and falsehood, and persuade
himself that he have hit upon the very good method in the world of
preserve peace at home and prevent his father's have any right
to complain. his letter disgust I."
"your feeling be singular. they seem to satisfy every body else."
"I suspect they do not satisfy Mrs. Weston. they hardly can satisfy a
woman of her good sense and quick feeling: stand in a mother's
place, but without a mother's affection to blind she. it be on she
account that attention to Randalls be doubly due, and she must doubly
feel the omission. have she be a person of consequence herself, he
would have come I dare say; and it would not have signify whether he
do or no. can you think your friend behindhand in these sort of
consideration? do you suppose she do not often say all this to
herself? no, Emma, your amiable young man can be amiable only in
French, not in English. he may be very 'aimable,' have very good
manner, and be very agreeable; but he can have no english delicacy
towards the feeling of other people: nothing really amiable about he."
"you seem determined to think ill of he."
"Me!--not at all," reply Mr. Knightley, rather displeased; "I do not
want to think ill of he. I should be as ready to acknowledge his
merit as any other man; but I hear of none, except what be merely
personal; that he be well-grow and good-look, with smooth,
plausible manner."
"well, if he have nothing else to recommend he, he will be a treasure
at Highbury. we do not often look upon fine young man, well-breed and
agreeable. we must not be nice and ask for all the virtue into the
bargain. cannot you imagine, Mr. Knightley, what a _sensation_ his
coming will produce? there will be but one subject throughout the
parish of Donwell and Highbury; but one interest--one object of
curiosity; it will be all Mr. Frank Churchill; we shall think and speak
of nobody else."
"you will excuse my be so much over-power. if I find he
conversable, I shall be glad of his acquaintance; but if he be only a
chattering coxcomb, he will not occupy much of my time or thought."
"my idea of he be, that he can adapt his conversation to the taste of
every body, and have the power as well as the wish of be universally
agreeable. to you, he will talk of farming; to I, of draw or
music; and so on to every body, have that general information on all
subject which will enable he to follow the lead, or take the lead,
just as propriety may require, and to speak extremely well on each;
that be my idea of he."
"and mine," say Mr. Knightley warmly, "be, that if he turn out any
thing like it, he will be the most insufferable fellow breathing!
what! at three-and-twenty to be the king of his company--the great
man--the practised politician, who be to read every body's character,
and make every body's talent conduce to the display of his own
superiority; to be dispense his flattery around, that he may make
all appear like fool compare with himself! my dear Emma, your own
good sense could not endure such a puppy when it come to the point."
"I will say no more about he," cry Emma, "you turn every thing to
evil. we be both prejudice; you against, I for he; and we have no
chance of agree till he be really here."
"Prejudiced! I be not prejudiced."
"but I be very much, and without be at all ashamed of it. my love
for Mr. and Mrs. Weston give I a decide prejudice in his favour."
"he be a person I never think of from one month's end to another," say
Mr. Knightley, with a degree of vexation, which make Emma immediately
talk of something else, though she could not comprehend why he should
be angry.
to take a dislike to a young man, only because he appear to be of a
different disposition from himself, be unworthy the real liberality of
mind which she be always use to acknowledge in he; for with all the
high opinion of himself, which she have often lay to his charge, she
have never before for a moment suppose it could make he unjust to the
merit of another.
VOLUME II
CHAPTER I
Emma and Harriet have be walk together one morning, and, in Emma's
opinion, have be talk enough of Mr. Elton for that day. she could
not think that Harriet's solace or her own sin require more; and she
be therefore industriously get rid of the subject as they
returned;--but it burst out again when she think she have succeed,
and after speak some time of what the poor must suffer in winter,
and receive no other answer than a very plaintive-- "Mr. Elton be so
good to the poor!" she find something else must be do.
they be just approach the house where live Mrs. and Miss Bates.
she determine to call upon they and seek safety in number. there be
always sufficient reason for such an attention; Mrs. and Miss Bates
love to be call on, and she know she be consider by the very few
who presume ever to see imperfection in she, as rather negligent in
that respect, and as not contribute what she ought to the stock of
their scanty comfort.
she have have many a hint from Mr. Knightley and some from her own heart,
as to her deficiency--but none be equal to counteract the persuasion
of its be very disagreeable,--a waste of time--tiresome woman--and
all the horror of be in danger of fall in with the second-rate
and third-rate of Highbury, who be call on they for ever, and
therefore she seldom go near they. but now she make the sudden
resolution of not pass their door without go in--observe, as
she propose it to Harriet, that, as well as she could calculate, they
be just now quite safe from any letter from Jane Fairfax.
the house belong to people in business. Mrs. and Miss Bates occupy
the drawing-room floor; and there, in the very moderate-sized
apartment, which be every thing to they, the visitor be most
cordially and even gratefully welcome; the quiet neat old lady, who
with her knitting be seat in the warm corner, want even to
give up her place to Miss Woodhouse, and her more active, talk
daughter, almost ready to overpower they with care and kindness, thank
for their visit, solicitude for their shoe, anxious inquiry after
Mr. Woodhouse's health, cheerful communication about her mother's, and
sweet-cake from the beaufet--"Mrs. Cole have just be there, just
call in for ten minute, and have be so good as to sit an hour with
they, and _she_ have take a piece of cake and be so kind as to say
she like it very much; and, therefore, she hop Miss Woodhouse and
Miss Smith would do they the favour to eat a piece too."
the mention of the Coles be sure to be follow by that of Mr. Elton.
there be intimacy between they, and Mr. Cole have hear from Mr. Elton
since his go away. Emma know what be come; they must have the
letter over again, and settle how long he have be go, and how much
he be engage in company, and what a favourite he be wherever he
go, and how full the Master of the Ceremonies' ball have be; and she
go through it very well, with all the interest and all the
commendation that could be requisite, and always put forward to
prevent Harriet's be oblige to say a word.
this she have be prepare for when she enter the house; but mean,
have once talk he handsomely over, to be no far incommode by
any troublesome topic, and to wander at large amongst all the
Mistresses and Misses of Highbury, and their card-party. she have not
be prepare to have Jane Fairfax succeed Mr. Elton; but he be
actually hurry off by Miss Bates, she jump away from he at last
abruptly to the Coles, to usher in a letter from her niece.
"oh! yes--Mr. Elton, I understand--certainly as to dancing-- Mrs. Cole
be tell I that dance at the room at Bath was-- Mrs. Cole be so
kind as to sit some time with we, talk of Jane; for as soon as she
come in, she begin inquire after she, Jane be so very great a
favourite there. whenever she be with we, Mrs. Cole do not know how
to shew her kindness enough; and I must say that Jane deserve it as
much as any body can. and so she begin inquire after she directly,
say, 'I know you cannot have hear from Jane lately, because it be
not her time for writing;' and when I immediately say, 'but indeed we
have, we have a letter this very morning,' I do not know that I ever see
any body more surprized. 'have you, upon your honour?' say she;
'well, that be quite unexpected. do let I hear what she say.'"
Emma's politeness be at hand directly, to say, with smile interest--
"have you hear from Miss Fairfax so lately? I be extremely happy. I
hope she be well?"
"thank you. you be so kind!" reply the happily deceive aunt, while
eagerly hunt for the letter.--"Oh! here it be. I be sure it could
not be far off; but I have put my huswife upon it, you see, without
be aware, and so it be quite hid, but I have it in my hand so very
lately that I be almost sure it must be on the table. I be read
it to Mrs. Cole, and since she go away, I be read it again to my
mother, for it be such a pleasure to she--a letter from Jane--that she
can never hear it often enough; so I know it could not be far off, and
here it be, only just under my huswife--and since you be so kind as to
wish to hear what she says;--but, first of all, I really must, in
justice to Jane, apologise for her writing so short a letter--only two
page you see--hardly two--and in general she fill the whole paper
and cross half. my mother often wonder that I can make it out so
well. she often say, when the letter be first open, 'well, Hetty,
now I think you will be put to it to make out all that checker-work'--
donot you, ma'am?--and then I tell she, I be sure she would contrive to
make it out herself, if she have nobody to do it for she--every word of
it--I be sure she would pore over it till she have make out every word.
and, indeed, though my mother's eye be not so good as they be, she
can see amazingly well still, thank God! with the help of spectacle.
it be such a blessing! my mother's be really very good indeed. Jane
often say, when she be here, 'I be sure, grandmama, you must have have
very strong eye to see as you do--and so much fine work as you have
do too!--I only wish my eye may last I as well.'"
all this speak extremely fast oblige Miss Bates to stop for breath;
and Emma say something very civil about the excellence of Miss
Fairfax's handwriting.
"you be extremely kind," reply Miss Bates, highly gratify; "you
who be such a judge, and write so beautifully yourself. I be sure
there be nobody's praise that could give we so much pleasure as Miss
Woodhouse's. my mother do not hear; she be a little deaf you know.
Ma'am," address she, "do you hear what Miss Woodhouse be so oblige
to say about Jane's handwriting?"
and Emma have the advantage of hear her own silly compliment repeat
twice over before the good old lady could comprehend it. she be
ponder, in the meanwhile, upon the possibility, without seem very
rude, of make her escape from Jane Fairfax's letter, and have almost
resolve on hurry away directly under some slight excuse, when Miss
Bates turn to she again and seize her attention.
"my mother's deafness be very trifle you see--just nothing at all.
by only raise my voice, and say any thing two or three time over,
she be sure to hear; but then she be use to my voice. but it be very
remarkable that she should always hear Jane well than she do I.
Jane speak so distinct! however, she will not find her grandmama at
all deafer than she be two year ago; which be say a great deal at
my mother's time of life--and it really be full two year, you know,
since she be here. we never be so long without see she before,
and as I be tell Mrs. Cole, we shall hardly know how to make enough
of she now."
"be you expect Miss Fairfax here soon?"
"oh yes; next week."
"indeed!--that must be a very great pleasure."
"thank you. you be very kind. yes, next week. every body be so
surprized; and every body say the same oblige thing. I be sure she
will be as happy to see her friend at Highbury, as they can be to see
she. yes, Friday or Saturday; she cannot say which, because Colonel
Campbell will be want the carriage himself one of those day. so
very good of they to send she the whole way! but they always do, you
know. oh yes, Friday or Saturday next. that be what she write about.
that be the reason of she write out of rule, as we call it; for, in
the common course, we should not have hear from she before next
Tuesday or Wednesday."
"yes, so I imagine. I be afraid there could be little chance of my
hear any thing of Miss Fairfax to-day."
"so oblige of you! no, we should not have hear, if it have not be
for this particular circumstance, of she be to come here so soon.
my mother be so delighted!--for she be to be three month with we at
least. three month, she say so, positively, as I be go to have
the pleasure of reading to you. the case be, you see, that the
Campbells be go to Ireland. Mrs. Dixon have persuade her father
and mother to come over and see she directly. they have not intend to
go over till the summer, but she be so impatient to see they again--for
till she marry, last October, she be never away from they so much as
a week, which must make it very strange to be in different kingdom, I
be go to say, but however different country, and so she write a
very urgent letter to her mother--or her father, I declare I do not
know which it be, but we shall see presently in Jane's letter--write
in Mr. Dixon's name as well as her own, to press their come over
directly, and they would give they the meeting in Dublin, and take they
back to their country seat, Baly-craig, a beautiful place, I fancy.
Jane have hear a great deal of its beauty; from Mr. Dixon, I mean-- I
do not know that she ever hear about it from any body else; but it be
very natural, you know, that he should like to speak of his own place
while he be pay his address--and as Jane use to be very often
walk out with they--for Colonel and Mrs. Campbell be very
particular about their daughterbe not walk out often with only Mr.
Dixon, for which I do not at all blame they; of course she hear every
thing he might be tell Miss Campbell about his own home in Ireland;
and I think she write we word that he have shew they some drawing of
the place, view that he have take himself. he be a most amiable,
charming young man, I believe. Jane be quite long to go to
Ireland, from his account of thing."
at this moment, an ingenious and animate suspicion enter Emma's
brain with regard to Jane Fairfax, this charming Mr. Dixon, and the not
go to Ireland, she say, with the insidious design of farth
discovery,
"you must feel it very fortunate that Miss Fairfax should be allow to
come to you at such a time. consider the very particular friendship
between she and Mrs. Dixon, you could hardly have expect she to be
excuse from accompany Colonel and Mrs. Campbell."
"very true, very true, indeed. the very thing that we have always be
rather afraid of; for we should not have like to have she at such a
distance from we, for month together--not able to come if any thing
be to happen. but you see, every thing turn out for the good. they
want she (Mr. and Mrs. Dixon) excessively to come over with Colonel and
Mrs. Campbell; quite depend upon it; nothing can be more kind or
press than their _joint_ invitation, Jane say, as you will hear
presently; Mr. Dixon do not seem in the least backward in any
attention. he be a most charming young man. ever since the service he
render Jane at Weymouth, when they be out in that party on the
water, and she, by the sudden whirling round of something or other
among the sail, would have be dash into the sea at once, and
actually be all but go, if he have not, with the great presence of
mind, catch hold of her habit-- (I can never think of it without
trembling!)--but ever since we have the history of that day, I have be
so fond of Mr. Dixon!"
"but, in spite of all her friend' urgency, and her own wish of see
Ireland, Miss Fairfax prefer devote the time to you and Mrs. Bates?"
"yes--entirely her own doing, entirely her own choice; and Colonel and
Mrs. Campbell think she do quite right, just what they should
recommend; and indeed they particularly _wish_ she to try her native
air, as she have not be quite so well as usual lately."
"I be concerned to hear of it. I think they judge wisely. but Mrs.
Dixon must be very much disappointed. Mrs. Dixon, I understand, have no
remarkable degree of personal beauty; be not, by any mean, to be
compare with Miss Fairfax."
"oh! no. you be very obliging to say such thing--but certainly not.
there be no comparison between they. Miss Campbell always be
absolutely plain--but extremely elegant and amiable."
"yes, that of course."
"Jane catch a bad cold, poor thing! so long ago as the 7th of
November, (as I be go to read to you,) and have never be well
since. a long time, be not it, for a cold to hang upon she? she never
mention it before, because she would not alarm we. just like she! so
considerate!--but however, she be so far from well, that her kind
friend the campbell think she have well come home, and try an air
that always agree with she; and they have no doubt that three or four
month at Highbury will entirely cure she--and it be certainly a great
deal well that she should come here, than go to Ireland, if she be
unwell. nobody could nurse she, as we should do."
"it appear to I the most desirable arrangement in the world."
"and so she be to come to we next Friday or Saturday, and the Campbells
leave town in their way to Holyhead the Monday follow--as you will
find from Jane's letter. so sudden!--you may guess, dear Miss
Woodhouse, what a flurry it have throw I in! if it be not for the
drawback of her illness--but I be afraid we must expect to see she
grow thin, and look very poorly. I must tell you what an unlucky
thing happen to I, as to that. I always make a point of read
Jane's letter through to myself first, before I read they aloud to my
mother, you know, for fear of there be any thing in they to distress
she. Jane desire I to do it, so I always do: and so I begin to-day
with my usual caution; but no soon do I come to the mention of she
be unwell, than I burst out, quite frightened, with 'bless I! poor
Jane be ill!'--which my mother, be on the watch, hear distinctly,
and be sadly alarmed at. however, when I read on, I find it be not
near so bad as I have fancy at first; and I make so light of it now to
she, that she do not think much about it. but I cannot imagine how I
could be so off my guard. if Jane do not get well soon, we will call
in Mr. Perry. the expense shall not be think of; and though he be so
liberal, and so fond of Jane that I dare say he would not mean to
charge any thing for attendance, we could not suffer it to be so, you
know. he have a wife and family to maintain, and be not to be give
away his time. well, now I have just give you a hint of what Jane
write about, we will turn to her letter, and I be sure she tell she
own story a great deal well than I can tell it for she."
"I be afraid we must be run away," say Emma, glance at Harriet,
and begin to rise--"My father will be expect we. I have no
intention, I think I have no power of stay more than five minute,
when I first enter the house. I merely call, because I would not
pass the door without inquire after Mrs. Bates; but I have be so
pleasantly detain! now, however, we must wish you and Mrs. Bates
good morning."
and not all that could be urge to detain she succeed. she regain
the street--happy in this, that though much have be force on she
against her will, though she have in fact hear the whole substance of
Jane Fairfax's letter, she have be able to escape the letter itself.
CHAPTER II
Jane Fairfax be an orphan, the only child of Mrs. Bates's young
daughter.
the marriage of Lieut. Fairfax of the _______ regiment of infantry, and
Miss Jane Bates, have have its day of fame and pleasure, hope and
interest; but nothing now remain of it, save the melancholy
remembrance of he die in action abroad--of his widow sink under
consumption and grief soon afterwards--and this girl.
by birth she belong to Highbury: and when at three year old, on
lose her mother, she become the property, the charge, the
consolation, the fondling of her grandmother and aunt, there have seem
every probability of she be permanently fix there; of her be
teach only what very limited mean could command, and grow up with
no advantage of connexion or improvement, to be engraft on what
nature have give she in a pleasing person, good understanding, and
warm-hearted, well-mean relation.
but the compassionate feeling of a friend of her father give a change
to her destiny. this be Colonel Campbell, who have very highly
regard Fairfax, as an excellent officer and most deserving young man;
and far, have be indebted to he for such attention, during a
severe camp-fever, as he believe have save his life. these be
claim which he do not learn to overlook, though some year pass
away from the death of poor Fairfax, before his own return to England
put any thing in his power. when he do return, he seek out the
child and take notice of she. he be a married man, with only one
living child, a girl, about Jane's age: and Jane become their guest,
pay they long visit and grow a favourite with all; and before
she be nine year old, his daughter's great fondness for she, and his
own wish of be a real friend, unite to produce an offer from
Colonel Campbell of undertake the whole charge of her education. it
be accept; and from that period Jane have belong to Colonel
Campbell's family, and have live with they entirely, only visit her
grandmother from time to time.
the plan be that she should be bring up for educate other; the
very few hundred pound which she inherit from her father make
independence impossible. to provide for she otherwise be out of
Colonel Campbell's power; for though his income, by pay and
appointment, be handsome, his fortune be moderate and must be all
his daughter's; but, by give she an education, he hop to be
supply the mean of respectable subsistence hereafter.
such be Jane Fairfax's history. she have fall into good hand, know
nothing but kindness from the Campbells, and be give an excellent
education. live constantly with right-minded and well-inform
people, her heart and understanding have receive every advantage of
discipline and culture; and Colonel Campbell's residence be in
London, every light talent have be do full justice to, by the
attendance of first-rate master. her disposition and ability be
equally worthy of all that friendship could do; and at eighteen or
nineteen she be, as far as such an early age can be qualified for the
care of child, fully competent to the office of instruction herself;
but she be too much beloved to be part with. neither father nor
mother could promote, and the daughter could not endure it. the evil
day be put off. it be easy to decide that she be still too young;
and Jane remain with they, share, as another daughter, in all the
rational pleasure of an elegant society, and a judicious mixture of
home and amusement, with only the drawback of the future, the sobering
suggestion of her own good understanding to remind she that all this
might soon be over.
the affection of the whole family, the warm attachment of Miss Campbell
in particular, be the more honourable to each party from the
circumstance of Jane's decide superiority both in beauty and
acquirement. that nature have give it in feature could not be unseen
by the young woman, nor could her high power of mind be unfelt by
the parent. they continue together with unabated regard however,
till the marriage of Miss Campbell, who by that chance, that luck which
so often defy anticipation in matrimonial affair, give attraction
to what be moderate rather than to what be superior, engage the
affection of Mr. Dixon, a young man, rich and agreeable, almost as
soon as they be acquaint; and be eligibly and happily settle,
while Jane Fairfax have yet her bread to earn.
this event have very lately take place; too lately for any thing to be
yet attempt by she less fortunate friend towards enter on her path
of duty; though she have now reach the age which her own judgment have
fix on for beginning. she have long resolve that one-and-twenty
should be the period. with the fortitude of a devoted novitiate, she
have resolve at one-and-twenty to complete the sacrifice, and retire
from all the pleasure of life, of rational intercourse, equal society,
peace and hope, to penance and mortification for ever.
the good sense of Colonel and Mrs. Campbell could not oppose such a
resolution, though their feeling do. as long as they live, no
exertion would be necessary, their home might be her for ever; and
for their own comfort they would have retain she wholly; but this
would be selfishness:--what must be at last, have well be soon.
perhaps they begin to feel it might have be kind and wise to have
resist the temptation of any delay, and spar she from a taste of
such enjoyment of ease and leisure as must now be relinquish.
still, however, affection be glad to catch at any reasonable excuse
for not hurry on the wretched moment. she have never be quite well
since the time of their daughter's marriage; and till she should have
completely recover her usual strength, they must forbid she engage
in duty, which, so far from be compatible with a weakened frame
and vary spirit, seem, under the most favourable circumstance,
to require something more than human perfection of body and mind to be
discharge with tolerable comfort.
with regard to she not accompany they to Ireland, her account to her
aunt contain nothing but truth, though there might be some truth not
tell. it be her own choice to give the time of their absence to
Highbury; to spend, perhaps, her last month of perfect liberty with
those kind relation to whom she be so very dear: and the Campbells,
whatever might be their motive or motif, whether single, or double,
or treble, give the arrangement their ready sanction, and say, that
they depend more on a few month spend in her native air, for the
recovery of her health, than on any thing else. certain it be that
she be to come; and that Highbury, instead of welcome that perfect
novelty which have be so long promise it--Mr. Frank Churchill--must
put up for the present with Jane Fairfax, who could bring only the
freshness of a two year' absence.
Emma be sorry;--to have to pay civility to a person she do not like
through three long months!--to be always do more than she wish,
and less than she ought! why she do not like Jane Fairfax might be a
difficult question to answer; Mr. Knightley have once tell she it be
because she see in she the really accomplish young woman, which she
want to be think herself; and though the accusation have be
eagerly refute at the time, there be moment of self-examination in
which her conscience could not quite acquit she. but "she could never
get acquaint with she: she do not know how it be, but there be
such coldness and reserve--such apparent indifference whether she
please or not--and then, her aunt be such an eternal talker!--and she
be make such a fuss with by every body!--and it have be always
imagine that they be to be so intimate--because their age be the
same, every body have suppose they must be so fond of each other."
these be her reason--she have no well.
it be a dislike so little just--every imputed fault be so magnify
by fancy, that she never see Jane Fairfax the first time after any
considerable absence, without feel that she have injure she; and
now, when the due visit be pay, on her arrival, after a two year'
interval, she be particularly strike with the very appearance and
manner, which for those two whole year she have be depreciate.
Jane Fairfax be very elegant, remarkably elegant; and she have herself
the high value for elegance. her height be pretty, just such as
almost every body would think tall, and nobody could think very tall;
her figure particularly graceful; her size a most become medium,
between fat and thin, though a slight appearance of ill-health seem
to point out the likeli evil of the two. Emma could not but feel
all this; and then, her face--her feature--there be more beauty in
they altogether than she have remember; it be not regular, but it be
very pleasing beauty. her eye, a deep grey, with dark eye-lash and
eyebrow, have never be deny their praise; but the skin, which she
have be use to cavil at, as want colour, have a clearness and
delicacy which really need no full bloom. it be a style of
beauty, of which elegance be the reign character, and as such, she
must, in honour, by all her principle, admire it:--elegance, which,
whether of person or of mind, she see so little in Highbury. there,
not to be vulgar, be distinction, and merit.
in short, she sit, during the first visit, look at Jane Fairfax with
twofold complacency; the sense of pleasure and the sense of render
justice, and be determine that she would dislike she no long.
when she take in her history, indeed, her situation, as well as her
beauty; when she consider what all this elegance be destine to,
what she be go to sink from, how she be go to live, it seem
impossible to feel any thing but compassion and respect; especially, if
to every well-know particular entitle she to interest, be add
the highly probable circumstance of an attachment to Mr. Dixon, which
she have so naturally start to herself. in that case, nothing could
be more pitiable or more honourable than the sacrifice she have
resolve on. Emma be very willing now to acquit she of have seduce
Mr. Dixon's action from his wife, or of any thing mischievous which
her imagination have suggest at first. if it be love, it might be
simple, single, successless love on her side alone. she might have
be unconsciously suck in the sad poison, while a sharer of his
conversation with her friend; and from the good, the pure of motif,
might now be deny herself this visit to Ireland, and resolve to
divide herself effectually from he and his connexion by soon
begin her career of laborious duty.
upon the whole, Emma leave she with such soften, charitable feeling,
as make she look around in walk home, and lament that Highbury
afford no young man worthy of give her independence; nobody that
she could wish to scheme about for she.
these be charming feeling--but not last. before she have
commit herself by any public profession of eternal friendship for
Jane Fairfax, or do more towards a recantation of past prejudice and
error, than say to Mr. Knightley, "she certainly be handsome; she
be well than handsome!" Jane have spend an evening at Hartfield with
her grandmother and aunt, and every thing be relapse much into its
usual state. former provocation reappear. the aunt be as tiresome
as ever; more tiresome, because anxiety for her health be now add to
admiration of her power; and they have to listen to the description of
exactly how little bread and butter she eat for breakfast, and how
small a slice of mutton for dinner, as well as to see exhibition of
new cap and new workbag for her mother and herself; and Jane's
offence rise again. they have music; Emma be oblige to play; and the
thank and praise which necessarily follow appear to her an
affectation of candour, an air of greatness, mean only to shew off
in high style her own very superior performance. she be, besides,
which be the bad of all, so cold, so cautious! there be no getting
at her real opinion. wrapt up in a cloak of politeness, she seem
determined to hazard nothing. she be disgustingly, be suspiciously
reserve.
if any thing could be more, where all be most, she be more reserved
on the subject of Weymouth and the Dixons than any thing. she seem
bent on give no real insight into Mr. Dixon's character, or her own
value for his company, or opinion of the suitableness of the match. it
be all general approbation and smoothness; nothing delineate or
distinguish. it do she no service however. her caution be throw
away. Emma see its artifice, and return to her first surmise.
there probably _be_ something more to conceal than her own preference;
Mr. Dixon, perhaps, have be very near change one friend for the
other, or be fix only to Miss Campbell, for the sake of the future
twelve thousand pound.
the like reserve prevail on other topic. she and Mr. Frank
Churchill have be at Weymouth at the same time. it be know that
they be a little acquainted; but not a syllable of real information
could Emma procure as to what he truly be. "be he handsome?"--"she
believe he be reckon a very fine young man." "be he agreeable?"--
"he be generally think so." "do he appear a sensible young man; a
young man of information?"--"at a watering-place, or in a common London
acquaintance, it be difficult to decide on such point. manner be
all that could be safely judge of, under a much long knowledge than
they have yet have of Mr. Churchill. she believe every body find his
manner pleasing." Emma could not forgive she.
CHAPTER III
Emma could not forgive her;--but as neither provocation nor resentment
be discern by Mr. Knightley, who have be of the party, and have
see only proper attention and please behaviour on each side, he be
express the next morning, be at Hartfield again on business with
Mr. Woodhouse, his approbation of the whole; not so openly as he might
have do have her father be out of the room, but speak plain
enough to be very intelligible to Emma. he have be use to think she
unjust to Jane, and have now great pleasure in mark an improvement.
"a very pleasant evening," he begin, as soon as Mr. Woodhouse have be
talk into what be necessary, tell that he understand, and the paper
sweep away;--"particularly pleasant. you and Miss Fairfax give we some
very good music. I do not know a more luxurious state, sir, than
sit at one's ease to be entertain a whole evening by two such
young woman; sometimes with music and sometimes with conversation. I
be sure Miss Fairfax must have find the evening pleasant, Emma. you
leave nothing undo. I be glad you make she play so much, for have
no instrument at her grandmother's, it must have be a real
indulgence."
"I be happy you approve," say Emma, smile; "but I hope I be not
often deficient in what be due to guest at Hartfield."
"no, my dear," say her father instantly; "_that_ I be sure you be
not. there be nobody half so attentive and civil as you be. if any
thing, you be too attentive. the muffin last night--if it have be
hand round once, I think it would have be enough."
"no," say Mr. Knightley, nearly at the same time; "you be not often
deficient; not often deficient either in manner or comprehension. I
think you understand I, therefore."
an arch look expressed--"i understand you well enough;" but she say
only, "Miss Fairfax be reserve."
"I always tell you she be--a little; but you will soon overcome all
that part of her reserve which ought to be overcome, all that have its
foundation in diffidence. what arise from discretion must be
honour."
"you think her diffident. I do not see it."
"my dear Emma," say he, move from his chair into one close by she,
"you be not go to tell I, I hope, that you have not a pleasant
evening."
"oh! no; I be pleased with my own perseverance in ask question;
and amuse to think how little information I obtain."
"I be disappoint," be his only answer.
"I hope every body have a pleasant evening," say Mr. Woodhouse, in his
quiet way. "I have. once, I feel the fire rather too much; but then I
move back my chair a little, a very little, and it do not disturb I.
Miss Bates be very chatty and good-humour, as she always be, though
she speak rather too quick. however, she be very agreeable, and Mrs.
Bates too, in a different way. I like old friend; and Miss Jane
Fairfax be a very pretty sort of young lady, a very pretty and a very
well-behave young lady indeed. she must have find the evening
agreeable, Mr. Knightley, because she have Emma."
"true, sir; and Emma, because she have Miss Fairfax."
Emma see his anxiety, and wish to appease it, at least for the
present, say, and with a sincerity which no one could question--
"she be a sort of elegant creature that one cannot keep one's eye
from. I be always watch she to admire; and I do pity she from my
heart."
Mr. Knightley look as if he be more gratified than he care to
express; and before he could make any reply, Mr. Woodhouse, whose
thought be on the Bates's, said--
"it be a great pity that their circumstance should be so confine! a
great pity indeed! and I have often wish--but it be so little one can
venture to do--small, trifle present, of any thing uncommon-- now we
have kill a porker, and Emma think of send they a loin or a leg;
it be very small and delicate--Hartfield pork be not like any other
pork--but still it be pork--and, my dear Emma, unless one could be sure
of their make it into steak, nicely fry, as ours be fry,
without the small grease, and not roast it, for no stomach can bear
roast pork--I think we have well send the leg--do not you think so,
my dear?"
"my dear papa, I send the whole hind-quarter. I know you would wish it.
there will be the leg to be salt, you know, which be so very nice,
and the loin to be dress directly in any manner they like."
"thatbe right, my dear, very right. I have not think of it before,
but that be the good way. they must not over-salt the leg; and then,
if it be not over-salt, and if it be very thoroughly boil, just as
Serle boil ours, and eat very moderately of, with a boil turnip,
and a little carrot or parsnip, I do not consider it unwholesome."
"Emma," say Mr. Knightley presently, "I have a piece of news for you.
you like news--and I hear an article in my way hither that I think
will interest you."
"News! oh! yes, I always like news. what be it?--why do you smile
so?--where do you hear it?--at randall?"
he have time only to say,
"no, not at Randalls; I have not be near Randalls," when the door be
throw open, and Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax walk into the room.
full of thank, and full of news, Miss Bates know not which to give
quick. Mr. Knightley soon see that he have lose his moment, and that
not another syllable of communication could rest with he.
"oh! my dear sir, how be you this morning? my dear Miss woodhouse-- I
come quite over-power. such a beautiful hind-quarter of pork! you
be too bountiful! have you hear the news? Mr. Elton be go to be
marry."
Emma have not have time even to think of Mr. Elton, and she be so
completely surprize that she could not avoid a little start, and a
little blush, at the sound.
"there be my news:--i thought it would interest you," say Mr.
Knightley, with a smile which imply a conviction of some part of what
have pass between they.
"but where could _you_ hear it?" cry Miss Bates. "where could you
possibly hear it, Mr. Knightley? for it be not five minute since I
receive Mrs. Cole's note--no, it cannot be more than five--or at
least ten--for I have get my bonnet and spencer on, just ready to come
out--I be only go down to speak to Patty again about the pork--Jane
be stand in the passage--be not you, Jane?--for my mother be so
afraid that we have not any salt-pan large enough. so I say I would
go down and see, and Jane say, 'shall I go down instead? for I think
you have a little cold, and Patty have be wash the kitchen.'--'Oh!
my dear,' say I--well, and just then come the note. a Miss Hawkins--
thatbe all I know. a Miss Hawkins of Bath. but, Mr. Knightley, how
could you possibly have hear it? for the very moment Mr. Cole tell
Mrs. Cole of it, she sit down and write to I. a Miss Hawkins--"
"I be with Mr. Cole on business an hour and a half ago. he have just
read Elton's letter as I be shewn in, and hand it to I directly."
"well! that be quite--I suppose there never be a piece of news more
generally interesting. my dear sir, you really be too bountiful. my
mother desire she very good compliment and regard, and a thousand
thank, and say you really quite oppress she."
"we consider our Hartfield pork," reply Mr. woodhouse--"indeed it
certainly be, so very superior to all other pork, that Emma and I
cannot have a great pleasure than--"
"oh! my dear sir, as my mother say, our friend be only too good to
we. if ever there be people who, without have great wealth
themselves, have every thing they could wish for, I be sure it be we.
we may well say that 'our lot be cast in a goodly heritage.' well, Mr.
Knightley, and so you actually see the letter; well--"
"it be short--merely to announce--but cheerful, exulting, of
course."-- here be a sly glance at Emma. "he have be so fortunate as
to--I forget the precise word--one have no business to remember they.
the information be, as you state, that he be go to be married to a
Miss Hawkins. by his style, I should imagine it just settle."
"Mr. Elton go to be marry!" say Emma, as soon as she could speak.
"he will have every body's wish for his happiness."
"he be very young to settle," be Mr. Woodhouse's observation. "he have
well not be in a hurry. he seem to I very well off as he be. we
be always glad to see he at Hartfield."
"a new neighbour for we all, Miss Woodhouse!" say Miss Bates,
joyfully; "my mother be so pleased!--she say she cannot bear to have
the poor old vicarage without a mistress. this be great news, indeed.
Jane, you have never see Mr. Elton!--no wonder that you have such a
curiosity to see he."
Jane's curiosity do not appear of that absorb nature as wholly to
occupy she.
"no--I have never see Mr. Elton," she reply, start on this
appeal; "be he--be he a tall man?"
"who shall answer that question?" cry Emma. "my father would say
'yes,' Mr. Knightley 'no;' and Miss Bates and I that he be just the
happy medium. when you have be here a little long, Miss Fairfax,
you will understand that Mr. Elton be the standard of perfection in
Highbury, both in person and mind."
"very true, Miss Woodhouse, so she will. he be the very good young
man--but, my dear Jane, if you remember, I tell you yesterday he be
precisely the height of Mr. Perry. Miss Hawkins,--I dare say, an
excellent young woman. his extreme attention to my mother--want
she to sit in the vicarage pew, that she might hear the well, for my
mother be a little deaf, you know--it be not much, but she do not
hear quite quick. Jane say that Colonel Campbell be a little deaf.
he fancy bathing might be good for it--the warm bath--but she say
it do he no lasting benefit. Colonel Campbell, you know, be quite
our angel. and Mr. Dixon seem a very charming young man, quite worthy
of he. it be such a happiness when good people get together--and they
always do. now, here will be Mr. Elton and Miss Hawkins; and there be
the Coles, such very good people; and the Perrys--I suppose there never
be a happy or a well couple than Mr. and Mrs. Perry. I say, sir,"
turn to Mr. Woodhouse, "I think there be few place with such
society as Highbury. I always say, we be quite blessed in our
neighbours.--My dear sir, if there be one thing my mother love well
than another, it be pork--a roast loin of pork--"
"as to who, or what Miss Hawkins be, or how long he have be acquaint
with she," say Emma, "nothing I suppose can be know. one feel that
it cannot be a very long acquaintance. he have be go only four
week."
nobody have any information to give; and, after a few more wondering,
Emma say,
"you be silent, Miss Fairfax--but I hope you mean to take an interest
in this news. you, who have be hear and see so much of late on
these subject, who must have be so deep in the business on Miss
Campbell's account--we shall not excuse your be indifferent about
Mr. Elton and Miss Hawkins."
"when I have see Mr. Elton," reply Jane, "I dare say I shall be
interested--but I believe it require _that_ with I. and as it be
some month since Miss Campbell marry, the impression may be a little
wear off."
"yes, he have be go just four week, as you observe, Miss
Woodhouse," say Miss Bates, "four week yesterday.--a Miss
Hawkins!--Well, I have always rather fancy it would be some young lady
hereabout; not that I ever--Mrs. Cole once whisper to I--but I
immediately say, 'no, Mr. Elton be a most worthy young man--but'--In
short, I do not think I be particularly quick at those sort of
discovery. I do not pretend to it. what be before I, I see. at
the same time, nobody could wonder if Mr. Elton should have
aspire--Miss Woodhouse let I chatter on, so good-humouredly. she
know I would not offend for the world. how do Miss Smith do? she
seem quite recover now. have you hear from Mrs. John Knightley
lately? oh! those dear little child. Jane, do you know I always
fancy Mr. Dixon like Mr. John Knightley. I mean in person--tall, and
with that sort of look--and not very talkative."
"quite wrong, my dear aunt; there be no likeness at all."
"very odd! but one never do form a just idea of any body beforehand.
one take up a notion, and run away with it. Mr. Dixon, you say, be
not, strictly speak, handsome?"
"handsome! oh! no--far from it--certainly plain. I tell you he be
plain."
"my dear, you say that Miss Campbell would not allow he to be plain,
and that you yourself--"
"oh! as for I, my judgment be worth nothing. where I have a regard, I
always think a person well-looking. but I give what I believe the
general opinion, when I call he plain."
"well, my dear Jane, I believe we must be run away. the weather
do not look well, and grandmama will be uneasy. you be too
obliging, my dear Miss Woodhouse; but we really must take leave. this
have be a most agreeable piece of news indeed. I shall just go round
by Mrs. Cole's; but I shall not stop three minute: and, Jane, you have
well go home directly--I would not have you out in a shower!--we
think she be the well for Highbury already. thank you, we do indeed.
I shall not attempt call on Mrs. Goddard, for I really do not think
she care for any thing but _boil_ pork: when we dress the leg it
will be another thing. good morning to you, my dear sir. oh! Mr.
Knightley be come too. well, that is so very!--i be sure if Jane be
tired, you will be so kind as to give she your arm.--mr. Elton, and
Miss hawkins!--good morning to you."
Emma, alone with her father, have half her attention want by he while
he lament that young people would be in such a hurry to marry--and
to marry stranger too--and the other half she could give to her own
view of the subject. it be to herself an amusing and a very welcome
piece of news, as prove that Mr. Elton could not have suffer long;
but she be sorry for Harriet: Harriet must feel it--and all that she
could hope be, by give the first information herself, to save she
from hear it abruptly from other. it be now about the time that
she be likely to call. if she be to meet Miss Bates in she
way!--and upon its beginning to rain, Emma be oblige to expect that
the weather would be detain she at Mrs. Goddard's, and that the
intelligence would undoubtedly rush upon she without preparation.
the shower be heavy, but short; and it have not be over five minute,
when in come Harriet, with just the heated, agitated look which
hurry thither with a full heart be likely to give; and the "oh!
Miss Woodhouse, what do you think have happen!" which instantly burst
forth, have all the evidence of correspond perturbation. as the blow
be give, Emma feel that she could not now shew great kindness than
in listening; and Harriet, unchecked, run eagerly through what she have
to tell. "she have set out from Mrs. Goddard's half an hour ago--she
have be afraid it would rain--she have be afraid it would pour down
every moment--but she think she might get to Hartfield first--she have
hurry on as fast as possible; but then, as she be pass by the
house where a young woman be make up a gown for she, she think she
would just step in and see how it go on; and though she do not seem
to stay half a moment there, soon after she come out it begin to rain,
and she do not know what to do; so she run on directly, as fast as she
could, and take shelter at Ford's."--Ford's be the principal
woollen-draper, linen-draper, and haberdasher's shop unite; the shop
first in size and fashion in the place.--"and so, there she have set,
without an idea of any thing in the world, full ten minute,
perhaps--when, all of a sudden, who should come in--to be sure it be
so very odd!--but they always deal at Ford's--who should come in, but
Elizabeth Martin and her brother!-- Dear Miss Woodhouse! only think. I
think I should have faint. I do not know what to do. I be
sit near the door--Elizabeth see I directly; but he do not; he
be busy with the umbrella. I be sure she see I, but she look away
directly, and take no notice; and they both go to quite the far
end of the shop; and I keep sit near the door!--Oh! dear; I be so
miserable! I be sure I must have be as white as my gown. I could
not go away you know, because of the rain; but I do so wish myself
anywhere in the world but there.--oh! dear, Miss Woodhouse--well, at
last, I fancy, he look round and see I; for instead of go on with
her buying, they begin whisper to one another. I be sure they be
talk of I; and I could not help think that he be persuade she
to speak to me--(do you think he be, Miss woodhouse?)--for presently
she come forward--come quite up to I, and ask I how I do, and
seem ready to shake hand, if I would. she do not do any of it in
the same way that she use; I could see she be alter; but, however,
she seem to _try_ to be very friendly, and we shake hand, and stand
talk some time; but I know no more what I say--I be in such a
tremble!--i remember she say she be sorry we never meet now; which I
think almost too kind! dear, Miss Woodhouse, I be absolutely
miserable! by that time, it be begin to hold up, and I be
determined that nothing should stop I from get away--and
then--only think!-- I find he be come up towards I too--slowly you
know, and as if he do not quite know what to do; and so he come and
speak, and I answer--and I stand for a minute, feel dreadfully,
you know, one cannot tell how; and then I take courage, and say it do
not rain, and I must go; and so off I set; and I have not get three
yard from the door, when he come after I, only to say, if I be go
to Hartfield, he think I have much well go round by Mr. Cole's
stable, for I should find the near way quite float by this rain.
oh! dear, I think it would have be the death of I! so I say, I
be very much oblige to he: you know I could not do less; and then
he go back to Elizabeth, and I come round by the stable--I believe I
do--but I hardly know where I be, or any thing about it. oh! Miss
Woodhouse, I would rather do any thing than have it happen: and yet,
you know, there be a sort of satisfaction in see he behave so
pleasantly and so kindly. and Elizabeth, too. oh! Miss Woodhouse, do
talk to I and make I comfortable again."
very sincerely do Emma wish to do so; but it be not immediately in
her power. she be oblige to stop and think. she be not thoroughly
comfortable herself. the young man's conduct, and his sister's, seem
the result of real feeling, and she could not but pity they. as
Harriet describe it, there have be an interesting mixture of wounded
affection and genuine delicacy in their behaviour. but she have
believe they to be well-meaning, worthy people before; and what
difference do this make in the evil of the connexion? it be folly
to be disturb by it. of course, he must be sorry to lose she--they
must be all sorry. ambition, as well as love, have probably be
mortify. they might all have hop to rise by Harriet's
acquaintance: and besides, what be the value of Harriet's
description?--So easily please--so little discerning;--what signify
her praise?
she exert herself, and do try to make her comfortable, by
consider all that have pass as a mere trifle, and quite unworthy of
be dwelt on,
"it might be distress, for the moment," say she; "but you seem to
have behave extremely well; and it be over--and may never--can never,
as a first meeting, occur again, and therefore you need not think about
it."
Harriet say, "very true," and she "would not think about it;" but
still she talk of it--still she could talk of nothing else; and Emma,
at last, in order to put the martin out of her head, be oblige to
hurry on the news, which she have mean to give with so much tender
caution; hardly know herself whether to rejoice or be angry, ashamed
or only amuse, at such a state of mind in poor Harriet--such a
conclusion of Mr. Elton's importance with she!
Mr. Elton's right, however, gradually revive. though she do not
feel the first intelligence as she might have do the day before, or
an hour before, its interest soon increase; and before their first
conversation be over, she have talk herself into all the sensation
of curiosity, wonder and regret, pain and pleasure, as to this
fortunate Miss Hawkins, which could conduce to place the martin under
proper subordination in her fancy.
Emma learn to be rather glad that there have be such a meeting. it
have be serviceable in deaden the first shock, without retain
any influence to alarm. as Harriet now live, the martin could not
get at she, without seek she, where hitherto they have want either
the courage or the condescension to seek she; for since her refusal of
the brother, the sister never have be at Mrs. Goddard's; and a
twelvemonth might pass without their be throw together again, with
any necessity, or even any power of speech.
CHAPTER IV
human nature be so well disposed towards those who be in interesting
situation, that a young person, who either marry or dy, be sure of
be kindly speak of.
a week have not pass since Miss Hawkins's name be first mention in
Highbury, before she be, by some mean or other, discover to have
every recommendation of person and mind; to be handsome, elegant,
highly accomplish, and perfectly amiable: and when Mr. Elton himself
arrive to triumph in his happy prospect, and circulate the fame of
her merit, there be very little more for he to do, than to tell she
christian name, and say whose music she principally play.
Mr. Elton return, a very happy man. he have go away reject and
mortify--disappoint in a very sanguine hope, after a series of what
appear to he strong encouragement; and not only lose the right
lady, but find himself debase to the level of a very wrong one. he
have go away deeply offended--he come back engaged to another--and to
another as superior, of course, to the first, as under such
circumstance what be gain always be to what be lose. he come back
gay and self-satisfy, eager and busy, care nothing for Miss
Woodhouse, and defy Miss Smith.
the charming Augusta Hawkins, in addition to all the usual advantage
of perfect beauty and merit, be in possession of an independent
fortune, of so many thousand as would always be call ten; a point of
some dignity, as well as some convenience: the story tell well; he have
not throw himself away--he have gain a woman of 10,000 l. or
thereabout; and he have gain she with such delightful rapidity--the
first hour of introduction have be so very soon follow by
distinguishing notice; the history which he have to give Mrs. Cole of
the rise and progress of the affair be so glorious--the step so
quick, from the accidental rencontre, to the dinner at Mr. Green's, and
the party at Mrs. Brown's--smile and blush rise in importance--
with consciousness and agitation richly scatter--the lady have be so
easily impress--so sweetly dispose--have in short, to use a most
intelligible phrase, be so very ready to have he, that vanity and
prudence be equally content.
he have catch both substance and shadow--both fortune and affection,
and be just the happy man he ought to be; talk only of himself and
his own concern--expect to be congratulate--ready to be laugh
at--and, with cordial, fearless smile, now address all the young
lady of the place, to whom, a few week ago, he would have be more
cautiously gallant.
the wedding be no distant event, as the party have only themselves to
please, and nothing but the necessary preparation to wait for; and
when he set out for Bath again, there be a general expectation, which
a certain glance of Mrs. Cole's do not seem to contradict, that when
he next enter Highbury he would bring his bride.
during his present short stay, Emma have barely see he; but just
enough to feel that the first meeting be over, and to give she the
impression of his not be improve by the mixture of pique and
pretension, now spread over his air. she be, in fact, begin very
much to wonder that she have ever think he pleasing at all; and his
sight be so inseparably connect with some very disagreeable
feeling, that, except in a moral light, as a penance, a lesson, a
source of profitable humiliation to her own mind, she would have be
thankful to be assure of never see he again. she wish he very
well; but he give her pain, and his welfare twenty mile off would
administer most satisfaction.
the pain of his continued residence in Highbury, however, must
certainly be lessen by his marriage. many vain solicitude would be
prevent--many awkwardness smooth by it. a _Mrs._ _elton_ would
be an excuse for any change of intercourse; former intimacy might sink
without remark. it would be almost begin their life of civility
again.
of the lady, individually, Emma think very little. she be good
enough for Mr. Elton, no doubt; accomplish enough for Highbury--
handsome enough--to look plain, probably, by Harriet's side. as to
connexion, there Emma be perfectly easy; persuade, that after all his
own vaunted claim and disdain of Harriet, he have do nothing. on
that article, truth seem attainable. _what_ she be, must be
uncertain; but _who_ she be, might be find out; and set aside the
10,000 l., it do not appear that she be at all Harriet's superior.
she bring no name, no blood, no alliance. Miss Hawkins be the
young of the two daughter of a Bristol--merchant, of course, he
must be call; but, as the whole of the profit of his mercantile life
appear so very moderate, it be not unfair to guess the dignity of
his line of trade have be very moderate also. part of every winter
she have be use to spend in Bath; but Bristol be her home, the very
heart of Bristol; for though the father and mother have die some year
ago, an uncle remain--in the law line--nothing more distinctly
honourable be hazard of he, than that he be in the law line; and
with he the daughter have live. Emma guess he to be the drudge of
some attorney, and too stupid to rise. and all the grandeur of the
connexion seem dependent on the eld sister, who be _very_ _well_
_marry_, to a gentleman in a _great_ _way_, near Bristol, who keep
two carriage! that be the wind-up of the history; that be the glory
of Miss Hawkins.
could she but have give Harriet her feeling about it all! she have
talk she into love; but, alas! she be not so easily to be talk out
of it. the charm of an object to occupy the many vacancy of
Harriet's mind be not to be talk away. he might be supersede by
another; he certainly would indeed; nothing could be clear; even a
Robert Martin would have be sufficient; but nothing else, she fear,
would cure she. Harriet be one of those, who, have once begin,
would be always in love. and now, poor girl! she be considerably
bad from this reappearance of Mr. Elton. she be always have a
glimpse of he somewhere or other. Emma see he only once; but two or
three time every day Harriet be sure _just_ to meet with he, or
_just_ to miss he, _just_ to hear his voice, or see his shoulder,
_just_ to have something occur to preserve he in her fancy, in all the
favour warmth of surprize and conjecture. she be, moreover,
perpetually hear about he; for, except when at Hartfield, she
be always among those who see no fault in Mr. Elton, and find nothing
so interesting as the discussion of his concern; and every report,
therefore, every guess--all that have already occur, all that might
occur in the arrangement of his affair, comprehending income,
servant, and furniture, be continually in agitation around she. she
regard be receive strength by invariable praise of he, and her
regret keep alive, and feeling irritate by ceaseless repetition of
Miss Hawkins's happiness, and continual observation of, how much he
seem attached!--his air as he walk by the house--the very sitting
of his hat, be all in proof of how much he be in love!
have it be allowable entertainment, have there be no pain to her
friend, or reproach to herself, in the wavering of Harriet's mind,
Emma would have be amuse by its variation. sometimes Mr. Elton
predominate, sometimes the martin; and each be occasionally useful
as a check to the other. Mr. Elton's engagement have be the cure of
the agitation of meet Mr. Martin. the unhappiness produce by the
knowledge of that engagement have be a little put aside by Elizabeth
Martin's call at Mrs. Goddard's a few day afterwards. Harriet have
not be at home; but a note have be prepare and leave for she,
write in the very style to touch; a small mixture of reproach, with a
great deal of kindness; and till Mr. Elton himself appear, she have
be much occupy by it, continually ponder over what could be do
in return, and wish to do more than she dare to confess. but Mr.
Elton, in person, have drive away all such care. while he staid, the
martin be forget; and on the very morning of his set off for
Bath again, Emma, to dissipate some of the distress it occasion,
judge it well for she to return Elizabeth Martin's visit.
how that visit be to be acknowledge--what would be necessary--and
what might be safe, have be a point of some doubtful consideration.
absolute neglect of the mother and sister, when invite to come, would
be ingratitude. it must not be: and yet the danger of a renewal of the
acquaintance!--
after much thinking, she could determine on nothing well, than
Harriet's return the visit; but in a way that, if they have
understanding, should convince they that it be to be only a formal
acquaintance. she mean to take she in the carriage, leave she at the
Abbey Mill, while she drive a little far, and call for she again so
soon, as to allow no time for insidious application or dangerous
recurrence to the past, and give the most decide proof of what degree
of intimacy be choose for the future.
she could think of nothing well: and though there be something in
it which her own heart could not approve--something of ingratitude,
merely glossed over--it must be do, or what would become of Harriet?
CHAPTER V
small heart have Harriet for visit. only half an hour before her
friend call for she at Mrs. Goddard's, her evil star have lead she to
the very spot where, at that moment, a trunk, direct to _the Rev.
Philip Elton, White-Hart, Bath_, be to be see under the operation of
be lift into the butcher's cart, which be to convey it to where
the coach past; and every thing in this world, except that trunk
and the direction, be consequently a blank.
she go, however; and when they reach the farm, and she be to be
put down, at the end of the broad, neat gravel walk, which lead between
espalier apple-tree to the front door, the sight of every thing which
have give she so much pleasure the autumn before, be begin to
revive a little local agitation; and when they part, Emma observe
she to be look around with a sort of fearful curiosity, which
determine she not to allow the visit to exceed the propose quarter of
an hour. she go on herself, to give that portion of time to an old
servant who be marry, and settle in Donwell.
the quarter of an hour bring she punctually to the white gate again;
and Miss Smith receive her summon, be with she without delay, and
unattended by any alarming young man. she come solitarily down the
gravel walk--a Miss Martin just appear at the door, and part with
she seemingly with ceremonious civility.
Harriet could not very soon give an intelligible account. she be
feel too much; but at last Emma collect from she enough to
understand the sort of meeting, and the sort of pain it be create.
she have see only Mrs. Martin and the two girl. they have receive she
doubtingly, if not coolly; and nothing beyond the mere commonplace
have be talk almost all the time--till just at last, when Mrs.
Martin's saying, all of a sudden, that she think Miss Smith be
grow, have bring on a more interesting subject, and a warm manner.
in that very room she have be measure last September, with her two
friend. there be the pencil mark and memorandum on the
wainscot by the window. _he_ have do it. they all seem to remember
the day, the hour, the party, the occasion--to feel the same
consciousness, the same regret--to be ready to return to the same good
understanding; and they be just grow again like themselves,
(Harriet, as Emma must suspect, as ready as the good of they to be
cordial and happy,) when the carriage reappear, and all be over.
the style of the visit, and the shortness of it, be then feel to be
decisive. fourteen minute to be give to those with whom she have
thankfully pass six week not six month ago!--emma could not but
picture it all, and feel how justly they might resent, how naturally
Harriet must suffer. it be a bad business. she would have give a
great deal, or endure a great deal, to have have the martin in a
high rank of life. they be so deserving, that a _little_ higher
should have be enough: but as it be, how could she have do
otherwise?--Impossible!--She could not repent. they must be separate;
but there be a great deal of pain in the process--so much to herself
at this time, that she soon feel the necessity of a little consolation,
and resolve on go home by way of Randalls to procure it. her mind
be quite sick of Mr. Elton and the martin. the refreshment of
Randalls be absolutely necessary.
it be a good scheme; but on drive to the door they hear that
neither "master nor mistress be at home;" they have both be out some
time; the man believe they be go to Hartfield.
"this be too bad," cry Emma, as they turn away. "and now we shall
just miss they; too provoking!--i do not know when I have be so
disappointed." and she lean back in the corner, to indulge her
murmur, or to reason they away; probably a little of both--such be
the commonest process of a not ill-dispose mind. presently the
carriage stopt; she look up; it be stopt by Mr. and Mrs. Weston, who
be stand to speak to she. there be instant pleasure in the sight
of they, and still great pleasure be convey in sound--for Mr.
Weston immediately accost she with,
"how d'ye do?--how d'ye do?--we have be sit with your father--
glad to see he so well. Frank come to-morrow--I have a letter this
morning--we see he to-morrow by dinner-time to a certainty--he be at
Oxford to-day, and he come for a whole fortnight; I know it would be
so. if he have come at Christmas he could not have staid three day; I
be always glad he do not come at Christmas; now we be go to have
just the right weather for he, fine, dry, settle weather. we shall
enjoy he completely; every thing have turn out exactly as we could
wish."
there be no resisting such news, no possibility of avoid the
influence of such a happy face as Mr. Weston's, confirm as it all be
by the word and the countenance of his wife, few and quieter, but
not less to the purpose. to know that _she_ think his come certain
be enough to make Emma consider it so, and sincerely do she rejoice
in their joy. it be a most delightful reanimation of exhausted
spirit. the wear-out past be sink in the freshness of what be
come; and in the rapidity of half a moment's thought, she hop Mr.
Elton would now be talk of no more.
Mr. Weston give she the history of the engagement at Enscombe, which
allow his son to answer for have an entire fortnight at his
command, as well as the route and the method of his journey; and she
listen, and smile, and congratulate.
"I shall soon bring he over to Hartfield," say he, at the conclusion.
Emma could imagine she see a touch of the arm at this speech, from his
wife.
"we have well move on, Mr. Weston," say she, "we be detain the
girl."
"well, well, I be ready;"--and turn again to Emma, "but you must not
be expect such a _very_ fine young man; you have only have _my_
account you know; I dare say he be really nothing extraordinary:"--though
his own sparkle eye at the moment be speak a very
different conviction.
Emma could look perfectly unconscious and innocent, and answer in a
manner that appropriate nothing.
"think of I to-morrow, my dear Emma, about four o'clock," be Mrs.
Weston's parting injunction; speak with some anxiety, and mean only
for she.
"four o'clock!--depend upon it he will be here by three," be Mr.
Weston's quick amendment; and so end a most satisfactory meeting.
Emma's spirit be mount quite up to happiness; every thing wear a
different air; James and his horse seem not half so sluggish as
before. when she look at the hedge, she think the elder at least
must soon be come out; and when she turn round to Harriet, she see
something like a look of spring, a tender smile even there.
"will Mr. Frank Churchill pass through Bath as well as oxford?"--wa a
question, however, which do not augur much.
but neither geography nor tranquillity could come all at once, and Emma
be now in a humour to resolve that they should both come in time.
the morning of the interesting day arrive, and Mrs. Weston's faithful
pupil do not forget either at ten, or eleven, or twelve o'clock, that
she be to think of she at four.
"my dear, dear anxious friend,"--said she, in mental soliloquy, while
walk downstairs from her own room, "always overcareful for every
body's comfort but your own; I see you now in all your little fidget,
go again and again into his room, to be sure that all be right."
the clock strike twelve as she pass through the hall. "'tis twelve;
I shall not forget to think of you four hour hence; and by this time
to-morrow, perhaps, or a little later, I may be think of the
possibility of their all call here. I be sure they will bring he
soon."
she open the parlour door, and see two gentleman sit with her
father--Mr. Weston and his son. they have be arrive only a few
minute, and Mr. Weston have scarcely finish his explanation of
Frank's be a day before his time, and her father be yet in the
midst of his very civil welcome and congratulation, when she appear,
to have her share of surprize, introduction, and pleasure.
the Frank Churchill so long talk of, so high in interest, be
actually before she--he be present to she, and she do not think too
much have be say in his praise; he be a _very_ good look young
man; height, air, address, all be unexceptionable, and his
countenance have a great deal of the spirit and liveliness of his
father's; he look quick and sensible. she feel immediately that she
should like he; and there be a well-breed ease of manner, and a
readiness to talk, which convince she that he come intend to be
acquaint with she, and that acquaint they soon must be.
he have reach Randalls the evening before. she be pleased with the
eagerness to arrive which have make he alter his plan, and travel
early, later, and quick, that he might gain half a day.
"I tell you yesterday," cry Mr. Weston with exultation, "I tell you
all that he would be here before the time name. I remember what I
use to do myself. one cannot creep upon a journey; one cannot help
get on fast than one have plan; and the pleasure of come in
upon one's friend before the look-out begin, be worth a great deal
more than any little exertion it need."
"it be a great pleasure where one can indulge in it," say the young
man, "though there be not many house that I should presume on so far;
but in come _home_ I feel I might do any thing."
the word _home_ make his father look on he with fresh complacency.
Emma be directly sure that he know how to make himself agreeable; the
conviction be strengthen by what follow. he be very much pleased
with Randalls, think it a most admirably arrange house, would hardly
allow it even to be very small, admire the situation, the walk to
Highbury, Highbury itself, Hartfield still more, and profess himself
to have always feel the sort of interest in the country which none but
one's _own_ country give, and the great curiosity to visit it.
that he should never have be able to indulge so amiable a feeling
before, pass suspiciously through Emma's brain; but still, if it be
a falsehood, it be a pleasant one, and pleasantly handle. his manner
have no air of study or exaggeration. he do really look and speak as
if in a state of no common enjoyment.
their subject in general be such as belong to an opening
acquaintance. on his side be the inquiries,--"Was she a
horsewoman?--pleasant rides?--pleasant walks?--Had they a large
neighbourhood?--highbury, perhaps, afford society enough?--there be
several very pretty house in and about it.--ball--have they
balls?--was it a musical society?"
but when satisfied on all these point, and their acquaintance
proportionably advanced, he contrive to find an opportunity, while
their two father be engage with each other, of introduce his
mother-in-law, and speak of she with so much handsome praise, so
much warm admiration, so much gratitude for the happiness she secure
to his father, and her very kind reception of himself, as be an
additional proof of his know how to please--and of his certainly
think it worth while to try to please she. he do not advance a
word of praise beyond what she know to be thoroughly deserve by Mrs.
Weston; but, undoubtedly he could know very little of the matter. he
understand what would be welcome; he could be sure of little else.
"his father's marriage," he say, "have be the wise measure, every
friend must rejoice in it; and the family from whom he have receive
such a blessing must be ever consider as have confer the high
obligation on he."
he get as near as he could to thank she for Miss Taylor's merit,
without seem quite to forget that in the common course of thing it
be to be rather suppose that Miss Taylor have form Miss Woodhouse's
character, than Miss Woodhouse Miss Taylor's. and at last, as if
resolve to qualify his opinion completely for travel round to its
object, he wind it all up with astonishment at the youth and beauty of
her person.
"elegant, agreeable manner, I be prepare for," say he; "but I
confes that, consider every thing, I have not expect more than a
very tolerably well-look woman of a certain age; I do not know that
I be to find a pretty young woman in Mrs. Weston."
"you cannot see too much perfection in Mrs. Weston for my feeling,"
say Emma; "be you to guess she to be _eighteen_, I should listen
with pleasure; but _she_ would be ready to quarrel with you for use
such word. donot let she imagine that you have speak of she as a
pretty young woman."
"I hope I should know well," he reply; "no, depend upon it, (with a
gallant bow,) that in address Mrs. Weston I should understand whom I
might praise without any danger of be think extravagant in my
term."
Emma wonder whether the same suspicion of what might be expect from
their know each other, which have take strong possession of her
mind, have ever cross his; and whether his compliment be to be
consider as mark of acquiescence, or proof of defiance. she must
see more of he to understand his way; at present she only feel they
be agreeable.
she have no doubt of what Mr. Weston be often think about. his
quick eye she detect again and again glance towards they with a
happy expression; and even, when he might have determine not to look,
she be confident that he be often listen.
her own father's perfect exemption from any thought of the kind, the
entire deficiency in he of all such sort of penetration or suspicion,
be a most comfortable circumstance. happily he be not far from
approve matrimony than from foresee it.-- though always object
to every marriage that be arrange, he never suffer beforehand from
the apprehension of any; it seem as if he could not think so ill of
any two person' understanding as to suppose they mean to marry till
it be prove against they. she bless the favour blindness. he
could now, without the drawback of a single unpleasant surmise, without
a glance forward at any possible treachery in his guest, give way to
all his natural kind-hearted civility in solicitous inquiry after Mr.
Frank Churchill's accommodation on his journey, through the sad evil
of sleep two night on the road, and express very genuine unmixed
anxiety to know that he have certainly escape catch cold--which,
however, he could not allow he to feel quite assured of himself till
after another night.
a reasonable visit pay, Mr. Weston begin to move.--"He must be go.
he have business at the Crown about his hay, and a great many errand
for Mrs. Weston at Ford's, but he need not hurry any body else." his
son, too well breed to hear the hint, rise immediately also, say,
"as you be go far on business, sir, I will take the opportunity
of pay a visit, which must be pay some day or other, and therefore
may as well be pay now. I have the honour of be acquaint with a
neighbour of your, (turn to Emma,) a lady reside in or near
Highbury; a family of the name of Fairfax. I shall have no difficulty,
I suppose, in find the house; though Fairfax, I believe, be not the
proper name--I should rather say Barnes, or Bates. do you know any
family of that name?"
"to be sure we do," cry his father; "Mrs. Bates--we pass she
house--I see Miss Bates at the window. true, true, you be acquaint
with Miss Fairfax; I remember you know she at Weymouth, and a fine girl
she be. call upon she, by all mean."
"there be no necessity for my calling this morning," say the young
man; "another day would do as well; but there be that degree of
acquaintance at Weymouth which--"
"oh! go to-day, go to-day. do not defer it. what be right to be do
cannot be do too soon. and, besides, I must give you a hint, Frank;
any want of attention to her _here_ should be carefully avoid. you
see she with the Campbells, when she be the equal of every body she
mix with, but here she be with a poor old grandmother, who have barely
enough to live on. if you do not call early it will be a slight."
the son look convinced.
"I have hear her speak of the acquaintance," say Emma; "she be a very
elegant young woman."
he agree to it, but with so quiet a "yes," as incline she almost to
doubt his real concurrence; and yet there must be a very distinct sort
of elegance for the fashionable world, if Jane Fairfax could be think
only ordinarily gift with it.
"if you be never particularly strike by her manner before," say
she, "I think you will to-day. you will see she to advantage; see she
and hear she--no, I be afraid you will not hear she at all, for she have
an aunt who never hold her tongue."
"you be acquaint with Miss Jane Fairfax, sir, be you?" say Mr.
Woodhouse, always the last to make his way in conversation; "then give
I leave to assure you that you will find she a very agreeable young
lady. she be stay here on a visit to her grandmama and aunt, very
worthy people; I have know they all my life. they will be extremely
glad to see you, I be sure; and one of my servant shall go with you to
shew you the way."
"my dear sir, upon no account in the world; my father can direct I."
"but your father be not go so far; he be only go to the Crown,
quite on the other side of the street, and there be a great many
house; you might be very much at a loss, and it be a very dirty walk,
unless you keep on the footpath; but my coachman can tell you where you
have well cross the street."
Mr. Frank Churchill still decline it, look as serious as he could,
and his father give his hearty support by call out, "my good friend,
this be quite unnecessary; Frank know a puddle of water when he see
it, and as to Mrs. Bates's, he may get there from the Crown in a hop,
step, and jump."
they be permit to go alone; and with a cordial nod from one, and a
graceful bow from the other, the two gentleman take leave. Emma
remain very well pleased with this beginning of the acquaintance, and
could now engage to think of they all at Randalls any hour of the day,
with full confidence in their comfort.
CHAPTER VI
the next morning bring Mr. Frank Churchill again. he come with Mrs.
Weston, to whom and to Highbury he seem to take very cordially. he
have be sit with she, it appear, most companionably at home,
till her usual hour of exercise; and on be desire to chuse their
walk, immediately fix on Highbury.--"He do not doubt there be
very pleasant walk in every direction, but if leave to he, he should
always chuse the same. Highbury, that airy, cheerful, happy-look
Highbury, would be his constant attraction."-- Highbury, with Mrs.
Weston, stand for Hartfield; and she trust to its bearing the same
construction with he. they walk thither directly.
Emma have hardly expect they: for Mr. Weston, who have call in for
half a minute, in order to hear that his son be very handsome, know
nothing of their plan; and it be an agreeable surprize to she,
therefore, to perceive they walk up to the house together, arm in
arm. she be want to see he again, and especially to see he in
company with Mrs. Weston, upon his behaviour to whom her opinion of he
be to depend. if he be deficient there, nothing should make amend
for it. but on see they together, she become perfectly satisfied.
it be not merely in fine word or hyperbolical compliment that he pay
his duty; nothing could be more proper or pleasing than his whole
manner to she--nothing could more agreeably denote his wish of
consider she as a friend and secure her affection. and there be
time enough for Emma to form a reasonable judgment, as their visit
include all the rest of the morning. they be all three walk
about together for an hour or two--first round the shrubbery of
Hartfield, and afterwards in Highbury. he be delighted with every
thing; admire Hartfield sufficiently for Mr. Woodhouse's ear; and when
their go far be resolve on, confess his wish to be make
acquaint with the whole village, and find matter of commendation and
interest much oftener than Emma could have suppose.
some of the object of his curiosity speak very amiable feeling. he
beg to be shew the house which his father have live in so long, and
which have be the home of his father's father; and on recollect
that an old woman who have nurse he be still live, walk in quest
of her cottage from one end of the street to the other; and though in
some point of pursuit or observation there be no positive merit, they
shewed, altogether, a good-will towards Highbury in general, which must
be very like a merit to those he be with.
Emma watch and decide, that with such feeling as be now shewn, it
could not be fairly suppose that he have be ever voluntarily
absent himself; that he have not be act a part, or make a
parade of insincere profession; and that Mr. Knightley certainly have
not do he justice.
their first pause be at the Crown Inn, an inconsiderable house, though
the principal one of the sort, where a couple of pair of post-horse
be keep, more for the convenience of the neighbourhood than from any
run on the road; and his companion have not expect to be detain by
any interest excite there; but in pass it they give the history of
the large room visibly add; it have be build many year ago for a
ball-room, and while the neighbourhood have be in a particularly
populous, dancing state, have be occasionally use as such;--but such
brilliant day have long pass away, and now the high purpose for
which it be ever want be to accommodate a whist club establish
among the gentleman and half-gentleman of the place. he be
immediately interested. its character as a ball-room catch he; and
instead of pass on, he stopt for several minute at the two superior
sashe window which be open, to look in and contemplate its
capability, and lament that its original purpose should have cease.
he see no fault in the room, he would acknowledge none which they
suggest. no, it be long enough, broad enough, handsome enough. it
would hold the very number for comfort. they ought to have ball there
at least every fortnight through the winter. why have not Miss
Woodhouse revive the former good old day of the room?--She who could
do any thing in Highbury! the want of proper family in the place,
and the conviction that none beyond the place and its immediate
environ could be tempt to attend, be mention; but he be not
satisfied. he could not be persuade that so many good-look house
as he see around he, could not furnish number enough for such a
meeting; and even when particular be give and family describe,
he be still unwilling to admit that the inconvenience of such a
mixture would be any thing, or that there would be the small
difficulty in every body's return into their proper place the next
morning. he argue like a young man very much bent on dancing; and
Emma be rather surprize to see the constitution of the Weston prevail
so decidedly against the habit of the Churchills. he seem to have
all the life and spirit, cheerful feeling, and social inclination of
his father, and nothing of the pride or reserve of Enscombe. of pride,
indeed, there be, perhaps, scarcely enough; his indifference to a
confusion of rank, border too much on inelegance of mind. he could
be no judge, however, of the evil he be hold cheap. it be but an
effusion of lively spirit.
at last he be persuade to move on from the front of the Crown; and
be now almost face the house where the Bateses lodge, Emma
recollect his intended visit the day before, and ask he if he have
pay it.
"yes, oh! yes"--he reply; "I be just go to mention it. a very
successful visit:--I see all the three lady; and feel very much
oblige to you for your preparatory hint. if the talk aunt have
take I quite by surprize, it must have be the death of I. as it
be, I be only betray into pay a most unreasonable visit. ten
minute would have be all that be necessary, perhaps all that be
proper; and I have tell my father I should certainly be at home before
he--but there be no get away, no pause; and, to my utter
astonishment, I find, when he (find I nowhere else) join I
there at last, that I have be actually sit with they very nearly
three-quarter of an hour. the good lady have not give I the
possibility of escape before."
"and how do you think Miss Fairfax look?"
"Ill, very ill--that be, if a young lady can ever be allow to look
ill. but the expression be hardly admissible, Mrs. Weston, be it?
lady can never look ill. and, seriously, Miss Fairfax be naturally
so pale, as almost always to give the appearance of ill health.-- a
most deplorable want of complexion."
Emma would not agree to this, and begin a warm defence of Miss
Fairfax's complexion. "it be certainly never brilliant, but she would
not allow it to have a sickly hue in general; and there be a softness
and delicacy in her skin which give peculiar elegance to the character
of her face." he listen with all due deference; acknowledge that he
have hear many people say the same--but yet he must confess, that to
he nothing could make amend for the want of the fine glow of health.
where feature be indifferent, a fine complexion give beauty to they
all; and where they be good, the effect be--fortunately he need not
attempt to describe what the effect be.
"well," say Emma, "there be no disputing about taste.--at least you
admire she except her complexion."
he shake his head and laughed.--"i cannot separate Miss Fairfax and her
complexion."
"do you see she often at Weymouth? be you often in the same
society?"
at this moment they be approach Ford's, and he hastily exclaim,
"ha! this must be the very shop that every body attend every day of
their life, as my father inform I. he come to Highbury himself, he
say, six day out of the seven, and have always business at Ford's. if
it be not inconvenient to you, pray let we go in, that I may prove
myself to belong to the place, to be a true citizen of Highbury. I
must buy something at Ford's. it will be take out my freedom.-- I
dare say they sell glove."
"oh! yes, glove and every thing. I do admire your patriotism. you
will be adore in Highbury. you be very popular before you come,
because you be Mr. Weston's son--but lie out half a guinea at Ford's,
and your popularity will stand upon your own virtue."
they go in; and while the sleek, well-tie parcel of "Men's beaver"
and "York Tan" be bring down and display on the counter, he
said--"but I beg your pardon, Miss Woodhouse, you be speak to I,
you be say something at the very moment of this burst of my _amor_
_patriae_. do not let I lose it. I assure you the utmost stretch of
public fame would not make I amend for the loss of any happiness in
private life."
"I merely ask, whether you have know much of Miss Fairfax and her
party at Weymouth."
"and now that I understand your question, I must pronounce it to be a
very unfair one. it be always the lady's right to decide on the degree
of acquaintance. Miss Fairfax must already have give she account.-- I
shall not commit myself by claim more than she may chuse to allow."
"upon my word! you answer as discreetly as she could do herself. but
her account of every thing leave so much to be guess, she be so very
reserve, so very unwilling to give the least information about any
body, that I really think you may say what you like of your
acquaintance with she."
"may I, indeed?--Then I will speak the truth, and nothing suit I so
well. I meet she frequently at Weymouth. I have know the Campbells a
little in town; and at Weymouth we be very much in the same set.
Colonel Campbell be a very agreeable man, and Mrs. Campbell a friendly,
warm-hearted woman. I like they all."
"you know Miss Fairfax's situation in life, I conclude; what she be
destine to be?"
"Yes--(rather hesitatingly)--i believe I do."
"you get upon delicate subject, Emma," say Mrs. Weston smile;
"remember that I be here.--mr. Frank Churchill hardly know what to say
when you speak of Miss Fairfax's situation in life. I will move a
little far off."
"I certainly do forget to think of _her_," say Emma, "as have ever
be any thing but my friend and my dear friend."
he look as if he fully understand and honour such a sentiment.
when the glove be buy, and they have quit the shop again, "do
you ever hear the young lady we be speak of, play?" say Frank
Churchill.
"ever hear she!" repeat Emma. "you forget how much she belong to
Highbury. I have hear she every year of our life since we both
begin. she play charmingly."
"you think so, do you?--I want the opinion of some one who could
really judge. she appear to I to play well, that is, with
considerable taste, but I know nothing of the matter myself.-- I be
excessively fond of music, but without the small skill or right of
judging of any body's performance.--i have be use to hear she's
admire; and I remember one proof of her be think to play well:--a
man, a very musical man, and in love with another woman--engage to
she--on the point of marriage--would yet never ask that other woman to
sit down to the instrument, if the lady in question could sit down
instead--never seem to like to hear one if he could hear the other.
that, I think, in a man of know musical talent, be some proof."
"Proof indeed!" say Emma, highly amused.--"mr. Dixon be very musical,
be he? we shall know more about they all, in half an hour, from you,
than Miss Fairfax would have vouchsafe in half a year."
"yes, Mr. Dixon and Miss Campbell be the person; and I think it a
very strong proof."
"certainly--very strong it be; to own the truth, a great deal strong
than, if _i_ have be Miss Campbell, would have be at all agreeable
to I. I could not excuse a man's have more music than love--more
ear than eye--a more acute sensibility to fine sound than to my
feeling. how do Miss Campbell appear to like it?"
"it be her very particular friend, you know."
"poor comfort!" say Emma, laugh. "one would rather have a stranger
prefer than one's very particular friend--with a stranger it might
not recur again--but the misery of have a very particular friend
always at hand, to do every thing well than one do oneself!-- Poor
Mrs. Dixon! well, I be glad she be go to settle in Ireland."
"you be right. it be not very flattering to Miss Campbell; but she
really do not seem to feel it."
"so much the well--or so much the worse:--I do not know which. but
be it sweetness or be it stupidity in she--quickness of friendship, or
dulness of feeling--there be one person, I think, who must have feel
it: Miss Fairfax herself. she must have feel the improper and
dangerous distinction."
"as to that--I do not--"
"oh! do not imagine that I expect an account of Miss Fairfax's
sensation from you, or from any body else. they be know to no human
being, I guess, but herself. but if she continue to play whenever she
be ask by Mr. Dixon, one may guess what one chuse."
"there appear such a perfectly good understanding among they all--"
he begin rather quickly, but check himself, add, "however, it be
impossible for I to say on what term they really be--how it might
all be behind the scene. I can only say that there be smoothness
outwardly. but you, who have know Miss Fairfax from a child, must be
a well judge of her character, and of how she be likely to conduct
herself in critical situation, than I can be."
"I have know she from a child, undoubtedly; we have be child and
woman together; and it be natural to suppose that we should be
intimate,--that we should have take to each other whenever she visit
her friend. but we never do. I hardly know how it have happen; a
little, perhaps, from that wickedness on my side which be prone to
take disgust towards a girl so idolize and so cry up as she always
be, by her aunt and grandmother, and all their set. and then, her
reserve--I never could attach myself to any one so completely reserved."
"it be a most repulsive quality, indeed," say he. "oftentime very
convenient, no doubt, but never pleasing. there be safety in reserve,
but no attraction. one cannot love a reserved person."
"not till the reserve cease towards oneself; and then the attraction
may be the great. but I must be more in want of a friend, or an
agreeable companion, than I have yet be, to take the trouble of
conquer any body's reserve to procure one. intimacy between Miss
Fairfax and I be quite out of the question. I have no reason to think
ill of she--not the least--except that such extreme and perpetual
cautiousness of word and manner, such a dread of give a distinct idea
about any body, be apt to suggest suspicion of there be something
to conceal."
he perfectly agree with she: and after walk together so long, and
think so much alike, Emma feel herself so well acquainted with he,
that she could hardly believe it to be only their second meeting. he
be not exactly what she have expect; less of the man of the world in
some of his notion, less of the spoiled child of fortune, therefore
well than she have expect. his idea seem more moderate--his
feeling warmer. she be particularly strike by his manner of
consider Mr. Elton's house, which, as well as the church, he would
go and look at, and would not join they in find much fault with.
no, he could not believe it a bad house; not such a house as a man be
to be pity for have. if it be to be share with the woman he
love, he could not think any man to be pity for have that house.
there must be ample room in it for every real comfort. the man must be
a blockhead who want more.
Mrs. Weston laugh, and say he do not know what he be talk
about. use only to a large house himself, and without ever think
how many advantage and accommodation be attach to its size, he
could be no judge of the privation inevitably belong to a small
one. but Emma, in her own mind, determine that he _do_ know what he
be talk about, and that he shew a very amiable inclination to
settle early in life, and to marry, from worthy motif. he might not
be aware of the inroad on domestic peace to be occasion by no
housekeeper's room, or a bad butler's pantry, but no doubt he do
perfectly feel that Enscombe could not make he happy, and that
whenever he be attach, he would willingly give up much of wealth to
be allow an early establishment.
CHAPTER VII
Emma's very good opinion of Frank Churchill be a little shake the
follow day, by hear that he be go off to London, merely to
have his hair cut. a sudden freak seem to have seize he at
breakfast, and he have send for a chaise and set off, intend to
return to dinner, but with no more important view that appear than
have his hair cut. there be certainly no harm in his travel
sixteen mile twice over on such an errand; but there be an air of
foppery and nonsense in it which she could not approve. it do not
accord with the rationality of plan, the moderation in expense, or even
the unselfish warmth of heart, which she have believe herself to
discern in he yesterday. vanity, extravagance, love of change,
restlessness of temper, which must be do something, good or bad;
heedlessness as to the pleasure of his father and Mrs. Weston,
indifferent as to how his conduct might appear in general; he become
liable to all these charge. his father only call he a coxcomb, and
think it a very good story; but that Mrs. Weston do not like it, be
clear enough, by she pass it over as quickly as possible, and make
no other comment than that "all young people would have their little
whim."
with the exception of this little blot, Emma find that his visit
hitherto have give her friend only good idea of he. Mrs. Weston be
very ready to say how attentive and pleasant a companion he make
himself--how much she see to like in his disposition altogether. he
appear to have a very open temper--certainly a very cheerful and
lively one; she could observe nothing wrong in his notion, a great
deal decidedly right; he speak of his uncle with warm regard, be fond
of talk of he--say he would be the good man in the world if he
be leave to himself; and though there be no be attach to the
aunt, he acknowledge her kindness with gratitude, and seem to mean
always to speak of she with respect. this be all very promising; and,
but for such an unfortunate fancy for have his hair cut, there be
nothing to denote he unworthy of the distinguished honour which her
imagination have give he; the honour, if not of be really in love
with she, of be at least very near it, and save only by her own
indifference--(for still her resolution hold of never marrying)--the
honour, in short, of be mark out for she by all their joint
acquaintance.
Mr. Weston, on his side, add a virtue to the account which must have
some weight. he give she to understand that Frank admire she
extremely--think she very beautiful and very charming; and with so
much to be say for he altogether, she find she must not judge he
harshly. as Mrs. Weston observe, "all young people would have their
little whim."
there be one person among his new acquaintance in Surry, not so
leniently dispose. in general he be judge, throughout the parish
of Donwell and Highbury, with great candour; liberal allowance be
make for the little excess of such a handsome young man--one who
smile so often and bow so well; but there be one spirit among they
not to be soften, from its power of censure, by bow or smile--Mr.
Knightley. the circumstance be tell he at Hartfield; for the moment,
he be silent; but Emma hear he almost immediately afterwards say to
himself, over a newspaper he hold in his hand, "Hum! just the trifling,
silly fellow I take he for." she have half a mind to resent; but an
instant's observation convince she that it be really say only to
relieve his own feeling, and not mean to provoke; and therefore she
let it pass.
although in one instance the bearer of not good tiding, Mr. and Mrs.
Weston's visit this morning be in another respect particularly
opportune. something occur while they be at Hartfield, to make
Emma want their advice; and, which be still more lucky, she want
exactly the advice they give.
this be the occurrence:--The Coles have be settle some year in
Highbury, and be very good sort of people--friendly, liberal, and
unpretending; but, on the other hand, they be of low origin, in
trade, and only moderately genteel. on their first come into the
country, they have live in proportion to their income, quietly, keep
little company, and that little unexpensively; but the last year or two
have bring they a considerable increase of mean--the house in town
have yield great profit, and fortune in general have smile on they.
with their wealth, their view increase; their want of a large house,
their inclination for more company. they add to their house, to
their number of servant, to their expense of every sort; and by this
time be, in fortune and style of living, second only to the family at
Hartfield. their love of society, and their new dining-room, prepare
every body for their keep dinner-company; and a few party, chiefly
among the single man, have already take place. the regular and good
family Emma could hardly suppose they would presume to invite--
neither Donwell, nor Hartfield, nor Randalls. nothing should tempt
_her_ to go, if they do; and she regret that her father's know
habit would be give her refusal less meaning than she could wish.
the Coles be very respectable in their way, but they ought to be
teach that it be not for they to arrange the term on which the
superior family would visit they. this lesson, she very much fear,
they would receive only from herself; she have little hope of Mr.
Knightley, none of Mr. Weston.
but she have make up her mind how to meet this presumption so many week
before it appear, that when the insult come at last, it find she
very differently affect. Donwell and Randalls have receive their
invitation, and none have come for her father and herself; and Mrs.
Weston's accounting for it with "I suppose they will not take the
liberty with you; they know you do not dine out," be not quite
sufficient. she feel that she should like to have have the power of
refusal; and afterwards, as the idea of the party to be assemble
there, consist precisely of those whose society be dear to she,
occur again and again, she do not know that she might not have be
tempt to accept. Harriet be to be there in the evening, and the
Bateses. they have be speak of it as they walk about Highbury
the day before, and Frank Churchill have most earnestly lament her
absence. might not the evening end in a dance? have be a question of
his. the bare possibility of it act as a farth irritation on her
spirit; and her be leave in solitary grandeur, even suppose the
omission to be intend as a compliment, be but poor comfort.
it be the arrival of this very invitation while the Westons be at
Hartfield, which make their presence so acceptable; for though her
first remark, on read it, be that "of course it must be decline,"
she so very soon proceed to ask they what they advise she to do,
that their advice for her go be most prompt and successful.
she own that, consider every thing, she be not absolutely without
inclination for the party. the Coles express themselves so
properly--there be so much real attention in the manner of it--so
much consideration for her father. "they would have solicit the
honour early, but have be wait the arrival of a folding-screen
from London, which they hop might keep Mr. Woodhouse from any draught
of air, and therefore induce he the more readily to give they the
honour of his company." upon the whole, she be very persuadable; and
it be briefly settle among themselves how it might be do without
neglect his comfort--how certainly Mrs. Goddard, if not Mrs. Bates,
might be depend on for bear he company-- Mr. Woodhouse be to be
talk into an acquiescence of his daughter's go out to dinner on a
day now near at hand, and spend the whole evening away from he. as
for _his_ go, Emma do not wish he to think it possible, the hour
would be too late, and the party too numerous. he be soon pretty well
resign.
"I be not fond of dinner-visit," say he--"i never be. no more be
Emma. late hour do not agree with we. I be sorry Mr. and Mrs. Cole
should have do it. I think it would be much well if they would
come in one afternoon next summer, and take their tea with we--take we
in their afternoon walk; which they might do, as our hour be so
reasonable, and yet get home without be out in the damp of the
evening. the dew of a summer evening be what I would not expose any
body to. however, as they be so very desirous to have dear Emma dine
with they, and as you will both be there, and Mr. Knightley too, to
take care of she, I cannot wish to prevent it, provide the weather be
what it ought, neither damp, nor cold, nor windy." then turn to
Mrs. Weston, with a look of gentle reproach--"ah! Miss Taylor, if you
have not marry, you would have staid at home with I."
"well, sir," cry Mr. Weston, "as I take Miss Taylor away, it be
incumbent on I to supply her place, if I can; and I will step to Mrs.
Goddard in a moment, if you wish it."
but the idea of any thing to be do in a _moment_, be increase, not
lessening, Mr. Woodhouse's agitation. the lady know well how to
allay it. Mr. Weston must be quiet, and every thing deliberately
arrange.
with this treatment, Mr. Woodhouse be soon compose enough for talk
as usual. "he should be happy to see Mrs. Goddard. he have a great
regard for Mrs. Goddard; and Emma should write a line, and invite she.
James could take the note. but first of all, there must be an answer
write to Mrs. Cole."
"you will make my excuse, my dear, as civilly as possible. you will
say that I be quite an invalid, and go no where, and therefore must
decline their oblige invitation; begin with my _compliment_, of
course. but you will do every thing right. I need not tell you what
be to be do. we must remember to let James know that the carriage
will be want on Tuesday. I shall have no fear for you with he. we
have never be there above once since the new approach be make; but
still I have no doubt that James will take you very safely. and when
you get there, you must tell he at what time you would have he come
for you again; and you have well name an early hour. you will not
like stay late. you will get very tired when tea be over."
"but you would not wish I to come away before I be tired, papa?"
"oh! no, my love; but you will soon be tired. there will be a great
many people talk at once. you will not like the noise."
"but, my dear sir," cry Mr. Weston, "if Emma come away early, it
will be break up the party."
"and no great harm if it do," say Mr. Woodhouse. "the soon every
party break up, the well."
"but you do not consider how it may appear to the Coles. Emma's go
away directly after tea might be give offence. they be good-natured
people, and think little of their own claim; but still they must feel
that any body's hurrying away be no great compliment; and Miss
Woodhouse's do it would be more thought of than any other person's
in the room. you would not wish to disappoint and mortify the Coles, I
be sure, sir; friendly, good sort of people as ever live, and who have
be your neighbour these _ten_ year."
"no, upon no account in the world, Mr. Weston; I be much oblige to you
for remind I. I should be extremely sorry to be give they any
pain. I know what worthy people they be. Perry tell I that Mr.
Cole never touch malt liquor. you would not think it to look at he,
but he be bilious--Mr. Cole be very bilious. no, I would not be the
mean of give they any pain. my dear Emma, we must consider this. I
be sure, rather than run the risk of hurt Mr. and Mrs. Cole, you
would stay a little long than you might wish. you will not regard
be tired. you will be perfectly safe, you know, among your friend."
"oh yes, papa. I have no fear at all for myself; and I should have no
scruple of stay as late as Mrs. Weston, but on your account. I be
only afraid of your sit up for I. I be not afraid of your not
be exceedingly comfortable with Mrs. Goddard. she love piquet, you
know; but when she be go home, I be afraid you will be sit up by
yourself, instead of go to bed at your usual time--and the idea of
that would entirely destroy my comfort. you must promise I not to sit
up."
he do, on the condition of some promise on her side: such as that,
if she come home cold, she would be sure to warm herself thoroughly; if
hungry, that she would take something to eat; that her own maid should
sit up for she; and that Serle and the butler should see that every
thing be safe in the house, as usual.
CHAPTER VIII
Frank Churchill come back again; and if he keep his father's dinner
waiting, it be not know at Hartfield; for Mrs. Weston be too anxious
for his be a favourite with Mr. Woodhouse, to betray any
imperfection which could be conceal.
he come back, have have his hair cut, and laugh at himself with a very
good grace, but without seem really at all ashamed of what he have
do. he have no reason to wish his hair long, to conceal any
confusion of face; no reason to wish the money unspent, to improve his
spirit. he be quite as undaunted and as lively as ever; and, after
see he, Emma thus moralise to herself:--
"I do not know whether it ought to be so, but certainly silly thing do
cease to be silly if they be do by sensible people in an impudent
way. wickedness be always wickedness, but folly be not always
folly.--It depend upon the character of those who handle it. Mr.
Knightley, he be _not_ a trifling, silly young man. if he be, he
would have do this differently. he would either have glory in the
achievement, or be ashamed of it. there would have be either the
ostentation of a coxcomb, or the evasion of a mind too weak to defend
its own vanities.--no, I be perfectly sure that he be not trifle or
silly."
with Tuesday come the agreeable prospect of see he again, and for a
long time than hitherto; of judge of his general manner, and by
inference, of the meaning of his manner towards herself; of guess
how soon it might be necessary for she to throw coldness into her air;
and of fancy what the observation of all those might be, who be
now see they together for the first time.
she mean to be very happy, in spite of the scene be lay at Mr.
Cole's; and without be able to forget that among the failing of Mr.
Elton, even in the day of his favour, none have disturb she more than
his propensity to dine with Mr. Cole.
her father's comfort be amply secure, Mrs. Bates as well as Mrs.
Goddard be able to come; and her last pleasing duty, before she leave
the house, be to pay her respect to they as they sit together after
dinner; and while her father be fondly notice the beauty of her
dress, to make the two lady all the amend in her power, by help
they to large slice of cake and full glass of wine, for whatever
unwilling self-denial his care of their constitution might have oblige
they to practise during the meal.--She have provide a plentiful dinner
for they; she wish she could know that they have be allow to eat
it.
she follow another carriage to Mr. Cole's door; and be pleased to
see that it be Mr. Knightley's; for Mr. Knightley keep no horse,
have little spare money and a great deal of health, activity, and
independence, be too apt, in Emma's opinion, to get about as he could,
and not use his carriage so often as become the owner of Donwell Abbey.
she have an opportunity now of speak her approbation while warm from
her heart, for he stop to hand she out.
"this be come as you should do," say she; "like a gentleman.-- I be
quite glad to see you."
he thank she, observe, "how lucky that we should arrive at the same
moment! for, if we have meet first in the drawing-room, I doubt whether
you would have discern I to be more of a gentleman than usual.-- you
might not have distinguish how I come, by my look or manner."
"yes I should, I be sure I should. there be always a look of
consciousness or bustle when people come in a way which they know to be
beneath they. you think you carry it off very well, I dare say, but
with you it be a sort of bravado, an air of affected unconcern; I
always observe it whenever I meet you under those circumstance. _now_
you have nothing to try for. you be not afraid of be suppose
ashamed. you be not strive to look tall than any body else.
_now_ I shall really be very happy to walk into the same room with you."
"nonsensical girl!" be his reply, but not at all in anger.
Emma have as much reason to be satisfied with the rest of the party as
with Mr. Knightley. she be receive with a cordial respect which
could not but please, and give all the consequence she could wish for.
when the Westons arrive, the kind look of love, the strong of
admiration be for she, from both husband and wife; the son approach
she with a cheerful eagerness which mark she as his peculiar object,
and at dinner she find he seat by she--and, as she firmly believe,
not without some dexterity on his side.
the party be rather large, as it include one other family, a proper
unobjectionable country family, whom the Coles have the advantage of
name among their acquaintance, and the male part of Mr. Cox's family,
the lawyer of Highbury. the less worthy female be to come in the
evening, with Miss Bates, Miss Fairfax, and Miss Smith; but already, at
dinner, they be too numerous for any subject of conversation to be
general; and, while politic and Mr. Elton be talk over, Emma could
fairly surrender all her attention to the pleasantness of her
neighbour. the first remote sound to which she feel herself oblige to
attend, be the name of Jane Fairfax. Mrs. Cole seem to be relate
something of she that be expect to be very interesting. she
listen, and find it well worth listen to. that very dear part of
Emma, her fancy, receive an amusing supply. Mrs. Cole be tell
that she have be call on Miss Bates, and as soon as she enter the
room have be strike by the sight of a pianoforte--a very elegant
look instrument--not a grand, but a large-sized square pianoforte;
and the substance of the story, the end of all the dialogue which
ensue of surprize, and inquiry, and congratulation on her side, and
explanation on Miss Bates's, be, that this pianoforte have arrive
from Broadwood's the day before, to the great astonishment of both aunt
and niece--entirely unexpected; that at first, by Miss Bates's account,
Jane herself be quite at a loss, quite bewildered to think who could
possibly have order it--but now, they be both perfectly satisfied
that it could be from only one quarter;--of course it must be from
Colonel Campbell.
"one can suppose nothing else," add Mrs. Cole, "and I be only
surprize that there could ever have be a doubt. but Jane, it seem,
have a letter from they very lately, and not a word be say about it.
she know their way well; but I should not consider their silence as
any reason for their not meaning to make the present. they might chuse
to surprize she."
Mrs. Cole have many to agree with she; every body who speak on the
subject be equally convinced that it must come from Colonel Campbell,
and equally rejoice that such a present have be make; and there be
enough ready to speak to allow Emma to think her own way, and still
listen to Mrs. Cole.
"I declare, I do not know when I have hear any thing that have give I
more satisfaction!--It always have quite hurt I that Jane Fairfax, who
play so delightfully, should not have an instrument. it seem quite
a shame, especially consider how many house there be where fine
instrument be absolutely throw away. this be like give ourselves
a slap, to be sure! and it be but yesterday I be tell Mr. Cole, I
really be ashamed to look at our new grand pianoforte in the
drawing-room, while I do not know one note from another, and our little
girl, who be but just begin, perhaps may never make any thing of
it; and there be poor Jane Fairfax, who be mistress of music, have not
any thing of the nature of an instrument, not even the pitifull old
spinet in the world, to amuse herself with.--I be say this to Mr.
Cole but yesterday, and he quite agree with I; only he be so
particularly fond of music that he could not help indulge himself in
the purchase, hop that some of our good neighbour might be so
oblige occasionally to put it to a well use than we can; and that
really be the reason why the instrument be buy--or else I be sure
we ought to be ashamed of it.--We be in great hope that Miss
Woodhouse may be prevail with to try it this evening."
Miss Woodhouse make the proper acquiescence; and find that nothing
more be to be entrap from any communication of Mrs. Cole's, turn
to Frank Churchill.
"why do you smile?" say she.
"Nay, why do you?"
"Me!--I suppose I smile for pleasure at Colonel Campbell's be so
rich and so liberal.--It be a handsome present."
"very."
"I rather wonder that it be never make before."
"perhaps Miss Fairfax have never be stay here so long before."
"or that he do not give she the use of their own instrument--which
must now be shut up in London, untouched by any body."
"that be a grand pianoforte, and he might think it too large for Mrs.
Bates's house."
"you may _say_ what you chuse--but your countenance testify that your
_thought_ on this subject be very much like mine."
"I do not know. I rather believe you be give I more credit for
acuteness than I deserve. I smile because you smile, and shall
probably suspect whatever I find you suspect; but at present I do not
see what there be to question. if Colonel Campbell be not the person,
who can be?"
"what do you say to Mrs. Dixon?"
"Mrs. Dixon! very true indeed. I have not think of Mrs. Dixon. she
must know as well as her father, how acceptable an instrument would be;
and perhaps the mode of it, the mystery, the surprize, be more like a
young woman's scheme than an elderly man's. it be Mrs. Dixon, I dare
say. I tell you that your suspicion would guide mine."
"if so, you must extend your suspicion and comprehend _Mr_. Dixon in
they."
"Mr. Dixon.--Very well. yes, I immediately perceive that it must be
the joint present of Mr. and Mrs. Dixon. we be speak the other
day, you know, of his be so warm an admirer of her performance."
"yes, and what you tell I on that head, confirm an idea which I have
entertain before.--I do not mean to reflect upon the good intention
of either Mr. Dixon or Miss Fairfax, but I cannot help suspect
either that, after make his proposal to her friend, he have the
misfortune to fall in love with _her_, or that he become conscious of a
little attachment on her side. one might guess twenty thing without
guess exactly the right; but I be sure there must be a particular
cause for her chuse to come to Highbury instead of go with the
Campbells to Ireland. here, she must be lead a life of privation
and penance; there it would have be all enjoyment. as to the
pretence of try her native air, I look upon that as a mere
excuse.--in the summer it might have pass; but what can any body's
native air do for they in the month of January, February, and March?
good fire and carriage would be much more to the purpose in most
case of delicate health, and I dare say in she's. I do not require you
to adopt all my suspicion, though you make so noble a profession of
do it, but I honestly tell you what they be."
"and, upon my word, they have an air of great probability. Mr. Dixon's
preference of her music to her friend's, I can answer for be very
decide."
"and then, he save her life. do you ever hear of that?-- a water
party; and by some accident she be fall overboard. he catch she."
"he do. I be there--one of the party."
"be you really?--well!--but you observe nothing of course, for it
seem to be a new idea to you.--If I have be there, I think I should
have make some discovery."
"I dare say you would; but I, simple i, see nothing but the fact, that
Miss Fairfax be nearly dash from the vessel and that Mr. Dixon
catch her.--It be the work of a moment. and though the consequent
shock and alarm be very great and much more durable--indeed I believe
it be half an hour before any of we be comfortable again--yet that
be too general a sensation for any thing of peculiar anxiety to be
observable. I do not mean to say, however, that you might not have
make discovery."
the conversation be here interrupt. they be call on to share in
the awkwardness of a rather long interval between the course, and
oblige to be as formal and as orderly as the other; but when the
table be again safely cover, when every corner dish be place
exactly right, and occupation and ease be generally restore, Emma
say,
"the arrival of this pianoforte be decisive with I. I want to know
a little more, and this tell I quite enough. depend upon it, we
shall soon hear that it be a present from Mr. and Mrs. Dixon."
"and if the dixon should absolutely deny all knowledge of it we must
conclude it to come from the Campbells."
"no, I be sure it be not from the Campbells. Miss Fairfax know it be
not from the Campbells, or they would have be guess at first. she
would not have be puzzle, have she dare fix on they. I may not have
convince you perhaps, but I be perfectly convince myself that Mr.
Dixon be a principal in the business."
"indeed you injure I if you suppose I unconvinced. your reasoning
carry my judgment along with they entirely. at first, while I suppose
you satisfied that Colonel Campbell be the giver, I see it only as
paternal kindness, and think it the most natural thing in the world.
but when you mention Mrs. Dixon, I feel how much more probable that
it should be the tribute of warm female friendship. and now I can see
it in no other light than as an offering of love."
there be no occasion to press the matter far. the conviction
seem real; he look as if he feel it. she say no more, other
subject take their turn; and the rest of the dinner pass away; the
dessert succeed, the child come in, and be talk to and admire
amid the usual rate of conversation; a few clever thing say, a few
downright silly, but by much the large proportion neither the one nor
the other--nothing bad than everyday remark, dull repetition, old
news, and heavy joke.
the lady have not be long in the drawing-room, before the other
lady, in their different division, arrive. Emma watch the entree
of her own particular little friend; and if she could not exult in her
dignity and grace, she could not only love the bloom sweetness and
the artless manner, but could most heartily rejoice in that light,
cheerful, unsentimental disposition which allow she so many
alleviation of pleasure, in the midst of the pang of disappointed
affection. there she sit--and who would have guess how many tear
she have be lately shed? to be in company, nicely dress herself
and see other nicely dress, to sit and smile and look pretty, and
say nothing, be enough for the happiness of the present hour. Jane
Fairfax do look and move superior; but Emma suspect she might have
be glad to change feeling with Harriet, very glad to have purchase
the mortification of have love--yes, of have love even Mr. Elton
in vain--by the surrender of all the dangerous pleasure of know
herself belove by the husband of her friend.
in so large a party it be not necessary that Emma should approach she.
she do not wish to speak of the pianoforte, she feel too much in the
secret herself, to think the appearance of curiosity or interest fair,
and therefore purposely keep at a distance; but by the other, the
subject be almost immediately introduce, and she see the blush of
consciousness with which congratulation be receive, the blush of
guilt which accompany the name of "my excellent friend Colonel
Campbell."
Mrs. Weston, kind-hearted and musical, be particularly interested by
the circumstance, and Emma could not help be amuse at her
perseverance in dwelling on the subject; and have so much to ask and
to say as to tone, touch, and pedal, totally unsuspicious of that wish
of say as little about it as possible, which she plainly read in the
fair heroine's countenance.
they be soon join by some of the gentleman; and the very first of
the early be Frank Churchill. in he walk, the first and the
handsome; and after pay his compliment en passant to Miss Bates
and her niece, make his way directly to the opposite side of the
circle, where sit Miss Woodhouse; and till he could find a seat by she,
would not sit at all. Emma divine what every body present must be
think. she be his object, and every body must perceive it. she
introduce he to her friend, Miss Smith, and, at convenient moment
afterwards, hear what each thought of the other. "he have never see
so lovely a face, and be delighted with her naivete." and she, "only
to be sure it be pay he too great a compliment, but she do think
there be some look a little like Mr. Elton." Emma restrain her
indignation, and only turn from she in silence.
smile of intelligence pass between she and the gentleman on first
glancing towards Miss Fairfax; but it be most prudent to avoid speech.
he tell she that he have be impatient to leave the dining-room--hat
sit long--be always the first to move when he could--that his
father, Mr. Knightley, Mr. Cox, and Mr. Cole, be leave very busy over
parish business--that as long as he have staid, however, it have be
pleasant enough, as he have find they in general a set of
gentlemanlike, sensible man; and speak so handsomely of Highbury
altogether--think it so abundant in agreeable family--that Emma
begin to feel she have be use to despise the place rather too much.
she question he as to the society in Yorkshire--the extent of the
neighbourhood about Enscombe, and the sort; and could make out from his
answer that, as far as Enscombe be concern, there be very little
go on, that their visiting be among a range of great family,
none very near; and that even when day be fix, and invitation
accept, it be an even chance that Mrs. Churchill be not in health
and spirit for go; that they make a point of visit no fresh
person; and that, though he have his separate engagement, it be not
without difficulty, without considerable address _at_ _time_, that he
could get away, or introduce an acquaintance for a night.
she see that Enscombe could not satisfy, and that Highbury, take at
its good, might reasonably please a young man who have more retirement
at home than he like. his importance at Enscombe be very evident.
he do not boast, but it naturally betray itself, that he have
persuade his aunt where his uncle could do nothing, and on she
laughing and notice it, he own that he believe (except one or
two point) he could _with_ _time_ persuade she to any thing. one of
those point on which his influence fail, he then mention. he have
want very much to go abroad--have be very eager indeed to be allow
to travel--but she would not hear of it. this have happen the year
before. _now_, he say, he be begin to have no long the same
wish.
the unpersuadable point, which he do not mention, Emma guess to be
good behaviour to his father.
"I have make a most wretched discovery," say he, after a short
pause.-- "I have be here a week to-morrow--half my time. I never
know day fly so fast. a week to-morrow!--and I have hardly begin to
enjoy myself. but just get acquaint with Mrs. Weston, and others!--
I hate the recollection."
"perhaps you may now begin to regret that you spend one whole day, out
of so few, in have your hair cut."
"no," say he, smile, "that be no subject of regret at all. I have
no pleasure in see my friend, unless I can believe myself fit to be
see."
the rest of the gentleman be now in the room, Emma find herself
oblige to turn from he for a few minute, and listen to Mr. Cole.
when Mr. Cole have move away, and her attention could be restore as
before, she see Frank Churchill look intently across the room at
Miss Fairfax, who be sit exactly opposite.
"what be the matter?" say she.
he start. "thank you for rouse I," he reply. "I believe I have
be very rude; but really Miss Fairfax have do her hair in so odd a
way--so very odd a way--that I cannot keep my eye from she. I never
see any thing so outree!--those curls!--this must be a fancy of her
own. I see nobody else look like her!-- I must go and ask she
whether it be an irish fashion. shall i?-- yes, I will--I declare I
will--and you shall see how she take it;--whether she colour."
he be go immediately; and Emma soon see he stand before Miss
Fairfax, and talk to she; but as to its effect on the young lady, as
he have improvidently place himself exactly between they, exactly in
front of Miss Fairfax, she could absolutely distinguish nothing.
before he could return to his chair, it be take by Mrs. Weston.
"this be the luxury of a large party," say she:--"one can get near
every body, and say every thing. my dear Emma, I be long to talk to
you. I have be make discovery and form plan, just like
yourself, and I must tell they while the idea be fresh. do you know
how Miss Bates and her niece come here?"
"how?--they be invite, be not they?"
"oh! yes--but how they be convey hither?--the manner of their
come?"
"they walk, I conclude. how else could they come?"
"very true.--well, a little while ago it occur to I how very sad it
would be to have Jane Fairfax walk home again, late at night, and
cold as the night be now. and as I look at she, though I never see
she appear to more advantage, it strike I that she be heat, and
would therefore be particularly liable to take cold. poor girl! I
could not bear the idea of it; so, as soon as Mr. Weston come into the
room, and I could get at he, I speak to he about the carriage. you
may guess how readily he come into my wish; and have his
approbation, I make my way directly to Miss Bates, to assure she that
the carriage would be at her service before it take we home; for I
think it would be make her comfortable at once. good soul! she be
as grateful as possible, you may be sure. 'nobody be ever so
fortunate as herself!'--but with many, many thanks--'there be no
occasion to trouble we, for Mr. Knightley's carriage have bring, and
be to take they home again.' I be quite surprized;--very glad, I be
sure; but really quite surprized. such a very kind attention--and so
thoughtful an attention!--the sort of thing that so few man would
think of. and, in short, from know his usual way, I be very much
inclined to think that it be for their accommodation the carriage be
use at all. I do suspect he would not have have a pair of horse for
himself, and that it be only as an excuse for assist they."
"very likely," say emma--"nothing more likely. I know no man more
likely than Mr. Knightley to do the sort of thing--to do any thing
really good-nature, useful, considerate, or benevolent. he be not a
gallant man, but he be a very humane one; and this, consider Jane
Fairfax's ill-health, would appear a case of humanity to him;--and for
an act of unostentatious kindness, there be nobody whom I would fix on
more than on Mr. Knightley. I know he have horse to-day--for we
arrive together; and I laugh at he about it, but he say not a word
that could betray."
"well," say Mrs. Weston, smile, "you give he credit for more
simple, disinterested benevolence in this instance than I do; for while
Miss Bates be speak, a suspicion dart into my head, and I have
never be able to get it out again. the more I think of it, the more
probable it appear. in short, I have make a match between Mr.
Knightley and Jane Fairfax. see the consequence of keep you
company!--what do you say to it?"
"Mr. Knightley and Jane Fairfax!" exclaim Emma. "Dear Mrs. Weston,
how could you think of such a thing?--mr. Knightley!--Mr. Knightley
must not marry!--you would not have little Henry cut out from
donwell?-- oh! no, no, Henry must have Donwell. I cannot at all
consent to Mr. Knightley's marrying; and I be sure it be not at all
likely. I be amazed that you should think of such a thing."
"my dear Emma, I have tell you what lead I to think of it. I do not
want the match--I do not want to injure dear little Henry--but the
idea have be give I by circumstance; and if Mr. Knightley really
wish to marry, you would not have he refrain on Henry's account, a
boy of six year old, who know nothing of the matter?"
"yes, I would. I could not bear to have Henry supplanted.-- Mr.
Knightley marry!--No, I have never have such an idea, and I cannot adopt
it now. and Jane Fairfax, too, of all woman!"
"Nay, she have always be a first favourite with he, as you very well
know."
"but the imprudence of such a match!"
"I be not speak of its prudence; merely its probability."
"I see no probability in it, unless you have any well foundation than
what you mention. his good-nature, his humanity, as I tell you, would
be quite enough to account for the horse. he have a great regard for
the Bateses, you know, independent of Jane Fairfax--and be always glad
to shew they attention. my dear Mrs. Weston, do not take to
match-making. you do it very ill. Jane Fairfax mistress of the
Abbey!--Oh! no, no;--every feel revolt. for his own sake, I would
not have he do so mad a thing."
"Imprudent, if you please--but not mad. except inequality of
fortune, and perhaps a little disparity of age, I can see nothing
unsuitable."
"but Mr. Knightley do not want to marry. I be sure he have not the
least idea of it. do not put it into his head. why should he marry?--
he be as happy as possible by himself; with his farm, and his sheep,
and his library, and all the parish to manage; and he be extremely fond
of his brother's child. he have no occasion to marry, either to fill
up his time or his heart."
"my dear Emma, as long as he think so, it be so; but if he really
love Jane Fairfax--"
"Nonsense! he do not care about Jane Fairfax. in the way of love, I
be sure he do not. he would do any good to she, or her family; but--"
"well," say Mrs. Weston, laugh, "perhaps the great good he could
do they, would be to give Jane such a respectable home."
"if it would be good to she, I be sure it would be evil to himself; a
very shameful and degrading connexion. how would he bear to have Miss
Bates belong to him?--To have she haunt the Abbey, and thank
he all day long for his great kindness in marry Jane?-- 'so very
kind and obliging!--But he always have be such a very kind neighbour!'
and then fly off, through half a sentence, to her mother's old
petticoat. 'not that it be such a very old petticoat either--for
still it would last a great while--and, indeed, she must thankfully say
that their petticoat be all very strong.'"
"for shame, Emma! do not mimic she. you divert I against my
conscience. and, upon my word, I do not think Mr. Knightley would be
much disturb by Miss Bates. little thing do not irritate he. she
might talk on; and if he want to say any thing himself, he would only
talk louder, and drown her voice. but the question be not, whether it
would be a bad connexion for he, but whether he wish it; and I think
he do. I have hear he speak, and so must you, so very highly of
Jane Fairfax! the interest he take in she--his anxiety about her
health--his concern that she should have no happy prospect! I have
hear he express himself so warmly on those points!--such an admirer
of her performance on the pianoforte, and of her voice! I have hear
he say that he could listen to she for ever. oh! and I have almost
forget one idea that occur to I--this pianoforte that have be
send here by somebody--though we have all be so well satisfied to
consider it a present from the Campbells, may it not be from Mr.
Knightley? I cannot help suspect he. I think he be just the
person to do it, even without be in love."
"then it can be no argument to prove that he be in love. but I do not
think it be at all a likely thing for he to do. Mr. Knightley do
nothing mysteriously."
"I have hear he lament she have no instrument repeatedly;
oftener than I should suppose such a circumstance would, in the common
course of thing, occur to he."
"very well; and if he have intend to give she one, he would have tell
she so."
"there might be scruple of delicacy, my dear Emma. I have a very
strong notion that it come from he. I be sure he be particularly
silent when Mrs. Cole tell we of it at dinner."
"you take up an idea, Mrs. Weston, and run away with it; as you have
many a time reproach I with do. I see no sign of attachment--I
believe nothing of the pianoforte--and proof only shall convince I
that Mr. Knightley have any thought of marry Jane Fairfax."
they combat the point some time long in the same way; Emma rather
gain ground over the mind of her friend; for Mrs. Weston be the
most used of the two to yield; till a little bustle in the room shew
they that tea be over, and the instrument in preparation;--and at the
same moment Mr. Cole approach to entreat Miss Woodhouse would do
they the honour of try it. Frank Churchill, of whom, in the
eagerness of her conversation with Mrs. Weston, she have be see
nothing, except that he have find a seat by Miss Fairfax, follow Mr.
Cole, to add his very pressing entreaty; and as, in every respect, it
suit Emma well to lead, she give a very proper compliance.
she know the limitation of her own power too well to attempt more
than she could perform with credit; she want neither taste nor spirit
in the little thing which be generally acceptable, and could
accompany her own voice well. one accompaniment to her song take she
agreeably by surprize--a second, slightly but correctly take by Frank
Churchill. her pardon be duly beg at the close of the song, and
every thing usual follow. he be accuse of have a delightful
voice, and a perfect knowledge of music; which be properly deny; and
that he know nothing of the matter, and have no voice at all, roundly
assert. they sing together once more; and Emma would then resign her
place to Miss Fairfax, whose performance, both vocal and instrumental,
she never could attempt to conceal from herself, be infinitely
superior to her own.
with mixed feeling, she seat herself at a little distance from the
number round the instrument, to listen. Frank Churchill sing again.
they have sing together once or twice, it appear, at Weymouth. but
the sight of Mr. Knightley among the most attentive, soon draw away
half Emma's mind; and she fall into a train of think on the subject
of Mrs. Weston's suspicion, to which the sweet sound of the united
voice give only momentary interruption. her objection to Mr.
Knightley's marrying do not in the least subside. she could see
nothing but evil in it. it would be a great disappointment to Mr. John
Knightley; consequently to Isabella. a real injury to the child--a
most mortifying change, and material loss to they all;--a very great
deduction from her father's daily comfort--and, as to herself, she
could not at all endure the idea of Jane Fairfax at Donwell Abbey. a
Mrs. Knightley for they all to give way to!--No--Mr. Knightley must
never marry. Little Henry must remain the heir of Donwell.
presently Mr. Knightley look back, and come and sit down by she.
they talk at first only of the performance. his admiration be
certainly very warm; yet she think, but for Mrs. Weston, it would not
have strike she. as a sort of touchstone, however, she begin to speak
of his kindness in convey the aunt and niece; and though his answer
be in the spirit of cut the matter short, she believe it to
indicate only his disinclination to dwell on any kindness of his own.
"I often feel concern," say she, "that I dare not make our carriage
more useful on such occasion. it be not that I be without the wish;
but you know how impossible my father would deem it that James should
put-to for such a purpose."
"quite out of the question, quite out of the question," he replied;--
"but you must often wish it, I be sure." and he smile with such
seem pleasure at the conviction, that she must proceed another step.
"this present from the Campbells," say she--"this pianoforte be very
kindly give."
"yes," he reply, and without the small apparent embarrassment.--
"but they would have do well have they give her notice of it.
surprize be foolish thing. the pleasure be not enhance, and the
inconvenience be often considerable. I should have expect well
judgment in Colonel Campbell."
from that moment, Emma could have take her oath that Mr. Knightley have
have no concern in give the instrument. but whether he be entirely
free from peculiar attachment--whether there be no actual
preference--remain a little long doubtful. towards the end of
Jane's second song, her voice grow thick.
"that will do," say he, when it be finish, think aloud--"you
have sing quite enough for one evening--now be quiet."
another song, however, be soon beg for. "one more;--they would not
fatigue Miss Fairfax on any account, and would only ask for one more."
and Frank Churchill be hear to say, "I think you could manage this
without effort; the first part be so very trifling. the strength of
the song fall on the second."
Mr. Knightley grow angry.
"that fellow," say he, indignantly, "think of nothing but shew off
his own voice. this must not be." and touch Miss Bates, who at
that moment pass near--"Miss Bates, be you mad, to let your niece
sing herself hoarse in this manner? go, and interfere. they have no
mercy on she."
Miss Bates, in her real anxiety for Jane, could hardly stay even to be
grateful, before she stept forward and put an end to all far
singing. here cease the concert part of the evening, for Miss
Woodhouse and Miss Fairfax be the only young lady performer; but
soon (within five minute) the proposal of dancing--originate nobody
exactly know where--be so effectually promote by Mr. and Mrs. Cole,
that every thing be rapidly clear away, to give proper space. Mrs.
Weston, capital in her country-dance, be seat, and begin an
irresistible waltz; and Frank Churchill, come up with most become
gallantry to Emma, have secure her hand, and lead she up to the top.
while wait till the other young people could pair themselves off,
Emma find time, in spite of the compliment she be receive on her
voice and her taste, to look about, and see what become of Mr.
Knightley. this would be a trial. he be no dancer in general. if he
be to be very alert in engage Jane Fairfax now, it might augur
something. there be no immediate appearance. no; he be talk to
Mrs. Cole--he be look on unconcerned; Jane be ask by somebody
else, and he be still talk to Mrs. Cole.
Emma have no long an alarm for Henry; his interest be yet safe; and
she lead off the dance with genuine spirit and enjoyment. not more than
five couple could be muster; but the rarity and the suddenness of it
make it very delightful, and she find herself well match in a
partner. they be a couple worth look at.
two dance, unfortunately, be all that could be allow. it be
grow late, and Miss Bates become anxious to get home, on her
mother's account. after some attempt, therefore, to be permit to
begin again, they be oblige to thank Mrs. Weston, look sorrowful,
and have do.
"perhaps it be as well," say Frank Churchill, as he attend Emma to
her carriage. "I must have ask Miss Fairfax, and her languid dancing
would not have agree with I, after your."
CHAPTER IX
Emma do not repent her condescension in go to the Coles. the visit
afford she many pleasant recollection the next day; and all that she
might be suppose to have lose on the side of dignified seclusion, must
be amply repay in the splendour of popularity. she must have
delight the Coles--worthy people, who deserve to be make happy!--And
leave a name behind she that would not soon die away.
perfect happiness, even in memory, be not common; and there be two
point on which she be not quite easy. she doubt whether she have
not transgress the duty of woman by woman, in betray she
suspicion of Jane Fairfax's feeling to Frank Churchill. it be
hardly right; but it have be so strong an idea, that it would escape
she, and his submission to all that she tell, be a compliment to her
penetration, which make it difficult for she to be quite certain that
she ought to have hold her tongue.
the other circumstance of regret relate also to Jane Fairfax; and
there she have no doubt. she do unfeignedly and unequivocally regret
the inferiority of her own playing and singing. she do most heartily
grieve over the idleness of her childhood--and sit down and practise
vigorously an hour and a half.
she be then interrupt by Harriet's come in; and if Harriet's
praise could have satisfy she, she might soon have be comfort.
"oh! if I could but play as well as you and Miss Fairfax!"
"donot class we together, Harriet. my playing be no more like shebe,
than a lamp be like sunshine."
"oh! dear--I think you play the good of the two. I think you play
quite as well as she do. I be sure I have much rather hear you.
every body last night say how well you play."
"those who know any thing about it, must have feel the difference. the
truth be, Harriet, that my playing be just good enough to be praise,
but Jane Fairfax's be much beyond it."
"well, I always shall think that you play quite as well as she do, or
that if there be any difference nobody would ever find it out. Mr.
Cole say how much taste you have; and Mr. Frank Churchill talk a
great deal about your taste, and that he value taste much more than
execution."
"ah! but Jane Fairfax have they both, Harriet."
"be you sure? I see she have execution, but I do not know she have any
taste. nobody talk about it. and I hate italian singing.-- there be
no understanding a word of it. besides, if she do play so very well,
you know, it be no more than she be oblige to do, because she will
have to teach. the Coxes be wonder last night whether she would
get into any great family. how do you think the Coxes look?"
"just as they always do--very vulgar."
"they tell I something," say Harriet rather hesitatingly; "but it be
nothing of any consequence."
Emma be oblige to ask what they have tell she, though fearful of its
produce Mr. Elton.
"they tell I--that Mr. Martin din with they last Saturday."
"oh!"
"he come to their father upon some business, and he ask he to stay
to dinner."
"oh!"
"they talk a great deal about he, especially Anne Cox. I do not
know what she mean, but she ask I if I think I should go and stay
there again next summer."
"she mean to be impertinently curious, just as such an Anne Cox should
be."
"she say he be very agreeable the day he din there. he sit by she
at dinner. Miss Nash think either of the Coxes would be very glad to
marry he."
"very likely.--I think they be, without exception, the most vulgar
girl in Highbury."
Harriet have business at Ford's.--Emma think it most prudent to go
with she. another accidental meeting with the martin be possible,
and in her present state, would be dangerous.
Harriet, tempt by every thing and sway by half a word, be always
very long at a purchase; and while she be still hang over muslin
and change her mind, Emma go to the door for amusement.--much could
not be hop from the traffic of even the busy part of Highbury;--
Mr. Perry walk hastily by, Mr. William Cox let himself in at the
office-door, Mr. Cole's carriage-horse return from exercise, or a
stray letter-boy on an obstinate mule, be the lively object she
could presume to expect; and when her eye fall only on the butcher
with his tray, a tidy old woman travel homeward from shop with her
full basket, two cur quarrel over a dirty bone, and a string of
dawdle child round the baker's little bow-window eye the
gingerbread, she know she have no reason to complain, and be amuse
enough; quite enough still to stand at the door. a mind lively and at
ease, can do with see nothing, and can see nothing that do not
answer.
she look down the Randalls road. the scene enlarge; two person
appear; Mrs. Weston and her son-in-law; they be walk into
Highbury;--to Hartfield of course. they be stop, however, in the
first place at Mrs. Bates's; whose house be a little nearer randall
than Ford's; and have all but knock, when Emma catch their
eye.--Immediately they cross the road and come forward to she; and
the agreeableness of yesterday's engagement seem to give fresh
pleasure to the present meeting. Mrs. Weston inform she that she be
go to call on the Bateses, in order to hear the new instrument.
"for my companion tell I," say she, "that I absolutely promise Miss
Bates last night, that I would come this morning. I be not aware of
it myself. I do not know that I have fix a day, but as he say I
do, I be go now."
"and while Mrs. Weston pay her visit, I may be allow, I hope," say
Frank Churchill, "to join your party and wait for she at Hartfield--if
you be go home."
Mrs. Weston be disappoint.
"I think you mean to go with I. they would be very much pleased."
"I! I should be quite in the way. but, perhaps--I may be equally in
the way here. Miss Woodhouse look as if she do not want I. my aunt
always send I off when she be shop. she say I fidget she to
death; and Miss Woodhouse look as if she could almost say the same.
what be I to do?"
"I be here on no business of my own," say Emma; "I be only wait for
my friend. she will probably have soon do, and then we shall go
home. but you have well go with Mrs. Weston and hear the instrument."
"well--if you advise it.--But (with a smile) if Colonel Campbell should
have employ a careless friend, and if it should prove to have an
indifferent tone--what shall I say? I shall be no support to Mrs.
Weston. she might do very well by herself. a disagreeable truth would
be palatable through her lip, but I be the wretched being in the
world at a civil falsehood."
"I do not believe any such thing," reply emma.--"i am persuade that
you can be as insincere as your neighbour, when it be necessary; but
there be no reason to suppose the instrument be indifferent. quite
otherwise indeed, if I understand Miss Fairfax's opinion last night."
"do come with I," say Mrs. Weston, "if it be not very disagreeable to
you. it need not detain we long. we will go to Hartfield afterwards.
we will follow they to Hartfield. I really wish you to call with I.
it will be feel so great an attention! and I always think you mean
it."
he could say no more; and with the hope of Hartfield to reward he,
return with Mrs. Weston to Mrs. Bates's door. Emma watch they in,
and then join Harriet at the interesting counter,--trying, with all
the force of her own mind, to convince she that if she want plain
muslin it be of no use to look at figure; and that a blue ribbon, be
it ever so beautiful, would still never match her yellow pattern. at
last it be all settle, even to the destination of the parcel.
"should I send it to Mrs. Goddard's, ma'am?" ask Mrs. Ford.--
"yes--no--yes, to Mrs. Goddard's. only my pattern gown be at Hartfield.
no, you shall send it to Hartfield, if you please. but then, Mrs.
Goddard will want to see it.--and I could take the pattern gown home
any day. but I shall want the ribbon directly--so it have well go to
Hartfield--at least the ribbon. you could make it into two parcel,
Mrs. Ford, could not you?"
"it be not worth while, Harriet, to give Mrs. Ford the trouble of two
parcel."
"no more it be."
"no trouble in the world, ma'am," say the oblige Mrs. Ford.
"oh! but indeed I would much rather have it only in one. then, if you
please, you shall send it all to Mrs. Goddard's-- I do not know--no, I
think, Miss Woodhouse, I may just as well have it send to Hartfield,
and take it home with I at night. what do you advise?"
"that you do not give another half-second to the subject. to
Hartfield, if you please, Mrs. Ford."
"Aye, that will be much good," say Harriet, quite satisfied, "I should
not at all like to have it send to Mrs. Goddard's."
voice approach the shop--or rather one voice and two lady: Mrs.
Weston and Miss Bates meet they at the door.
"my dear Miss Woodhouse," say the latter, "I be just run across to
entreat the favour of you to come and sit down with we a little while,
and give we your opinion of our new instrument; you and Miss Smith.
how do you do, Miss smith?--very well I thank you.--And I beg Mrs.
Weston to come with I, that I might be sure of succeed."
"I hope Mrs. Bates and Miss Fairfax are--"
"very well, I be much oblige to you. my mother be delightfully well;
and Jane catch no cold last night. how be Mr. Woodhouse?--I be so
glad to hear such a good account. Mrs. Weston tell I you be here.--
oh! then, say I, I must run across, I be sure Miss Woodhouse will
allow I just to run across and entreat she to come in; my mother will
be so very happy to see she--and now we be such a nice party, she
cannot refuse.--'aye, pray do,' say Mr. Frank Churchill, 'Miss
Woodhouse's opinion of the instrument will be worth have.'-- but,
say I, I shall be more sure of succeed if one of you will go with
me.--'oh,' say he, 'wait half a minute, till I have finish my
job;'--For, would you believe it, Miss Woodhouse, there he be, in the
most obliging manner in the world, fasten in the rivet of my
mother's spectacles.--the rivet come out, you know, this morning.-- so
very obliging!--For my mother have no use of her spectacle--could not
put they on. and, by the bye, every body ought to have two pair of
spectacle; they should indeed. Jane say so. I mean to take they
over to John Saunders the first thing I do, but something or other
hinder I all the morning; first one thing, then another, there be no
say what, you know. at one time Patty come to say she think the
kitchen chimney want sweep. oh, say I, Patty do not come with
your bad news to I. here be the rivet of your mistress's spectacle
out. then the baked apple come home, Mrs. Wallis send they by she
boy; they be extremely civil and oblige to we, the Wallises,
always--I have hear some people say that Mrs. Wallis can be uncivil
and give a very rude answer, but we have never know any thing but the
great attention from they. and it cannot be for the value of our
custom now, for what be our consumption of bread, you know? only three
of us.--besides dear Jane at present--and she really eat
nothing--make such a shocking breakfast, you would be quite frightened
if you see it. I dare not let my mother know how little she eat--so I
say one thing and then I say another, and it pass off. but about the
middle of the day she get hungry, and there be nothing she like so
well as these bake apple, and they be extremely wholesome, for I
take the opportunity the other day of ask Mr. Perry; I happen to
meet he in the street. not that I have any doubt before-- I have so
often hear Mr. Woodhouse recommend a baked apple. I believe it be the
only way that Mr. Woodhouse think the fruit thoroughly wholesome. we
have apple-dumpling, however, very often. Patty make an excellent
apple-dumpling. well, Mrs. Weston, you have prevail, I hope, and
these lady will oblige we."
Emma would be "very happy to wait on Mrs. Bates, &c.," and they do at
last move out of the shop, with no farth delay from Miss Bates than,
"how do you do, Mrs. Ford? I beg your pardon. I do not see you
before. I hear you have a charming collection of new ribbon from
town. Jane come back delighted yesterday. thank ye, the glove do
very well--only a little too large about the wrist; but Jane be take
they in."
"what be I talk of?" say she, begin again when they be all
in the street.
Emma wonder on what, of all the medley, she would fix.
"I declare I cannot recollect what I be talk of.--oh! my mother's
spectacle. so very obliging of Mr. Frank Churchill! 'oh!' say he,
'I do think I can fasten the rivet; I like a job of this kind
excessively.'--Which you know shew he to be so very. . . . indeed I
must say that, much as I have hear of he before and much as I have
expect, he very far exceed any thing. . . . I do congratulate you,
Mrs. Weston, most warmly. he seem every thing the fond parent
could. . . . 'oh!' say he, 'I can fasten the rivet. I like a job of
that sort excessively.' I never shall forget his manner. and when I
bring out the baked apple from the closet, and hop our friend
would be so very obliging as to take some, 'oh!' say he directly,
'there be nothing in the way of fruit half so good, and these be the
finest-look home-bake apple I ever see in my life.' that, you
know, be so very. . . . and I be sure, by his manner, it be no
compliment. indeed they be very delightful apple, and Mrs. Wallis
do they full justice--only we do not have they bake more than twice,
and Mr. Woodhouse make we promise to have they do three time--but
Miss Woodhouse will be so good as not to mention it. the apple
themselves be the very fine sort for bake, beyond a doubt; all
from Donwell--some of Mr. Knightley's most liberal supply. he send we
a sack every year; and certainly there never be such a keep apple
anywhere as one of his tree--I believe there be two of they. my
mother say the orchard be always famous in her young day. but I
be really quite shock the other day--for Mr. Knightley call one
morning, and Jane be eat these apple, and we talk about they and
say how much she enjoy they, and he ask whether we be not get to
the end of our stock. 'I be sure you must be,' say he, 'and I will
send you another supply; for I have a great many more than I can ever
use. William Larkins let I keep a large quantity than usual this
year. I will send you some more, before they get good for nothing.' so
I beg he would not--for really as to ours be go, I could not
absolutely say that we have a great many left--it be but half a dozen
indeed; but they should be all keep for Jane; and I could not at all
bear that he should be send we more, so liberal as he have be
already; and Jane say the same. and when he be go, she almost
quarrel with I--no, I should not say quarrel, for we never have a
quarrel in our life; but she be quite distressed that I have own the
apple be so nearly go; she wish I have make he believe we have a
great many left. oh, say I, my dear, I do say as much as I could.
however, the very same evening William Larkins come over with a large
basket of apple, the same sort of apple, a bushel at least, and I be
very much oblige, and go down and speak to William Larkins and say
every thing, as you may suppose. William Larkins be such an old
acquaintance! I be always glad to see he. but, however, I find
afterwards from Patty, that William say it be all the apple of
_that_ sort his master have; he have bring they all--and now his master
have not one leave to bake or boil. William do not seem to mind it
himself, he be so pleased to think his master have sell so many; for
William, you know, think more of his master's profit than any thing;
but Mrs. Hodges, he say, be quite displeased at their be all send
away. she could not bear that her master should not be able to have
another apple-tart this spring. he tell Patty this, but bid she not
mind it, and be sure not to say any thing to we about it, for Mrs.
Hodges _would_ be cross sometimes, and as long as so many sack be
sell, it do not signify who eat the remainder. and so Patty tell I,
and I be excessively shocked indeed! I would not have Mr. Knightley
know any thing about it for the world! he would be so very. . . . I
want to keep it from Jane's knowledge; but, unluckily, I have
mention it before I be aware."
Miss Bates have just do as Patty open the door; and her visitor
walk upstairs without have any regular narration to attend to,
pursue only by the sound of her desultory good-will.
"pray take care, Mrs. Weston, there be a step at the turning. pray
take care, Miss Woodhouse, our be rather a dark staircase--rather
dark and narrow than one could wish. Miss Smith, pray take care.
Miss Woodhouse, I be quite concerned, I be sure you hit your foot.
Miss Smith, the step at the turning."
CHAPTER x
the appearance of the little sit-room as they enter, be
tranquillity itself; Mrs. Bates, deprive of her usual employment,
slumber on one side of the fire, Frank Churchill, at a table near
she, most deedily occupy about her spectacle, and Jane Fairfax,
stand with she back to they, intent on her pianoforte.
busy as he be, however, the young man be yet able to shew a most
happy countenance on see Emma again.
"this be a pleasure," say he, in rather a low voice, "come at least
ten minute early than I have calculate. you find I try to be
useful; tell I if you think I shall succeed."
"what!" say Mrs. Weston, "have not you finish it yet? you would not
earn a very good livelihood as a work silversmith at this rate."
"I have not be work uninterruptedly," he reply, "I have be
assist Miss Fairfax in try to make her instrument stand steadily,
it be not quite firm; an unevenness in the floor, I believe. you see
we have be wedge one leg with paper. this be very kind of you to
be persuade to come. I be almost afraid you would be hurry home."
he contrive that she should be seat by he; and be sufficiently
employ in look out the good baked apple for she, and try to
make her help or advise he in his work, till Jane Fairfax be quite
ready to sit down to the pianoforte again. that she be not
immediately ready, Emma do suspect to arise from the state of her
nerve; she have not yet possess the instrument long enough to touch
it without emotion; she must reason herself into the power of
performance; and Emma could not but pity such feeling, whatever their
origin, and could not but resolve never to expose they to her neighbour
again.
at last Jane begin, and though the first bar be feebly give, the
power of the instrument be gradually do full justice to. Mrs.
Weston have be delighted before, and be delighted again; Emma join
she in all her praise; and the pianoforte, with every proper
discrimination, be pronounce to be altogether of the high promise.
"whoever Colonel Campbell might employ," say Frank Churchill, with a
smile at Emma, "the person have not choose ill. I hear a good deal of
Colonel Campbell's taste at Weymouth; and the softness of the upper
note I be sure be exactly what he and _all_ _that_ _party_ would
particularly prize. I dare say, Miss Fairfax, that he either give his
friend very minute direction, or write to Broadwood himself. do not
you think so?"
Jane do not look round. she be not oblige to hear. Mrs. Weston have
be speak to she at the same moment.
"it be not fair," say Emma, in a whisper; "mine be a random guess.
do not distress she."
he shake his head with a smile, and look as if he have very little
doubt and very little mercy. soon afterwards he begin again,
"how much your friend in Ireland must be enjoy your pleasure on
this occasion, Miss Fairfax. I dare say they often think of you, and
wonder which will be the day, the precise day of the instrument's
come to hand. do you imagine Colonel Campbell know the business to
be go forward just at this time?--do you imagine it to be the
consequence of an immediate commission from he, or that he may have
send only a general direction, an order indefinite as to time, to
depend upon contingency and convenience?"
he pause. she could not but hear; she could not avoid answer,
"till I have a letter from Colonel Campbell," say she, in a voice of
force calmness, "I can imagine nothing with any confidence. it must
be all conjecture."
"conjecture--aye, sometimes one conjecture right, and sometimes one
conjecture wrong. I wish I could conjecture how soon I shall make
this rivet quite firm. what nonsense one talk, Miss Woodhouse, when
hard at work, if one talk at all;--your real workman, I suppose, hold
their tongue; but we gentlemen labourer if we get hold of a
word--Miss Fairfax say something about conjecture. there, it be
do. I have the pleasure, madam, (to Mrs. Bates,) of restore your
spectacle, heal for the present."
he be very warmly thank both by mother and daughter; to escape a
little from the latter, he go to the pianoforte, and beg Miss
Fairfax, who be still sit at it, to play something more.
"if you be very kind," say he, "it will be one of the waltz we
dance last night;--let I live they over again. you do not enjoy
they as I do; you appear tired the whole time. I believe you be
glad we dance no long; but I would have give world--all the
world one ever have to give--for another half-hour."
she play.
"what felicity it be to hear a tune again which _have_ make one happy!--
if I mistake not that be dance at Weymouth."
she look up at he for a moment, colour deeply, and play
something else. he take some music from a chair near the pianoforte,
and turn to Emma, say,
"here be something quite new to I. do you know it?--cramer.-- and
here be a new set of irish melody. that, from such a quarter, one
might expect. this be all send with the instrument. very thoughtful
of Colonel Campbell, be not it?--He know Miss Fairfax could have no
music here. I honour that part of the attention particularly; it shews
it to have be so thoroughly from the heart. nothing hastily do;
nothing incomplete. true affection only could have prompt it."
Emma wish he would be less point, yet could not help be amuse;
and when on glance her eye towards Jane Fairfax she catch the
remain of a smile, when she see that with all the deep blush of
consciousness, there have be a smile of secret delight, she have less
scruple in the amusement, and much less compunction with respect to
her.--this amiable, upright, perfect Jane Fairfax be apparently
cherish very reprehensible feeling.
he bring all the music to she, and they look it over together.--
Emma take the opportunity of whispering,
"you speak too plain. she must understand you."
"I hope she do. I would have she understand I. I be not in the
least ashamed of my meaning."
"but really, I be half ashamed, and wish I have never take up the idea."
"I be very glad you do, and that you communicate it to I. I have
now a key to all her odd look and way. leave shame to she. if she
do wrong, she ought to feel it."
"she be not entirely without it, I think."
"I do not see much sign of it. she be play _Robin_ _Adair_ at this
moment--_his_ favourite."
shortly afterwards Miss Bates, pass near the window, descry Mr.
Knightley on horse-back not far off.
"Mr. Knightley I declare!--i must speak to he if possible, just to
thank he. I will not open the window here; it would give you all
cold; but I can go into my mother's room you know. I dare say he will
come in when he know who be here. quite delightful to have you all
meet so!--Our little room so honour!"
she be in the adjoining chamber while she still speak, and open the
casement there, immediately call Mr. Knightley's attention, and every
syllable of their conversation be as distinctly hear by the other,
as if it have pass within the same apartment.
"how d' ye do?--how d'ye do?--Very well, I thank you. so oblige to
you for the carriage last night. we be just in time; my mother just
ready for we. pray come in; do come in. you will find some friend
here."
so begin Miss Bates; and Mr. Knightley seem determined to be hear in
his turn, for most resolutely and commandingly do he say,
"how be your niece, Miss Bates?--I want to inquire after you all, but
particularly your niece. how be Miss fairfax?--i hope she catch no
cold last night. how be she to-day? tell I how Miss Fairfax be."
and Miss Bates be oblige to give a direct answer before he would hear
she in any thing else. the listener be amuse; and Mrs. Weston give
Emma a look of particular meaning. but Emma still shake her head in
steady scepticism.
"so oblige to you!--so very much oblige to you for the carriage,"
resume Miss Bates.
he cut she short with,
"I be go to Kingston. can I do any thing for you?"
"oh! dear, Kingston--be you?--Mrs. Cole be say the other day she
want something from Kingston."
"Mrs. Cole have servant to send. can I do any thing for _you_?"
"no, I thank you. but do come in. who do you think be here?-- Miss
Woodhouse and Miss Smith; so kind as to call to hear the new
pianoforte. do put up your horse at the Crown, and come in."
"well," say he, in a deliberate manner, "for five minute, perhaps."
"and here be Mrs. Weston and Mr. Frank Churchill too!--Quite
delightful; so many friend!"
"no, not now, I thank you. I could not stay two minute. I must get
on to Kingston as fast as I can."
"oh! do come in. they will be so very happy to see you."
"no, no; your room be full enough. I will call another day, and hear
the pianoforte."
"well, I be so sorry!--Oh! Mr. Knightley, what a delightful party last
night; how extremely pleasant.--Did you ever see such dancing?-- was
not it delightful?--miss Woodhouse and Mr. Frank Churchill; I never see
any thing equal to it."
"oh! very delightful indeed; I can say nothing less, for I suppose Miss
Woodhouse and Mr. Frank Churchill be hear every thing that pass.
and (raise his voice still more) I do not see why Miss Fairfax should
not be mention too. I think Miss Fairfax dance very well; and Mrs.
Weston be the very good country-dance player, without exception, in
England. now, if your friend have any gratitude, they will say
something pretty loud about you and I in return; but I cannot stay to
hear it."
"oh! Mr. Knightley, one moment more; something of consequence--so
shocked!--jane and I be both so shocked about the apple!"
"what be the matter now?"
"to think of your send we all your store apple. you say you have a
great many, and now you have not one left. we really be so shocked!
Mrs. Hodges may well be angry. William Larkins mention it here. you
should not have do it, indeed you should not. ah! he be off. he
never can bear to be thank. but I think he would have staid now,
and it would have be a pity not to have mention. . . . well,
(return to the room,) I have not be able to succeed. Mr.
Knightley cannot stop. he be go to Kingston. he ask I if he
could do any thing. . . ."
"yes," say Jane, "we hear his kind offer, we hear every thing."
"oh! yes, my dear, I dare say you might, because you know, the door be
open, and the window be open, and Mr. Knightley speak loud. you must
have hear every thing to be sure. 'can I do any thing for you at
Kingston?' say he; so I just mention. . . . oh! Miss Woodhouse,
must you be going?--you seem but just come--so very obliging of you."
Emma find it really time to be at home; the visit have already last
long; and on examine watch, so much of the morning be perceive to
be go, that Mrs. Weston and her companion take leave also, could
allow themselves only to walk with the two young lady to Hartfield
gate, before they set off for Randalls.
CHAPTER XI
it may be possible to do without dance entirely. instance have be
know of young people pass many, many month successively, without
be at any ball of any description, and no material injury accrue
either to body or mind;--but when a beginning be make--when the
felicity of rapid motion have once be, though slightly, feel--it
must be a very heavy set that do not ask for more.
Frank Churchill have dance once at Highbury, and long to dance again;
and the last half-hour of an evening which Mr. Woodhouse be persuade
to spend with his daughter at Randalls, be pass by the two young
people in scheme on the subject. Frank's be the first idea; and his
the great zeal in pursue it; for the lady be the good judge of
the difficulty, and the most solicitous for accommodation and
appearance. but still she have inclination enough for shew people
again how delightfully Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse
dance--for do that in which she need not blush to compare herself
with Jane Fairfax--and even for simple dancing itself, without any of
the wicked aid of vanity--to assist he first in pace out the room
they be in to see what it could be make to hold--and then in take
the dimension of the other parlour, in the hope of discover, in
spite of all that Mr. Weston could say of their exactly equal size,
that it be a little the large.
his first proposition and request, that the dance begin at Mr. Cole's
should be finish there--that the same party should be collect, and
the same musician engage, meet with the readiest acquiescence. Mr.
Weston enter into the idea with thorough enjoyment, and Mrs. Weston
most willingly undertake to play as long as they could wish to dance;
and the interesting employment have follow, of reckon up exactly
who there would be, and portion out the indispensable division of
space to every couple.
"you and Miss Smith, and Miss Fairfax, will be three, and the two Miss
Coxes five," have be repeat many time over. "and there will be the
two Gilberts, young Cox, my father, and myself, besides Mr. Knightley.
yes, that will be quite enough for pleasure. you and Miss Smith, and
Miss Fairfax, will be three, and the two Miss Coxes five; and for five
couple there will be plenty of room."
but soon it come to be on one side,
"but will there be good room for five couple?--i really do not think
there will."
on another,
"and after all, five couple be not enough to make it worth while to
stand up. five couple be nothing, when one think seriously about it.
it will not do to _invite_ five couple. it can be allowable only as
the thought of the moment."
somebody say that _miss_ Gilbert be expect at her brother's, and
must be invite with the rest. somebody else believe _Mrs_. Gilbert
would have dance the other evening, if she have be ask. a word be
put in for a second young Cox; and at last, Mr. Weston name one
family of cousin who must be include, and another of very old
acquaintance who could not be leave out, it become a certainty that the
five couple would be at least ten, and a very interesting speculation
in what possible manner they could be dispose of.
the door of the two room be just opposite each other. "might not
they use both room, and dance across the passage?" it seem the good
scheme; and yet it be not so good but that many of they want a
well. Emma say it would be awkward; Mrs. Weston be in distress
about the supper; and Mr. Woodhouse oppose it earnestly, on the score
of health. it make he so very unhappy, indeed, that it could not be
persevere in.
"oh! no," say he; "it would be the extreme of imprudence. I could not
bear it for Emma!--Emma be not strong. she would catch a dreadful
cold. so would poor little Harriet. so you would all. Mrs. Weston,
you would be quite lay up; do not let they talk of such a wild thing.
pray do not let they talk of it. that young man (speak lower) be
very thoughtless. do not tell his father, but that young man be not
quite the thing. he have be open the door very often this
evening, and keep they open very inconsiderately. he do not think
of the draught. I do not mean to set you against he, but indeed he be
not quite the thing!"
Mrs. Weston be sorry for such a charge. she know the importance of
it, and say every thing in her power to do it away. every door be
now close, the passage plan give up, and the first scheme of dancing
only in the room they be in resort to again; and with such
good-will on Frank Churchill's part, that the space which a quarter of
an hour before have be deem barely sufficient for five couple, be
now endeavour to be make out quite enough for ten.
"we be too magnificent," say he. "we allow unnecessary room. ten
couple may stand here very well."
Emma demur. "it would be a crowd--a sad crowd; and what could be
bad than dance without space to turn in?"
"very true," he gravely reply; "it be very bad." but still he go
on measuring, and still he end with,
"I think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple."
"no, no," say she, "you be quite unreasonable. it would be dreadful
to be stand so close! nothing can be far from pleasure than to
be dance in a crowd--and a crowd in a little room!"
"there be no deny it," he reply. "I agree with you exactly. a
crowd in a little room--Miss Woodhouse, you have the art of give
picture in a few word. exquisite, quite exquisite!--still, however,
have proceed so far, one be unwilling to give the matter up. it
would be a disappointment to my father--and altogether--I do not know
that--I be rather of opinion that ten couple might stand here very
well."
Emma perceive that the nature of his gallantry be a little
self-willed, and that he would rather oppose than lose the pleasure of
dance with she; but she take the compliment, and forgave the rest.
have she intend ever to _marry_ he, it might have be worth while to
pause and consider, and try to understand the value of his preference,
and the character of his temper; but for all the purpose of their
acquaintance, he be quite amiable enough.
before the middle of the next day, he be at Hartfield; and he enter
the room with such an agreeable smile as certify the continuance of
the scheme. it soon appear that he come to announce an improvement.
"well, Miss Woodhouse," he almost immediately begin, "your inclination
for dancing have not be quite frightened away, I hope, by the terror
of my father's little room. I bring a new proposal on the subject:--a
thought of my father's, which wait only your approbation to be act
upon. may I hope for the honour of your hand for the two first dance
of this little project ball, to be give, not at Randalls, but at the
Crown Inn?"
"the Crown!"
"yes; if you and Mr. Woodhouse see no objection, and I trust you
cannot, my father hop his friend will be so kind as to visit he
there. well accommodation, he can promise they, and not a less
grateful welcome than at Randalls. it be his own idea. Mrs. Weston
see no objection to it, provide you be satisfied. this be what we
all feel. oh! you be perfectly right! ten couple, in either of the
Randalls room, would have be insufferable!--dreadful!--i feel how
right you be the whole time, but be too anxious for secure _any_
_thing_ to like to yield. be not it a good exchange?--you consent--I
hope you consent?"
"it appear to I a plan that nobody can object to, if Mr. and Mrs.
Weston do not. I think it admirable; and, as far as I can answer for
myself, shall be most happy--it seem the only improvement that could
be. Papa, do you not think it an excellent improvement?"
she be oblige to repeat and explain it, before it be fully
comprehend; and then, be quite new, farther representation be
necessary to make it acceptable.
"no; he think it very far from an improvement--a very bad plan--much
bad than the other. a room at an inn be always damp and dangerous;
never properly air, or fit to be inhabit. if they must dance, they
have well dance at Randalls. he have never be in the room at the
Crown in his life--do not know the people who keep it by sight.--oh!
no--a very bad plan. they would catch bad cold at the Crown than
anywhere."
"I be go to observe, sir," say Frank Churchill, "that one of the
great recommendation of this change would be the very little danger of
any body's catch cold--so much less danger at the Crown than at
Randalls! Mr. Perry might have reason to regret the alteration, but
nobody else could."
"Sir," say Mr. Woodhouse, rather warmly, "you be very much mistaken
if you suppose Mr. Perry to be that sort of character. Mr. Perry be
extremely concerned when any of we be ill. but I do not understand
how the room at the Crown can be safe for you than your father's
house."
"from the very circumstance of its be large, sir. we shall have no
occasion to open the window at all--not once the whole evening; and it
be that dreadful habit of open the window, let in cold air upon
heated body, which (as you well know, sir) do the mischief."
"open the windows!--but surely, Mr. Churchill, nobody would think of
open the window at Randalls. nobody could be so imprudent! I
never hear of such a thing. dance with open windows!--i be sure,
neither your father nor Mrs. Weston (poor Miss Taylor that be) would
suffer it."
"ah! sir--but a thoughtless young person will sometimes step behind a
window-curtain, and throw up a sash, without its be suspect. I
have often know it do myself."
"have you indeed, sir?--bless I! I never could have suppose it. but
I live out of the world, and be often astonish at what I hear.
however, this do make a difference; and, perhaps, when we come to
talk it over--but these sort of thing require a good deal of
consideration. one cannot resolve upon they in a hurry. if Mr. and
Mrs. Weston will be so obliging as to call here one morning, we may
talk it over, and see what can be do."
"but, unfortunately, sir, my time be so limited--"
"oh!" interrupt Emma, "there will be plenty of time for talk every
thing over. there be no hurry at all. if it can be contrive to be at
the Crown, papa, it will be very convenient for the horse. they will
be so near their own stable."
"so they will, my dear. that be a great thing. not that James ever
complain; but it be right to spare our horse when we can. if I could
be sure of the room be thoroughly air--but be Mrs. Stokes to be
trust? I doubt it. I do not know she, even by sight."
"I can answer for every thing of that nature, sir, because it will be
under Mrs. Weston's care. Mrs. Weston undertake to direct the whole."
"there, papa!--Now you must be satisfy--our own dear Mrs. Weston, who
be carefulness itself. do not you remember what Mr. Perry say, so
many year ago, when I have the measle? 'if _miss_ _Taylor_ undertake
to wrap Miss Emma up, you need not have any fear, sir.' how often
have I hear you speak of it as such a compliment to she!"
"aye, very true. Mr. Perry do say so. I shall never forget it. poor
little Emma! you be very bad with the measle; that be, you would
have be very bad, but for Perry's great attention. he come four
time a day for a week. he say, from the first, it be a very good
sort--which be our great comfort; but the measle be a dreadful
complaint. I hope whenever poor Isabella's little one have the
measle, she will send for Perry."
"my father and Mrs. Weston be at the Crown at this moment," say Frank
Churchill, "examine the capability of the house. I leave they there
and come on to Hartfield, impatient for your opinion, and hop you
might be persuade to join they and give your advice on the spot. I
be desire to say so from both. it would be the great pleasure to
they, if you could allow I to attend you there. they can do nothing
satisfactorily without you."
Emma be most happy to be call to such a council; and her father,
engage to think it all over while she be go, the two young people
set off together without delay for the Crown. there be Mr. and Mrs.
Weston; delight to see she and receive her approbation, very busy and
very happy in their different way; she, in some little distress; and
he, find every thing perfect.
"Emma," say she, "this paper be bad than I expect. look! in
place you see it be dreadfully dirty; and the wainscot be more yellow
and forlorn than any thing I could have imagine."
"my dear, you be too particular," say her husband. "what do all
that signify? you will see nothing of it by candlelight. it will be
as clean as Randalls by candlelight. we never see any thing of it on
our club-night."
the lady here probably exchange look which mean, "man never know
when thing be dirty or not;" and the gentleman perhaps think each
to himself, "woman will have their little nonsense and needless care."
one perplexity, however, arise, which the gentleman do not disdain.
it regard a supper-room. at the time of the ballroom's be build,
supper have not be in question; and a small card-room adjoining, be
the only addition. what be to be do? this card-room would be
want as a card-room now; or, if card be conveniently vote
unnecessary by their four self, still be it not too small for any
comfortable supper? another room of much well size might be secure
for the purpose; but it be at the other end of the house, and a long
awkward passage must be go through to get at it. this make a
difficulty. Mrs. Weston be afraid of draught for the young people in
that passage; and neither Emma nor the gentleman could tolerate the
prospect of be miserably crowd at supper.
Mrs. Weston propose have no regular supper; merely sandwich, &c.,
set out in the little room; but that be scout as a wretched
suggestion. a private dance, without sit down to supper, be
pronounce an infamous fraud upon the right of man and woman; and Mrs.
Weston must not speak of it again. she then take another line of
expediency, and look into the doubtful room, observe,
"I do not think it _be_ so very small. we shall not be many, you know."
and Mr. Weston at the same time, walk briskly with long step
through the passage, be call out,
"you talk a great deal of the length of this passage, my dear. it be a
mere nothing after all; and not the least draught from the stair."
"I wish," say Mrs. Weston, "one could know which arrangement our
guest in general would like good. to do what would be most generally
pleasing must be our object--if one could but tell what that would be."
"yes, very true," cry Frank, "very true. you want your neighbour'
opinion. I do not wonder at you. if one could ascertain what the
chief of they--the Coles, for instance. they be not far off. shall I
call upon they? or Miss Bates? she be still nearer.-- and I do not
know whether Miss Bates be not as likely to understand the inclination
of the rest of the people as any body. I think we do want a large
council. suppose I go and invite Miss Bates to join we?"
"well--if you please," say Mrs. Weston rather hesitating, "if you
think she will be of any use."
"you will get nothing to the purpose from Miss Bates," say Emma. "she
will be all delight and gratitude, but she will tell you nothing. she
will not even listen to your question. I see no advantage in
consult Miss Bates."
"but she be so amusing, so extremely amusing! I be very fond of
hear Miss Bates talk. and I need not bring the whole family, you
know."
here Mr. Weston join they, and on hear what be propose, give it
his decide approbation.
"Aye, do, Frank.--Go and fetch Miss Bates, and let we end the matter at
once. she will enjoy the scheme, I be sure; and I do not know a
properer person for shew we how to do away difficulty. Fetch Miss
Bates. we be grow a little too nice. she be a stand lesson of
how to be happy. but fetch they both. invite they both."
"both sir! can the old lady?" . . .
"the old lady! no, the young lady, to be sure. I shall think you a
great blockhead, Frank, if you bring the aunt without the niece."
"oh! I beg your pardon, sir. I do not immediately recollect.
undoubtedly if you wish it, I will endeavour to persuade they both."
and away he run.
long before he reappear, attend the short, neat, brisk-move
aunt, and her elegant niece,--mrs. Weston, like a sweet-temper woman
and a good wife, have examine the passage again, and find the evil of
it much less than she have suppose before--indeed very trifling; and
here end the difficulty of decision. all the rest, in speculation
at least, be perfectly smooth. all the minor arrangement of table
and chair, light and music, tea and supper, make themselves; or be
leave as mere trifle to be settle at any time between Mrs. Weston and
Mrs. Stokes.-- every body invite, be certainly to come; Frank have
already write to Enscombe to propose stay a few day beyond his
fortnight, which could not possibly be refuse. and a delightful dance
it be to be.
most cordially, when Miss Bates arrive, do she agree that it must.
as a counsellor she be not want; but as an approver, (a much safe
character,) she be truly welcome. her approbation, at once general
and minute, warm and incessant, could not but please; and for another
half-hour they be all walk to and fro, between the different
room, some suggest, some attend, and all in happy enjoyment of
the future. the party do not break up without Emma's be positively
secure for the two first dance by the hero of the evening, nor
without she overhear Mr. Weston whisper to his wife, "he have ask
she, my dear. thatbe right. I know he would!"
CHAPTER XII
one thing only be want to make the prospect of the ball completely
satisfactory to Emma--its be fix for a day within the grant term
of Frank Churchill's stay in Surry; for, in spite of Mr. Weston's
confidence, she could not think it so very impossible that the
Churchills might not allow their nephew to remain a day beyond his
fortnight. but this be not judge feasible. the preparation must
take their time, nothing could be properly ready till the third week
be enter on, and for a few day they must be plan, proceed
and hop in uncertainty--at the risk--in her opinion, the great
risk, of its be all in vain.
Enscombe however be gracious, gracious in fact, if not in word. his
wish of stay long evidently do not please; but it be not
opposed. all be safe and prosperous; and as the removal of one
solicitude generally make way for another, Emma, be now certain of
her ball, begin to adopt as the next vexation Mr. Knightley's provoking
indifference about it. either because he do not dance himself, or
because the plan have be form without his be consult, he seem
resolve that it should not interest he, determine against its
exciting any present curiosity, or afford he any future amusement.
to her voluntary communication Emma could get no more approving reply,
than,
"very well. if the Westons think it worth while to be at all this
trouble for a few hour of noisy entertainment, I have nothing to say
against it, but that they shall not chuse pleasure for me.-- oh! yes,
I must be there; I could not refuse; and I will keep as much awake as I
can; but I would rather be at home, look over William Larkins's
week's account; much rather, I confess.-- pleasure in see
dancing!--not I, indeed--I never look at it-- I do not know who
does.--fine dancing, I believe, like virtue, must be its own reward.
those who be stand by be usually think of something very
different."
this Emma feel be aim at she; and it make she quite angry. it be
not in compliment to Jane Fairfax however that he be so indifferent,
or so indignant; he be not guide by _she_ feeling in reprobate the
ball, for _she_ enjoy the thought of it to an extraordinary degree.
it make she animate--open hearted--she voluntarily said;--
"oh! Miss Woodhouse, I hope nothing may happen to prevent the ball.
what a disappointment it would be! I do look forward to it, I own,
with _very_ great pleasure."
it be not to oblige Jane Fairfax therefore that he would have
prefer the society of William Larkins. No!--she be more and more
convince that Mrs. Weston be quite mistaken in that surmise. there
be a great deal of friendly and of compassionate attachment on his
side--but no love.
alas! there be soon no leisure for quarrel with Mr. Knightley.
two day of joyful security be immediately follow by the over-throw
of every thing. a letter arrive from Mr. Churchill to urge his
nephew's instant return. Mrs. Churchill be unwell--far too unwell to
do without he; she have be in a very suffer state (so say she
husband) when write to her nephew two day before, though from her
usual unwillingness to give pain, and constant habit of never think
of herself, she have not mention it; but now she be too ill to
trifle, and must entreat he to set off for Enscombe without delay.
the substance of this letter be forward to Emma, in a note from Mrs.
Weston, instantly. as to his going, it be inevitable. he must be
go within a few hour, though without feel any real alarm for his
aunt, to lessen his repugnance. he know her illness; they never
occur but for her own convenience.
Mrs. Weston add, "that he could only allow himself time to hurry to
Highbury, after breakfast, and take leave of the few friend there whom
he could suppose to feel any interest in he; and that he might be
expect at Hartfield very soon."
this wretched note be the finale of Emma's breakfast. when once it
have be read, there be no do any thing, but lament and exclaim.
the loss of the ball--the loss of the young man--and all that the
young man might be feeling!--It be too wretched!-- such a delightful
evening as it would have been!--every body so happy! and she and her
partner the happiest!--"I say it would be so," be the only
consolation.
her father's feeling be quite distinct. he think principally of
Mrs. Churchill's illness, and want to know how she be treat; and
as for the ball, it be shocking to have dear Emma disappoint; but
they would all be safe at home.
Emma be ready for her visitor some time before he appear; but if
this reflect at all upon his impatience, his sorrowful look and total
want of spirit when he do come might redeem he. he feel the go
away almost too much to speak of it. his dejection be most evident.
he sit really lose in thought for the first few minute; and when
rouse himself, it be only to say,
"of all horrid thing, leave-taking be the bad."
"but you will come again," say Emma. "this will not be your only
visit to Randalls."
"ah!--(shake his head)--the uncertainty of when I may be able to
return!--i shall try for it with a zeal!--it will be the object of all
my thought and cares!--and if my uncle and aunt go to town this
spring--but I be afraid--they do not stir last spring-- I be afraid it
be a custom go for ever."
"our poor ball must be quite give up."
"ah! that ball!--why do we wait for any thing?--why not seize the
pleasure at once?--how often be happiness destroy by preparation,
foolish preparation!--you tell we it would be so.--oh! Miss Woodhouse,
why be you always so right?"
"indeed, I be very sorry to be right in this instance. I would much
rather have be merry than wise."
"if I can come again, we be still to have our ball. my father depend
on it. do not forget your engagement."
Emma look graciously.
"such a fortnight as it have be!" he continue; "every day more
precious and more delightful than the day before!--every day make I
less fit to bear any other place. happy those, who can remain at
Highbury!"
"as you do we such ample justice now," say Emma, laugh, "I will
venture to ask, whether you do not come a little doubtfully at first?
do not we rather surpass your expectation? I be sure we do. I be
sure you do not much expect to like we. you would not have be so
long in come, if you have have a pleasant idea of Highbury."
he laugh rather consciously; and though deny the sentiment, Emma
be convince that it have be so.
"and you must be off this very morning?"
"yes; my father be to join I here: we shall walk back together, and I
must be off immediately. I be almost afraid that every moment will
bring he."
"not five minute to spare even for your friend Miss Fairfax and Miss
Bates? how unlucky! Miss Bates's powerful, argumentative mind might
have strengthen your."
"yes--I _have_ call there; pass the door, I think it well. it
be a right thing to do. I go in for three minute, and be detain
by Miss Bates's be absent. she be out; and I feel it impossible
not to wait till she come in. she be a woman that one may, that one
_must_ laugh at; but that one would not wish to slight. it be well
to pay my visit, then"--
he hesitate, get up, walk to a window.
"in short," say he, "perhaps, Miss Woodhouse--I think you can hardly
be quite without suspicion"--
he look at she, as if want to read her thought. she hardly know
what to say. it seem like the forerunner of something absolutely
serious, which she do not wish. force herself to speak, therefore,
in the hope of put it by, she calmly say,
"you be quite in the right; it be most natural to pay your visit,
then"--
he be silent. she believe he be look at she; probably reflect
on what she have say, and try to understand the manner. she hear
he sigh. it be natural for he to feel that he have _cause_ to sigh.
he could not believe she to be encourage he. a few awkward moment
pass, and he sit down again; and in a more determined manner say,
"it be something to feel that all the rest of my time might be give
to Hartfield. my regard for Hartfield be most warm"--
he stopt again, rise again, and seem quite embarrassed.-- he be more
in love with she than Emma have suppose; and who can say how it might
have end, if his father have not make his appearance? Mr. Woodhouse
soon follow; and the necessity of exertion make he compose.
a very few minute more, however, complete the present trial. Mr.
Weston, always alert when business be to be do, and as incapable of
procrastinate any evil that be inevitable, as of foresee any that
be doubtful, say, "it be time to go;" and the young man, though he
might and do sigh, could not but agree, to take leave.
"I shall hear about you all," say he; "that be my chief consolation.
I shall hear of every thing that be go on among you. I have engage
Mrs. Weston to correspond with I. she have be so kind as to promise
it. oh! the blessing of a female correspondent, when one be really
interested in the absent!--she will tell I every thing. in her
letter I shall be at dear Highbury again."
a very friendly shake of the hand, a very earnest "good-bye," close
the speech, and the door have soon shut out Frank Churchill. Short have
be the notice--short their meeting; he be go; and Emma feel so
sorry to part, and foresaw so great a loss to their little society from
his absence as to begin to be afraid of be too sorry, and feel it
too much.
it be a sad change. they have be meet almost every day since his
arrival. certainly his be at Randalls have give great spirit to the
last two week--indescribable spirit; the idea, the expectation of
see he which every morning have bring, the assurance of his
attention, his liveliness, his manner! it have be a very happy
fortnight, and forlorn must be the sinking from it into the common
course of Hartfield day. to complete every other recommendation, he
have _almost_ tell she that he love she. what strength, or what
constancy of affection he might be subject to, be another point; but
at present she could not doubt his have a decidedly warm admiration,
a conscious preference of herself; and this persuasion, join to all
the rest, make she think that she _must_ be a little in love with he,
in spite of every previous determination against it.
"I certainly must," say she. "this sensation of listlessness,
weariness, stupidity, this disinclination to sit down and employ
myself, this feeling of every thingbe be dull and insipid about the
house!-- I must be in love; I should be the oddest creature in the
world if I be not--for a few week at least. well! evil to some be
always good to other. I shall have many fellow-mourner for the ball,
if not for Frank Churchill; but Mr. Knightley will be happy. he may
spend the evening with his dear William Larkins now if he like."
Mr. Knightley, however, shew no triumphant happiness. he could not
say that he be sorry on his own account; his very cheerful look would
have contradict he if he have; but he say, and very steadily, that
he be sorry for the disappointment of the other, and with
considerable kindness add,
"you, Emma, who have so few opportunity of dancing, you be really
out of luck; you be very much out of luck!"
it be some day before she see Jane Fairfax, to judge of her honest
regret in this woeful change; but when they do meet, her composure be
odious. she have be particularly unwell, however, suffer from
headache to a degree, which make her aunt declare, that have the ball
take place, she do not think Jane could have attend it; and it be
charity to impute some of her unbecoming indifference to the languor of
ill-health.
CHAPTER XIII
Emma continue to entertain no doubt of she be in love. her idea
only vary as to the how much. at first, she think it be a good
deal; and afterwards, but little. she have great pleasure in hear
Frank Churchill talk of; and, for his sake, great pleasure than
ever in see Mr. and Mrs. Weston; she be very often think of he,
and quite impatient for a letter, that she might know how he be, how
be his spirit, how be his aunt, and what be the chance of his
come to Randalls again this spring. but, on the other hand, she
could not admit herself to be unhappy, nor, after the first morning, to
be less disposed for employment than usual; she be still busy and
cheerful; and, pleasing as he be, she could yet imagine he to have
fault; and far, though think of he so much, and, as she sit
draw or work, form a thousand amusing scheme for the progress
and close of their attachment, fancy interesting dialogue, and
invent elegant letter; the conclusion of every imaginary
declaration on his side be that she _refuse_ _he_. their affection
be always to subside into friendship. every thing tender and charming
be to mark their parting; but still they be to part. when she
become sensible of this, it strike she that she could not be very much
in love; for in spite of her previous and fix determination never to
quit her father, never to marry, a strong attachment certainly must
produce more of a struggle than she could foresee in her own feeling.
"I do not find myself make any use of the word _sacrifice_," say
she.-- "in not one of all my clever reply, my delicate negative, be
there any allusion to make a sacrifice. I do suspect that he be not
really necessary to my happiness. so much the well. I certainly
will not persuade myself to feel more than I do. I be quite enough in
love. I should be sorry to be more."
upon the whole, she be equally content with her view of his feeling.
"_he_ be undoubtedly very much in love--every thing denote it--very
much in love indeed!--and when he come again, if his affection
continue, I must be on my guard not to encourage it.--It would be most
inexcusable to do otherwise, as my own mind be quite make up. not that
I imagine he can think I have be encourage he hitherto. no, if he
have believe I at all to share his feeling, he would not have be so
wretched. could he have think himself encourage, his look and
language at parting would have be different.-- still, however, I must
be on my guard. this be in the supposition of his attachment
continue what it now be; but I do not know that I expect it will; I
do not look upon he to be quite the sort of man-- I do not altogether
build upon his steadiness or constancy.-- his feeling be warm, but I
can imagine they rather changeable.-- every consideration of the
subject, in short, make I thankful that my happiness be not more
deeply involved.--i shall do very well again after a little while--and
then, it will be a good thing over; for they say every body be in love
once in their life, and I shall have be let off easily."
when his letter to Mrs. Weston arrive, Emma have the perusal of it; and
she read it with a degree of pleasure and admiration which make she at
first shake her head over her own sensation, and think she have
undervalue their strength. it be a long, well-write letter, give
the particular of his journey and of his feeling, express all the
affection, gratitude, and respect which be natural and honourable, and
describe every thing exterior and local that could be suppose
attractive, with spirit and precision. no suspicious flourish now of
apology or concern; it be the language of real feeling towards Mrs.
Weston; and the transition from Highbury to Enscombe, the contrast
between the place in some of the first blessing of social life be
just enough touch on to shew how keenly it be feel, and how much
more might have be say but for the restraint of propriety.--the
charm of her own name be not want. _miss_ _Woodhouse_ appear
more than once, and never without a something of please connexion,
either a compliment to her taste, or a remembrance of what she have
say; and in the very last time of its meeting her eye, unadorned as it
be by any such broad wreath of gallantry, she yet could discern the
effect of her influence and acknowledge the great compliment perhaps
of all convey. compress into the very low vacant corner be
these words--"i have not a spare moment on Tuesday, as you know, for
Miss Woodhouse's beautiful little friend. pray make my excuse and
adieus to she." this, Emma could not doubt, be all for herself.
Harriet be remember only from be _her_ friend. his information
and prospect as to Enscombe be neither bad nor well than have
be anticipate; Mrs. Churchill be recover, and he dare not yet,
even in his own imagination, fix a time for come to Randalls again.
Gratifying, however, and stimulative as be the letter in the material
part, its sentiment, she yet find, when it be fold up and return
to Mrs. Weston, that it have not add any last warmth, that she
could still do without the writer, and that he must learn to do without
she. her intention be unchanged. her resolution of refusal only
grow more interesting by the addition of a scheme for his subsequent
consolation and happiness. his recollection of Harriet, and the word
which clothe it, the "beautiful little friend," suggest to she the
idea of Harriet's succeed she in his affection. be it
impossible?--no.--harriet undoubtedly be greatly his inferior in
understanding; but he have be very much strike with the loveliness of
her face and the warm simplicity of her manner; and all the
probability of circumstance and connexion be in her favour.--For
Harriet, it would be advantageous and delightful indeed.
"I must not dwell upon it," say she.--"i must not think of it. I know
the danger of indulge such speculation. but strange thing have
happen; and when we cease to care for each other as we do now, it
will be the mean of confirm we in that sort of true disinterested
friendship which I can already look forward to with pleasure."
it be well to have a comfort in store on Harriet's behalf, though it
might be wise to let the fancy touch it seldom; for evil in that
quarter be at hand. as Frank Churchill's arrival have succeed Mr.
Elton's engagement in the conversation of Highbury, as the late
interest have entirely bear down the first, so now upon Frank
Churchill's disappearance, Mr. Elton's concern be assume the most
irresistible form.--His wedding-day be name. he would soon be among
they again; Mr. Elton and his bride. there be hardly time to talk
over the first letter from Enscombe before "Mr. Elton and his bride"
be in every body's mouth, and Frank Churchill be forget. Emma
grow sick at the sound. she have have three week of happy exemption
from Mr. Elton; and Harriet's mind, she have be willing to hope, have
be lately gain strength. with Mr. Weston's ball in view at least,
there have be a great deal of insensibility to other thing; but it
be now too evident that she have not attain such a state of composure
as could stand against the actual approach--new carriage, bell-ringing,
and all.
Poor Harriet be in a flutter of spirit which require all the
reasoning and soothing and attention of every kind that Emma could
give. Emma feel that she could not do too much for she, that Harriet
have a right to all her ingenuity and all her patience; but it be heavy
work to be for ever convincing without produce any effect, for ever
agree to, without be able to make their opinion the same. Harriet
listen submissively, and say "it be very true--it be just as Miss
Woodhouse describe--it be not worth while to think about they--and
she would not think about they any long" but no change of subject
could avail, and the next half-hour see she as anxious and restless
about the elton as before. at last Emma attack she on another
ground.
"your allow yourself to be so occupied and so unhappy about Mr.
Elton's marrying, Harriet, be the strong reproach you can make _I_.
you could not give I a great reproof for the mistake I fall into.
it be all my doing, I know. I have not forget it, I assure
you.--Deceived myself, I do very miserably deceive you--and it will
be a painful reflection to I for ever. do not imagine I in danger of
forget it."
Harriet feel this too much to utter more than a few word of eager
exclamation. Emma continue,
"I have not say, exert yourself Harriet for my sake; think less, talk
less of Mr. Elton for my sake; because for your own sake rather, I
would wish it to be do, for the sake of what be more important than
my comfort, a habit of self-command in you, a consideration of what be
your duty, an attention to propriety, an endeavour to avoid the
suspicion of other, to save your health and credit, and restore your
tranquillity. these be the motif which I have be press on you.
they be very important--and sorry I be that you cannot feel they
sufficiently to act upon they. my be save from pain be a very
secondary consideration. I want you to save yourself from great
pain. perhaps I may sometimes have feel that Harriet would not forget
what be due--or rather what would be kind by I."
this appeal to her affection do more than all the rest. the idea of
want gratitude and consideration for Miss Woodhouse, whom she really
love extremely, make she wretched for a while, and when the violence
of grief be comfort away, still remain powerful enough to prompt
to what be right and support she in it very tolerably.
"you, who have be the good friend I ever have in my life-- want
gratitude to you!--nobody be equal to you!--I care for nobody as I do
for you!--oh! Miss Woodhouse, how ungrateful I have be!"
such expression, assist as they be by every thing that look and
manner could do, make Emma feel that she have never love Harriet so
well, nor value her affection so highly before.
"there be no charm equal to tenderness of heart," say she afterwards
to herself. "there be nothing to be compare to it. warmth and
tenderness of heart, with an affectionate, open manner, will beat all
the clearness of head in the world, for attraction, I be sure it will.
it be tenderness of heart which make my dear father so generally
beloved--which give Isabella all her popularity.-- I have it not--but
I know how to prize and respect it.--Harriet be my superior in all the
charm and all the felicity it give. dear Harriet!--I would not change
you for the clearest-head, longest-sight, well-judge female
breathing. oh! the coldness of a Jane Fairfax!--Harriet be worth a
hundred such--and for a wife--a sensible man's wife--it be invaluable.
I mention no name; but happy the man who change Emma for Harriet!"
CHAPTER XIV
Mrs. Elton be first see at church: but though devotion might be
interrupt, curiosity could not be satisfy by a bride in a pew, and
it must be leave for the visit in form which be then to be pay, to
settle whether she be very pretty indeed, or only rather pretty, or
not pretty at all.
Emma have feeling, less of curiosity than of pride or propriety, to
make her resolve on not be the last to pay her respect; and she
make a point of Harriet's go with she, that the bad of the
business might be go through as soon as possible.
she could not enter the house again, could not be in the same room to
which she have with such vain artifice retreat three month ago, to
lace up her boot, without _recollect_. a thousand vexatious
thought would recur. compliment, charade, and horrible blunder;
and it be not to be suppose that poor Harriet should not be
recollect too; but she behave very well, and be only rather pale
and silent. the visit be of course short; and there be so much
embarrassment and occupation of mind to shorten it, that Emma would not
allow herself entirely to form an opinion of the lady, and on no
account to give one, beyond the nothing-mean term of be
"elegantly dress, and very pleasing."
she do not really like she. she would not be in a hurry to find
fault, but she suspect that there be no elegance;--ease, but not
elegance.-- she be almost sure that for a young woman, a stranger, a
bride, there be too much ease. her person be rather good; her face
not unpretty; but neither feature, nor air, nor voice, nor manner, be
elegant. Emma think at least it would turn out so.
as for Mr. Elton, his manner do not appear--but no, she would not
permit a hasty or a witty word from herself about his manner. it be
an awkward ceremony at any time to be receive wedding visit, and a
man have need be all grace to acquit himself well through it. the woman
be well off; she might have the assistance of fine clothe, and the
privilege of bashfulness, but the man have only his own good sense to
depend on; and when she consider how peculiarly unlucky poor Mr.
Elton be in be in the same room at once with the woman he have just
marry, the woman he have want to marry, and the woman whom he have
be expect to marry, she must allow he to have the right to look as
little wise, and to be as much affectedly, and as little really easy as
could be.
"well, Miss Woodhouse," say Harriet, when they have quit the house,
and after wait in vain for her friend to begin; "well, Miss
Woodhouse, (with a gentle sigh,) what do you think of her?-- be not she
very charming?"
there be a little hesitation in Emma's answer.
"oh! yes--very--a very pleasing young woman."
"I think she beautiful, quite beautiful."
"very nicely dress, indeed; a remarkably elegant gown."
"I be not at all surprize that he should have fall in love."
"oh! no--there be nothing to surprize one at all.--a pretty fortune;
and she come in his way."
"I dare say," return Harriet, sigh again, "I dare say she be very
much attach to he."
"perhaps she might; but it be not every man's fate to marry the woman
who love he well. Miss Hawkins perhaps want a home, and think
this the good offer she be likely to have."
"yes," say Harriet earnestly, "and well she might, nobody could ever
have a well. well, I wish they happy with all my heart. and now,
Miss Woodhouse, I do not think I shall mind see they again. he be
just as superior as ever;--but be marry, you know, it be quite a
different thing. no, indeed, Miss Woodhouse, you need not be afraid; I
can sit and admire he now without any great misery. to know that he
have not throw himself away, be such a comfort!-- she do seem a
charming young woman, just what he deserve. happy creature! he
call she 'augusta.' how delightful!"
when the visit be return, Emma make up her mind. she could then see
more and judge well. from Harriet's happen not to be at
Hartfield, and her father's be present to engage Mr. Elton, she have
a quarter of an hour of the lady's conversation to herself, and could
composedly attend to she; and the quarter of an hour quite convinced
she that Mrs. Elton be a vain woman, extremely well satisfied with
herself, and think much of her own importance; that she mean to
shine and be very superior, but with manner which have be form in a
bad school, pert and familiar; that all her notion be draw from one
set of people, and one style of living; that if not foolish she be
ignorant, and that her society would certainly do Mr. Elton no good.
Harriet would have be a well match. if not wise or refine
herself, she would have connect he with those who be; but Miss
Hawkins, it might be fairly suppose from her easy conceit, have be
the good of her own set. the rich brother-in-law near Bristol be the
pride of the alliance, and his place and his carriage be the pride
of he.
the very first subject after be seat be Maple Grove, "my brother
Mr. Suckling's seat;"--a comparison of Hartfield to Maple Grove. the
ground of Hartfield be small, but neat and pretty; and the house be
modern and well-build. Mrs. Elton seem most favourably impress by
the size of the room, the entrance, and all that she could see or
imagine. "very like Maple Grove indeed!--she be quite strike by the
likeness!--that room be the very shape and size of the morning-room at
Maple Grove; her sister's favourite room."-- Mr. Elton be appeal
to.--"Was not it astonishingly like?-- she could really almost fancy
herself at Maple Grove."
"and the staircase--you know, as I come in, I observe how very like
the staircase be; place exactly in the same part of the house. I
really could not help exclaim! I assure you, Miss Woodhouse, it be
very delightful to I, to be remind of a place I be so extremely
partial to as Maple Grove. I have spend so many happy month there!
(with a little sigh of sentiment). a charming place, undoubtedly.
every body who see it be strike by its beauty; but to I, it have be
quite a home. whenever you be transplant, like I, Miss Woodhouse,
you will understand how very delightful it be to meet with any thing at
all like what one have leave behind. I always say this be quite one of
the evil of matrimony."
Emma make as slight a reply as she could; but it be fully sufficient
for Mrs. Elton, who only want to be talk herself.
"so extremely like Maple Grove! and it be not merely the house--the
ground, I assure you, as far as I could observe, be strikingly like.
the laurel at Maple Grove be in the same profusion as here, and stand
very much in the same way--just across the lawn; and I have a glimpse of
a fine large tree, with a bench round it, which put I so exactly in
mind! my brother and sister will be enchant with this place. People
who have extensive ground themselves be always pleased with any thing
in the same style."
Emma doubt the truth of this sentiment. she have a great idea that
people who have extensive ground themselves care very little for the
extensive ground of any body else; but it be not worth while to
attack an error so double-dye, and therefore only say in reply,
"when you have see more of this country, I be afraid you will think
you have overrate Hartfield. Surry be full of beauty."
"oh! yes, I be quite aware of that. it be the garden of England, you
know. Surry be the garden of England."
"yes; but we must not rest our claim on that distinction. many
county, I believe, be call the garden of England, as well as
Surry."
"no, I fancy not," reply Mrs. Elton, with a most satisfied smile." I
never hear any county but Surry call so."
Emma be silence.
"my brother and sister have promise we a visit in the spring, or
summer at farth," continue Mrs. Elton; "and that will be our time
for explore. while they be with we, we shall explore a great deal,
I dare say. they will have their barouche-landau, of course, which
hold four perfectly; and therefore, without say any thing of _our_
carriage, we should be able to explore the different beauty extremely
well. they would hardly come in their chaise, I think, at that season
of the year. indeed, when the time draw on, I shall decidedly
recommend their bring the barouche-landau; it will be so very much
preferable. when people come into a beautiful country of this sort,
you know, Miss Woodhouse, one naturally wish they to see as much as
possible; and Mr. Suckling be extremely fond of explore. we explore
to king's-Weston twice last summer, in that way, most delightfully,
just after their first have the barouche-landau. you have many
party of that kind here, I suppose, Miss Woodhouse, every summer?"
"no; not immediately here. we be rather out of distance of the very
strike beauty which attract the sort of party you speak of; and
we be a very quiet set of people, I believe; more disposed to stay at
home than engage in scheme of pleasure."
"ah! there be nothing like stay at home for real comfort. nobody
can be more devoted to home than I be. I be quite a proverb for it at
Maple Grove. many a time have Selina say, when she have be go to
Bristol, 'I really cannot get this girl to move from the house. I
absolutely must go in by myself, though I hate be stick up in the
barouche-landau without a companion; but Augusta, I believe, with she
own good-will, would never stir beyond the park pal.' many a time
have she say so; and yet I be no advocate for entire seclusion. I
think, on the contrary, when people shut themselves up entirely from
society, it be a very bad thing; and that it be much more advisable to
mix in the world in a proper degree, without live in it either too
much or too little. I perfectly understand your situation, however,
Miss woodhouse--(looke towards Mr. Woodhouse), your father's state
of health must be a great drawback. why do not he try bath?--indeed
he should. let I recommend Bath to you. I assure you I have no doubt
of its do Mr. Woodhouse good."
"my father try it more than once, formerly; but without receive any
benefit; and Mr. Perry, whose name, I dare say, be not unknown to you,
do not conceive it would be at all more likely to be useful now."
"ah! thatbe a great pity; for I assure you, Miss Woodhouse, where the
water do agree, it be quite wonderful the relief they give. in my
Bath life, I have see such instance of it! and it be so cheerful a
place, that it could not fail of be of use to Mr. Woodhouse's
spirit, which, I understand, be sometimes much depressed. and as to
its recommendation to _you_, I fancy I need not take much pain to
dwell on they. the advantage of Bath to the young be pretty
generally understand. it would be a charming introduction for you, who
have live so seclude a life; and I could immediately secure you some
of the good society in the place. a line from I would bring you a
little host of acquaintance; and my particular friend, Mrs. Partridge,
the lady I have always reside with when in Bath, would be most happy
to shew you any attention, and would be the very person for you to go
into public with."
it be as much as Emma could bear, without be impolite. the idea of
she be indebted to Mrs. Elton for what be call an
_introduction_--of she go into public under the auspex of a friend
of Mrs. Elton's--probably some vulgar, dash widow, who, with the
help of a boarder, just make a shift to live!-- the dignity of Miss
Woodhouse, of Hartfield, be sink indeed!
she restrain herself, however, from any of the reproof she could
have give, and only thank Mrs. Elton coolly; "but their go to
Bath be quite out of the question; and she be not perfectly convince
that the place might suit she well than her father." and then, to
prevent farth outrage and indignation, change the subject directly.
"I do not ask whether you be musical, Mrs. Elton. upon these
occasion, a lady's character generally precede she; and Highbury have
long know that you be a superior performer."
"oh! no, indeed; I must protest against any such idea. a superior
performer!--very far from it, I assure you. consider from how partial
a quarter your information come. I be doatingly fond of
music--passionately fond;--and my friend say I be not entirely devoid
of taste; but as to any thing else, upon my honour my performance be
_mediocre_ to the last degree. you, Miss Woodhouse, I well know, play
delightfully. I assure you it have be the great satisfaction,
comfort, and delight to I, to hear what a musical society I be get
into. I absolutely cannot do without music. it be a necessary of life
to I; and have always be use to a very musical society, both at
Maple Grove and in Bath, it would have be a most serious sacrifice.
I honestly say as much to Mr. E. when he be speak of my future
home, and express his fear lest the retirement of it should be
disagreeable; and the inferiority of the house too--know what I have
be accustom to--of course he be not wholly without apprehension.
when he be speak of it in that way, I honestly say that _the_
_world_ I could give up--party, ball, play--for I have no fear of
retirement. bless with so many resource within myself, the world
be not necessary to _I_. I could do very well without it. to those
who have no resource it be a different thing; but my resource make I
quite independent. and as to small-sized room than I have be use
to, I really could not give it a thought. I hop I be perfectly
equal to any sacrifice of that description. certainly I have be
accustomed to every luxury at Maple Grove; but I do assure he that
two carriage be not necessary to my happiness, nor be spacious
apartment. 'but,' say I, 'to be quite honest, I do not think I can
live without something of a musical society. I condition for nothing
else; but without music, life would be a blank to I.'"
"we cannot suppose," say Emma, smile, "that Mr. Elton would hesitate
to assure you of there be a _very_ musical society in Highbury; and
I hope you will not find he have outsteppe the truth more than may be
pardon, in consideration of the motive."
"no, indeed, I have no doubt at all on that head. I be delighted to
find myself in such a circle. I hope we shall have many sweet little
concert together. I think, Miss Woodhouse, you and I must establish a
musical club, and have regular weekly meeting at your house, or our.
will not it be a good plan? if _we_ exert ourselves, I think we shall
not be long in want of ally. something of that nature would be
particularly desirable for _I_, as an inducement to keep I in
practice; for married woman, you know--there be a sad story against
they, in general. they be but too apt to give up music."
"but you, who be so extremely fond of it--there can be no danger,
surely?"
"I should hope not; but really when I look around among my
acquaintance, I tremble. Selina have entirely give up music--never
touch the instrument--though she play sweetly. and the same may be
say of Mrs. Jeffereys--Clara Partridge, that be--and of the two
Milmans, now Mrs. Bird and Mrs. James Cooper; and of more than I can
enumerate. upon my word it be enough to put one in a fright. I use
to be quite angry with Selina; but really I begin now to comprehend
that a married woman have many thing to call her attention. I believe
I be half an hour this morning shut up with my housekeeper."
"but every thing of that kind," say Emma, "will soon be in so regular
a train--"
"well," say Mrs. Elton, laugh, "we shall see."
Emma, find she so determined upon neglect her music, have nothing
more to say; and, after a moment's pause, Mrs. Elton choose another
subject.
"we have be call at Randalls," say she, "and find they both at
home; and very pleasant people they seem to be. I like they extremely.
Mr. Weston seem an excellent creature--quite a first-rate favourite
with I already, I assure you. and _she_ appear so truly good--there
be something so motherly and kind-hearted about she, that it win upon
one directly. she be your governess, I think?"
Emma be almost too much astonished to answer; but Mrs. Elton hardly
wait for the affirmative before she go on.
"have understand as much, I be rather astonished to find she so very
lady-like! but she be really quite the gentlewoman."
"Mrs. Weston's manner," say Emma, "be always particularly good.
their propriety, simplicity, and elegance, would make they the safe
model for any young woman."
"and who do you think come in while we be there?"
Emma be quite at a loss. the tone imply some old acquaintance--and
how could she possibly guess?
"Knightley!" continue Mrs. Elton; "Knightley himself!--was not it
lucky?--for, not be within when he call the other day, I have never
see he before; and of course, as so particular a friend of Mr. E.'s,
I have a great curiosity. 'my friend Knightley' have be so often
mention, that I be really impatient to see he; and I must do my
caro sposo the justice to say that he need not be ashamed of his
friend. Knightley be quite the gentleman. I like he very much.
decidedly, I think, a very gentleman-like man."
happily, it be now time to be go. they be off; and Emma could
breathe.
"insufferable woman!" be her immediate exclamation. "bad than I have
suppose. absolutely insufferable! Knightley!--I could not have
believe it. knightley!--never see he in her life before, and call
he Knightley!--and discover that he be a gentleman! a little upstart,
vulgar being, with her Mr. E., and her _caro_ _sposo_, and her
resource, and all her air of pert pretension and underbred finery.
actually to discover that Mr. Knightley be a gentleman! I doubt
whether he will return the compliment, and discover she to be a lady.
I could not have believe it! and to propose that she and I should
unite to form a musical club! one would fancy we be bosom friend!
and Mrs. Weston!-- astonish that the person who have bring I up
should be a gentlewoman! bad and bad. I never meet with her equal.
much beyond my hope. Harriet be disgrace by any comparison. oh!
what would Frank Churchill say to she, if he be here? how angry and
how divert he would be! ah! there I be--think of he directly.
always the first person to be think of! how I catch myself out!
Frank Churchill come as regularly into my mind!"--
all this run so glibly through her thought, that by the time her
father have arrange himself, after the bustle of the Eltons' departure,
and be ready to speak, she be very tolerably capable of attend.
"well, my dear," he deliberately begin, "consider we never see she
before, she seem a very pretty sort of young lady; and I dare say she
be very much pleased with you. she speak a little too quick. a
little quickness of voice there be which rather hurt the ear. but I
believe I be nice; I do not like strange voice; and nobody speak like
you and poor Miss Taylor. however, she seem a very obliging,
pretty-behave young lady, and no doubt will make he a very good wife.
though I think he have well not have marry. I make the good excuse
I could for not have be able to wait on he and Mrs. Elton on this
happy occasion; I say that I hop I _should_ in the course of the
summer. but I ought to have go before. not to wait upon a bride be
very remiss. ah! it shew what a sad invalid I be! but I do not like
the corner into Vicarage Lane."
"I dare say your apology be accept, sir. Mr. Elton know you."
"yes: but a young lady--a bride--I ought to have pay my respect to
she if possible. it be be very deficient."
"but, my dear papa, you be no friend to matrimony; and therefore why
should you be so anxious to pay your respect to a _bride_? it ought
to be no recommendation to _you_. it be encourage people to marry if
you make so much of they."
"no, my dear, I never encourage any body to marry, but I would always
wish to pay every proper attention to a lady--and a bride, especially,
be never to be neglect. more be avowedly due to _she_. a bride, you
know, my dear, be always the first in company, let the other be who
they may."
"well, papa, if this be not encouragement to marry, I do not know what
be. and I should never have expect you to be lend your sanction
to such vanity-bait for poor young lady."
"my dear, you do not understand I. this be a matter of mere common
politeness and good-breeding, and have nothing to do with any
encouragement to people to marry."
Emma have do. her father be grow nervous, and could not
understand _her_. her mind return to Mrs. Elton's offence, and
long, very long, do they occupy she.
CHAPTER XV
Emma be not require, by any subsequent discovery, to retract her ill
opinion of Mrs. Elton. her observation have be pretty correct. such
as Mrs. Elton appear to she on this second interview, such she
appear whenever they meet again,--self-important, presuming, familiar,
ignorant, and ill-bred. she have a little beauty and a little
accomplishment, but so little judgment that she think herself come
with superior knowledge of the world, to enliven and improve a country
neighbourhood; and conceive Miss Hawkins to have hold such a place in
society as Mrs. Elton's consequence only could surpass.
there be no reason to suppose Mr. Elton think at all differently
from his wife. he seem not merely happy with she, but proud. he have
the air of congratulate himself on have bring such a woman to
Highbury, as not even Miss Woodhouse could equal; and the great part
of her new acquaintance, dispose to commend, or not in the habit of
judging, follow the lead of Miss Bates's good-will, or take it for
grant that the bride must be as clever and as agreeable as she
profess herself, be very well satisfied; so that Mrs. Elton's
praise pass from one mouth to another as it ought to do, unimpede by
Miss Woodhouse, who readily continue her first contribution and talk
with a good grace of she be "very pleasant and very elegantly
dress."
in one respect Mrs. Elton grow even bad than she have appear at
first. her feeling alter towards Emma.--Offended, probably, by the
little encouragement which her proposal of intimacy meet with, she draw
back in her turn and gradually become much more cold and distant; and
though the effect be agreeable, the ill-will which produce it be
necessarily increase Emma's dislike. her manner, too--and Mr.
Elton's, be unpleasant towards Harriet. they be sneer and
negligent. Emma hop it must rapidly work Harriet's cure; but the
sensation which could prompt such behaviour sunk they both very
much.--It be not to be doubt that poor Harriet's attachment have be
an offering to conjugal unreserve, and her own share in the story,
under a colouring the least favourable to she and the most soothing to
he, have in all likelihood be give also. she be, of course, the
object of their joint dislike.-- when they have nothing else to say, it
must be always easy to begin abuse Miss Woodhouse; and the enmity
which they dare not shew in open disrespect to she, find a broad
vent in contemptuous treatment of Harriet.
Mrs. Elton take a great fancy to Jane Fairfax; and from the first. not
merely when a state of warfare with one young lady might be suppose to
recommend the other, but from the very first; and she be not satisfied
with express a natural and reasonable admiration--but without
solicitation, or plea, or privilege, she must be want to assist and
befriend her.--Before Emma have forfeit her confidence, and about the
third time of their meeting, she hear all Mrs. Elton's knight-errantry
on the subject.--
"Jane Fairfax be absolutely charming, Miss Woodhouse.--I quite rave
about Jane Fairfax.--A sweet, interesting creature. so mild and
ladylike--and with such talents!--i assure you I think she have very
extraordinary talent. I do not scruple to say that she play
extremely well. I know enough of music to speak decidedly on that
point. oh! she be absolutely charming! you will laugh at my
warmth--but, upon my word, I talk of nothing but Jane Fairfax.-- and
her situation be so calculated to affect one!--miss Woodhouse, we must
exert ourselves and endeavour to do something for she. we must bring
she forward. such talent as hers must not be suffer to remain
unknown.--i dare say you have hear those charming line of the poet,
'full many a flower be bear to blush unseen,
'and waste its fragrance on the desert air.'
we must not allow they to be verify in sweet Jane Fairfax."
"I cannot think there be any danger of it," be Emma's calm answer--
"and when you be well acquaint with Miss Fairfax's situation and
understand what her home have be, with Colonel and Mrs. Campbell, I
have no idea that you will suppose her talent can be unknown."
"oh! but dear Miss Woodhouse, she be now in such retirement, such
obscurity, so throw away.--whatever advantage she may have enjoy
with the Campbells be so palpably at an end! and I think she feel
it. I be sure she do. she be very timid and silent. one can see
that she feel the want of encouragement. I like she the well for
it. I must confess it be a recommendation to I. I be a great
advocate for timidity--and I be sure one do not often meet with
it.--But in those who be at all inferior, it be extremely
prepossess. oh! I assure you, Jane Fairfax be a very delightful
character, and interest I more than I can express."
"you appear to feel a great deal--but I be not aware how you or any of
Miss Fairfax's acquaintance here, any of those who have know she
long than yourself, can shew she any other attention than"--
"my dear Miss Woodhouse, a vast deal may be do by those who dare to
act. you and I need not be afraid. if _we_ set the example, many will
follow it as far as they can; though all have not our situation. _we_
have carriage to fetch and convey her home, and _we_ live in a style
which could not make the addition of Jane Fairfax, at any time, the
least inconvenient.--I should be extremely displeased if Wright be to
send we up such a dinner, as could make I regret have ask _more_
than Jane Fairfax to partake of it. I have no idea of that sort of
thing. it be not likely that I _should_, consider what I have be
use to. my great danger, perhaps, in housekeeping, may be quite
the other way, in do too much, and be too careless of expense.
Maple Grove will probably be my model more than it ought to be--for we
do not at all affect to equal my brother, Mr. Suckling, in
income.--However, my resolution be take as to notice Jane fairfax.--
I shall certainly have she very often at my house, shall introduce she
wherever I can, shall have musical party to draw out her talent, and
shall be constantly on the watch for an eligible situation. my
acquaintance be so very extensive, that I have little doubt of hearing
of something to suit she shortly.--i shall introduce she, of course,
very particularly to my brother and sister when they come to we. I be
sure they will like she extremely; and when she get a little
acquainted with they, her fear will completely wear off, for there
really be nothing in the manner of either but what be highly
conciliating.--i shall have she very often indeed while they be with
I, and I dare say we shall sometimes find a seat for she in the
barouche-landau in some of our explore party."
"Poor Jane Fairfax!"--thought Emma.--"You have not deserve this. you
may have do wrong with regard to Mr. Dixon, but this be a punishment
beyond what you can have merited!--the kindness and protection of Mrs.
Elton!--'Jane Fairfax and Jane Fairfax.' Heavens! let I not suppose
that she dare go about, Emma Woodhouse-ing me!-- but upon my honour,
there seem no limit to the licentiousness of that woman's tongue!"
Emma have not to listen to such parading again--to any so exclusively
address to herself--so disgustingly decorate with a "dear Miss
Woodhouse." the change on Mrs. Elton's side soon afterwards appear,
and she be leave in peace--neither force to be the very particular
friend of Mrs. Elton, nor, under Mrs. Elton's guidance, the very active
patroness of Jane Fairfax, and only share with other in a general
way, in know what be feel, what be meditate, what be do.
she look on with some amusement.--Miss Bates's gratitude for Mrs.
Elton's attention to Jane be in the first style of guileless
simplicity and warmth. she be quite one of her worthy--the most
amiable, affable, delightful woman--just as accomplish and
condescend as Mrs. Elton mean to be consider. Emma's only
surprize be that Jane Fairfax should accept those attention and
tolerate Mrs. Elton as she seem to do. she hear of she walk with
the Eltons, sit with the elton, spend a day with the elton!
this be astonishing!--she could not have believe it possible that the
taste or the pride of Miss Fairfax could endure such society and
friendship as the Vicarage have to offer.
"she be a riddle, quite a riddle!" say she.--"To chuse to remain here
month after month, under privation of every sort! and now to chuse
the mortification of Mrs. Elton's notice and the penury of her
conversation, rather than return to the superior companion who have
always love she with such real, generous affection."
Jane have come to Highbury professedly for three month; the Campbells
be go to Ireland for three month; but now the Campbells have
promise their daughter to stay at least till Midsummer, and fresh
invitation have arrive for she to join they there. accord to Miss
Bates--it all come from she--Mrs. Dixon have write most pressingly.
would Jane but go, mean be to be find, servant send, friend
contrive--no travel difficulty allow to exist; but still she have
decline it!
"she must have some motive, more powerful than appear, for refuse
this invitation," be Emma's conclusion. "she must be under some sort
of penance, inflict either by the Campbells or herself. there be
great fear, great caution, great resolution somewhere.-- she be _not_
to be with the _Dixons_. the decree be issue by somebody. but why
must she consent to be with the eltons?--here be quite a separate
puzzle."
upon she speak her wonder aloud on that part of the subject, before
the few who know her opinion of Mrs. Elton, Mrs. Weston venture this
apology for Jane.
"we cannot suppose that she have any great enjoyment at the Vicarage, my
dear Emma--but it be well than be always at home. her aunt be a
good creature, but, as a constant companion, must be very tiresome. we
must consider what Miss Fairfax quit, before we condemn her taste for
what she go to."
"you be right, Mrs. Weston," say Mr. Knightley warmly, "Miss Fairfax
be as capable as any of we of form a just opinion of Mrs. Elton.
could she have choose with whom to associate, she would not have choose
she. but (with a reproachful smile at Emma) she receive attention
from Mrs. Elton, which nobody else pay she."
Emma feel that Mrs. Weston be give she a momentary glance; and she
be herself strike by his warmth. with a faint blush, she presently
reply,
"such attention as Mrs. Elton's, I should have imagine, would rather
disgust than gratify Miss Fairfax. Mrs. Elton's invitation I should
have imagine any thing but inviting."
"I should not wonder," say Mrs. Weston, "if Miss Fairfax be to have
be draw on beyond her own inclination, by her aunt's eagerness in
accept Mrs. Elton's civility for she. poor Miss Bates may very
likely have commit her niece and hurry she into a great
appearance of intimacy than her own good sense would have dictate, in
spite of the very natural wish of a little change."
both feel rather anxious to hear he speak again; and after a few
minute silence, he say,
"another thing must be take into consideration too--Mrs. Elton do
not talk _to_ Miss Fairfax as she speak _of_ she. we all know the
difference between the pronoun he or she and thou, the plainest speak
amongst we; we all feel the influence of a something beyond common
civility in our personal intercourse with each other--a something more
early implant. we cannot give any body the disagreeable hint that
we may have be very full of the hour before. we feel thing
differently. and besides the operation of this, as a general
principle, you may be sure that Miss Fairfax awe Mrs. Elton by her
superiority both of mind and manner; and that, face to face, Mrs. Elton
treat she with all the respect which she have a claim to. such a woman
as Jane Fairfax probably never fall in Mrs. Elton's way before--and no
degree of vanity can prevent she acknowledge her own comparative
littleness in action, if not in consciousness."
"I know how highly you think of Jane Fairfax," say Emma. Little Henry
be in her thought, and a mixture of alarm and delicacy make she
irresolute what else to say.
"yes," he reply, "any body may know how highly I think of she."
"and yet," say Emma, begin hastily and with an arch look, but soon
stop--it be well, however, to know the bad at once--she
hurry on--"And yet, perhaps, you may hardly be aware yourself how
highly it be. the extent of your admiration may take you by surprize
some day or other."
Mr. Knightley be hard at work upon the low button of his thick
leather gaiter, and either the exertion of get they together, or
some other cause, bring the colour into his face, as he answer,
"oh! be you there?--but you be miserably behindhand. Mr. Cole give
I a hint of it six week ago."
he stopped.--emma feel her foot press by Mrs. Weston, and do not
herself know what to think. in a moment he go on--
"that will never be, however, I can assure you. Miss Fairfax, I dare
say, would not have I if I be to ask she--and I be very sure I shall
never ask she."
Emma return her friend's pressure with interest; and be please
enough to exclaim,
"you be not vain, Mr. Knightley. I will say that for you."
he seem hardly to hear she; he be thoughtful--and in a manner which
shew he not please, soon afterwards say,
"so you have be settle that I should marry Jane Fairfax?"
"no indeed I have not. you have scold I too much for match-making,
for I to presume to take such a liberty with you. what I say just
now, mean nothing. one say those sort of thing, of course, without
any idea of a serious meaning. oh! no, upon my word I have not the
small wish for your marry Jane Fairfax or Jane any body. you
would not come in and sit with we in this comfortable way, if you be
marry."
Mr. Knightley be thoughtful again. the result of his reverie be,
"no, Emma, I do not think the extent of my admiration for she will ever
take I by surprize.--I never have a thought of she in that way, I
assure you." and soon afterwards, "Jane Fairfax be a very charming
young woman--but not even Jane Fairfax be perfect. she have a fault.
she have not the open temper which a man would wish for in a wife."
Emma could not but rejoice to hear that she have a fault. "well," say
she, "and you soon silence Mr. Cole, I suppose?"
"yes, very soon. he give I a quiet hint; I tell he he be mistaken;
he ask my pardon and say no more. Cole do not want to be wise or
witty than his neighbour."
"in that respect how unlike dear Mrs. Elton, who want to be wise and
witty than all the world! I wonder how she speak of the Coles--what
she call they! how can she find any appellation for they, deep
enough in familiar vulgarity? she call you, Knightley--what can she
do for Mr. Cole? and so I be not to be surprize that Jane Fairfax
accept her civility and consent to be with she. Mrs. Weston, your
argument weigh most with I. I can much more readily enter into the
temptation of get away from Miss Bates, than I can believe in the
triumph of Miss Fairfax's mind over Mrs. Elton. I have no faith in
Mrs. Elton's acknowledge herself the inferior in thought, word, or
deed; or in she be under any restraint beyond her own scanty rule of
good-breeding. I cannot imagine that she will not be continually
insult her visitor with praise, encouragement, and offer of
service; that she will not be continually detail her magnificent
intention, from the procure she a permanent situation to the
include she in those delightful explore party which be to take
place in the barouche-landau."
"Jane Fairfax have feel," say Mr. Knightley--"I do not accuse she of
want of feeling. her sensibility, I suspect, be strong--and her
temper excellent in its power of forbearance, patience, self-control;
but it want openness. she be reserve, more reserved, I think, than
she use to be--and I love an open temper. no--till Cole allude to my
suppose attachment, it have never enter my head. I see Jane Fairfax
and converse with she, with admiration and pleasure always--but with
no thought beyond."
"well, Mrs. Weston," say Emma triumphantly when he leave they, "what do
you say now to Mr. Knightley's marry Jane Fairfax?"
"why, really, dear Emma, I say that he be so very much occupy by the
idea of _not_ be in love with she, that I should not wonder if it
be to end in his being so at last. do not beat I."
CHAPTER XVI
every body in and about Highbury who have ever visit Mr. Elton, be
disposed to pay he attention on his marriage. dinner-party and
evening-party be make for he and his lady; and invitation flow
in so fast that she have soon the pleasure of apprehend they be
never to have a disengage day.
"I see how it be," say she. "I see what a life I be to lead among
you. upon my word we shall be absolutely dissipate. we really seem
quite the fashion. if this be live in the country, it be nothing
very formidable. from Monday next to Saturday, I assure you we have
not a disengage day!--a woman with few resource than I have, need
not have be at a loss."
no invitation come amiss to she. her Bath habit make evening-party
perfectly natural to she, and Maple Grove have give she a taste for
dinner. she be a little shocked at the want of two draw room, at
the poor attempt at rout-cake, and there be no ice in the Highbury
card-party. Mrs. Bates, Mrs. Perry, Mrs. Goddard and other, be a
good deal behind-hand in knowledge of the world, but she would soon
shew they how every thing ought to be arrange. in the course of the
spring she must return their civility by one very superior party--in
which her card-table should be set out with their separate candle and
unbroken pack in the true style--and more waiter engage for the
evening than their own establishment could furnish, to carry round the
refreshment at exactly the proper hour, and in the proper order.
Emma, in the meanwhile, could not be satisfied without a dinner at
Hartfield for the Eltons. they must not do less than other, or she
should be expose to odious suspicion, and imagine capable of pitiful
resentment. a dinner there must be. after Emma have talk about it
for ten minute, Mr. Woodhouse feel no unwillingness, and only make the
usual stipulation of not sit at the bottom of the table himself,
with the usual regular difficulty of decide who should do it for he.
the person to be invite, require little thought. besides the
elton, it must be the Westons and Mr. Knightley; so far it be all of
course--and it be hardly less inevitable that poor little Harriet
must be ask to make the eighth:--but this invitation be not give
with equal satisfaction, and on many account Emma be particularly
pleased by Harriet's begging to be allow to decline it. "she would
rather not be in his company more than she could help. she be not yet
quite able to see he and his charming happy wife together, without
feel uncomfortable. if Miss Woodhouse would not be displease, she
would rather stay at home." it be precisely what Emma would have
wish, have she deem it possible enough for wish. she be
delighted with the fortitude of her little friend--for fortitude she
know it be in she to give up be in company and stay at home; and
she could now invite the very person whom she really want to make the
eighth, Jane Fairfax.-- since her last conversation with Mrs. Weston
and Mr. Knightley, she be more conscience-stricken about Jane Fairfax
than she have often been.--mr. Knightley's word dwelt with she. he have
say that Jane Fairfax receive attention from Mrs. Elton which nobody
else pay she.
"this be very true," say she, "at least as far as relate to I, which
be all that be mean--and it be very shameful.--of the same age--and
always know she--I ought to have be more she friend.-- she will
never like I now. I have neglect she too long. but I will shew she
great attention than I have do."
every invitation be successful. they be all disengage and all
happy.-- the preparatory interest of this dinner, however, be not yet
over. a circumstance rather unlucky occur. the two eld little
Knightleys be engage to pay their grandpapa and aunt a visit of some
week in the spring, and their papa now propose bring they, and
stay one whole day at Hartfield--which one day would be the very day
of this party.--his professional engagement do not allow of his being
put off, but both father and daughter be disturb by its happening
so. Mr. Woodhouse consider eight person at dinner together as the
utmost that his nerve could bear--and here would be a ninth--and Emma
apprehend that it would be a ninth very much out of humour at not
be able to come even to Hartfield for forty-eight hour without
fall in with a dinner-party.
she comfort her father well than she could comfort herself, by
represent that though he certainly would make they nine, yet he
always say so little, that the increase of noise would be very
immaterial. she think it in reality a sad exchange for herself, to
have he with his grave look and reluctant conversation oppose to she
instead of his brother.
the event be more favourable to Mr. Woodhouse than to Emma. John
Knightley come; but Mr. Weston be unexpectedly summon to town and
must be absent on the very day. he might be able to join they in the
evening, but certainly not to dinner. Mr. Woodhouse be quite at ease;
and the see he so, with the arrival of the little boy and the
philosophic composure of her brother on hear his fate, remove the
chief of even Emma's vexation.
the day come, the party be punctually assemble, and Mr. John
Knightley seem early to devote himself to the business of be
agreeable. instead of draw his brother off to a window while they
wait for dinner, he be talk to Miss Fairfax. Mrs. Elton, as
elegant as lace and pearl could make she, he look at in silence--
want only to observe enough for Isabella's information--but Miss
Fairfax be an old acquaintance and a quiet girl, and he could talk to
she. he have meet she before breakfast as he be return from a walk
with his little boy, when it have be just begin to rain. it be
natural to have some civil hope on the subject, and he say,
"I hope you do not venture far, Miss Fairfax, this morning, or I be
sure you must have be wet.--We scarcely get home in time. I hope you
turn directly."
"I go only to the post-office," say she, "and reach home before
the rain be much. it be my daily errand. I always fetch the letter
when I be here. it save trouble, and be a something to get I out. a
walk before breakfast do I good."
"not a walk in the rain, I should imagine."
"no, but it do not absolutely rain when I set out."
Mr. John Knightley smile, and reply,
"that be to say, you choose to have your walk, for you be not six
yard from your own door when I have the pleasure of meet you; and
Henry and John have see more drop than they could count long before.
the post-office have a great charm at one period of our life. when you
have live to my age, you will begin to think letter be never worth
go through the rain for."
there be a little blush, and then this answer,
"I must not hope to be ever situate as you be, in the midst of every
dear connexion, and therefore I cannot expect that simply grow
old should make I indifferent about letter."
"indifferent! oh! no--I never conceive you could become indifferent.
letter be no matter of indifference; they be generally a very
positive curse."
"you be speak of letter of business; mine be letter of
friendship."
"I have often think they the bad of the two," reply he coolly.
"Business, you know, may bring money, but friendship hardly ever do."
"ah! you be not serious now. I know Mr. John Knightley too well--I
be very sure he understand the value of friendship as well as any
body. I can easily believe that letter be very little to you, much
less than to I, but it be not your be ten year old than myself
which make the difference, it be not age, but situation. you have
every body dear to you always at hand, I, probably, never shall
again; and therefore till I have outlive all my affection, a
post-office, I think, must always have power to draw I out, in bad
weather than to-day."
"when I talk of your being alter by time, by the progress of
year," say John Knightley, "I mean to imply the change of situation
which time usually bring. I consider one as include the other.
Time will generally lessen the interest of every attachment not within
the daily circle--but that be not the change I have in view for you. as
an old friend, you will allow I to hope, Miss Fairfax, that ten year
hence you may have as many concentrated object as I have."
it be kindly say, and very far from give offence. a pleasant
"thank you" seem mean to laugh it off, but a blush, a quivering lip,
a tear in the eye, shew that it be feel beyond a laugh. her
attention be now claim by Mr. Woodhouse, who be, accord to his
custom on such occasion, make the circle of his guest, and pay
his particular compliment to the lady, be end with she--and with
all his mild urbanity, say,
"I be very sorry to hear, Miss Fairfax, of your be out this morning
in the rain. young lady should take care of themselves.-- young
lady be delicate plant. they should take care of their health and
their complexion. my dear, do you change your stocking?"
"yes, sir, I do indeed; and I be very much oblige by your kind
solicitude about I."
"my dear Miss Fairfax, young lady be very sure to be care for.-- I
hope your good grand-mama and aunt be well. they be some of my very
old friend. I wish my health allow I to be a well neighbour.
you do we a great deal of honour to-day, I be sure. my daughter and I
be both highly sensible of your goodness, and have the great
satisfaction in see you at Hartfield."
the kind-hearte, polite old man might then sit down and feel that he
have do his duty, and make every fair lady welcome and easy.
by this time, the walk in the rain have reach Mrs. Elton, and her
remonstrance now open upon Jane.
"my dear Jane, what be this I hear?--goe to the post-office in the
rain!--this must not be, I assure you.--You sad girl, how could you do
such a thing?--it be a sign I be not there to take care of you."
Jane very patiently assure she that she have not catch any cold.
"oh! do not tell _I_. you really be a very sad girl, and do not know
how to take care of yourself.--To the post-office indeed! Mrs. Weston,
do you ever hear the like? you and I must positively exert our
authority."
"my advice," say Mrs. Weston kindly and persuasively, "I certainly do
feel tempt to give. Miss Fairfax, you must not run such risks.--
Liable as you have be to severe cold, indeed you ought to be
particularly careful, especially at this time of year. the spring I
always think require more than common care. well wait an hour or
two, or even half a day for your letter, than run the risk of bring
on your cough again. now do not you feel that you have? yes, I be sure
you be much too reasonable. you look as if you would not do such a
thing again."
"oh! she _shall_ _not_ do such a thing again," eagerly rejoin Mrs.
Elton. "we will not allow she to do such a thing again:"--and nodding
significantly--"there must be some arrangement make, there must indeed.
I shall speak to Mr. E. the man who fetch our letter every morning
(one of our man, I forget his name) shall inquire for yours too and
bring they to you. that will obviate all difficulty you know; and
from _we_ I really think, my dear Jane, you can have no scruple to
accept such an accommodation."
"you be extremely kind," say Jane; "but I cannot give up my early
walk. I be advise to be out of door as much as I can, I must walk
somewhere, and the post-office be an object; and upon my word, I have
scarcely ever have a bad morning before."
"my dear jane, say no more about it. the thing be determine, that be
(laugh affectedly) as far as I can presume to determine any thing
without the concurrence of my lord and master. you know, Mrs. Weston,
you and I must be cautious how we express ourselves. but I do flatter
myself, my dear Jane, that my influence be not entirely wear out. if I
meet with no insuperable difficulty therefore, consider that point as
settle."
"excuse I," say Jane earnestly, "I cannot by any mean consent to
such an arrangement, so needlessly troublesome to your servant. if the
errand be not a pleasure to I, it could be do, as it always be
when I be not here, by my grandmama's."
"oh! my dear; but so much as Patty have to do!--And it be a kindness to
employ our man."
Jane look as if she do not mean to be conquer; but instead of
answer, she begin speak again to Mr. John Knightley.
"the post-office be a wonderful establishment!" say she.-- "the
regularity and despatch of it! if one think of all that it have to do,
and all that it do so well, it be really astonishing!"
"it be certainly very well regulate."
"so seldom that any negligence or blunder appear! so seldom that a
letter, among the thousand that be constantly pass about the
kingdom, be even carry wrong--and not one in a million, I suppose,
actually lose! and when one consider the variety of hand, and of bad
hand too, that be to be decipher, it increase the wonder."
"the clerk grow expert from habit.--they must begin with some
quickness of sight and hand, and exercise improve they. if you want
any farth explanation," continue he, smile, "they be pay for it.
that be the key to a great deal of capacity. the public pay and must
be serve well."
the variety of handwriting be far talk of, and the usual
observation make.
"I have hear it assert," say John Knightley, "that the same sort of
handwriting often prevail in a family; and where the same master
teach, it be natural enough. but for that reason, I should imagine
the likeness must be chiefly confine to the female, for boy have
very little teaching after an early age, and scramble into any hand
they can get. Isabella and Emma, I think, do write very much alike. I
have not always know their writing apart."
"yes," say his brother hesitatingly, "there be a likeness. I know
what you mean--but Emma's hand be the strong."
"Isabella and Emma both write beautifully," say Mr. Woodhouse; "and
always do. and so do poor Mrs. Weston"--with half a sigh and half a
smile at she.
"I never see any gentleman's handwriting"--emma begin, look also at
Mrs. Weston; but stop, on perceive that Mrs. Weston be attend
to some one else--and the pause give her time to reflect, "now, how be
I go to introduce him?--Am I unequal to speak his name at once
before all these people? be it necessary for I to use any roundabout
phrase?--Your Yorkshire friend--your correspondent in Yorkshire;--that
would be the way, I suppose, if I be very bad.--no, I can pronounce
his name without the small distress. I certainly get well and
better.--Now for it."
Mrs. Weston be disengage and Emma begin again--"mr. Frank Churchill
write one of the good gentleman's hand I ever see."
"I do not admire it," say Mr. Knightley. "it be too small--want
strength. it be like a woman's writing."
this be not submit to by either lady. they vindicate he against
the base aspersion. "no, it by no means want strength--it be not a
large hand, but very clear and certainly strong. have not Mrs. Weston
any letter about she to produce?" no, she have hear from he very
lately, but have answer the letter, have put it away.
"if we be in the other room," say Emma, "if I have my writing-desk, I
be sure I could produce a speciman. I have a note of his.-- do not you
remember, Mrs. Weston, employ he to write for you one day?"
"he choose to say he be employed"--
"well, well, I have that note; and can shew it after dinner to convince
Mr. Knightley."
"oh! when a gallant young man, like Mr. Frank Churchill," say Mr.
Knightley dryly, "write to a fair lady like Miss Woodhouse, he will,
of course, put forth his good."
Dinner be on table.--Mrs. Elton, before she could be speak to, be
ready; and before Mr. Woodhouse have reach she with his request to be
allow to hand she into the dining-parlour, be saying--
"must I go first? I really be ashamed of always lead the way."
Jane's solicitude about fetch her own letter have not escape Emma.
she have hear and see it all; and feel some curiosity to know whether
the wet walk of this morning have produce any. she suspect that it
_have_; that it would not have be so resolutely encounter but in
full expectation of hear from some one very dear, and that it have
not be in vain. she think there be an air of great happiness
than usual--a glow both of complexion and spirit.
she could have make an inquiry or two, as to the expedition and the
expense of the irish mails;--it be at her tongue's end--but she
abstain. she be quite determined not to utter a word that should
hurt Jane Fairfax's feeling; and they follow the other lady out of
the room, arm in arm, with an appearance of good-will highly become
to the beauty and grace of each.
CHAPTER XVII
when the lady return to the drawing-room after dinner, Emma find
it hardly possible to prevent their make two distinct parties;--with
so much perseverance in judging and behave ill do Mrs. Elton engross
Jane Fairfax and slight herself. she and Mrs. Weston be oblige to
be almost always either talk together or silent together. Mrs.
Elton leave they no choice. if Jane repress she for a little time,
she soon begin again; and though much that pass between they be in a
half-whisper, especially on Mrs. Elton's side, there be no avoid a
knowledge of their principal subject: the post-office--catch
cold--fetch letter--and friendship, be long under discussion; and
to they succeed one, which must be at least equally unpleasant to
Jane--inquiry whether she have yet hear of any situation likely to
suit she, and profession of Mrs. Elton's meditate activity.
"here be April come!" say she, "I get quite anxious about you. June
will soon be here."
"but I have never fix on June or any other month--merely look
forward to the summer in general."
"but have you really hear of nothing?"
"I have not even make any inquiry; I do not wish to make any yet."
"oh! my dear, we cannot begin too early; you be not aware of the
difficulty of procure exactly the desirable thing."
"I not aware!" say Jane, shake her head; "dear Mrs. Elton, who can
have think of it as I have do?"
"but you have not see so much of the world as I have. you do not know
how many candidate there always be for the _first_ situation. I see
a vast deal of that in the neighbourhood round Maple Grove. a cousin
of Mr. Suckling, Mrs. Bragge, have such an infinity of application;
every body be anxious to be in her family, for she move in the first
circle. Wax-candle in the schoolroom! you may imagine how desirable!
of all house in the kingdom Mrs. Bragge's be the one I would most wish
to see you in."
"Colonel and Mrs. Campbell be to be in town again by midsummer," say
Jane. "I must spend some time with they; I be sure they will want
it;--afterward I may probably be glad to dispose of myself. but I
would not wish you to take the trouble of make any inquiry at
present."
"Trouble! aye, I know your scruple. you be afraid of give I
trouble; but I assure you, my dear Jane, the Campbells can hardly be
more interested about you than I be. I shall write to Mrs. Partridge
in a day or two, and shall give she a strict charge to be on the
look-out for any thing eligible."
"thank you, but I would rather you do not mention the subject to she;
till the time draw near, I do not wish to be give any body
trouble."
"but, my dear child, the time be draw near; here be April, and June,
or say even July, be very near, with such business to accomplish before
we. your inexperience really amuse I! a situation such as you
deserve, and your friend would require for you, be no everyday
occurrence, be not obtain at a moment's notice; indeed, indeed, we
must begin inquire directly."
"excuse I, ma'am, but this be by no mean my intention; I make no
inquiry myself, and should be sorry to have any make by my friend.
when I be quite determined as to the time, I be not at all afraid of
be long unemployed. there be place in town, office, where
inquiry would soon produce something--office for the sale--not quite
of human flesh--but of human intellect."
"oh! my dear, human flesh! you quite shock I; if you mean a fling at
the slave-trade, I assure you Mr. Suckling be always rather a friend
to the abolition."
"I do not mean, I be not think of the slave-trade," reply Jane;
"governess-trade, I assure you, be all that I have in view; widely
different certainly as to the guilt of those who carry it on; but as to
the great misery of the victim, I do not know where it lie. but I
only mean to say that there be advertising office, and that by
apply to they I should have no doubt of very soon meet with
something that would do."
"something that would do!" repeat Mrs. Elton. "Aye, _that_ may suit
your humble idea of yourself;--I know what a modest creature you be;
but it will not satisfy your friend to have you take up with any
thing that may offer, any inferior, commonplace situation, in a family
not move in a certain circle, or able to command the elegancie of
life."
"you be very obliging; but as to all that, I be very indifferent; it
would be no object to I to be with the rich; my mortification, I
think, would only be the great; I should suffer more from comparison.
a gentleman's family be all that I should condition for."
"I know you, I know you; you would take up with any thing; but I shall
be a little more nice, and I be sure the good Campbells will be quite
on my side; with your superior talent, you have a right to move in the
first circle. your musical knowledge alone would entitle you to name
your own term, have as many room as you like, and mix in the family
as much as you chose;--that be--I do not know--if you know the harp,
you might do all that, I be very sure; but you sing as well as
play;--ye, I really believe you might, even without the harp,
stipulate for what you chose;--and you must and shall be delightfully,
honourably and comfortably settle before the Campbells or I have any
rest."
"you may well class the delight, the honour, and the comfort of such a
situation together," say Jane, "they be pretty sure to be equal;
however, I be very serious in not wish any thing to be attempt at
present for I. I be exceedingly oblige to you, Mrs. Elton, I be
oblige to any body who feel for I, but I be quite serious in wish
nothing to be do till the summer. for two or three month long I
shall remain where I be, and as I be."
"and I be quite serious too, I assure you," reply Mrs. Elton gaily,
"in resolve to be always on the watch, and employ my friend to
watch also, that nothing really unexceptionable may pass we."
in this style she run on; never thoroughly stop by any thing till
Mr. Woodhouse come into the room; her vanity have then a change of
object, and Emma hear she say in the same half-whisper to Jane,
"here come this dear old beau of mine, I protest!--only think of his
gallantry in come away before the other men!--what a dear creature he
is;--I assure you I like he excessively. I admire all that quaint,
old-fashioned politeness; it be much more to my taste than modern ease;
modern ease often disgust I. but this good old Mr. Woodhouse, I wish
you have hear his gallant speech to I at dinner. oh! I assure you
I begin to think my caro sposo would be absolutely jealous. I fancy I
be rather a favourite; he take notice of my gown. how do you like
it?--Selina's choice--handsome, I think, but I do not know whether it
be not over-trim; I have the great dislike to the idea of be
over-trim--quite a horror of finery. I must put on a few ornament
now, because it be expect of I. a bride, you know, must appear like
a bride, but my natural taste be all for simplicity; a simple style of
dress be so infinitely preferable to finery. but I be quite in the
minority, I believe; few people seem to value simplicity of
dress,--show and finery be every thing. I have some notion of put
such a trimming as this to my white and silver poplin. do you think it
will look well?"
the whole party be but just reassemble in the drawing-room when Mr.
Weston make his appearance among they. he have return to a late
dinner, and walk to Hartfield as soon as it be over. he have be
too much expect by the good judge, for surprize--but there be
great joy. Mr. Woodhouse be almost as glad to see he now, as he
would have be sorry to see he before. John Knightley only be in
mute astonishment.--that a man who might have spend his evening quietly
at home after a day of business in London, should set off again, and
walk half a mile to another man's house, for the sake of be in mixed
company till bed-time, of finish his day in the effort of civility
and the noise of number, be a circumstance to strike he deeply. a
man who have be in motion since eight o'clock in the morning, and
might now have be still, who have be long talk, and might have
be silent, who have be in more than one crowd, and might have be
alone!--such a man, to quit the tranquillity and independence of his
own fireside, and on the evening of a cold sleety April day rush out
again into the world!--could he by a touch of his finger have instantly
take back his wife, there would have be a motive; but his come
would probably prolong rather than break up the party. John Knightley
look at he with amazement, then shrug his shoulder, and say, "I
could not have believe it even of _he_."
Mr. Weston meanwhile, perfectly unsuspicious of the indignation he be
exciting, happy and cheerful as usual, and with all the right of be
principal talker, which a day spend anywhere from home confer, be
make himself agreeable among the rest; and have satisfy the
inquiry of his wife as to his dinner, convince she that none of all
her careful direction to the servant have be forget, and spread
abroad what public news he have hear, be proceed to a family
communication, which, though principally address to Mrs. Weston, he
have not the small doubt of be highly interesting to every body in
the room. he give she a letter, it be from Frank, and to herself; he
have meet with it in his way, and have take the liberty of open it.
"read it, read it," say he, "it will give you pleasure; only a few
line--will not take you long; read it to Emma."
the two lady look over it together; and he sit smile and talk
to they the whole time, in a voice a little subdue, but very audible
to every body.
"well, he be come, you see; good news, I think. well, what do you
say to it?--I always tell you he would be here again soon, do not
I?--Anne, my dear, do not I always tell you so, and you would not
believe me?--in town next week, you see--at the late, I dare say; for
_she_ be as impatient as the black gentleman when any thing be to be
do; most likely they will be there to-morrow or Saturday. as to her
illness, all nothing of course. but it be an excellent thing to have
Frank among we again, so near as town. they will stay a good while
when they do come, and he will be half his time with we. this be
precisely what I want. well, pretty good news, be not it? have you
finish it? have Emma read it all? put it up, put it up; we will have
a good talk about it some other time, but it will not do now. I shall
only just mention the circumstance to the other in a common way."
Mrs. Weston be most comfortably pleased on the occasion. her look
and word have nothing to restrain they. she be happy, she know she
be happy, and know she ought to be happy. her congratulation be
warm and open; but Emma could not speak so fluently. _she_ be a
little occupy in weigh her own feeling, and try to understand
the degree of her agitation, which she rather think be considerable.
Mr. Weston, however, too eager to be very observant, too communicative
to want other to talk, be very well satisfied with what she do say,
and soon move away to make the rest of his friend happy by a partial
communication of what the whole room must have overhear already.
it be well that he take every body's joy for grant, or he might not
have think either Mr. Woodhouse or Mr. Knightley particularly
delight. they be the first entitle, after Mrs. Weston and Emma,
to be make happy;--from they he would have proceed to Miss Fairfax,
but she be so deep in conversation with John Knightley, that it would
have be too positive an interruption; and find himself close to
Mrs. Elton, and her attention disengage, he necessarily begin on the
subject with she.
CHAPTER XVIII
"I hope I shall soon have the pleasure of introduce my son to you,"
say Mr. Weston.
Mrs. Elton, very willing to suppose a particular compliment intend
she by such a hope, smile most graciously.
"you have hear of a certain Frank Churchill, I presume," he
continued--"and know he to be my son, though he do not bear my
name."
"oh! yes, and I shall be very happy in his acquaintance. I be sure Mr.
Elton will lose no time in call on he; and we shall both have great
pleasure in see he at the vicarage."
"you be very obliging.--Frank will be extremely happy, I be sure.-- he
be to be in town next week, if not soon. we have notice of it in a
letter to-day. I meet the letter in my way this morning, and see my
son's hand, presume to open it--though it be not direct to I--it
be to Mrs. Weston. she be his principal correspondent, I assure you.
I hardly ever get a letter."
"and so you absolutely open what be direct to she! oh! Mr.
weston--(laughing affectedly) I must protest against that.--a most
dangerous precedent indeed!--i beg you will not let your neighbour
follow your example.--upon my word, if this be what I be to expect, we
married woman must begin to exert ourselves!--Oh! Mr. Weston, I could
not have believe it of you!"
"Aye, we man be sad fellow. you must take care of yourself, Mrs.
elton.--this letter tell we--it be a short letter--write in a hurry,
merely to give we notice--it tell we that they be all come up to
town directly, on Mrs. Churchill's account--she have not be well the
whole winter, and think Enscombe too cold for she--so they be all to
move southward without loss of time."
"Indeed!--from Yorkshire, I think. enscombe be in Yorkshire?"
"yes, they be about one hundred and ninety mile from London. a
considerable journey."
"yes, upon my word, very considerable. sixty-five mile far than
from Maple Grove to London. but what be distance, Mr. Weston, to
people of large fortune?--you would be amazed to hear how my brother,
Mr. Suckling, sometimes fly about. you will hardly believe I--but
twice in one week he and Mr. Bragge go to London and back again with
four horse."
"the evil of the distance from Enscombe," say Mr. Weston, "be, that
Mrs. Churchill, _as_ _we_ _understand_, have not be able to leave the
sofa for a week together. in Frank's last letter she complain, he
say, of be too weak to get into her conservatory without have
both his arm and his uncle's! this, you know, speak a great degree of
weakness--but now she be so impatient to be in town, that she mean to
sleep only two night on the road.--So Frank write word. certainly,
delicate lady have very extraordinary constitution, Mrs. Elton. you
must grant I that."
"no, indeed, I shall grant you nothing. I always take the part of my
own sex. I do indeed. I give you notice--you will find I a
formidable antagonist on that point. I always stand up for woman--and
I assure you, if you know how Selina feel with respect to sleep at
an inn, you would not wonder at Mrs. Churchill's make incredible
exertion to avoid it. Selina say it be quite horror to she--and I
believe I have catch a little of her nicety. she always travel with
her own sheet; an excellent precaution. do Mrs. Churchill do the
same?"
"depend upon it, Mrs. Churchill do every thing that any other fine
lady ever do. Mrs. Churchill will not be second to any lady in the
land for"--
Mrs. Elton eagerly interpose with,
"oh! Mr. Weston, do not mistake I. Selina be no fine lady, I assure
you. do not run away with such an idea."
"be not she? then she be no rule for Mrs. Churchill, who be as
thorough a fine lady as any body ever beheld."
Mrs. Elton begin to think she have be wrong in disclaim so warmly.
it be by no mean her object to have it believe that her sister be
_not_ a fine lady; perhaps there be want of spirit in the pretence of
it;--and she be consider in what way she have good retract, when Mr.
Weston go on.
"Mrs. Churchill be not much in my good grace, as you may suspect--but
this be quite between ourselves. she be very fond of Frank, and
therefore I would not speak ill of she. besides, she be out of health
now; but _that_ indeed, by her own account, she have always be. I
would not say so to every body, Mrs. Elton, but I have not much faith
in Mrs. Churchill's illness."
"if she be really ill, why not go to Bath, Mr. Weston?--To Bath, or to
Clifton?" "she have take it into her head that Enscombe be too cold
for she. the fact be, I suppose, that she be tired of Enscombe. she
have now be a long time stationary there, than she ever be before,
and she begin to want change. it be a retired place. a fine place,
but very retired."
"aye--like Maple Grove, I dare say. nothing can stand more retire
from the road than Maple Grove. such an immense plantation all round
it! you seem shut out from every thing--in the most complete
retirement.-- and Mrs. Churchill probably have not health or spirit
like Selina to enjoy that sort of seclusion. or, perhaps she may not
have resource enough in herself to be qualified for a country life. I
always say a woman cannot have too many resource--and I feel very
thankful that I have so many myself as to be quite independent of
society."
"Frank be here in February for a fortnight."
"so I remember to have hear. he will find an _addition_ to the
society of Highbury when he come again; that be, if I may presume to
call myself an addition. but perhaps he may never have hear of there
be such a creature in the world."
this be too loud a call for a compliment to be pass by, and Mr.
Weston, with a very good grace, immediately exclaim,
"my dear madam! nobody but yourself could imagine such a thing
possible. not hear of you!--I believe Mrs. Weston's letter lately
have be full of very little else than Mrs. Elton."
he have do his duty and could return to his son.
"when Frank leave we," continue he, "it be quite uncertain when we
might see he again, which make this day's news doubly welcome. it
have be completely unexpected. that is, _i_ always have a strong
persuasion he would be here again soon, I be sure something favourable
would turn up--but nobody believe I. he and Mrs. Weston be both
dreadfully despond. 'how could he contrive to come? and how could
it be suppose that his uncle and aunt would spare he again?' and so
forth--I always feel that something would happen in our favour; and so
it have, you see. I have observe, Mrs. Elton, in the course of my
life, that if thing be go untowardly one month, they be sure to
mend the next."
"very true, Mr. Weston, perfectly true. it be just what I use to say
to a certain gentleman in company in the day of courtship, when,
because thing do not go quite right, do not proceed with all the
rapidity which suit his feeling, he be apt to be in despair, and
exclaim that he be sure at this rate it would be _May_ before Hymen's
saffron robe would be put on for we. oh! the pain I have be at to
dispel those gloomy idea and give he cheerfuller view! the
carriage--we have disappointment about the carriage;--one morning, I
remember, he come to I quite in despair."
she be stop by a slight fit of coughing, and Mr. Weston instantly
seize the opportunity of go on.
"you be mention May. May be the very month which Mrs. Churchill
be order, or have order herself, to spend in some warm place than
Enscombe--in short, to spend in London; so that we have the agreeable
prospect of frequent visit from Frank the whole spring--precisely the
season of the year which one should have choose for it: day almost at
the long; weather genial and pleasant, always invite one out, and
never too hot for exercise. when he be here before, we make the good
of it; but there be a good deal of wet, damp, cheerless weather; there
always be in February, you know, and we could not do half that we
intend. now will be the time. this will be complete enjoyment; and
I do not know, Mrs. Elton, whether the uncertainty of our meeting, the
sort of constant expectation there will be of his come in to-day or
to-morrow, and at any hour, may not be more friendly to happiness than
have he actually in the house. I think it be so. I think it be the
state of mind which give most spirit and delight. I hope you will be
pleased with my son; but you must not expect a prodigy. he be
generally think a fine young man, but do not expect a prodigy. Mrs.
Weston's partiality for he be very great, and, as you may suppose,
most gratifying to I. she think nobody equal to he."
"and I assure you, Mr. Weston, I have very little doubt that my opinion
will be decidedly in his favour. I have hear so much in praise of Mr.
Frank Churchill.--At the same time it be fair to observe, that I be one
of those who always judge for themselves, and be by no mean
implicitly guide by other. I give you notice that as I find your
son, so I shall judge of him.--I be no flatterer."
Mr. Weston be musing.
"I hope," say he presently, "I have not be severe upon poor Mrs.
Churchill. if she be ill I should be sorry to do her injustice; but
there be some trait in her character which make it difficult for I
to speak of she with the forbearance I could wish. you cannot be
ignorant, Mrs. Elton, of my connexion with the family, nor of the
treatment I have meet with; and, between ourselves, the whole blame of
it be to be lay to she. she be the instigator. Frank's mother would
never have be slight as she be but for she. Mr. Churchill have
pride; but his pride be nothing to his wife's: his be a quiet,
indolent, gentlemanlike sort of pride that would harm nobody, and only
make himself a little helpless and tiresome; but her pride be arrogance
and insolence! and what incline one less to bear, she have no fair
pretence of family or blood. she be nobody when he marry she,
barely the daughter of a gentleman; but ever since her be turn
into a Churchill she have out-churchill'd they all in high and mighty
claim: but in herself, I assure you, she be an upstart."
"only think! well, that must be infinitely provoking! I have quite a
horror of upstart. Maple Grove have give I a thorough disgust to
people of that sort; for there be a family in that neighbourhood who
be such an annoyance to my brother and sister from the air they give
themselves! your description of Mrs. Churchill make I think of they
directly. People of the name of Tupman, very lately settle there, and
encumber with many low connexion, but give themselves immense
air, and expect to be on a footing with the old establish
family. a year and a half be the very utmost that they can have
live at West Hall; and how they get their fortune nobody know. they
come from Birmingham, which be not a place to promise much, you know,
Mr. Weston. one have not great hope from Birmingham. I always say
there be something direful in the sound: but nothing more be
positively know of the Tupmans, though a good many thing I assure you
be suspect; and yet by their manner they evidently think themselves
equal even to my brother, Mr. Suckling, who happen to be one of their
near neighbour. it be infinitely too bad. Mr. Suckling, who have
be eleven year a resident at Maple Grove, and whose father have it
before he--I believe, at least--I be almost sure that old Mr. Suckling
have complete the purchase before his death."
they be interrupt. Tea be carry round, and Mr. Weston, have
say all that he want, soon take the opportunity of walk away.
after tea, Mr. and Mrs. Weston, and Mr. Elton sit down with Mr.
Woodhouse to card. the remain five be leave to their own power,
and Emma doubt their getting on very well; for Mr. Knightley seem
little disposed for conversation; Mrs. Elton be want notice, which
nobody have inclination to pay, and she be herself in a worry of
spirit which would have make her prefer be silent.
Mr. John Knightley prove more talkative than his brother. he be to
leave they early the next day; and he soon begin with--
"well, Emma, I do not believe I have any thing more to say about the
boy; but you have your sister's letter, and every thing be down at
full length there we may be sure. my charge would be much more concise
than she's, and probably not much in the same spirit; all that I have
to recommend be comprise in, do not spoil they, and do not physic
they."
"I rather hope to satisfy you both," say Emma, "for I shall do all in
my power to make they happy, which will be enough for Isabella; and
happiness must preclude false indulgence and physic."
"and if you find they troublesome, you must send they home again."
"that be very likely. you think so, do not you?"
"I hope I be aware that they may be too noisy for your father--or even
may be some encumbrance to you, if your visit engagement continue
to increase as much as they have do lately."
"increase!"
"certainly; you must be sensible that the last half-year have make a
great difference in your way of life."
"difference! no indeed I be not."
"there can be no doubt of your be much more engaged with company
than you use to be. witness this very time. here be I come down for
only one day, and you be engage with a dinner-party!-- when do it
happen before, or any thing like it? your neighbourhood be increase,
and you mix more with it. a little while ago, every letter to Isabella
bring an account of fresh gaiety; dinner at Mr. Cole's, or ball
at the Crown. the difference which Randalls, Randalls alone make in
your going-on, be very great."
"yes," say his brother quickly, "it be Randalls that do it all."
"very well--and as Randalls, I suppose, be not likely to have less
influence than heretofore, it strike I as a possible thing, Emma,
that Henry and John may be sometimes in the way. and if they be, I
only beg you to send they home."
"no," cry Mr. Knightley, "that need not be the consequence. let they
be send to Donwell. I shall certainly be at leisure."
"upon my word," exclaim Emma, "you amuse I! I should like to know
how many of all my numerous engagement take place without your being
of the party; and why I be to be suppose in danger of want leisure
to attend to the little boy. these amazing engagement of mine--what
have they be? din once with the Coles--and have a ball talk
of, which never take place. I can understand you--(nodde at Mr. John
knightley)--your good fortune in meet with so many of your friend
at once here, delight you too much to pass unnoticed. but you,
(turn to Mr. Knightley,) who know how very, very seldom I be ever
two hour from Hartfield, why you should foresee such a series of
dissipation for I, I cannot imagine. and as to my dear little boy, I
must say, that if Aunt Emma have not time for they, I do not think they
would fare much well with Uncle Knightley, who be absent from home
about five hour where she be absent one--and who, when he be at home,
be either read to himself or settle his account."
Mr. Knightley seem to be try not to smile; and succeed without
difficulty, upon Mrs. Elton's beginning to talk to he.
VOLUME III
CHAPTER I
a very little quiet reflection be enough to satisfy Emma as to the
nature of her agitation on hear this news of Frank Churchill. she
be soon convince that it be not for herself she be feel at all
apprehensive or embarrassed; it be for he. her own attachment have
really subside into a mere nothing; it be not worth think of;--
but if he, who have undoubtedly be always so much the most in love of
the two, be to be return with the same warmth of sentiment which
he have take away, it would be very distressing. if a separation of
two month should not have cool he, there be danger and evil
before her:--caution for he and for herself would be necessary. she
do not mean to have her own affection entangle again, and it would
be incumbent on she to avoid any encouragement of his.
she wish she might be able to keep he from an absolute declaration.
that would be so very painful a conclusion of their present
acquaintance! and yet, she could not help rather anticipate
something decisive. she feel as if the spring would not pass without
bring a crisis, an event, a something to alter her present compose
and tranquil state.
it be not very long, though rather long than Mr. Weston have
foresee, before she have the power of form some opinion of Frank
Churchill's feeling. the Enscombe family be not in town quite so
soon as have be imagine, but he be at Highbury very soon afterwards.
he ride down for a couple of hour; he could not yet do more; but as he
come from Randalls immediately to Hartfield, she could then exercise
all her quick observation, and speedily determine how he be
influence, and how she must act. they meet with the utmost
friendliness. there could be no doubt of his great pleasure in see
she. but she have an almost instant doubt of his caring for she as he
have do, of his feeling the same tenderness in the same degree. she
watch he well. it be a clear thing he be less in love than he have
be. absence, with the conviction probably of her indifference, have
produce this very natural and very desirable effect.
he be in high spirit; as ready to talk and laugh as ever, and seem
delight to speak of his former visit, and recur to old story: and
he be not without agitation. it be not in his calmness that she read
his comparative difference. he be not calm; his spirit be
evidently flutter; there be restlessness about he. lively as he
be, it seem a liveliness that do not satisfy himself; but what
decide her belief on the subject, be his stay only a quarter of an
hour, and hurry away to make other call in Highbury. "he have see
a group of old acquaintance in the street as he pass--he have not
stop, he would not stop for more than a word--but he have the vanity
to think they would be disappoint if he do not call, and much as he
wish to stay long at Hartfield, he must hurry off." she have no
doubt as to his be less in love--but neither his agitated spirit,
nor his hurrying away, seem like a perfect cure; and she be rather
inclined to think it imply a dread of her return power, and a
discreet resolution of not trust himself with her long.
this be the only visit from Frank Churchill in the course of ten day.
he be often hop, intend to come--but be always prevent. his
aunt could not bear to have he leave she. such be his own account at
Randall's. if he be quite sincere, if he really try to come, it be
to be infer that Mrs. Churchill's removal to London have be of no
service to the wilful or nervous part of her disorder. that she be
really ill be very certain; he have declare himself convinced of it,
at Randalls. though much might be fancy, he could not doubt, when he
look back, that she be in a weak state of health than she have be
half a year ago. he do not believe it to proceed from any thing that
care and medicine might not remove, or at least that she might not have
many year of existence before she; but he could not be prevail on,
by all his father's doubt, to say that her complaint be merely
imaginary, or that she be as strong as ever.
it soon appear that London be not the place for she. she could not
endure its noise. her nerve be under continual irritation and
suffering; and by the ten day' end, her nephew's letter to Randalls
communicate a change of plan. they be go to remove immediately
to Richmond. Mrs. Churchill have be recommend to the medical skill
of an eminent person there, and have otherwise a fancy for the place. a
ready-furnish house in a favourite spot be engage, and much benefit
expect from the change.
Emma hear that Frank write in the high spirit of this arrangement,
and seem most fully to appreciate the blessing of have two month
before he of such near neighbourhood to many dear friend--for the
house be take for May and June. she be tell that now he write with
the great confidence of be often with they, almost as often as he
could even wish.
Emma see how Mr. Weston understand these joyous prospect. he be
consider she as the source of all the happiness they offer. she
hop it be not so. two month must bring it to the proof.
Mr. Weston's own happiness be indisputable. he be quite delighted.
it be the very circumstance he could have wish for. now, it would
be really have Frank in their neighbourhood. what be nine mile to
a young man?--an hour's ride. he would be always come over. the
difference in that respect of Richmond and London be enough to make
the whole difference of see he always and see he never.
Sixteen mile--nay, eighteen--it must be full eighteen to
Manchester-street--be a serious obstacle. be he ever able to get
away, the day would be spend in come and return. there be no
comfort in have he in London; he might as well be at Enscombe; but
Richmond be the very distance for easy intercourse. well than
nearer!
one good thing be immediately bring to a certainty by this
removal,--the ball at the Crown. it have not be forget before,
but it have be soon acknowledge vain to attempt to fix a day. now,
however, it be absolutely to be; every preparation be resume, and
very soon after the Churchills have remove to Richmond, a few line
from Frank, to say that his aunt feel already much well for the
change, and that he have no doubt of be able to join they for
twenty-four hour at any give time, induce they to name as early a
day as possible.
Mr. Weston's ball be to be a real thing. a very few to-morrow stand
between the young people of Highbury and happiness.
Mr. Woodhouse be resign. the time of year lighten the evil to
he. May be well for every thing than February. Mrs. Bates be
engage to spend the evening at Hartfield, James have due notice, and he
sanguinely hop that neither dear little Henry nor dear little John
would have any thing the matter with they, while dear Emma be go.
CHAPTER II
no misfortune occur, again to prevent the ball. the day approach,
the day arrive; and after a morning of some anxious watching, Frank
Churchill, in all the certainty of his own self, reach Randalls
before dinner, and every thing be safe.
no second meeting have there yet be between he and Emma. the room at
the Crown be to witness it;--but it would be well than a common
meeting in a crowd. Mr. Weston have be so very earnest in his
entreaty for she arrive there as soon as possible after themselves,
for the purpose of take her opinion as to the propriety and comfort
of the room before any other person come, that she could not refuse
he, and must therefore spend some quiet interval in the young man's
company. she be to convey Harriet, and they drive to the Crown in
good time, the Randalls party just sufficiently before they.
Frank Churchill seem to have be on the watch; and though he do not
say much, his eye declare that he mean to have a delightful evening.
they all walk about together, to see that every thing be as it
should be; and within a few minute be join by the content of
another carriage, which Emma could not hear the sound of at first,
without great surprize. "so unreasonably early!" she be go to
exclaim; but she presently find that it be a family of old friend,
who be come, like herself, by particular desire, to help Mr.
Weston's judgment; and they be so very closely follow by another
carriage of cousin, who have be entreat to come early with the same
distinguish earnestness, on the same errand, that it seem as if
half the company might soon be collect together for the purpose of
preparatory inspection.
Emma perceive that her taste be not the only taste on which Mr.
Weston depend, and feel, that to be the favourite and intimate of a
man who have so many intimate and confidante, be not the very first
distinction in the scale of vanity. she like his open manner, but a
little less of open-heartedness would have make he a high
character.--general benevolence, but not general friendship, make a man
what he ought to be.-- she could fancy such a man. the whole party
walk about, and look, and praise again; and then, have nothing
else to do, form a sort of half-circle round the fire, to observe in
their various mode, till other subject be start, that, though
_May_, a fire in the evening be still very pleasant.
Emma find that it be not Mr. Weston's fault that the number of privy
councillor be not yet large. they have stop at Mrs. Bates's door
to offer the use of their carriage, but the aunt and niece be to be
bring by the Eltons.
Frank be stand by she, but not steadily; there be a restlessness,
which shew a mind not at ease. he be look about, he be go to
the door, he be watch for the sound of other carriages,--impatient
to begin, or afraid of be always near she.
Mrs. Elton be speak of. "I think she must be here soon," say he.
"I have a great curiosity to see Mrs. Elton, I have hear so much of
she. it cannot be long, I think, before she come."
a carriage be hear. he be on the move immediately; but come back,
say,
"I be forget that I be not acquaint with she. I have never see
either Mr. or Mrs. Elton. I have no business to put myself forward."
Mr. and Mrs. Elton appear; and all the smile and the propriety
pass.
"but Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax!" say Mr. Weston, look about. "we
think you be to bring they."
the mistake have be slight. the carriage be send for they now. Emma
long to know what Frank's first opinion of Mrs. Elton might be; how
he be affect by the study elegance of her dress, and her smile of
graciousness. he be immediately qualify himself to form an
opinion, by give she very proper attention, after the introduction
have pass.
in a few minute the carriage returned.--somebody talk of rain.-- "I
will see that there be umbrella, sir," say Frank to his father:
"Miss Bates must not be forget:" and away he go. Mr. Weston be
follow; but Mrs. Elton detain he, to gratify he by her opinion
of his son; and so briskly do she begin, that the young man himself,
though by no mean move slowly, could hardly be out of hearing.
"a very fine young man indeed, Mr. Weston. you know I candidly tell
you I should form my own opinion; and I be happy to say that I be
extremely pleased with him.--you may believe I. I never compliment.
I think he a very handsome young man, and his manner be precisely
what I like and approve--so truly the gentleman, without the least
conceit or puppyism. you must know I have a vast dislike to puppies--
quite a horror of they. they be never tolerate at Maple Grove.
neither Mr. Suckling nor I have ever any patience with they; and we
use sometimes to say very cut thing! Selina, who be mild almost
to a fault, bear with they much well."
while she talk of his son, Mr. Weston's attention be chain; but
when she get to Maple Grove, he could recollect that there be lady
just arrive to be attend to, and with happy smile must hurry away.
Mrs. Elton turn to Mrs. Weston. "I have no doubt of its be our
carriage with Miss Bates and Jane. our coachman and horse be so
extremely expeditious!--i believe we drive fast than any body.-- what
a pleasure it be to send one's carriage for a friend!-- I understand
you be so kind as to offer, but another time it will be quite
unnecessary. you may be very sure I shall always take care of _they_."
Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax, escort by the two gentleman, walk into
the room; and Mrs. Elton seem to think it as much her duty as Mrs.
Weston's to receive they. her gesture and movement might be
understand by any one who look on like Emma; but her word, every
body's word, be soon lose under the incessant flow of Miss Bates,
who come in talk, and have not finish her speech under many minute
after her be admit into the circle at the fire. as the door
open she be hear,
"so very obliging of you!--no rain at all. nothing to signify. I do
not care for myself. quite thick shoe. and Jane declares--
well!--(as soon as she be within the door) well! this be brilliant
indeed!--this be admirable!--excellently contrive, upon my word.
nothing want. could not have imagine it.--So well light up!--
Jane, Jane, look!--did you ever see any thing? oh! Mr. Weston, you
must really have have Aladdin's lamp. Good Mrs. Stokes would not know
her own room again. I see she as I come in; she be stand in the
entrance. 'oh! Mrs. Stokes,' say I--but I have not time for more."
she be now meet by Mrs. Weston.-- "very well, I thank you, ma'am. I
hope you be quite well. very happy to hear it. so afraid you might
have a headache!--seeing you pass by so often, and know how much
trouble you must have. delighted to hear it indeed. ah! dear Mrs.
Elton, so oblige to you for the carriage!--excellent time. Jane and I
quite ready. do not keep the horse a moment. most comfortable
carriage.-- oh! and I be sure our thank be due to you, Mrs. Weston,
on that score. Mrs. Elton have most kindly send Jane a note, or we
should have been.-- but two such offer in one day!--never be such
neighbour. I say to my mother, 'upon my word, ma'am--.' thank you,
my mother be remarkably well. go to Mr. Woodhouse's. I make she take
her shawl--for the evening be not warm--her large new shawl-- Mrs.
Dixon's wedding-present.--so kind of she to think of my mother! buy
at Weymouth, you know--Mr. Dixon's choice. there be three other,
Jane say, which they hesitate about some time. Colonel Campbell
rather prefer an olive. my dear Jane, be you sure you do not wet
your feet?--it be but a drop or two, but I be so afraid:--but Mr.
Frank Churchill be so extremely--and there be a mat to step upon--I
shall never forget his extreme politeness.--oh! Mr. Frank Churchill, I
must tell you my mother's spectacle have never be in fault since;
the rivet never come out again. my mother often talk of your
good-nature. do not she, jane?--do not we often talk of Mr. Frank
Churchill?-- ah! herebe Miss woodhouse.--dear Miss Woodhouse, how do
you do?-- very well I thank you, quite well. this be meet quite in
fairy-land!-- such a transformation!--must not compliment, I know
(eye Emma most complacently)--that would be rude--but upon my word,
Miss Woodhouse, you do look--how do you like Jane's hair?--you be a
judge.-- she do it all herself. quite wonderful how she do she
hair!-- no hairdresser from London I think could.--Ah! Dr. Hughes I
declare--and Mrs. Hughes. must go and speak to Dr. and Mrs. Hughes
for a moment.--how do you do? how do you do?--Very well, I thank you.
this be delightful, be not it?--Where's dear Mr. Richard?-- oh! there
he be. donot disturb he. much well employ talk to the young
lady. how do you do, Mr. richard?--i see you the other day as you
ride through the town--Mrs. Otway, I protest!--and good Mr. Otway, and
Miss Otway and Miss caroline.--such a host of friends!--and Mr. George
and Mr. Arthur!--How do you do? how do you all do?--quite well, I be
much oblige to you. never better.-- donot I hear another
carriage?--who can this be?--very likely the worthy coles.--upon my
word, this be charming to be stand about among such friend! and
such a noble fire!--i be quite roasted. no coffee, I thank you, for
I--never take coffee.--A little tea if you please, sir, by and
bye,--no hurry--oh! here it come. every thing so good!"
Frank Churchill return to his station by Emma; and as soon as Miss
Bates be quiet, she find herself necessarily overhear the
discourse of Mrs. Elton and Miss Fairfax, who be stand a little
way behind her.--He be thoughtful. whether he be overhear too,
she could not determine. after a good many compliment to Jane on her
dress and look, compliment very quietly and properly take, Mrs. Elton
be evidently want to be compliment herself--and it be, "how do
you like my gown?--how do you like my trimming?-- how have Wright do
my hair?"--with many other relative question, all answer with
patient politeness. Mrs. Elton then say, "nobody can think less of
dress in general than I do--but upon such an occasion as this, when
every body's eye be so much upon I, and in compliment to the
Westons--who I have no doubt be give this ball chiefly to do I
honour--I would not wish to be inferior to other. and I see very few
pearl in the room except mine.-- so Frank Churchill be a capital
dancer, I understand.--we shall see if our style suit.--a fine young
man certainly be Frank Churchill. I like he very well."
at this moment Frank begin talk so vigorously, that Emma could not
but imagine he have overhear his own praise, and do not want to hear
more;--and the voice of the lady be drown for a while, till
another suspension bring Mrs. Elton's tone again distinctly
forward.--Mr. Elton have just join they, and his wife be exclaim,
"oh! you have find we out at last, have you, in our seclusion?-- I be
this moment tell Jane, I think you would begin to be impatient for
tiding of we."
"jane!"--repeate Frank Churchill, with a look of surprize and
displeasure.-- "that be easy--but Miss Fairfax do not disapprove it,
I suppose."
"how do you like Mrs. Elton?" say Emma in a whisper.
"not at all."
"you be ungrateful."
"Ungrateful!--What do you mean?" then change from a frown to a
smile--"No, do not tell I--I do not want to know what you mean.--
where be my father?--when be we to begin dance?"
Emma could hardly understand he; he seem in an odd humour. he
walk off to find his father, but be quickly back again with both Mr.
and Mrs. Weston. he have meet with they in a little perplexity, which
must be lay before Emma. it have just occur to Mrs. Weston that
Mrs. Elton must be ask to begin the ball; that she would expect it;
which interfere with all their wish of give Emma that
distinction.--emma hear the sad truth with fortitude.
"and what be we to do for a proper partner for she?" say Mr. Weston.
"she will think Frank ought to ask she."
Frank turn instantly to Emma, to claim her former promise; and
boast himself an engaged man, which his father look his most
perfect approbation of--and it then appear that Mrs. Weston be
want _he_ to dance with Mrs. Elton himself, and that their business
be to help to persuade he into it, which be do pretty soon.-- Mr.
Weston and Mrs. Elton lead the way, Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss
Woodhouse follow. Emma must submit to stand second to Mrs. Elton,
though she have always consider the ball as peculiarly for she. it
be almost enough to make she think of marry. Mrs. Elton have
undoubtedly the advantage, at this time, in vanity completely
gratify; for though she have intend to begin with Frank Churchill,
she could not lose by the change. Mr. Weston might be his son's
superior.-- in spite of this little rub, however, Emma be smile with
enjoyment, delight to see the respectable length of the set as it be
form, and to feel that she have so many hour of unusual festivity
before her.-- she be more disturbed by Mr. Knightley's not dance
than by any thing else.--there he be, among the stander-by, where he
ought not to be; he ought to be dancing,--not class himself with the
husband, and father, and whist-player, who be pretend to feel
an interest in the dance till their rubber be make up,--so young as
he looked!-- he could not have appear to great advantage perhaps
anywhere, than where he have place himself. his tall, firm, upright
figure, among the bulky form and stoop shoulder of the elderly
man, be such as Emma feel must draw every body's eye; and, except
her own partner, there be not one among the whole row of young man who
could be compare with him.--He move a few step near, and those few
step be enough to prove in how gentlemanlike a manner, with what
natural grace, he must have dance, would he but take the
trouble.--whenever she catch his eye, she force he to smile; but in
general he be look grave. she wish he could love a ballroom
well, and could like Frank Churchill better.-- he seem often
observe she. she must not flatter herself that he think of she
dancing, but if he be criticise her behaviour, she do not feel
afraid. there be nothing like flirtation between she and her partner.
they seem more like cheerful, easy friend, than lover. that Frank
Churchill think less of she than he have do, be indubitable.
the ball proceed pleasantly. the anxious care, the incessant
attention of Mrs. Weston, be not throw away. every body seem
happy; and the praise of be a delightful ball, which be seldom
bestow till after a ball have cease to be, be repeatedly give in
the very beginning of the existence of this. of very important, very
recordable event, it be not more productive than such meeting
usually be. there be one, however, which Emma think something
of.--the two last dance before supper be begin, and Harriet have no
partner;--the only young lady sit down;--and so equal have be
hitherto the number of dancer, that how there could be any one
disengage be the wonder!--But Emma's wonder lessen soon afterwards,
on see Mr. Elton saunter about. he would not ask Harriet to
dance if it be possible to be avoid: she be sure he would not--and
she be expect he every moment to escape into the card-room.
Escape, however, be not his plan. he come to the part of the room
where the sitter-by be collect, speak to some, and walk about in
front of they, as if to shew his liberty, and his resolution of
maintain it. he do not omit be sometimes directly before Miss
Smith, or speak to those who be close to her.-- Emma see it. she
be not yet dance; she be work her way up from the bottom, and
have therefore leisure to look around, and by only turn her head a
little she see it all. when she be half-way up the set, the whole
group be exactly behind she, and she would no long allow her eye
to watch; but Mr. Elton be so near, that she hear every syllable of a
dialogue which just then take place between he and Mrs. Weston; and
she perceive that his wife, who be stand immediately above she,
be not only listen also, but even encourage he by significant
glances.--the kind-hearte, gentle Mrs. Weston have leave her seat to
join he and say, "do not you dance, Mr. Elton?" to which his prompt
reply be, "most readily, Mrs. Weston, if you will dance with I."
"Me!--oh! no--I would get you a well partner than myself. I be no
dancer."
"if Mrs. Gilbert wish to dance," say he, "I shall have great
pleasure, I be sure--for, though begin to feel myself rather an old
married man, and that my dancing day be over, it would give I very
great pleasure at any time to stand up with an old friend like Mrs.
Gilbert."
"Mrs. Gilbert do not mean to dance, but there be a young lady
disengage whom I should be very glad to see dancing--Miss Smith."
"Miss smith!--oh!--i have not observed.--You be extremely obliging--
and if I be not an old married man.--but my dancing day be over,
Mrs. Weston. you will excuse I. any thing else I should be most
happy to do, at your command--but my dancing day be over."
Mrs. Weston say no more; and Emma could imagine with what surprize and
mortification she must be return to her seat. this be Mr. Elton!
the amiable, obliging, gentle Mr. Elton.-- she look round for a
moment; he have join Mr. Knightley at a little distance, and be
arrange himself for settle conversation, while smile of high glee
pass between he and his wife.
she would not look again. her heart be in a glow, and she fear she
face might be as hot.
in another moment a happy sight catch her;--Mr. Knightley lead
Harriet to the set!--never have she be more surprized, seldom more
delight, than at that instant. she be all pleasure and gratitude,
both for Harriet and herself, and long to be thank he; and though
too distant for speech, her countenance say much, as soon as she could
catch his eye again.
his dancing prove to be just what she have believe it, extremely good;
and Harriet would have seem almost too lucky, if it have not be for
the cruel state of thing before, and for the very complete enjoyment
and very high sense of the distinction which her happy feature
announce. it be not throw away on she, she bound high than
ever, fly far down the middle, and be in a continual course of
smile.
Mr. Elton have retreat into the card-room, look (Emma trust) very
foolish. she do not think he be quite so hardened as his wife,
though grow very like her;--_she_ speak some of her feeling, by
observe audibly to her partner,
"Knightley have take pity on poor little Miss Smith!--Very goodnature,
I declare."
Supper be announce. the move begin; and Miss Bates might be hear
from that moment, without interruption, till her be seat at table
and take up her spoon.
"Jane, Jane, my dear Jane, where be you?--Here be your tippet. Mrs.
Weston beg you to put on your tippet. she say she be afraid there
will be draught in the passage, though every thing have be do--one
door nail up--quantity of mat--my dear Jane, indeed you must.
Mr. Churchill, oh! you be too obliging! how well you put it on!--so
gratify! excellent dancing indeed!-- yes, my dear, I run home, as I
say I should, to help grandmama to bed, and get back again, and nobody
miss me.--I set off without say a word, just as I tell you.
Grandmama be quite well, have a charming evening with Mr. Woodhouse, a
vast deal of chat, and backgammon.--Tea be make downstair, biscuit
and baked apple and wine before she come away: amazing luck in some
of her throw: and she inquire a great deal about you, how you be
amuse, and who be your partner. 'oh!' say I, 'I shall not
forestall Jane; I leave she dance with Mr. George Otway; she will love
to tell you all about it herself to-morrow: her first partner be Mr.
Elton, I do not know who will ask she next, perhaps Mr. William Cox.'
my dear sir, you be too obliging.--Is there nobody you would not
rather?--i be not helpless. Sir, you be most kind. upon my word,
Jane on one arm, and I on the other!--stop, stop, let we stand a
little back, Mrs. Elton be go; dear Mrs. Elton, how elegant she
looks!--beautiful lace!--now we all follow in her train. quite the
queen of the evening!--well, here we be at the passage. two step,
Jane, take care of the two step. oh! no, there be but one. well, I
be persuade there be two. how very odd! I be convince there
be two, and there be but one. I never see any thing equal to the
comfort and style--Candles everywhere.--I be tell you of your
grandmama, jane,--there be a little disappointment.-- the baked apple
and biscuit, excellent in their way, you know; but there be a
delicate fricassee of sweetbread and some asparagus bring in at
first, and good Mr. Woodhouse, not think the asparagus quite boil
enough, send it all out again. now there be nothing grandmama love
well than sweetbread and asparagus--so she be rather disappointed,
but we agree we would not speak of it to any body, for fear of its
get round to dear Miss Woodhouse, who would be so very much
concerned!--well, this be brilliant! I be all amazement! could not
have suppose any thing!--such elegance and profusion!--I have see
nothing like it since-- well, where shall we sit? where shall we sit?
anywhere, so that Jane be not in a draught. where _I_ sit be of no
consequence. oh! do you recommend this side?--well, I be sure, Mr.
Churchill--only it seem too good--but just as you please. what you
direct in this house cannot be wrong. Dear Jane, how shall we ever
recollect half the dish for grandmama? Soup too! bless I! I
should not be help so soon, but it smell most excellent, and I
cannot help begin."
Emma have no opportunity of speak to Mr. Knightley till after supper;
but, when they be all in the ballroom again, her eye invite he
irresistibly to come to she and be thank. he be warm in his
reprobation of Mr. Elton's conduct; it have be unpardonable rudeness;
and Mrs. Elton's look also receive the due share of censure.
"they aim at wound more than Harriet," say he. "Emma, why be it
that they be your enemy?"
he look with smile penetration; and, on receive no answer, add,
"_she_ ought not to be angry with you, I suspect, whatever he may
be.--to that surmise, you say nothing, of course; but confess, Emma,
that you do want he to marry Harriet."
"I do," reply Emma, "and they cannot forgive I."
he shake his head; but there be a smile of indulgence with it, and he
only say,
"I shall not scold you. I leave you to your own reflection."
"can you trust I with such flatterers?--doe my vain spirit ever tell
I I be wrong?"
"not your vain spirit, but your serious spirit.--If one lead you
wrong, I be sure the other tell you of it."
"I do own myself to have be completely mistaken in Mr. Elton. there
be a littleness about he which you discover, and which I do not:
and I be fully convinced of his be in love with Harriet. it be
through a series of strange blunder!"
"and, in return for your acknowledging so much, I will do you the
justice to say, that you would have choose for he well than he have
choose for himself.--Harriet Smith have some first-rate quality, which
Mrs. Elton be totally without. an unpretending, single-minded, artless
girl--infinitely to be prefer by any man of sense and taste to such
a woman as Mrs. Elton. I find Harriet more conversable than I
expect."
Emma be extremely gratified.--they be interrupt by the bustle of
Mr. Weston call on every body to begin dance again.
"come Miss Woodhouse, Miss Otway, Miss Fairfax, what be you all
doing?-- Come Emma, set your companion the example. every body be
lazy! every body be asleep!"
"I be ready," say Emma, "whenever I be want."
"whom be you go to dance with?" ask Mr. Knightley.
she hesitate a moment, and then reply, "with you, if you will ask
I."
"will you?" say he, offer his hand.
"indeed I will. you have shew that you can dance, and you know we be
not really so much brother and sister as to make it at all improper."
"brother and sister! no, indeed."
CHAPTER III
this little explanation with Mr. Knightley give Emma considerable
pleasure. it be one of the agreeable recollection of the ball, which
she walk about the lawn the next morning to enjoy.--She be extremely
glad that they have come to so good an understanding respect the
elton, and that their opinion of both husband and wife be so much
alike; and his praise of Harriet, his concession in her favour, be
peculiarly gratifying. the impertinence of the Eltons, which for a few
minute have threaten to ruin the rest of her evening, have be the
occasion of some of its high satisfaction; and she look forward
to another happy result--the cure of Harriet's infatuation.-- from
Harriet's manner of speak of the circumstance before they quit
the ballroom, she have strong hope. it seem as if her eye be
suddenly open, and she be enable to see that Mr. Elton be not the
superior creature she have believe he. the fever be over, and Emma
could harbour little fear of the pulse be quicken again by
injurious courtesy. she depend on the evil feeling of the elton
for supply all the discipline of pointed neglect that could be
far requisite.--harriet rational, Frank Churchill not too much in
love, and Mr. Knightley not want to quarrel with she, how very happy
a summer must be before she!
she be not to see Frank Churchill this morning. he have tell she that
he could not allow himself the pleasure of stop at Hartfield, as he
be to be at home by the middle of the day. she do not regret it.
have arrange all these matter, look they through, and put they
all to right, she be just turn to the house with spirit freshen
up for the demand of the two little boy, as well as of their
grandpapa, when the great iron sweep-gate open, and two person
enter whom she have never less expect to see together--Frank
Churchill, with Harriet lean on his arm--actually harriet!--a moment
suffice to convince she that something extraordinary have happen.
Harriet look white and frightened, and he be try to cheer her.--
the iron gate and the front-door be not twenty yard asunder;--they
be all three soon in the hall, and Harriet immediately sink into a
chair faint away.
a young lady who faint, must be recover; question must be answer,
and surprize be explain. such event be very interesting, but the
suspense of they cannot last long. a few minute make Emma acquaint
with the whole.
Miss Smith, and Miss Bickerton, another parlour boarder at Mrs.
Goddard's, who have be also at the ball, have walk out together, and
take a road, the Richmond road, which, though apparently public enough
for safety, have lead they into alarm.--about half a mile beyond
Highbury, make a sudden turn, and deeply shade by elm on each side,
it become for a considerable stretch very retire; and when the young
lady have advance some way into it, they have suddenly perceive at a
small distance before they, on a broad patch of greensward by the
side, a party of gipsy. a child on the watch, come towards they to
beg; and Miss Bickerton, excessively frightened, give a great scream,
and call on Harriet to follow she, run up a steep bank, clear a
slight hedge at the top, and make the good of her way by a short cut
back to Highbury. but poor Harriet could not follow. she have suffer
very much from cramp after dancing, and her first attempt to mount the
bank bring on such a return of it as make she absolutely powerless--
and in this state, and exceedingly terrify, she have be oblige to
remain.
how the tramper might have behave, have the young lady been more
courageous, must be doubtful; but such an invitation for attack could
not be resist; and Harriet be soon assail by half a dozen
child, head by a stout woman and a great boy, all clamorous, and
impertinent in look, though not absolutely in word.--more and more
frightened, she immediately promise they money, and take out her
purse, give they a shilling, and beg they not to want more, or to
use her ill.--She be then able to walk, though but slowly, and be
move away--but her terror and her purse be too tempting, and she
be follow, or rather surround, by the whole gang, demand more.
in this state Frank Churchill have find she, she tremble and
conditioning, they loud and insolent. by a most fortunate chance his
leave Highbury have be delay so as to bring he to her assistance
at this critical moment. the pleasantness of the morning have induce
he to walk forward, and leave his horse to meet he by another road,
a mile or two beyond Highbury--and happen to have borrow a pair
of scissor the night before of Miss Bates, and to have forget to
restore they, he have be oblige to stop at her door, and go in for a
few minute: he be therefore later than he have intend; and be on
foot, be unseen by the whole party till almost close to they. the
terror which the woman and boy have be create in Harriet be then
their own portion. he have leave they completely frightened; and Harriet
eagerly cling to he, and hardly able to speak, have just strength
enough to reach Hartfield, before her spirit be quite overcome. it
be his idea to bring she to Hartfield: he have think of no other
place.
this be the amount of the whole story,--of his communication and of
Harriet's as soon as she have recover her sens and speech.-- he
dare not stay long than to see she well; these several delay leave
he not another minute to lose; and Emma engage to give assurance of
her safety to Mrs. Goddard, and notice of there be such a set of
people in the neighbourhood to Mr. Knightley, he set off, with all the
grateful blessing that she could utter for her friend and herself.
such an adventure as this,--a fine young man and a lovely young woman
throw together in such a way, could hardly fail of suggest certain
idea to the cold heart and the steady brain. so Emma think,
at least. could a linguist, could a grammarian, could even a
mathematician have see what she do, have witness their appearance
together, and hear their history of it, without feel that
circumstance have be at work to make they peculiarly interesting to
each other?--how much more must an imaginist, like herself, be on fire
with speculation and foresight!--especially with such a groundwork of
anticipation as her mind have already make.
it be a very extraordinary thing! nothing of the sort have ever
occur before to any young lady in the place, within her memory; no
rencontre, no alarm of the kind;--and now it have happen to the very
person, and at the very hour, when the other very person be chance
to pass by to rescue her!--it certainly be very extraordinary!--and
knowing, as she do, the favourable state of mind of each at this
period, it strike she the more. he be wish to get the well of
his attachment to herself, she just recover from her mania for Mr.
Elton. it seem as if every thing unite to promise the most
interesting consequence. it be not possible that the occurrence
should not be strongly recommend each to the other.
in the few minute' conversation which she have yet have with he, while
Harriet have be partially insensible, he have speak of her terror, her
naivete, her fervour as she seize and clung to his arm, with a
sensibility amuse and delight; and just at last, after Harriet's own
account have be give, he have express his indignation at the
abominable folly of Miss Bickerton in the warm term. every thing
be to take its natural course, however, neither impel nor assist.
she would not stir a step, nor drop a hint. no, she have have enough of
interference. there could be no harm in a scheme, a mere passive
scheme. it be no more than a wish. beyond it she would on no account
proceed.
Emma's first resolution be to keep her father from the knowledge of
what have passed,--aware of the anxiety and alarm it would occasion: but
she soon feel that concealment must be impossible. within half an hour
it be know all over Highbury. it be the very event to engage those
who talk most, the young and the low; and all the youth and servant in
the place be soon in the happiness of frightful news. the last
night's ball seem lose in the gipsy. poor Mr. Woodhouse tremble
as he sit, and, as Emma have foresee, would scarcely be satisfy
without their promising never to go beyond the shrubbery again. it be
some comfort to he that many inquiry after himself and Miss
Woodhouse (for his neighbour know that he love to be inquire after),
as well as Miss Smith, be come in during the rest of the day; and
he have the pleasure of return for answer, that they be all very
indifferent--which, though not exactly true, for she be perfectly
well, and Harriet not much otherwise, Emma would not interfere with.
she have an unhappy state of health in general for the child of such a
man, for she hardly know what indisposition be; and if he do not
invent illness for she, she could make no figure in a message.
the gipsy do not wait for the operation of justice; they take
themselves off in a hurry. the young lady of Highbury might have
walk again in safety before their panic begin, and the whole history
dwindle soon into a matter of little importance but to Emma and she
nephews:--in her imagination it maintain its ground, and Henry and
John be still ask every day for the story of Harriet and the
gipsy, and still tenaciously set she right if she vary in the
slight particular from the original recital.
CHAPTER IV
a very few day have pass after this adventure, when Harriet come one
morning to Emma with a small parcel in her hand, and after sit down
and hesitating, thus begin:
"Miss Woodhouse--if you be at leisure--I have something that I should
like to tell you--a sort of confession to make--and then, you know, it
will be over."
Emma be a good deal surprize; but beg she to speak. there be a
seriousness in Harriet's manner which prepare she, quite as much as
her word, for something more than ordinary.
"it be my duty, and I be sure it be my wish," she continue, "to have
no reserve with you on this subject. as I be happily quite an alter
creature in _one_ _respect_, it be very fit that you should have the
satisfaction of know it. I do not want to say more than be
necessary--I be too much ashamed of have give way as I have do,
and I dare say you understand I."
"yes," say Emma, "I hope I do."
"how I could so long a time be fancy myself! . . ." cry Harriet,
warmly. "it seem like madness! I can see nothing at all
extraordinary in he now.--i do not care whether I meet he or
not--except that of the two I have rather not see he--and indeed I
would go any distance round to avoid he--but I do not envy his wife in
the least; I neither admire she nor envy she, as I have do: she be
very charming, I dare say, and all that, but I think her very
ill-temper and disagreeable--I shall never forget she look the other
night!--however, I assure you, Miss Woodhouse, I wish her no evil.--no,
let they be ever so happy together, it will not give I another
moment's pang: and to convince you that I have be speak truth, I
be now go to destroy--what I ought to have destroy long ago--what
I ought never to have kept-- I know that very well (blush as she
spoke).--However, now I will destroy it all--and it be my particular
wish to do it in your presence, that you may see how rational I be
grow. cannot you guess what this parcel hold?" say she, with a
conscious look.
"not the least in the world.--did he ever give you any thing?"
"no--I cannot call they gift; but they be thing that I have value
very much."
she hold the parcel towards she, and Emma read the word _most_
_precious_ _treasure_ on the top. her curiosity be greatly excited.
Harriet unfold the parcel, and she look on with impatience. within
abundance of silver paper be a pretty little Tunbridge-ware box, which
Harriet open: it be well line with the soft cotton; but,
except the cotton, Emma see only a small piece of court-plaister.
"now," say Harriet, "you _must_ recollect."
"no, indeed I do not."
"dear I! I should not have think it possible you could forget what
pass in this very room about court-plaister, one of the very last
time we ever meet in it!--It be but a very few day before I have my
sore throat--just before Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley came-- I think the
very evening.--do not you remember his cut his finger with your new
penknife, and your recommend court-plaister?-- but, as you have none
about you, and know I have, you desire I to supply he; and so I take
mine out and cut he a piece; but it be a great deal too large, and he
cut it small, and keep play some time with what be leave, before
he give it back to I. and so then, in my nonsense, I could not help
make a treasure of it--so I put it by never to be use, and look
at it now and then as a great treat."
"my dear Harriet!" cry Emma, put her hand before her face, and
jump up, "you make I more ashamed of myself than I can bear.
remember it? aye, I remember it all now; all, except your save this
relic--I know nothing of that till this moment--but the cut the
finger, and my recommend court-plaister, and say I have none about
me!--oh! my sin, my sins!--And I have plenty all the while in my
pocket!--one of my senseless tricks!--i deserve to be under a continual
blush all the rest of my life.--well--(sitte down again)--go
on--what else?"
"and have you really some at hand yourself? I be sure I never suspect
it, you do it so naturally."
"and so you actually put this piece of court-plaister by for his sake!"
say Emma, recover from her state of shame and feel divide
between wonder and amusement. and secretly she add to herself, "Lord
bless I! when should I ever have think of put by in cotton a
piece of court-plaister that Frank Churchill have be pull about! I
never be equal to this."
"here," resume Harriet, turn to her box again, "here be something
still more valuable, I mean that _have_ _be_ more valuable, because
this be what do really once belong to he, which the court-plaister
never do."
Emma be quite eager to see this superior treasure. it be the end of
an old pencil,--the part without any lead.
"this be really his," say harriet.--"do not you remember one
morning?--no, I dare say you do not. but one morning--I forget exactly
the day--but perhaps it be the Tuesday or Wednesday before _that_
_evening_, he want to make a memorandum in his pocket-book; it be
about spruce-beer. Mr. Knightley have be tell he something about
brewing spruce-beer, and he want to put it down; but when he take out
his pencil, there be so little lead that he soon cut it all away, and
it would not do, so you lend he another, and this be leave upon the
table as good for nothing. but I keep my eye on it; and, as soon as I
dare, catch it up, and never part with it again from that moment."
"I do remember it," cry Emma; "I perfectly remember it.-- talk
about spruce-beer.--oh! yes--Mr. Knightley and I both say we like
it, and Mr. Elton's seeming resolve to learn to like it too. I
perfectly remember it.--Stop; Mr. Knightley be stand just here, be
not he? I have an idea he be stand just here."
"ah! I do not know. I cannot recollect.--it be very odd, but I cannot
recollect.--Mr. Elton be sit here, I remember, much about where I
be now."--
"well, go on."
"oh! thatbe all. I have nothing more to shew you, or to say--except
that I be now go to throw they both behind the fire, and I wish you
to see I do it."
"my poor dear Harriet! and have you actually find happiness in
treasure up these thing?"
"yes, simpleton as I was!--but I be quite ashamed of it now, and wish I
could forget as easily as I can burn they. it be very wrong of I,
you know, to keep any remembrance, after he be marry. I know it
be--but have not resolution enough to part with they."
"but, Harriet, be it necessary to burn the court-plaister?--i have not
a word to say for the bit of old pencil, but the court-plaister might
be useful."
"I shall be happy to burn it," reply Harriet. "it have a
disagreeable look to I. I must get rid of every thing.-- there it
go, and there be an end, thank Heaven! of Mr. Elton."
"and when," think Emma, "will there be a beginning of Mr. Churchill?"
she have soon afterwards reason to believe that the beginning be
already make, and could not but hope that the gipsy, though she have
_tell_ no fortune, might be prove to have make harriet's.--about a
fortnight after the alarm, they come to a sufficient explanation, and
quite undesignedly. Emma be not think of it at the moment, which
make the information she receive more valuable. she merely say, in
the course of some trivial chat, "well, Harriet, whenever you marry I
would advise you to do so and so"--and think no more of it, till
after a minute's silence she hear Harriet say in a very serious tone,
"I shall never marry."
Emma then look up, and immediately see how it be; and after a
moment's debate, as to whether it should pass unnoticed or not, reply,
"never marry!--this be a new resolution."
"it be one that I shall never change, however."
after another short hesitation, "I hope it do not proceed from--I
hope it be not in compliment to Mr. Elton?"
"Mr. Elton indeed!" cry Harriet indignantly.--"Oh! no"--and Emma
could just catch the word, "so superior to Mr. Elton!"
she then take a long time for consideration. should she proceed no
farther?--should she let it pass, and seem to suspect nothing?--
perhaps Harriet might think her cold or angry if she do; or perhaps if
she be totally silent, it might only drive Harriet into ask she to
hear too much; and against any thing like such an unreserve as have
be, such an open and frequent discussion of hope and chance, she
be perfectly resolved.-- she believe it would be wise for she to say
and know at once, all that she mean to say and know. plain dealing
be always best. she have previously determine how far she would
proceed, on any application of the sort; and it would be safe for
both, to have the judicious law of her own brain lay down with
speed.-- she be decide, and thus spoke--
"Harriet, I will not affect to be in doubt of your meaning. your
resolution, or rather your expectation of never marry, result from
an idea that the person whom you might prefer, would be too greatly
your superior in situation to think of you. be not it so?"
"oh! Miss Woodhouse, believe I I have not the presumption to
suppose-- indeed I be not so mad.--but it be a pleasure to I to admire
he at a distance--and to think of his infinite superiority to all the
rest of the world, with the gratitude, wonder, and veneration, which
be so proper, in I especially."
"I be not at all surprize at you, Harriet. the service he render
you be enough to warm your heart."
"Service! oh! it be such an inexpressible obligation!-- the very
recollection of it, and all that I feel at the time--when I see he
come--his noble look--and my wretchedness before. such a change! in
one moment such a change! from perfect misery to perfect happiness!"
"it be very natural. it be natural, and it be honourable.-- yes,
honourable, I think, to chuse so well and so gratefully.-- but that it
will be a fortunate preference be more that I can promise. I do not
advise you to give way to it, Harriet. I do not by any mean engage
for its being return. consider what you be about. perhaps it will
be wisest in you to check your feeling while you can: at any rate do
not let they carry you far, unless you be persuade of his like you.
be observant of he. let his behaviour be the guide of your
sensation. I give you this caution now, because I shall never speak
to you again on the subject. I be determine against all interference.
Henceforward I know nothing of the matter. let no name ever pass our
lip. we be very wrong before; we will be cautious now.--He be your
superior, no doubt, and there do seem objection and obstacle of a
very serious nature; but yet, Harriet, more wonderful thing have take
place, there have be match of great disparity. but take care of
yourself. I would not have you too sanguine; though, however it may
end, be assure your raise your thought to _he_, be a mark of good
taste which I shall always know how to value."
Harriet kiss her hand in silent and submissive gratitude. Emma be
very decide in think such an attachment no bad thing for her
friend. its tendency would be to raise and refine her mind--and it
must be save she from the danger of degradation.
CHAPTER V
in this state of scheme, and hope, and connivance, June open upon
Hartfield. to Highbury in general it bring no material change. the
Eltons be still talk of a visit from the suckling, and of the use
to be make of their barouche-landau; and Jane Fairfax be still at her
grandmother's; and as the return of the Campbells from Ireland be
again delay, and August, instead of Midsummer, fix for it, she be
likely to remain there full two month long, provide at least she
be able to defeat Mrs. Elton's activity in her service, and save
herself from be hurry into a delightful situation against her will.
Mr. Knightley, who, for some reason well know to himself, have
certainly take an early dislike to Frank Churchill, be only grow
to dislike he more. he begin to suspect he of some double dealing in
his pursuit of Emma. that Emma be his object appear indisputable.
every thing declare it; his own attention, his father's hint, his
mother-in-law's guard silence; it be all in unison; word, conduct,
discretion, and indiscretion, tell the same story. but while so many
be devote he to Emma, and Emma herself make he over to Harriet,
Mr. Knightley begin to suspect he of some inclination to trifle with
Jane Fairfax. he could not understand it; but there be symptom of
intelligence between they--he think so at least--symptom of
admiration on his side, which, have once observe, he could not
persuade himself to think entirely void of meaning, however he might
wish to escape any of Emma's error of imagination. _she_ be not
present when the suspicion first arise. he be din with the
Randalls family, and Jane, at the elton'; and he have see a look, more
than a single look, at Miss Fairfax, which, from the admirer of Miss
Woodhouse, seem somewhat out of place. when he be again in their
company, he could not help remember what he have see; nor could he
avoid observation which, unless it be like Cowper and his fire at
twilight,
"myself create what I see,"
bring he yet strong suspicion of there be a something of
private liking, of private understanding even, between Frank Churchill
and Jane.
he have walk up one day after dinner, as he very often do, to spend
his evening at Hartfield. Emma and Harriet be go to walk; he
join they; and, on return, they fall in with a large party, who,
like themselves, judge it wisest to take their exercise early, as the
weather threaten rain; Mr. and Mrs. Weston and their son, Miss Bates
and her niece, who have accidentally meet. they all unite; and, on
reach Hartfield gate, Emma, who know it be exactly the sort of
visit that would be welcome to her father, press they all to go in
and drink tea with he. the Randalls party agree to it immediately;
and after a pretty long speech from Miss Bates, which few person
listen to, she also find it possible to accept dear Miss Woodhouse's
most obliging invitation.
as they be turn into the ground, Mr. Perry pass by on
horseback. the gentleman speak of his horse.
"by the bye," say Frank Churchill to Mrs. Weston presently, "what
become of Mr. Perry's plan of set up his carriage?"
Mrs. Weston look surprized, and say, "I do not know that he ever
have any such plan."
"Nay, I have it from you. you write I word of it three month ago."
"I! impossible!"
"indeed you do. I remember it perfectly. you mention it as what
be certainly to be very soon. Mrs. Perry have tell somebody, and be
extremely happy about it. it be owe to _her_ persuasion, as she
think his be out in bad weather do he a great deal of harm. you
must remember it now?"
"upon my word I never hear of it till this moment."
"never! really, never!--bless I! how could it be?--Then I must have
dream it--but I be completely persuade--Miss Smith, you walk as if
you be tired. you will not be sorry to find yourself at home."
"what be this?--what be this?" cry Mr. Weston, "about Perry and a
carriage? be Perry go to set up his carriage, Frank? I be glad he
can afford it. you have it from himself, have you?"
"no, sir," reply his son, laugh, "I seem to have have it from
nobody.--very odd!--i really be persuade of Mrs. Weston's have
mention it in one of her letter to Enscombe, many week ago, with
all these particular--but as she declare she never hear a syllable
of it before, of course it must have be a dream. I be a great
dreamer. I dream of every body at Highbury when I be away--and when I
have go through my particular friend, then I begin dream of Mr.
and Mrs. Perry."
"it be odd though," observe his father, "that you should have have such
a regular connected dream about people whom it be not very likely you
should be think of at Enscombe. Perry's set up his carriage!
and his wife's persuade he to it, out of care for his health--just
what will happen, I have no doubt, some time or other; only a little
premature. what an air of probability sometimes run through a dream!
and at other, what a heap of absurdity it be! well, Frank, your
dream certainly shews that Highbury be in your thought when you be
absent. Emma, you be a great dreamer, I think?"
Emma be out of hearing. she have hurry on before her guest to
prepare her father for their appearance, and be beyond the reach of
Mr. Weston's hint.
"why, to own the truth," cry Miss Bates, who have be try in vain
to be hear the last two minute, "if I must speak on this subject,
there be no deny that Mr. Frank Churchill might have--I do not mean
to say that he do not dream it--I be sure I have sometimes the oddest
dream in the world--but if I be question about it, I must
acknowledge that there be such an idea last spring; for Mrs. Perry
herself mention it to my mother, and the Coles know of it as well as
ourselves--but it be quite a secret, know to nobody else, and only
thought of about three day. Mrs. Perry be very anxious that he
should have a carriage, and come to my mother in great spirit one
morning because she think she have prevail. Jane, donot you
remember grandmama's tell we of it when we get home? I forget where
we have be walk to--very likely to Randalls; yes, I think it be
to Randalls. Mrs. Perry be always particularly fond of my
mother--indeed I do not know who be not--and she have mention it to
she in confidence; she have no objection to she tell we, of course,
but it be not to go beyond: and, from that day to this, I never
mention it to a soul that I know of. at the same time, I will not
positively answer for my have never dropt a hint, because I know I do
sometimes pop out a thing before I be aware. I be a talker, you know;
I be rather a talker; and now and then I have let a thing escape I
which I should not. I be not like Jane; I wish I be. I will answer
for it _she_ never betray the least thing in the world. where be
she?--oh! just behind. perfectly remember Mrs. Perry's coming.--
extraordinary dream, indeed!"
they be enter the hall. Mr. Knightley's eye have precede Miss
Bates's in a glance at Jane. from Frank Churchill's face, where he
think he see confusion suppress or laugh away, he have
involuntarily turn to her; but she be indeed behind, and too busy
with her shawl. Mr. Weston have walk in. the two other gentleman
wait at the door to let she pass. Mr. Knightley suspect in Frank
Churchill the determination of catch her eye--he seem watch
she intently--in vain, however, if it be so-- Jane pass between
they into the hall, and look at neither.
there be no time for farth remark or explanation. the dream must be
bear with, and Mr. Knightley must take his seat with the rest round
the large modern circular table which Emma have introduce at Hartfield,
and which none but Emma could have have power to place there and
persuade her father to use, instead of the small-sized Pembroke, on
which two of his daily meal have, for forty year be crowd. Tea
pass pleasantly, and nobody seem in a hurry to move.
"Miss Woodhouse," say Frank Churchill, after examine a table behind
he, which he could reach as he sit, "have your nephew take away
their alphabet--their box of letter? it use to stand here. where
be it? this be a sort of dull-look evening, that ought to be
treat rather as winter than summer. we have great amusement with
those letter one morning. I want to puzzle you again."
Emma be pleased with the thought; and produce the box, the table be
quickly scatter over with alphabet, which no one seem so much
dispose to employ as their two self. they be rapidly form
word for each other, or for any body else who would be puzzle. the
quietness of the game make it particularly eligible for Mr. Woodhouse,
who have often be distress by the more animate sort, which Mr.
Weston have occasionally introduce, and who now sit happily occupy in
lamenting, with tender melancholy, over the departure of the "poor
little boy," or in fondly point out, as he take up any stray letter
near he, how beautifully Emma have write it.
Frank Churchill place a word before Miss Fairfax. she give a slight
glance round the table, and apply herself to it. Frank be next to
Emma, Jane opposite to they--and Mr. Knightley so place as to see they
all; and it be his object to see as much as he could, with as little
apparent observation. the word be discover, and with a faint smile
push away. if mean to be immediately mix with the other, and
bury from sight, she should have look on the table instead of
look just across, for it be not mixed; and Harriet, eager after
every fresh word, and find out none, directly take it up, and fall
to work. she be sit by Mr. Knightley, and turn to he for help.
the word be _blunder_; and as Harriet exultingly proclaim it, there
be a blush on Jane's cheek which give it a meaning not otherwise
ostensible. Mr. Knightley connect it with the dream; but how it
could all be, be beyond his comprehension. how the delicacy, the
discretion of his favourite could have be so lain asleep! he fear
there must be some decide involvement. disingenuousness and double
dealing seem to meet he at every turn. these letter be but the
vehicle for gallantry and trick. it be a child's play, choose to
conceal a deep game on Frank Churchill's part.
with great indignation do he continue to observe he; with great alarm
and distrust, to observe also his two blind companion. he see a
short word prepare for Emma, and give to she with a look sly and
demure. he see that Emma have soon make it out, and find it highly
entertaining, though it be something which she judge it proper to
appear to censure; for she say, "Nonsense! for shame!" he hear Frank
Churchill next say, with a glance towards Jane, "I will give it to
she--shall I?"--and as clearly hear Emma oppose it with eager
laugh warmth. "no, no, you must not; you shall not, indeed."
it be do however. this gallant young man, who seem to love
without feeling, and to recommend himself without complaisance,
directly hand over the word to Miss Fairfax, and with a particular
degree of sedate civility entreat she to study it. Mr. Knightley's
excessive curiosity to know what this word might be, make he seize
every possible moment for dart his eye towards it, and it be not
long before he see it to be _Dixon_. Jane Fairfax's perception seem
to accompany his; her comprehension be certainly more equal to the
covert meaning, the superior intelligence, of those five letter so
arrange. she be evidently displease; look up, and see herself
watch, blush more deeply than he have ever perceive she, and say
only, "I do not know that proper name be allow," push away the
letter with even an angry spirit, and look resolve to be engage by
no other word that could be offer. her face be avert from those
who have make the attack, and turn towards her aunt.
"Aye, very true, my dear," cry the latter, though Jane have not speak
a word--"i be just go to say the same thing. it be time for we to
be go indeed. the evening be close in, and grandmama will be
look for we. my dear sir, you be too obliging. we really must
wish you good night."
Jane's alertness in move, prove she as ready as her aunt have
preconceive. she be immediately up, and want to quit the table;
but so many be also move, that she could not get away; and Mr.
Knightley think he see another collection of letter anxiously push
towards she, and resolutely sweep away by her unexamined. she be
afterwards look for her shawl--Frank Churchill be look also--it
be grow dusk, and the room be in confusion; and how they part,
Mr. Knightley could not tell.
he remain at Hartfield after all the rest, his thought full of what
he have see; so full, that when the candle come to assist his
observation, he must--yes, he certainly must, as a friend--an anxious
friend--give Emma some hint, ask she some question. he could not see
she in a situation of such danger, without try to preserve she. it
be his duty.
"pray, Emma," say he, "may I ask in what lie the great amusement, the
poignant sting of the last word give to you and Miss Fairfax? I see
the word, and be curious to know how it could be so very entertaining
to the one, and so very distressing to the other."
Emma be extremely confused. she could not endure to give he the true
explanation; for though her suspicion be by no mean remove, she
be really ashamed of have ever impart they.
"oh!" she cry in evident embarrassment, "it all mean nothing; a mere
joke among ourselves."
"the joke," he reply gravely, "seem confine to you and Mr.
Churchill."
he have hop she would speak again, but she do not. she would rather
busy herself about any thing than speak. he sit a little while in
doubt. a variety of evil cross his mind. interference--fruitless
interference. Emma's confusion, and the acknowledge intimacy, seem
to declare her affection engage. yet he would speak. he owe it to
she, to risk any thing that might be involve in an unwelcome
interference, rather than her welfare; to encounter any thing, rather
than the remembrance of neglect in such a cause.
"my dear Emma," say he at last, with earnest kindness, "do you think
you perfectly understand the degree of acquaintance between the
gentleman and lady we have be speak of?"
"between Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax? oh! yes, perfectly.--
why do you make a doubt of it?"
"have you never at any time have reason to think that he admire she, or
that she admire he?"
"never, never!" she cry with a most open eagerness--"never, for the
twentieth part of a moment, do such an idea occur to I. and how
could it possibly come into your head?"
"I have lately imagine that I see symptom of attachment between
they--certain expressive look, which I do not believe mean to be
public."
"oh! you amuse I excessively. I be delighted to find that you can
vouchsafe to let your imagination wander--but it will not do--very
sorry to check you in your first essay--but indeed it will not do.
there be no admiration between they, I do assure you; and the
appearance which have catch you, have arise from some peculiar
circumstance--feeling rather of a totally different nature--it be
impossible exactly to explain:--there be a good deal of nonsense in
it--but the part which be capable of be communicate, which be
sense, be, that they be as far from any attachment or admiration for
one another, as any two being in the world can be. that is, I
_presume_ it to be so on her side, and I can _answer_ for its being so
on his. I will answer for the gentleman's indifference."
she speak with a confidence which stagger, with a satisfaction which
silence, Mr. Knightley. she be in gay spirit, and would have
prolong the conversation, want to hear the particular of his
suspicion, every look describe, and all the wheres and hows of a
circumstance which highly entertain she: but his gaiety do not meet
her. he find he could not be useful, and his feeling be too much
irritated for talk. that he might not be irritated into an absolute
fever, by the fire which Mr. Woodhouse's tender habit require almost
every evening throughout the year, he soon afterwards take a hasty
leave, and walk home to the coolness and solitude of Donwell Abbey.
CHAPTER VI
after be long feed with hope of a speedy visit from Mr. and Mrs.
Suckling, the Highbury world be oblige to endure the mortification
of hear that they could not possibly come till the autumn. no such
importation of novelty could enrich their intellectual store at
present. in the daily interchange of news, they must be again
restrict to the other topic with which for a while the suckling'
coming have be unite, such as the last account of Mrs. Churchill,
whose health seem every day to supply a different report, and the
situation of Mrs. Weston, whose happiness it be to be hop might
eventually be as much increase by the arrival of a child, as that of
all her neighbour be by the approach of it.
Mrs. Elton be very much disappointed. it be the delay of a great
deal of pleasure and parade. her introduction and recommendation
must all wait, and every project party be still only talk of. so
she think at first;--but a little consideration convince she that
every thing need not be put off. why should not they explore to Box
Hill though the Sucklings do not come? they could go there again with
they in the autumn. it be settle that they should go to Box Hill.
that there be to be such a party have be long generally know: it
have even give the idea of another. Emma have never be to Box Hill;
she wish to see what every body find so well worth seeing, and she
and Mr. Weston have agree to chuse some fine morning and drive thither.
two or three more of the choose only be to be admit to join they,
and it be to be do in a quiet, unpretending, elegant way, infinitely
superior to the bustle and preparation, the regular eating and
drinking, and picnic parade of the Eltons and the Sucklings.
this be so very well understand between they, that Emma could not but
feel some surprise, and a little displeasure, on hear from Mr.
Weston that he have be propose to Mrs. Elton, as her brother and
sister have fail she, that the two party should unite, and go
together; and that as Mrs. Elton have very readily accede to it, so it
be to be, if she have no objection. now, as her objection be nothing
but her very great dislike of Mrs. Elton, of which Mr. Weston must
already be perfectly aware, it be not worth bring forward
again:--it could not be do without a reproof to he, which would be
give pain to his wife; and she find herself therefore oblige to
consent to an arrangement which she would have do a great deal to
avoid; an arrangement which would probably expose she even to the
degradation of be say to be of Mrs. Elton's party! every feeling
be offend; and the forbearance of her outward submission leave a
heavy arrear due of secret severity in her reflection on the
unmanageable goodwill of Mr. Weston's temper.
"I be glad you approve of what I have do," say he very comfortably.
"but I think you would. such scheme as these be nothing without
number. one cannot have too large a party. a large party secure its
own amusement. and she be a good-natured woman after all. one could
not leave she out."
Emma deny none of it aloud, and agree to none of it in private.
it be now the middle of June, and the weather fine; and Mrs. Elton be
grow impatient to name the day, and settle with Mr. Weston as to
pigeon-pie and cold lamb, when a lame carriage-horse throw every thing
into sad uncertainty. it might be week, it might be only a few day,
before the horse be useable; but no preparation could be venture
on, and it be all melancholy stagnation. Mrs. Elton's resource be
inadequate to such an attack.
"be not this most vexatious, Knightley?" she cried.--"and such weather
for exploring!--these delay and disappointment be quite odious.
what be we to do?--The year will wear away at this rate, and nothing
do. before this time last year I assure you we have have a delightful
explore party from Maple Grove to king Weston."
"you have well explore to Donwell," reply Mr. Knightley. "that may
be do without horse. come, and eat my strawberry. they be
ripen fast."
if Mr. Knightley do not begin seriously, he be oblige to proceed so,
for his proposal be catch at with delight; and the "oh! I should
like it of all thing," be not plainer in word than manner. Donwell
be famous for its strawberry-bed, which seem a plea for the
invitation: but no plea be necessary; cabbage-bed would have be
enough to tempt the lady, who only want to be go somewhere. she
promise he again and again to come--much oftener than he doubt--and
be extremely gratified by such a proof of intimacy, such a
distinguish compliment as she choose to consider it.
"you may depend upon I," say she. "I certainly will come. name your
day, and I will come. you will allow I to bring Jane Fairfax?"
"I cannot name a day," say he, "till I have speak to some other whom
I would wish to meet you."
"oh! leave all that to I. only give I a carte-blanche.--I be Lady
Patroness, you know. it be my party. I will bring friend with I."
"I hope you will bring Elton," say he: "but I will not trouble you to
give any other invitation."
"oh! now you be look very sly. but consider--you need not be
afraid of delegate power to _I_. I be no young lady on her
preferment. married woman, you know, may be safely authorise. it be
my party. leave it all to I. I will invite your guest."
"No,"--he calmly replied,--"there be but one married woman in the world
whom I can ever allow to invite what guest she please to Donwell, and
that one is--"
"--Mrs. Weston, I suppose," interrupt Mrs. Elton, rather mortify.
"No--Mrs. Knightley;--and till she be in be, I will manage such
matter myself."
"ah! you be an odd creature!" she cry, satisfied to have no one
prefer to herself.--"you be a humourist, and may say what you like.
quite a humourist. well, I shall bring Jane with I--Jane and her
aunt.--the rest I leave to you. I have no objection at all to meet
the Hartfield family. donot scruple. I know you be attach to they."
"you certainly will meet they if I can prevail; and I shall call on
Miss Bates in my way home."
"thatbe quite unnecessary; I see Jane every day:--but as you like. it
be to be a morning scheme, you know, Knightley; quite a simple thing.
I shall wear a large bonnet, and bring one of my little basket hang
on my arm. here,--probably this basket with pink ribbon. nothing can
be more simple, you see. and Jane will have such another. there be to
be no form or parade--a sort of gipsy party. we be to walk about your
garden, and gather the strawberry ourselves, and sit under
trees;--and whatever else you may like to provide, it be to be all out
of door--a table spread in the shade, you know. every thing as
natural and simple as possible. be not that your idea?"
"not quite. my idea of the simple and the natural will be to have the
table spread in the dining-room. the nature and the simplicity of
gentleman and lady, with their servant and furniture, I think be
well observe by meal within door. when you be tired of eat
strawberry in the garden, there shall be cold meat in the house."
"well--as you please; only donot have a great set out. and, by the
bye, can I or my housekeeper be of any use to you with our opinion?--
Pray be sincere, Knightley. if you wish I to talk to Mrs. Hodges, or
to inspect anything--"
"I have not the least wish for it, I thank you."
"well--but if any difficulty should arise, my housekeeper be
extremely clever."
"I will answer for it, that mine think herself full as clever, and
would spurn any body's assistance."
"I wish we have a donkey. the thing would be for we all to come on
donkey, Jane, Miss Bates, and I--and my caro sposo walk by. I
really must talk to he about purchase a donkey. in a country life I
conceive it to be a sort of necessary; for, let a woman have ever so
many resource, it be not possible for she to be always shut up at
home;--and very long walk, you know--in summer there be dust, and in
winter there be dirt."
"you will not find either, between Donwell and Highbury. Donwell Lane
be never dusty, and now it be perfectly dry. come on a donkey,
however, if you prefer it. you can borrow Mrs. Cole's. I would wish
every thing to be as much to your taste as possible."
"that I be sure you would. indeed I do you justice, my good friend.
under that peculiar sort of dry, blunt manner, I know you have the
warm heart. as I tell Mr. E., you be a thorough humourist.-- yes,
believe I, Knightley, I be fully sensible of your attention to I in
the whole of this scheme. you have hit upon the very thing to please
I."
Mr. Knightley have another reason for avoid a table in the shade. he
wish to persuade Mr. Woodhouse, as well as Emma, to join the party;
and he know that to have any of they sit down out of door to eat
would inevitably make he ill. Mr. Woodhouse must not, under the
specious pretence of a morning drive, and an hour or two spend at
Donwell, be tempt away to his misery.
he be invite on good faith. no lurk horror be to upbraid he
for his easy credulity. he do consent. he have not be at Donwell
for two year. "some very fine morning, he, and Emma, and Harriet,
could go very well; and he could sit still with Mrs. Weston, while the
dear girl walk about the garden. he do not suppose they could be
damp now, in the middle of the day. he should like to see the old
house again exceedingly, and should be very happy to meet Mr. and Mrs.
Elton, and any other of his neighbours.--he could not see any objection
at all to his, and Emma's, and Harriet's go there some very fine
morning. he think it very well do of Mr. Knightley to invite
they--very kind and sensible--much cleverer than din out.--He be
not fond of din out."
Mr. Knightley be fortunate in every body's most ready concurrence.
the invitation be everywhere so well receive, that it seem as if,
like Mrs. Elton, they be all take the scheme as a particular
compliment to themselves.--Emma and Harriet profess very high
expectation of pleasure from it; and Mr. Weston, unasked, promise to
get Frank over to join they, if possible; a proof of approbation and
gratitude which could have be dispense with.-- Mr. Knightley be
then oblige to say that he should be glad to see he; and Mr. Weston
engage to lose no time in writing, and spare no argument to induce
he to come.
in the meanwhile the lame horse recover so fast, that the party to
Box Hill be again under happy consideration; and at last Donwell be
settle for one day, and Box Hill for the next,--the weather appear
exactly right.
under a bright mid-day sun, at almost Midsummer, Mr. Woodhouse be
safely convey in his carriage, with one window down, to partake of
this al-fresco party; and in one of the most comfortable room in the
Abbey, especially prepare for he by a fire all the morning, he be
happily place, quite at his ease, ready to talk with pleasure of what
have be achieve, and advise every body to come and sit down, and not
to heat themselves.-- Mrs. Weston, who seem to have walk there on
purpose to be tired, and sit all the time with he, remain, when all
the other be invite or persuade out, his patient listener and
sympathiser.
it be so long since Emma have be at the Abbey, that as soon as she
be satisfied of her father's comfort, she be glad to leave he, and
look around she; eager to refresh and correct her memory with more
particular observation, more exact understanding of a house and ground
which must ever be so interesting to she and all her family.
she feel all the honest pride and complacency which her alliance with
the present and future proprietor could fairly warrant, as she view
the respectable size and style of the building, its suitable, become,
characteristic situation, low and sheltered--its ample garden
stretch down to meadow wash by a stream, of which the Abbey, with
all the old neglect of prospect, have scarcely a sight--and its
abundance of timber in row and avenue, which neither fashion nor
extravagance have root up.--the house be large than Hartfield, and
totally unlike it, cover a good deal of ground, ramble and
irregular, with many comfortable, and one or two handsome rooms.--it
be just what it ought to be, and it look what it be--and Emma feel
an increase respect for it, as the residence of a family of such true
gentility, untainted in blood and understanding.--some fault of temper
John Knightley have; but Isabella have connect herself unexceptionably.
she have give they neither man, nor name, nor place, that could raise
a blush. these be pleasant feeling, and she walk about and
indulge they till it be necessary to do as the other do, and
collect round the strawberry-beds.--the whole party be assemble,
except Frank Churchill, who be expect every moment from Richmond;
and Mrs. Elton, in all her apparatus of happiness, her large bonnet and
her basket, be very ready to lead the way in gathering, accept, or
talk--strawberry, and only strawberry, could now be think or
speak of.--"the good fruit in England--every body's favourite--always
wholesome.--These the fine bed and fine sorts.--delightful to
gather for one's self--the only way of really enjoy them.--morne
decidedly the good time--never tired--every sort good--hautboy
infinitely superior--no comparison--the other hardly
eatable--hautboy very scarce--Chili preferred--white wood fine
flavour of all--price of strawberry in London--abundance about
Bristol--Maple Grove--cultivation--bed when to be renew--gardener
think exactly different--no general rule--gardener never to be put
out of their way--delicious fruit--only too rich to be eat much
of--inferior to cherry--currant more refreshing--only objection to
gather strawberry the stoop--glare sun--tired to death--could
bear it no long--must go and sit in the shade."
such, for half an hour, be the conversation--interrupt only once by
Mrs. Weston, who come out, in her solicitude after her son-in-law, to
inquire if he be come--and she be a little uneasy.-- she have some
fear of his horse.
seat tolerably in the shade be find; and now Emma be oblige to
overhear what Mrs. Elton and Jane Fairfax be talk of.-- a
situation, a most desirable situation, be in question. Mrs. Elton have
receive notice of it that morning, and be in rapture. it be not
with Mrs. Suckling, it be not with Mrs. Bragge, but in felicity and
splendour it fall short only of they: it be with a cousin of Mrs.
Bragge, an acquaintance of Mrs. Suckling, a lady know at Maple Grove.
Delightful, charming, superior, first circle, sphere, line, rank,
every thing--and Mrs. Elton be wild to have the offer close with
immediately.--on her side, all be warmth, energy, and triumph--and she
positively refuse to take her friend's negative, though Miss Fairfax
continue to assure she that she would not at present engage in any
thing, repeat the same motif which she have be hear to urge
before.-- still Mrs. Elton insist on be authorise to write an
acquiescence by the morrow's post.--How Jane could bear it at all, be
astonishing to emma.--she do look vex, she do speak pointedly--and
at last, with a decision of action unusual to she, propose a
removal.-- "should not they walk? would not Mr. Knightley shew they
the gardens--all the gardens?--She wish to see the whole
extent."--The pertinacity of her friend seem more than she could bear.
it be hot; and after walk some time over the garden in a
scatter, disperse way, scarcely any three together, they insensibly
follow one another to the delicious shade of a broad short avenue of
lime, which stretch beyond the garden at an equal distance from the
river, seem the finish of the pleasure grounds.-- it lead to nothing;
nothing but a view at the end over a low stone wall with high pillar,
which seem intended, in their erection, to give the appearance of an
approach to the house, which never have be there. disputable,
however, as might be the taste of such a termination, it be in itself
a charming walk, and the view which close it extremely pretty.--The
considerable slope, at nearly the foot of which the Abbey stand,
gradually acquire a steep form beyond its ground; and at half a
mile distant be a bank of considerable abruptness and grandeur, well
clothe with wood;--and at the bottom of this bank, favourably place
and shelter, rise the Abbey Mill Farm, with meadow in front, and the
river make a close and handsome curve around it.
it be a sweet view--sweet to the eye and the mind. english verdure,
english culture, English comfort, see under a sun bright, without
be oppressive.
in this walk Emma and Mr. Weston find all the other assemble; and
towards this view she immediately perceive Mr. Knightley and Harriet
distinct from the rest, quietly lead the way. Mr. Knightley and
Harriet!--It be an odd tete-a-tete; but she be glad to see it.--there
have be a time when he would have scorn she as a companion, and
turn from she with little ceremony. now they seem in pleasant
conversation. there have be a time also when Emma would have be
sorry to see Harriet in a spot so favourable for the Abbey Mill Farm;
but now she fear it not. it might be safely view with all its
appendage of prosperity and beauty, its rich pasture, spread
flock, orchard in blossom, and light column of smoke ascending.--She
join they at the wall, and find they more engaged in talk than in
look around. he be give Harriet information as to mode of
agriculture, etc. and Emma receive a smile which seem to say,
"these be my own concern. I have a right to talk on such subject,
without be suspect of introduce Robert Martin."--she do not
suspect he. it be too old a story.--robert Martin have probably
cease to think of harriet.--they take a few turn together along the
walk.--the shade be most refreshing, and Emma find it the pleasant
part of the day.
the next remove be to the house; they must all go in and eat;--and
they be all seated and busy, and still Frank Churchill do not come.
Mrs. Weston look, and look in vain. his father would not own
himself uneasy, and laugh at her fear; but she could not be cure of
wish that he would part with his black mare. he have express
himself as to come, with more than common certainty. "his aunt be
so much well, that he have not a doubt of get over to they."--mrs.
Churchill's state, however, as many be ready to remind she, be
liable to such sudden variation as might disappoint her nephew in the
most reasonable dependence--and Mrs. Weston be at last persuade to
believe, or to say, that it must be by some attack of Mrs. Churchill
that he be prevent coming.-- Emma look at Harriet while the point
be under consideration; she behave very well, and betray no emotion.
the cold repast be over, and the party be to go out once more to see
what have not yet be see, the old Abbey fish-pond; perhaps get as
far as the clover, which be to be begin cut on the morrow, or, at
any rate, have the pleasure of be hot, and grow cool again.--mr.
Woodhouse, who have already take his little round in the high part
of the gardens, where no damp from the river be imagine even by
he, stir no more; and his daughter resolve to remain with he,
that Mrs. Weston might be persuade away by her husband to the exercise
and variety which her spirit seem to need.
Mr. Knightley have do all in his power for Mr. Woodhouse's
entertainment. book of engraving, drawer of medal, cameo, coral,
shell, and every other family collection within his cabinet, have be
prepared for his old friend, to while away the morning; and the
kindness have perfectly answer. Mr. Woodhouse have be exceedingly
well amuse. Mrs. Weston have be shew they all to he, and now he
would shew they all to emma;--fortunate in have no other resemblance
to a child, than in a total want of taste for what he see, for he be
slow, constant, and methodical.--before this second look over be
begin, however, Emma walk into the hall for the sake of a few
moment' free observation of the entrance and ground-plot of the
house--and be hardly there, when Jane Fairfax appear, come quickly
in from the garden, and with a look of escape.-- little expect to
meet Miss Woodhouse so soon, there be a start at first; but Miss
Woodhouse be the very person she be in quest of.
"will you be so kind," say she, "when I be miss, as to say that I be
go home?--I be go this moment.--my aunt be not aware how late it
be, nor how long we have be absent--but I be sure we shall be want,
and I be determined to go directly.--i have say nothing about it to
any body. it would only be give trouble and distress. some be go
to the pond, and some to the lime walk. till they all come in I shall
not be miss; and when they do, will you have the goodness to say that
I be go?"
"certainly, if you wish it;--but you be not go to walk to Highbury
alone?"
"yes--what should hurt me?--i walk fast. I shall be at home in twenty
minute."
"but it be too far, indeed it be, to be walk quite alone. let my
father's servant go with you.--let I order the carriage. it can be
round in five minute."
"thank you, thank you--but on no account.--i would rather walk.-- and
for _I_ to be afraid of walk alone!--i, who may so soon have to
guard other!"
she speak with great agitation; and Emma very feelingly reply, "that
can be no reason for your be expose to danger now. I must order
the carriage. the heat even would be danger.--you be fatigue
already."
"I am,"--she answered--"i be fatigue; but it be not the sort of
fatigue--quick walking will refresh me.--Miss Woodhouse, we all know at
time what it be to be weary in spirit. mine, I confess, be
exhausted. the great kindness you can shew I, will be to let I
have my own way, and only say that I be go when it be necessary."
Emma have not another word to oppose. she see it all; and enter into
her feeling, promote she quit the house immediately, and watch
she safely off with the zeal of a friend. her parting look be
grateful--and her parting word, "oh! Miss Woodhouse, the comfort of
be sometimes alone!"--seeme to burst from an overcharged heart, and
to describe somewhat of the continual endurance to be practise by she,
even towards some of those who love she good.
"such a home, indeed! such an aunt!" say Emma, as she turn back into
the hall again. "I do pity you. and the more sensibility you betray
of their just horror, the more I shall like you."
Jane have not be go a quarter of an hour, and they have only
accomplish some view of St. Mark's Place, Venice, when Frank
Churchill enter the room. Emma have not be think of he, she have
forget to think of he--but she be very glad to see he. Mrs.
Weston would be at ease. the black mare be blameless; _they_ be
right who have name Mrs. Churchill as the cause. he have be detain
by a temporary increase of illness in she; a nervous seizure, which have
last some hour--and he have quite give up every thought of come,
till very late;--and have he know how hot a ride he should have, and
how late, with all his hurry, he must be, he believe he should not
have come at all. the heat be excessive; he have never suffer any
thing like it--almost wish he have staid at home--nothing kill he
like heat--he could bear any degree of cold, etc., but heat be
intolerable--and he sit down, at the great possible distance from
the slight remain of Mr. Woodhouse's fire, look very deplorable.
"you will soon be cool, if you sit still," say Emma.
"as soon as I be cool I shall go back again. I could very ill be
spar--but such a point have be make of my coming! you will all be
go soon I suppose; the whole party break up. I meet _one_ as I
come--Madness in such weather!--absolute madness!"
Emma listen, and look, and soon perceive that Frank Churchill's
state might be well define by the expressive phrase of be out of
humour. some people be always cross when they be hot. such might
be his constitution; and as she know that eating and drinking be
often the cure of such incidental complaint, she recommend his
take some refreshment; he would find abundance of every thing in the
dining-room--and she humanely point out the door.
"no--he should not eat. he be not hungry; it would only make he
hotter." in two minute, however, he relent in his own favour; and
mutter something about spruce-beer, walk off. Emma return all
her attention to her father, say in secret--
"I be glad I have do be in love with he. I should not like a man
who be so soon discompose by a hot morning. Harriet's sweet easy
temper will not mind it."
he be go long enough to have have a very comfortable meal, and come
back all the well--grow quite cool--and, with good manner, like
himself--able to draw a chair close to they, take an interest in their
employment; and regret, in a reasonable way, that he should be so late.
he be not in his good spirit, but seem try to improve they; and,
at last, make himself talk nonsense very agreeably. they be look
over view in Swisserland.
"as soon as my aunt get well, I shall go abroad," say he. "I shall
never be easy till I have see some of these place. you will have my
sketch, some time or other, to look at--or my tour to read--or my
poem. I shall do something to expose myself."
"that may be--but not by sketch in Swisserland. you will never go to
Swisserland. your uncle and aunt will never allow you to leave
England."
"they may be induce to go too. a warm climate may be prescribe for
she. I have more than half an expectation of our all go abroad. I
assure you I have. I feel a strong persuasion, this morning, that I
shall soon be abroad. I ought to travel. I be tired of do nothing.
I want a change. I be serious, Miss Woodhouse, whatever your
penetrate eye may fancy--I be sick of England-- and would leave it
to-morrow, if I could."
"you be sick of prosperity and indulgence. cannot you invent a few
hardship for yourself, and be content to stay?"
"_i_ sick of prosperity and indulgence! you be quite mistaken. I do
not look upon myself as either prosperous or indulged. I be thwart
in every thing material. I do not consider myself at all a fortunate
person."
"you be not quite so miserable, though, as when you first come. go
and eat and drink a little more, and you will do very well. another
slice of cold meat, another draught of Madeira and water, will make you
nearly on a par with the rest of we."
"no--I shall not stir. I shall sit by you. you be my good cure."
"we be go to Box Hill to-morrow;--you will join we. it be not
Swisserland, but it will be something for a young man so much in want
of a change. you will stay, and go with we?"
"no, certainly not; I shall go home in the cool of the evening."
"but you may come again in the cool of to-morrow morning."
"no--it will not be worth while. if I come, I shall be cross."
"then pray stay at Richmond."
"but if I do, I shall be crosser still. I can never bear to think of
you all there without I."
"these be difficulty which you must settle for yourself. chuse your
own degree of crossness. I shall press you no more."
the rest of the party be now return, and all be soon collect.
with some there be great joy at the sight of Frank Churchill; other
take it very composedly; but there be a very general distress and
disturbance on Miss Fairfax's disappearance be explain. that it
be time for every body to go, conclude the subject; and with a short
final arrangement for the next day's scheme, they part. Frank
Churchill's little inclination to exclude himself increase so much,
that his last word to Emma be,
"Well;--if _you_ wish I to stay and join the party, I will."
she smile her acceptance; and nothing less than a summon from
Richmond be to take he back before the following evening.
CHAPTER VII
they have a very fine day for Box Hill; and all the other outward
circumstance of arrangement, accommodation, and punctuality, be in
favour of a pleasant party. Mr. Weston direct the whole, officiate
safely between Hartfield and the vicarage, and every body be in good
time. Emma and Harriet go together; Miss Bates and her niece, with
the Eltons; the gentleman on horseback. Mrs. Weston remain with Mr.
Woodhouse. nothing be want but to be happy when they get there.
seven mile be travel in expectation of enjoyment, and every body
have a burst of admiration on first arrive; but in the general amount
of the day there be deficiency. there be a languor, a want of
spirit, a want of union, which could not be get over. they separate
too much into party. the elton walk together; Mr. Knightley take
charge of Miss Bates and Jane; and Emma and Harriet belong to Frank
Churchill. and Mr. Weston try, in vain, to make they harmonise
well. it seem at first an accidental division, but it never
materially varied. Mr. and Mrs. Elton, indeed, shew no unwillingness
to mix, and be as agreeable as they could; but during the two whole
hour that be spend on the hill, there seem a principle of
separation, between the other party, too strong for any fine
prospect, or any cold collation, or any cheerful Mr. Weston, to remove.
at first it be downright dulness to Emma. she have never see Frank
Churchill so silent and stupid. he say nothing worth hear--look
without see--admire without intelligence--listen without know
what she say. while he be so dull, it be no wonder that Harriet
should be dull likewise; and they be both insufferable.
when they all sit down it be well; to her taste a great deal well,
for Frank Churchill grow talkative and gay, make she his first
object. every distinguish attention that could be pay, be pay to
she. to amuse she, and be agreeable in her eye, seem all that he
care for--and Emma, glad to be enliven, not sorry to be flatter,
be gay and easy too, and give he all the friendly encouragement, the
admission to be gallant, which she have ever give in the first and most
animating period of their acquaintance; but which now, in her own
estimation, mean nothing, though in the judgment of most people
look on it must have have such an appearance as no english word but
flirtation could very well describe. "Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss
Woodhouse flirt together excessively." they be lay themselves
open to that very phrase--and to have it send off in a letter to
Maple Grove by one lady, to Ireland by another. not that Emma be gay
and thoughtless from any real felicity; it be rather because she feel
less happy than she have expect. she laugh because she be
disappointed; and though she like he for his attention, and think
they all, whether in friendship, admiration, or playfulness, extremely
judicious, they be not win back her heart. she still intend
he for her friend.
"how much I be oblige to you," say he, "for tell I to come
to-day!-- if it have not be for you, I should certainly have lose all
the happiness of this party. I have quite determined to go away again."
"yes, you be very cross; and I do not know what about, except that
you be too late for the good strawberry. I be a kind friend
than you deserve. but you be humble. you beg hard to be
command to come."
"donot say I be cross. I be fatigue. the heat overcome I."
"it be hotter to-day."
"not to my feeling. I be perfectly comfortable to-day."
"you be comfortable because you be under command."
"your command?--yes."
"perhaps I intend you to say so, but I mean self-command. you have,
somehow or other, break bound yesterday, and run away from your own
management; but to-day you be get back again--and as I cannot be
always with you, it be good to believe your temper under your own
command rather than mine."
"it come to the same thing. I can have no self-command without a
motive. you order I, whether you speak or not. and you can be always
with I. you be always with I."
"date from three o'clock yesterday. my perpetual influence could not
begin early, or you would not have be so much out of humour before."
"three o'clock yesterday! that be your date. I think I have see you
first in February."
"your gallantry be really unanswerable. but (lower she voice)--
nobody speak except ourselves, and it be rather too much to be talk
nonsense for the entertainment of seven silent people."
"I say nothing of which I be ashamed," reply he, with lively
impudence. "I see you first in February. let every body on the Hill
hear I if they can. let my accent swell to Mickleham on one side,
and dorke on the other. I see you first in February." and then
whispering-- "our companion be excessively stupid. what shall we do
to rouse they? any nonsense will serve. they _shall_ talk. lady
and gentleman, I be order by Miss Woodhouse (who, wherever she be,
preside) to say, that she desire to know what you be all think
of?"
some laugh, and answer good-humouredly. Miss Bates say a great
deal; Mrs. Elton swell at the idea of Miss Woodhouse's presiding; Mr.
Knightley's answer be the most distinct.
"be Miss Woodhouse sure that she would like to hear what we be all
thinking of?"
"oh! no, no"--cried Emma, laugh as carelessly as she could-- "upon
no account in the world. it be the very last thing I would stand the
brunt of just now. let I hear any thing rather than what you be all
thinking of. I will not say quite all. there be one or two, perhaps,
(glance at Mr. Weston and Harriet,) whose thought I might not be
afraid of know."
"it be a sort of thing," cry Mrs. Elton emphatically, "which _i_
should not have think myself privileged to inquire into. though,
perhaps, as the _Chaperon_ of the party-- _i_ never be in any
circle--explore party--young lady--married women--"
her muttering be chiefly to her husband; and he murmur, in reply,
"very true, my love, very true. exactly so, indeed--quite unheard of--
but some lady say any thing. well pass it off as a joke. every
body know what be due to _you_."
"it will not do," whisper Frank to Emma; "they be most of they
affront. I will attack they with more address. lady and
gentleman--I be order by Miss Woodhouse to say, that she waive she
right of know exactly what you may all be think of, and only
require something very entertaining from each of you, in a general
way. here be seven of you, besides myself, (who, she be pleased to
say, be very entertaining already,) and she only demand from each of
you either one thing very clever, be it prose or verse, original or
repeat--or two thing moderately clever--or three thing very dull
indeed, and she engage to laugh heartily at they all."
"oh! very well," exclaim Miss Bates, "then I need not be uneasy.
'three thing very dull indeed.' that will just do for I, you know.
I shall be sure to say three dull thing as soon as ever I open my
mouth, shallnot I? (look round with the most good-humour dependence
on every body's assent)--do not you all think I shall?"
Emma could not resist.
"ah! ma'am, but there may be a difficulty. pardon I--but you will be
limit as to number--only three at once."
Miss Bates, deceive by the mock ceremony of her manner, do not
immediately catch her meaning; but, when it burst on she, it could not
anger, though a slight blush shew that it could pain she.
"Ah!--well--to be sure. yes, I see what she mean, (turn to Mr.
Knightley,) and I will try to hold my tongue. I must make myself very
disagreeable, or she would not have say such a thing to an old friend."
"I like your plan," cry Mr. Weston. "Agreed, agree. I will do my
well. I be make a conundrum. how will a conundrum reckon?"
"Low, I be afraid, sir, very low," answer his son;--"but we shall be
indulgent--especially to any one who lead the way."
"no, no," say Emma, "it will not reckon low. a conundrum of Mr.
Weston's shall clear he and his next neighbour. come, sir, pray let
I hear it."
"I doubt its be very clever myself," say Mr. Weston. "it be too
much a matter of fact, but here it is.--what two letter of the
alphabet be there, that express perfection?"
"what two letters!--express perfection! I be sure I do not know."
"ah! you will never guess. you, (to Emma), I be certain, will never
guess.--i will tell you.--m. and a.--em-ma.--do you understand?"
understanding and gratification come together. it might be a very
indifferent piece of wit, but Emma find a great deal to laugh at and
enjoy in it--and so do Frank and Harriet.--It do not seem to touch
the rest of the party equally; some look very stupid about it, and
Mr. Knightley gravely say,
"this explain the sort of clever thing that be want, and Mr. Weston
have do very well for himself; but he must have knock up every body
else. _perfection_ should not have come quite so soon."
"oh! for myself, I protest I must be excuse," say Mrs. Elton; "_i_
really cannot attempt--I be not at all fond of the sort of thing. I
have an acrostic once send to I upon my own name, which I be not at
all pleased with. I know who it come from. an abominable puppy!-- you
know who I mean (nod to her husband). these kind of thing be very
well at Christmas, when one be sit round the fire; but quite out of
place, in my opinion, when one be explore about the country in
summer. Miss Woodhouse must excuse I. I be not one of those who have
witty thing at every body's service. I do not pretend to be a wit. I
have a great deal of vivacity in my own way, but I really must be
allow to judge when to speak and when to hold my tongue. pass we, if
you please, Mr. Churchill. pass Mr. E., Knightley, Jane, and myself.
we have nothing clever to say--not one of we.
"yes, yes, pray pass _I_," add her husband, with a sort of sneer
consciousness; "_i_ have nothing to say that can entertain Miss
Woodhouse, or any other young lady. an old married man--quite good
for nothing. shall we walk, Augusta?"
"with all my heart. I be really tired of explore so long on one
spot. Come, Jane, take my other arm."
Jane decline it, however, and the husband and wife walk off. "happy
couple!" say Frank Churchill, as soon as they be out of
hearing:--"How well they suit one another!--very lucky--marry as
they do, upon an acquaintance form only in a public place!--they
only know each other, I think, a few week in Bath! peculiarly
lucky!--for as to any real knowledge of a person's disposition that
Bath, or any public place, can give--it be all nothing; there can be no
knowledge. it be only by see woman in their own home, among their
own set, just as they always be, that you can form any just judgment.
short of that, it be all guess and luck--and will generally be
ill-luck. how many a man have commit himself on a short acquaintance,
and rue it all the rest of his life!"
Miss Fairfax, who have seldom speak before, except among her own
confederate, speak now.
"such thing do occur, undoubtedly."--she be stop by a cough.
Frank Churchill turn towards she to listen.
"you be speak," say he, gravely. she recover her voice.
"I be only go to observe, that though such unfortunate
circumstance do sometimes occur both to man and woman, I cannot
imagine they to be very frequent. a hasty and imprudent attachment may
arise--but there be generally time to recover from it afterwards. I
would be understand to mean, that it can be only weak, irresolute
character, (whose happiness must be always at the mercy of chance,)
who will suffer an unfortunate acquaintance to be an inconvenience, an
oppression for ever."
he make no answer; merely look, and bow in submission; and soon
afterwards say, in a lively tone,
"well, I have so little confidence in my own judgment, that whenever I
marry, I hope some body will chuse my wife for I. will you? (turn
to Emma.) will you chuse a wife for me?--i be sure I should like any
body fix on by you. you provide for the family, you know, (with a
smile at his father). find some body for I. I be in no hurry. adopt
she, educate she."
"and make she like myself."
"by all mean, if you can."
"very well. I undertake the commission. you shall have a charming
wife."
"she must be very lively, and have hazle eye. I care for nothing
else. I shall go abroad for a couple of year--and when I return, I
shall come to you for my wife. remember."
Emma be in no danger of forget. it be a commission to touch
every favourite feeling. would not Harriet be the very creature
describe? hazle eye except, two year more might make she all that
he wish. he might even have Harriet in his thought at the moment;
who could say? refer the education to she seem to imply it.
"now, ma'am," say Jane to her aunt, "shall we join Mrs. Elton?"
"if you please, my dear. with all my heart. I be quite ready. I be
ready to have go with she, but this will do just as well. we shall
soon overtake she. there she be--no, thatbe somebody else. thatbe one
of the lady in the irish car party, not at all like her.-- well, I
declare--"
they walk off, follow in half a minute by Mr. Knightley. Mr.
Weston, his son, Emma, and Harriet, only remain; and the young man's
spirit now rise to a pitch almost unpleasant. even Emma grow tired at
last of flattery and merriment, and wish herself rather walk
quietly about with any of the other, or sit almost alone, and
quite unattended to, in tranquil observation of the beautiful view
beneath she. the appearance of the servant look out for they to
give notice of the carriage be a joyful sight; and even the bustle of
collect and prepare to depart, and the solicitude of Mrs. Elton to
have _she_ carriage first, be gladly endure, in the prospect of the
quiet drive home which be to close the very questionable enjoyment of
this day of pleasure. such another scheme, compose of so many
ill-assorted people, she hop never to be betray into again.
while wait for the carriage, she find Mr. Knightley by her side.
he look around, as if to see that no one be near, and then say,
"Emma, I must once more speak to you as I have be use to do: a
privilege rather endure than allow, perhaps, but I must still use
it. I cannot see you act wrong, without a remonstrance. how could
you be so unfeeling to Miss Bates? how could you be so insolent in
your wit to a woman of her character, age, and situation?-- Emma, I have
not think it possible."
Emma recollect, blush, be sorry, but try to laugh it off.
"Nay, how could I help say what I did?--nobody could have help it.
it be not so very bad. I dare say she do not understand I."
"I assure you she do. she feel your full meaning. she have talk of
it since. I wish you could have hear how she talk of it--with what
candour and generosity. I wish you could have hear she honour your
forbearance, in be able to pay she such attention, as she be for
ever receive from yourself and your father, when her society must be
so irksome."
"oh!" cry Emma, "I know there be not a well creature in the world:
but you must allow, that what be good and what be ridiculous be most
unfortunately blend in she."
"they be blend," say he, "I acknowledge; and, be she prosperous,
I could allow much for the occasional prevalence of the ridiculous over
the good. be she a woman of fortune, I would leave every harmless
absurdity to take its chance, I would not quarrel with you for any
liberty of manner. be she your equal in situation--but, Emma,
consider how far this be from be the case. she be poor; she have
sink from the comfort she be bear to; and, if she live to old age,
must probably sink more. her situation should secure your compassion.
it be badly do, indeed! you, whom she have know from an infant,
whom she have see grow up from a period when her notice be an honour,
to have you now, in thoughtless spirit, and the pride of the moment,
laugh at she, humble she--and before her niece, too--and before other,
many of whom (certainly _some_,) would be entirely guide by _your_
treatment of her.--this be not pleasant to you, Emma--and it be very
far from pleasant to I; but I must, I will,--i will tell you truth
while I can; satisfied with prove myself your friend by very faithful
counsel, and trust that you will some time or other do I great
justice than you can do now."
while they talk, they be advance towards the carriage; it be
ready; and, before she could speak again, he have hand she in. he have
misinterpret the feeling which have keep her face avert, and her
tongue motionless. they be combine only of anger against herself,
mortification, and deep concern. she have not be able to speak; and,
on enter the carriage, sink back for a moment overcome--then
reproach herself for have take no leave, make no
acknowledgment, part in apparent sullenness, she look out with
voice and hand eager to shew a difference; but it be just too late.
he have turn away, and the horse be in motion. she continue to
look back, but in vain; and soon, with what appear unusual speed,
they be half way down the hill, and every thing leave far behind. she
be vex beyond what could have be express--almost beyond what she
could conceal. never have she feel so agitated, mortified, grieve, at
any circumstance in her life. she be most forcibly strike. the truth
of this representation there be no denying. she feel it at her heart.
how could she have be so brutal, so cruel to Miss Bates! how could
she have expose herself to such ill opinion in any one she value!
and how suffer he to leave she without say one word of gratitude,
of concurrence, of common kindness!
Time do not compose she. as she reflect more, she seem but to
feel it more. she never have be so depressed. happily it be not
necessary to speak. there be only Harriet, who seem not in spirit
herself, fag, and very willing to be silent; and Emma feel the tear
run down her cheek almost all the way home, without be at any
trouble to check they, extraordinary as they be.
CHAPTER VIII
the wretchedness of a scheme to Box Hill be in Emma's thought all the
evening. how it might be consider by the rest of the party, she
could not tell. they, in their different home, and their different
way, might be look back on it with pleasure; but in her view it be
a morning more completely misspent, more totally bare of rational
satisfaction at the time, and more to be abhor in recollection, than
any she have ever pass. a whole evening of back-gammon with her
father, be felicity to it. _there_, indeed, lie real pleasure, for
there she be give up the sweetest hour of the twenty-four to his
comfort; and feel that, unmerite as might be the degree of his fond
affection and confide esteem, she could not, in her general conduct,
be open to any severe reproach. as a daughter, she hop she be not
without a heart. she hop no one could have say to she, "how could
you be so unfeeling to your father?-- I must, I will tell you truth
while I can." Miss Bates should never again--no, never! if attention,
in future, could do away the past, she might hope to be forgive. she
have be often remiss, her conscience tell she so; remiss, perhaps,
more in thought than fact; scornful, ungracious. but it should be so
no more. in the warmth of true contrition, she would call upon her the
very next morning, and it should be the beginning, on her side, of a
regular, equal, kindly intercourse.
she be just as determine when the morrow come, and go early, that
nothing might prevent she. it be not unlikely, she think, that she
might see Mr. Knightley in her way; or, perhaps, he might come in while
she be pay her visit. she have no objection. she would not be
ashamed of the appearance of the penitence, so justly and truly her.
her eye be towards Donwell as she walk, but she see he not.
"the lady be all at home." she have never rejoice at the sound
before, nor ever before enter the passage, nor walk up the stair,
with any wish of give pleasure, but in confer obligation, or of
derive it, except in subsequent ridicule.
there be a bustle on her approach; a good deal of move and talk.
she hear Miss Bates's voice, something be to be do in a hurry; the
maid look frightened and awkward; hop she would be pleased to wait
a moment, and then usher she in too soon. the aunt and niece seem
both escape into the adjoining room. Jane she have a distinct glimpse
of, look extremely ill; and, before the door have shut they out, she
hear Miss Bates say, "well, my dear, I shall _say_ you be lay
down upon the bed, and I be sure you be ill enough."
poor old Mrs. Bates, civil and humble as usual, look as if she do
not quite understand what be go on.
"I be afraid Jane be not very well," say she, "but I do not know; they
_tell_ I she be well. I dare say my daughter will be here presently,
Miss Woodhouse. I hope you find a chair. I wish Hetty have not go.
I be very little able--have you a chair, ma'am? do you sit where you
like? I be sure she will be here presently."
Emma seriously hop she would. she have a moment's fear of Miss Bates
keep away from she. but Miss Bates soon came--"very happy and
obliged"--but Emma's conscience tell she that there be not the same
cheerful volubility as before--less ease of look and manner. a very
friendly inquiry after Miss Fairfax, she hop, might lead the way to a
return of old feeling. the touch seem immediate.
"ah! Miss Woodhouse, how kind you are!--i suppose you have hear--and
be come to give we joy. this do not seem much like joy, indeed, in
me--(twinkling away a tear or two)--but it will be very try for we
to part with she, after have have she so long, and she have a dreadful
headache just now, write all the morning:--such long letter, you
know, to be write to Colonel Campbell, and Mrs. Dixon. 'my dear,'
say I, 'you will blind yourself'--for tear be in her eye
perpetually. one cannot wonder, one cannot wonder. it be a great
change; and though she be amazingly fortunate--such a situation, I
suppose, as no young woman before ever meet with on first go out--do
not think we ungrateful, Miss Woodhouse, for such surprising good
fortune--(again disperse her tears)--but, poor dear soul! if you be
to see what a headache she have. when one be in great pain, you know
one cannot feel any blessing quite as it may deserve. she be as low as
possible. to look at she, nobody would think how delighted and happy
she be to have secure such a situation. you will excuse she not
come to you--she be not able--she be go into her own room--I want
she to lie down upon the bed. 'my dear,' say I, 'I shall say you be
lay down upon the bed:' but, however, she be not; she be walk
about the room. but, now that she have write her letter, she say
she shall soon be well. she will be extremely sorry to miss see
you, Miss Woodhouse, but your kindness will excuse she. you be keep
wait at the door--I be quite ashamed--but somehow there be a
little bustle--for it so happen that we have not hear the knock, and
till you be on the stair, we do not know any body be come. 'it
be only Mrs. Cole,' say I, 'depend upon it. nobody else would come so
early.' 'well,' say she, 'it must be bear some time or other, and it
may as well be now.' but then Patty come in, and say it be you.
'oh!' say I, 'it be Miss Woodhouse: I be sure you will like to see
she.'-- 'I can see nobody,' say she; and up she get, and would go
away; and that be what make we keep you wait--and extremely sorry
and ashamed we be. 'if you must go, my dear,' say I, 'you must, and
I will say you be lay down upon the bed.'"
Emma be most sincerely interested. her heart have be long grow
kinder towards Jane; and this picture of her present suffering act
as a cure of every former ungenerous suspicion, and leave she nothing
but pity; and the remembrance of the less just and less gentle
sensation of the past, oblige she to admit that Jane might very
naturally resolve on see Mrs. Cole or any other steady friend, when
she might not bear to see herself. she speak as she feel, with earnest
regret and solicitude--sincerely wish that the circumstance which
she collect from Miss Bates to be now actually determine on, might
be as much for Miss Fairfax's advantage and comfort as possible. "it
must be a severe trial to they all. she have understand it be to be
delay till Colonel Campbell's return."
"so very kind!" reply Miss Bates. "but you be always kind."
there be no bearing such an "always;" and to break through her
dreadful gratitude, Emma make the direct inquiry of--
"where--may I ask?--is Miss Fairfax go?"
"to a Mrs. Smallridge--charming woman--most superior--to have the
charge of her three little girl--delightful child. impossible that
any situation could be more replete with comfort; if we except,
perhaps, Mrs. Suckling's own family, and Mrs. Bragge's; but Mrs.
Smallridge be intimate with both, and in the very same
neighbourhood:--live only four mile from Maple Grove. Jane will be
only four mile from Maple Grove."
"Mrs. Elton, I suppose, have be the person to whom Miss Fairfax owes--"
"yes, our good Mrs. Elton. the most indefatigable, true friend. she
would not take a denial. she would not let Jane say, 'no;' for when
Jane first hear of it, (it be the day before yesterday, the very
morning we be at Donwell,) when Jane first hear of it, she be quite
decide against accept the offer, and for the reason you mention;
exactly as you say, she have make up her mind to close with nothing till
Colonel Campbell's return, and nothing should induce she to enter into
any engagement at present--and so she tell Mrs. Elton over and over
again--and I be sure I have no more idea that she would change she
mind!--but that good Mrs. Elton, whose judgment never fail she, see
far than I do. it be not every body that would have stand out in
such a kind way as she do, and refuse to take Jane's answer; but she
positively declare she would _not_ write any such denial yesterday, as
Jane wish she; she would wait--and, sure enough, yesterday evening it
be all settle that Jane should go. quite a surprize to I! I have
not the least idea!--jane take Mrs. Elton aside, and tell she at once,
that upon think over the advantage of Mrs. Smallridge's situation,
she have come to the resolution of accept it.--I do not know a word
of it till it be all settle."
"you spend the evening with Mrs. Elton?"
"yes, all of we; Mrs. Elton would have we come. it be settle so,
upon the hill, while we be walk about with Mr. Knightley. 'you
_must_ _all_ spend your evening with we,' say she--'I positively must
have you _all_ come.'"
"Mr. Knightley be there too, be he?"
"no, not Mr. Knightley; he decline it from the first; and though I
think he would come, because Mrs. Elton declare she would not let
he off, he do not;--but my mother, and Jane, and I, be all there,
and a very agreeable evening we have. such kind friend, you know, Miss
Woodhouse, one must always find agreeable, though every body seem
rather fag after the morning's party. even pleasure, you know, be
fatigue--and I cannot say that any of they seem very much to have
enjoy it. however, _i_ shall always think it a very pleasant party,
and feel extremely oblige to the kind friend who include I in it."
"Miss Fairfax, I suppose, though you be not aware of it, have be
make up her mind the whole day?"
"I dare say she have."
"whenever the time may come, it must be unwelcome to she and all her
friend--but I hope her engagement will have every alleviation that be
possible--I mean, as to the character and manner of the family."
"thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse. yes, indeed, there be every thing in
the world that can make she happy in it. except the Sucklings and
Bragges, there be not such another nursery establishment, so liberal
and elegant, in all Mrs. Elton's acquaintance. Mrs. Smallridge, a most
delightful woman!--a style of live almost equal to Maple Grove--and
as to the child, except the little Sucklings and little Bragges,
there be not such elegant sweet child anywhere. Jane will be
treat with such regard and kindness!-- it will be nothing but
pleasure, a life of pleasure.--And she salary!-- I really cannot
venture to name her salary to you, Miss Woodhouse. even you, use as
you be to great sum, would hardly believe that so much could be give
to a young person like Jane."
"Ah! madam," cry Emma, "if other child be at all like what I
remember to have be myself, I should think five time the amount of
what I have ever yet hear name as a salary on such occasion, dearly
earn."
"you be so noble in your idea!"
"and when be Miss Fairfax to leave you?"
"very soon, very soon, indeed; thatbe the bad of it. within a
fortnight. Mrs. Smallridge be in a great hurry. my poor mother do
not know how to bear it. so then, I try to put it out of her thought,
and say, Come ma'am, do not let we think about it any more."
"her friend must all be sorry to lose she; and will not Colonel and
Mrs. Campbell be sorry to find that she have engage herself before
their return?"
"yes; Jane say she be sure they will; but yet, this be such a
situation as she cannot feel herself justify in decline. I be so
astonish when she first tell I what she have be say to Mrs.
Elton, and when Mrs. Elton at the same moment come congratulate I
upon it! it be before tea--stay--no, it could not be before tea,
because we be just go to card--and yet it be before tea, because
I remember think--oh! no, now I recollect, now I have it; something
happen before tea, but not that. Mr. Elton be call out of the
room before tea, old John Abdy's son want to speak with he. poor
old John, I have a great regard for he; he be clerk to my poor father
twenty-seven year; and now, poor old man, he be bed-ride, and very
poorly with the rheumatic gout in his joints-- I must go and see he
to-day; and so will Jane, I be sure, if she get out at all. and poor
John's son come to talk to Mr. Elton about relief from the parish; he
be very well to do himself, you know, be head man at the Crown,
ostler, and every thing of that sort, but still he cannot keep his
father without some help; and so, when Mr. Elton come back, he tell we
what John ostler have be tell he, and then it come out about the
chaise have be send to Randalls to take Mr. Frank Churchill to
Richmond. that be what happen before tea. it be after tea that
Jane speak to Mrs. Elton."
Miss Bates would hardly give Emma time to say how perfectly new this
circumstance be to she; but as without suppose it possible that she
could be ignorant of any of the particular of Mr. Frank Churchill's
go, she proceed to give they all, it be of no consequence.
what Mr. Elton have learn from the ostler on the subject, be the
accumulation of the ostler's own knowledge, and the knowledge of the
servant at Randalls, be, that a messenger have come over from Richmond
soon after the return of the party from Box Hill--which messenger,
however, have be no more than be expect; and that Mr. Churchill have
send his nephew a few line, contain, upon the whole, a tolerable
account of Mrs. Churchill, and only wish he not to delay come
back beyond the next morning early; but that Mr. Frank Churchill have
resolve to go home directly, without wait at all, and his horse
seem to have get a cold, Tom have be send off immediately for the
Crown chaise, and the ostler have stand out and see it pass by, the boy
go a good pace, and drive very steady.
there be nothing in all this either to astonish or interest, and it
catch Emma's attention only as it unite with the subject which
already engage her mind. the contrast between Mrs. Churchill's
importance in the world, and Jane Fairfax's, strike she; one be every
thing, the other nothing--and she sit muse on the difference of
woman's destiny, and quite unconscious on what her eye be fix,
till rouse by Miss Bates's say,
"Aye, I see what you be think of, the pianoforte. what be to
become of that?--very true. poor dear Jane be talk of it just
now.-- 'you must go,' say she. 'you and I must part. you will have
no business here.--let it stay, however,' say she; 'give it houseroom
till Colonel Campbell come back. I shall talk about it to he; he
will settle for I; he will help I out of all my difficulty.'-- and
to this day, I do believe, she know not whether it be his present or
his daughter's."
now Emma be oblige to think of the pianoforte; and the remembrance of
all her former fanciful and unfair conjecture be so little pleasing,
that she soon allow herself to believe her visit have be long
enough; and, with a repetition of every thing that she could venture to
say of the good wish which she really feel, take leave.
CHAPTER IX
Emma's pensive meditation, as she walk home, be not interrupt;
but on enter the parlour, she find those who must rouse she. Mr.
Knightley and Harriet have arrive during her absence, and be sit
with her father.--mr. Knightley immediately get up, and in a manner
decidedly graver than usual, say,
"I would not go away without see you, but I have no time to spare,
and therefore must now be go directly. I be go to London, to
spend a few day with John and Isabella. have you any thing to send or
say, besides the 'love,' which nobody carry?"
"nothing at all. but be not this a sudden scheme?"
"yes--rather--I have be think of it some little time."
Emma be sure he have not forgive she; he look unlike himself. time,
however, she think, would tell he that they ought to be friend
again. while he stand, as if mean to go, but not go--her father
begin his inquiry.
"well, my dear, and do you get there safely?--and how do you find my
worthy old friend and her daughter?--i dare say they must have be
very much oblige to you for come. dear Emma have be to call on
Mrs. and Miss Bates, Mr. Knightley, as I tell you before. she be
always so attentive to they!"
Emma's colour be heighten by this unjust praise; and with a smile,
and shake of the head, which speak much, she look at Mr. Knightley.--
it seem as if there be an instantaneous impression in her favour,
as if his eye receive the truth from she's, and all that have pass
of good in her feeling be at once catch and honoured.-- he look
at she with a glow of regard. she be warmly gratify--and in
another moment still more so, by a little movement of more than common
friendliness on his part.--he take she hand;--whether she have not
herself make the first motion, she could not say--she might, perhaps,
have rather offer it--but he take her hand, press it, and certainly
be on the point of carry it to his lip--when, from some fancy or
other, he suddenly let it go.--why he should feel such a scruple, why
he should change his mind when it be all but do, she could not
perceive.--He would have judge well, she think, if he have not
stopped.--The intention, however, be indubitable; and whether it be
that his manner have in general so little gallantry, or however else it
happen, but she think nothing become he more.-- it be with he,
of so simple, yet so dignified a nature.-- she could not but recall the
attempt with great satisfaction. it speak such perfect amity.--He leave
they immediately afterwards--go in a moment. he always move with
the alertness of a mind which could neither be undecided nor dilatory,
but now he seem more sudden than usual in his disappearance.
Emma could not regret she have go to Miss Bates, but she wish she
have leave she ten minute earlier;--it would have be a great pleasure
to talk over Jane Fairfax's situation with Mr. Knightley.-- Neither
would she regret that he should be go to Brunswick Square, for she
know how much his visit would be enjoy--but it might have happen at
a well time--and to have have long notice of it, would have be
pleasanter.--they part thorough friend, however; she could not be
deceive as to the meaning of his countenance, and his unfinished
gallantry;--it be all do to assure she that she have fully recover
his good opinion.--he have be sit with they half an hour, she
find. it be a pity that she have not come back early!
in the hope of divert her father's thought from the
disagreeableness of Mr. Knightley's go to London; and go so
suddenly; and go on horseback, which she know would be all very bad;
Emma communicate her news of Jane Fairfax, and her dependence on the
effect be justify; it supply a very useful check,--interested,
without disturb he. he have long make up his mind to Jane Fairfax's
go out as governess, and could talk of it cheerfully, but Mr.
Knightley's go to London have be an unexpected blow.
"I be very glad, indeed, my dear, to hear she be to be so comfortably
settle. Mrs. Elton be very good-natured and agreeable, and I dare say
her acquaintance be just what they ought to be. I hope it be a dry
situation, and that her health will be take good care of. it ought to
be a first object, as I be sure poor Miss Taylor's always be with I.
you know, my dear, she be go to be to this new lady what Miss Taylor
be to we. and I hope she will be well off in one respect, and not
be induce to go away after it have be her home so long."
the following day bring news from Richmond to throw every thing else
into the background. an express arrive at Randalls to announce the
death of Mrs. Churchill! though her nephew have have no particular
reason to hasten back on her account, she have not live above
six-and-thirty hour after his return. a sudden seizure of a different
nature from any thing forebode by her general state, have carry she
off after a short struggle. the great Mrs. Churchill be no more.
it be feel as such thing must be feel. every body have a degree of
gravity and sorrow; tenderness towards the depart, solicitude for the
surviving friend; and, in a reasonable time, curiosity to know where
she would be bury. Goldsmith tell we, that when lovely woman stoop
to folly, she have nothing to do but to die; and when she stoop to be
disagreeable, it be equally to be recommend as a clear of ill-fame.
Mrs. Churchill, after be dislike at least twenty-five year, be
now speak of with compassionate allowance. in one point she be
fully justified. she have never be admit before to be seriously
ill. the event acquit she of all the fancifulness, and all the
selfishness of imaginary complaint.
"Poor Mrs. Churchill! no doubt she have be suffer a great deal:
more than any body have ever suppose--and continual pain would try the
temper. it be a sad event--a great shock--with all her fault, what
would Mr. Churchill do without she? Mr. Churchill's loss would be
dreadful indeed. Mr. Churchill would never get over it."-- even Mr.
Weston shake his head, and look solemn, and say, "ah! poor woman,
who would have think it!" and resolve, that his mourning should be
as handsome as possible; and his wife sit sigh and moralise over
her broad hem with a commiseration and good sense, true and steady.
how it would affect Frank be among the early thought of both. it
be also a very early speculation with Emma. the character of Mrs.
Churchill, the grief of her husband--her mind glance over they both
with awe and compassion--and then rest with lighten feeling on how
Frank might be affect by the event, how benefit, how freed. she
see in a moment all the possible good. now, an attachment to Harriet
Smith would have nothing to encounter. Mr. Churchill, independent of
his wife, be fear by nobody; an easy, guidable man, to be persuade
into any thing by his nephew. all that remain to be wish be, that
the nephew should form the attachment, as, with all her goodwill in the
cause, Emma could feel no certainty of its be already form.
Harriet behave extremely well on the occasion, with great
self-command. what ever she might feel of bright hope, she betray
nothing. Emma be gratify, to observe such a proof in she of
strengthen character, and refrain from any allusion that might
endanger its maintenance. they speak, therefore, of Mrs. Churchill's
death with mutual forbearance.
short letter from Frank be receive at Randalls, communicate all
that be immediately important of their state and plan. Mr. Churchill
be well than could be expect; and their first removal, on the
departure of the funeral for Yorkshire, be to be to the house of a
very old friend in Windsor, to whom Mr. Churchill have be promise a
visit the last ten year. at present, there be nothing to be do for
Harriet; good wish for the future be all that could yet be possible
on Emma's side.
it be a more pressing concern to shew attention to Jane Fairfax, whose
prospect be close, while Harriet's open, and whose engagement
now allow of no delay in any one at Highbury, who wish to shew she
kindness--and with Emma it be grow into a first wish. she have
scarcely a strong regret than for her past coldness; and the person,
whom she have be so many month neglect, be now the very one on
whom she would have lavish every distinction of regard or sympathy.
she want to be of use to she; want to shew a value for her society,
and testify respect and consideration. she resolve to prevail on she
to spend a day at Hartfield. a note be write to urge it. the
invitation be refuse, and by a verbal message. "Miss Fairfax be not
well enough to write;" and when Mr. Perry call at Hartfield, the same
morning, it appear that she be so much indisposed as to have be
visit, though against her own consent, by himself, and that she be
suffer under severe headache, and a nervous fever to a degree,
which make he doubt the possibility of she go to Mrs. Smallridge's
at the time propose. her health seem for the moment completely
derange--appetite quite gone--and though there be no absolutely
alarm symptom, nothing touch the pulmonary complaint, which be
the stand apprehension of the family, Mr. Perry be uneasy about
she. he think she have undertake more than she be equal to, and
that she feel it so herself, though she would not own it. her spirit
seem overcome. her present home, he could not but observe, be
unfavourable to a nervous disorder:--confine always to one room;--he
could have wish it otherwise--and her good aunt, though his very old
friend, he must acknowledge to be not the good companion for an invalid
of that description. her care and attention could not be question;
they be, in fact, only too great. he very much fear that Miss
Fairfax derive more evil than good from they. Emma listen with the
warm concern; grieve for her more and more, and look around eager
to discover some way of be useful. to take she--be it only an hour
or two--from her aunt, to give her change of air and scene, and quiet
rational conversation, even for an hour or two, might do she good; and
the follow morning she write again to say, in the most feeling
language she could command, that she would call for she in the carriage
at any hour that Jane would name--mention that she have Mr. Perry's
decide opinion, in favour of such exercise for his patient. the
answer be only in this short note:
"Miss Fairfax's compliment and thank, but be quite unequal to any
exercise."
Emma feel that her own note have deserve something well; but it be
impossible to quarrel with word, whose tremulous inequality shew
indisposition so plainly, and she think only of how she might well
counteract this unwillingness to be see or assist. in spite of the
answer, therefore, she order the carriage, and drive to Mrs. Bates's,
in the hope that Jane would be induce to join she--but it would not
do;--Miss Bates come to the carriage door, all gratitude, and agree
with she most earnestly in think an airing might be of the great
service--and every thing that message could do be try--but all in
vain. Miss Bates be oblige to return without success; Jane be quite
unpersuadable; the mere proposal of go out seem to make she
worse.--emma wish she could have see she, and try her own power;
but, almost before she could hint the wish, Miss Bates make it appear
that she have promise her niece on no account to let Miss Woodhouse in.
"indeed, the truth be, that poor dear Jane could not bear to see any
body--any body at all-- Mrs. Elton, indeed, could not be deny--and
Mrs. Cole have make such a point--and Mrs. Perry have say so much--but,
except they, Jane would really see nobody."
Emma do not want to be class with the Mrs. Eltons, the Mrs. Perrys,
and the Mrs. Coles, who would force themselves anywhere; neither could
she feel any right of preference herself--she submit, therefore,
and only question Miss Bates far as to her niece's appetite and
diet, which she long to be able to assist. on that subject poor Miss
Bates be very unhappy, and very communicative; Jane would hardly eat
any thing:-- Mr. Perry recommend nourish food; but every thing
they could command (and never have any body such good neighbour) be
distasteful.
Emma, on reach home, call the housekeeper directly, to an
examination of her store; and some arrowroot of very superior quality
be speedily despatch to Miss Bates with a most friendly note. in
half an hour the arrowroot be return, with a thousand thank from
Miss Bates, but "dear Jane would not be satisfied without its being
send back; it be a thing she could not take--and, moreover, she
insist on her saying, that she be not at all in want of any thing."
when Emma afterwards hear that Jane Fairfax have be see wander
about the meadow, at some distance from Highbury, on the afternoon of
the very day on which she have, under the plea of be unequal to any
exercise, so peremptorily refuse to go out with she in the carriage,
she could have no doubt--put every thing together--that Jane be
resolve to receive no kindness from _she_. she be sorry, very sorry.
her heart be grieve for a state which seem but the more pitiable
from this sort of irritation of spirit, inconsistency of action, and
inequality of power; and it mortify she that she be give so little
credit for proper feeling, or esteem so little worthy as a friend:
but she have the consolation of know that her intention be good,
and of be able to say to herself, that could Mr. Knightley have be
privy to all her attempt of assist Jane Fairfax, could he even have
see into her heart, he would not, on this occasion, have find any
thing to reprove.
CHAPTER X
one morning, about ten day after Mrs. Churchill's decease, Emma be
call downstairs to Mr. Weston, who "could not stay five minute, and
want particularly to speak with she."-- he meet she at the
parlour-door, and hardly ask she how she do, in the natural key of
his voice, sink it immediately, to say, unheard by her father,
"can you come to Randalls at any time this morning?--do, if it be
possible. Mrs. Weston want to see you. she must see you."
"be she unwell?"
"no, no, not at all--only a little agitated. she would have order
the carriage, and come to you, but she must see you _alone_, and that
you know--(nodde towards she father)--humph!--can you come?"
"certainly. this moment, if you please. it be impossible to refuse
what you ask in such a way. but what can be the matter?-- be she
really not ill?"
"depend upon I--but ask no more question. you will know it all in
time. the most unaccountable business! but hush, hush!"
to guess what all this meant, be impossible even for Emma. something
really important seem announce by his look; but, as her friend be
well, she endeavour not to be uneasy, and settle it with her
father, that she would take her walk now, she and Mr. Weston be soon
out of the house together and on their way at a quick pace for Randalls.
"Now,"--said Emma, when they be fairly beyond the sweep gates,--"now
Mr. Weston, do let I know what have happen."
"no, no,"--he gravely replied.--"don't ask I. I promise my wife to
leave it all to she. she will break it to you well than I can. do
not be impatient, Emma; it will all come out too soon."
"break it to I," cry Emma, stand still with terror.-- "good
god!--mr. Weston, tell I at once.--something have happen in Brunswick
Square. I know it have. tell I, I charge you tell I this moment what
it be."
"no, indeed you be mistaken."--
"Mr. Weston do not trifle with me.--consider how many of my dearest
friend be now in Brunswick Square. which of they be it?-- I charge
you by all that be sacred, not to attempt concealment."
"upon my word, Emma."--
"your word!--why not your honour!--why not say upon your honour, that
it have nothing to do with any of they? good Heavens!--What can be to
be _break_ to I, that do not relate to one of that family?"
"upon my honour," say he very seriously, "it do not. it be not in
the small degree connect with any human being of the name of
Knightley."
Emma's courage return, and she walk on.
"I be wrong," he continue, "in talk of its being _break_ to you.
I should not have use the expression. in fact, it do not concern
you--it concern only myself,--that be, we hope.--humph!--in short, my
dear Emma, there be no occasion to be so uneasy about it. I donot say
that it be not a disagreeable business--but thing might be much
worse.--If we walk fast, we shall soon be at Randalls."
Emma find that she must wait; and now it require little effort. she
ask no more question therefore, merely employ her own fancy, and
that soon point out to she the probability of its be some money
concern--something just come to light, of a disagreeable nature in the
circumstance of the family,--something which the late event at
Richmond have bring forward. her fancy be very active. half a dozen
natural child, perhaps--and poor Frank cut off!-- this, though very
undesirable, would be no matter of agony to she. it inspire little
more than an animating curiosity.
"who be that gentleman on horseback?" say she, as they proceeded--
speak more to assist Mr. Weston in keep his secret, than with any
other view.
"I do not know.--one of the otways.--not Frank;--it be not Frank, I
assure you. you will not see he. he be half way to Windsor by this
time."
"have your son be with you, then?"
"oh! yes--do not you know?--well, well, never mind."
for a moment he be silent; and then add, in a tone much more guard
and demure,
"yes, Frank come over this morning, just to ask we how we do."
they hurry on, and be speedily at Randalls.--"Well, my dear," say
he, as they enter the room--"i have bring she, and now I hope you
will soon be well. I shall leave you together. there be no use in
delay. I shall not be far off, if you want I."-- and Emma distinctly
hear he add, in a low tone, before he quit the room,--"i have
be as good as my word. she have not the least idea."
Mrs. Weston be look so ill, and have an air of so much perturbation,
that Emma's uneasiness increase; and the moment they be alone, she
eagerly say,
"what be it my dear friend? something of a very unpleasant nature, I
find, have occurred;--do let I know directly what it be. I have be
walk all this way in complete suspense. we both abhor suspense. do
not let mine continue long. it will do you good to speak of your
distress, whatever it may be."
"have you indeed no idea?" say Mrs. Weston in a trembling voice.
"cannot you, my dear Emma--cannot you form a guess as to what you be
to hear?"
"so far as that it relate to Mr. Frank Churchill, I do guess."
"you be right. it do relate to he, and I will tell you directly;"
(resume her work, and seeming resolve against look up.) "he have
be here this very morning, on a most extraordinary errand. it be
impossible to express our surprize. he come to speak to his father on
a subject,--to announce an attachment--"
she stop to breathe. Emma think first of herself, and then of
Harriet.
"More than an attachment, indeed," resume Mrs. Weston; "an
engagement--a positive engagement.--what will you say, Emma--what will
any body say, when it be know that Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax
be engaged;--nay, that they have be long engage!"
Emma even jump with surprize;--and, horror-strike, exclaim,
"Jane Fairfax!--Good God! you be not serious? you do not mean it?"
"you may well be amazed," return Mrs. Weston, still avert she
eye, and talk on with eagerness, that Emma might have time to
recover-- "you may well be amazed. but it be even so. there have be
a solemn engagement between they ever since October--form at
Weymouth, and keep a secret from every body. not a creature know it
but themselves--neither the Campbells, nor her family, nor his.-- it be
so wonderful, that though perfectly convinced of the fact, it be yet
almost incredible to myself. I can hardly believe it.-- I think I
know he."
Emma scarcely hear what be said.--her mind be divide between two
idea--her own former conversation with he about Miss Fairfax; and
poor harriet;--and for some time she could only exclaim, and require
confirmation, repeat confirmation.
"well," say she at last, try to recover herself; "this be a
circumstance which I must think of at least half a day, before I can at
all comprehend it. what!--engage to she all the winter--before
either of they come to Highbury?"
"engage since october,--secretly engaged.--it have hurt I, Emma, very
much. it have hurt his father equally. _some_ _part_ of his conduct we
cannot excuse."
Emma ponder a moment, and then reply, "I will not pretend _not_ to
understand you; and to give you all the relief in my power, be assure
that no such effect have follow his attention to I, as you be
apprehensive of."
Mrs. Weston look up, afraid to believe; but Emma's countenance be as
steady as her word.
"that you may have less difficulty in believe this boast, of my
present perfect indifference," she continue, "I will far tell you,
that there be a period in the early part of our acquaintance, when I
do like he, when I be very much disposed to be attach to he--nay,
be attach--and how it come to cease, be perhaps the wonder.
fortunately, however, it do cease. I have really for some time past,
for at least these three month, care nothing about he. you may
believe I, Mrs. Weston. this be the simple truth."
Mrs. Weston kiss she with tear of joy; and when she could find
utterance, assure she, that this protestation have do she more good
than any thing else in the world could do.
"Mr. Weston will be almost as much relieved as myself," say she. "on
this point we have be wretche. it be our darling wish that you
might be attach to each other--and we be persuade that it be
so.-- imagine what we have be feel on your account."
"I have escape; and that I should escape, may be a matter of grateful
wonder to you and myself. but this do not acquit _he_, Mrs. Weston;
and I must say, that I think he greatly to blame. what right have he
to come among we with affection and faith engage, and with manner so
_very_ disengage? what right have he to endeavour to please, as he
certainly do--to distinguish any one young woman with persevere
attention, as he certainly do--while he really belong to
another?--how could he tell what mischief he might be doing?-- how
could he tell that he might not be make I in love with him?--very
wrong, very wrong indeed."
"from something that he say, my dear Emma, I rather imagine--"
"and how could _she_ bear such behaviour! composure with a witness!
to look on, while repeat attention be offer to another woman,
before her face, and not resent it.--that be a degree of placidity,
which I can neither comprehend nor respect."
"there be misunderstanding between they, Emma; he say so expressly.
he have not time to enter into much explanation. he be here only a
quarter of an hour, and in a state of agitation which do not allow the
full use even of the time he could stay--but that there have be
misunderstanding he decidedly say. the present crisis, indeed,
seem to be bring on by they; and those misunderstanding might very
possibly arise from the impropriety of his conduct."
"Impropriety! oh! Mrs. Weston--it be too calm a censure. much, much
beyond impropriety!--it have sink he, I cannot say how it have sink he
in my opinion. so unlike what a man should be!-- none of that upright
integrity, that strict adherence to truth and principle, that disdain
of trick and littleness, which a man should display in every
transaction of his life."
"Nay, dear Emma, now I must take his part; for though he have be wrong
in this instance, I have know he long enough to answer for his have
many, very many, good quality; and--"
"Good God!" cry Emma, not attend to her.--"Mrs. smallridge, too!
Jane actually on the point of go as governess! what could he mean
by such horrible indelicacy? to suffer she to engage herself--to
suffer she even to think of such a measure!"
"he know nothing about it, Emma. on this article I can fully acquit
he. it be a private resolution of her, not communicate to he--or
at least not communicate in a way to carry conviction.-- till
yesterday, I know he say he be in the dark as to her plan. they
burst on he, I do not know how, but by some letter or message--and it
be the discovery of what she be do, of this very project of her,
which determine he to come forward at once, own it all to his uncle,
throw himself on his kindness, and, in short, put an end to the
miserable state of concealment that have be carry on so long."
Emma begin to listen well.
"I be to hear from he soon," continue Mrs. Weston. "he tell I at
parting, that he should soon write; and he speak in a manner which
seem to promise I many particular that could not be give now. let
we wait, therefore, for this letter. it may bring many extenuation.
it may make many thing intelligible and excusable which now be not to
be understand. donot let we be severe, donot let we be in a hurry to
condemn he. let we have patience. I must love he; and now that I be
satisfied on one point, the one material point, I be sincerely anxious
for its all turn out well, and ready to hope that it may. they must
both have suffer a great deal under such a system of secresy and
concealment."
"_his_ suffering," reply Emma dryly, "do not appear to have do he
much harm. well, and how do Mr. Churchill take it?"
"most favourably for his nephew--give his consent with scarcely a
difficulty. conceive what the event of a week have do in that
family! while poor Mrs. Churchill live, I suppose there could not
have be a hope, a chance, a possibility;--but scarcely be she
remain at rest in the family vault, than her husband be persuade to
act exactly opposite to what she would have require. what a blessing
it be, when undue influence do not survive the grave!-- he give his
consent with very little persuasion."
"ah!" think Emma, "he would have do as much for Harriet."
"this be settle last night, and Frank be off with the light this
morning. he stop at Highbury, at the Bates's, I fancy, some
time--and then come on hither; but be in such a hurry to get back to
his uncle, to whom he be just now more necessary than ever, that, as I
tell you, he could stay with we but a quarter of an hour.-- he be very
much agitated--very much, indeed--to a degree that make he appear
quite a different creature from any thing I have ever see he
before.--In addition to all the rest, there have be the shock of
find she so very unwell, which he have have no previous suspicion of--
and there be every appearance of his have be feel a great deal."
"and do you really believe the affair to have be carry on with
such perfect secresy?--The Campbells, the Dixons, do none of they know
of the engagement?"
Emma could not speak the name of Dixon without a little blush.
"none; not one. he positively say that it have be know to no being
in the world but their two self."
"well," say Emma, "I suppose we shall gradually grow reconcile to the
idea, and I wish they very happy. but I shall always think it a very
abominable sort of proceeding. what have it be but a system of
hypocrisy and deceit,--espionage, and treachery?-- to come among we
with profession of openness and simplicity; and such a league in
secret to judge we all!--here have we be, the whole winter and
spring, completely dupe, fancy ourselves all on an equal footing of
truth and honour, with two people in the midst of we who may have be
carry round, compare and sit in judgment on sentiment and
word that be never mean for both to hear.--they must take the
consequence, if they have hear each other speak of in a way not
perfectly agreeable!"
"I be quite easy on that head," reply Mrs. Weston. "I be very sure
that I never say any thing of either to the other, which both might
not have hear."
"you be in luck.--your only blunder be confine to my ear, when you
imagine a certain friend of our in love with the lady."
"true. but as I have always have a thoroughly good opinion of Miss
Fairfax, I never could, under any blunder, have speak ill of she; and
as to speak ill of he, there I must have be safe."
at this moment Mr. Weston appear at a little distance from the
window, evidently on the watch. his wife give he a look which invite
he in; and, while he be come round, add, "now, dear Emma, let
I intreat you to say and look every thing that may set his heart at
ease, and incline he to be satisfied with the match. let we make the
good of it--and, indeed, almost every thing may be fairly say in her
favour. it be not a connexion to gratify; but if Mr. Churchill do
not feel that, why should we? and it may be a very fortunate
circumstance for he, for Frank, I mean, that he should have attach
himself to a girl of such steadiness of character and good judgment as
I have always give her credit for--and still be disposed to give she
credit for, in spite of this one great deviation from the strict rule
of right. and how much may be say in her situation for even that
error!"
"much, indeed!" cry Emma feelingly. "if a woman can ever be excuse
for think only of herself, it be in a situation like jane
fairfax's.--of such, one may almost say, that 'the world be not
their's, nor the world's law.'"
she meet Mr. Weston on his entrance, with a smile countenance,
exclaim,
"a very pretty trick you have be play I, upon my word! this be
a device, I suppose, to sport with my curiosity, and exercise my talent
of guess. but you really frighten I. I think you have lose
half your property, at least. and here, instead of its be a matter
of condolence, it turn out to be one of congratulation.--I
congratulate you, Mr. Weston, with all my heart, on the prospect of
have one of the most lovely and accomplished young woman in England
for your daughter."
a glance or two between he and his wife, convince he that all be as
right as this speech proclaim; and its happy effect on his spirit
be immediate. his air and voice recover their usual briskness: he
shake she heartily and gratefully by the hand, and enter on the
subject in a manner to prove, that he now only want time and
persuasion to think the engagement no very bad thing. his companion
suggest only what could palliate imprudence, or smooth objection;
and by the time they have talk it all over together, and he have talk
it all over again with Emma, in their walk back to Hartfield, he be
become perfectly reconcile, and not far from think it the very good
thing that Frank could possibly have do.
CHAPTER XI
"Harriet, poor harriet!"--those be the word; in they lie the
torment idea which Emma could not get rid of, and which constitute
the real misery of the business to she. Frank Churchill have behave
very ill by herself--very ill in many ways,--but it be not so much
_his_ behaviour as she _own_, which make she so angry with he. it be
the scrape which he have draw she into on Harriet's account, that give
the deep hue to his offence.--poor Harriet! to be a second time the
dupe of her misconception and flattery. Mr. Knightley have speak
prophetically, when he once say, "Emma, you have be no friend to
Harriet Smith."--she be afraid she have do she nothing but
disservice.--it be true that she have not to charge herself, in this
instance as in the former, with be the sole and original author of
the mischief; with have suggest such feeling as might otherwise
never have enter Harriet's imagination; for Harriet have acknowledge
her admiration and preference of Frank Churchill before she have ever
give she a hint on the subject; but she feel completely guilty of
have encourage what she might have repress. she might have
prevent the indulgence and increase of such sentiment. her
influence would have be enough. and now she be very conscious that
she ought to have prevent them.--She feel that she have be risk
her friend's happiness on most insufficient ground. common sense
would have direct she to tell Harriet, that she must not allow
herself to think of he, and that there be five hundred chance to
one against his ever care for her.--"But, with common sense," she
add, "I be afraid I have have little to do."
she be extremely angry with herself. if she could not have be angry
with Frank Churchill too, it would have be dreadful.-- as for Jane
Fairfax, she might at least relieve her feeling from any present
solicitude on her account. Harriet would be anxiety enough; she need
no long be unhappy about Jane, whose trouble and whose ill-health
having, of course, the same origin, must be equally under cure.--her
day of insignificance and evil be over.--she would soon be well, and
happy, and prosperous.-- Emma could now imagine why her own attention
have be slight. this discovery lay many small matter open. no
doubt it have be from jealousy.--In Jane's eye she have be a rival;
and well might any thing she could offer of assistance or regard be
repulse. an airing in the Hartfield carriage would have be the
rack, and arrowroot from the Hartfield storeroom must have be poison.
she understand it all; and as far as her mind could disengage itself
from the injustice and selfishness of angry feeling, she acknowledge
that Jane Fairfax would have neither elevation nor happiness beyond her
desert. but poor Harriet be such an engrossing charge! there be
little sympathy to be spar for any body else. Emma be sadly fearful
that this second disappointment would be more severe than the first.
consider the very superior claim of the object, it ought; and
judging by its apparently strong effect on Harriet's mind, produce
reserve and self-command, it would.-- she must communicate the painful
truth, however, and as soon as possible. an injunction of secresy have
be among Mr. Weston's parting word. "for the present, the whole
affair be to be completely a secret. Mr. Churchill have make a point
of it, as a token of respect to the wife he have so very recently lose;
and every body admit it to be no more than due decorum."-- Emma have
promise; but still Harriet must be except. it be her superior duty.
in spite of her vexation, she could not help feel it almost
ridiculous, that she should have the very same distressing and delicate
office to perform by Harriet, which Mrs. Weston have just go through
by herself. the intelligence, which have be so anxiously announce to
she, she be now to be anxiously announce to another. her heart beat
quick on hear Harriet's footstep and voice; so, she suppose, have
poor Mrs. Weston feel when _she_ be approach Randalls. could the
event of the disclosure bear an equal resemblance!-- but of that,
unfortunately, there could be no chance.
"well, Miss Woodhouse!" cry Harriet, come eagerly into the room--
"be not this the oddest news that ever be?"
"what news do you mean?" reply Emma, unable to guess, by look or
voice, whether Harriet could indeed have receive any hint.
"About Jane Fairfax. do you ever hear any thing so strange? Oh!--you
need not be afraid of own it to I, for Mr. Weston have tell I
himself. I meet he just now. he tell I it be to be a great secret;
and, therefore, I should not think of mention it to any body but
you, but he say you know it."
"what do Mr. Weston tell you?"--said Emma, still perplexed.
"oh! he tell I all about it; that Jane Fairfax and Mr. Frank Churchill
be to be marry, and that they have be privately engage to one
another this long while. how very odd!"
it be, indeed, so odd; Harriet's behaviour be so extremely odd, that
Emma do not know how to understand it. her character appear
absolutely change. she seem to propose shew no agitation, or
disappointment, or peculiar concern in the discovery. Emma look at
she, quite unable to speak.
"have you any idea," cry Harriet, "of his be in love with
her?--you, perhaps, might.--You (blush as she speak) who can see
into every body's heart; but nobody else--"
"upon my word," say Emma, "I begin to doubt my have any such talent.
can you seriously ask I, Harriet, whether I imagine he attach to
another woman at the very time that I be--tacitly, if not openly--
encourage you to give way to your own feelings?--i never have the
slight suspicion, till within the last hour, of Mr. Frank
Churchillbe have the least regard for Jane Fairfax. you may be very
sure that if I have, I should have caution you accordingly."
"I!" cry Harriet, colour, and astonish. "why should you
caution me?--you do not think I care about Mr. Frank Churchill."
"I be delighted to hear you speak so stoutly on the subject," reply
Emma, smile; "but you do not mean to deny that there be a time--and
not very distant either--when you give I reason to understand that you
do care about he?"
"him!--never, never. dear Miss Woodhouse, how could you so mistake
I?" turn away distressed.
"Harriet!" cry Emma, after a moment's pause--"What do you mean?--
Good Heaven! what do you mean?--mistake you!--am I to suppose then?--"
she could not speak another word.--her voice be lose; and she sit
down, wait in great terror till Harriet should answer.
Harriet, who be stand at some distance, and with face turn from
she, do not immediately say any thing; and when she do speak, it be
in a voice nearly as agitated as Emma's.
"I should not have think it possible," she begin, "that you could
have misunderstood I! I know we agree never to name he--but
consider how infinitely superior he be to every body else, I should
not have think it possible that I could be suppose to mean any other
person. Mr. Frank Churchill, indeed! I do not know who would ever
look at he in the company of the other. I hope I have a well taste
than to think of Mr. Frank Churchill, who be like nobody by his side.
and that you should have be so mistaken, be amazing!--i be sure, but
for believe that you entirely approve and mean to encourage I in
my attachment, I should have consider it at first too great a
presumption almost, to dare to think of he. at first, if you have not
tell I that more wonderful thing have happen; that there have be
match of great disparity (those be your very words);-- I should
not have dare to give way to--I should not have think it
possible--but if _you_, who have be always acquaint with him--"
"Harriet!" cry Emma, collect herself resolutely--"Let we
understand each other now, without the possibility of farth mistake.
be you speak of--Mr. Knightley?"
"to be sure I be. I never could have an idea of any body else--and so
I think you know. when we talk about he, it be as clear as
possible."
"not quite," return Emma, with forced calmness, "for all that you
then say, appear to I to relate to a different person. I could
almost assert that you have _name_ Mr. Frank Churchill. I be sure the
service Mr. Frank Churchill have render you, in protect you from
the gipsy, be speak of."
"oh! Miss Woodhouse, how you do forget!"
"my dear Harriet, I perfectly remember the substance of what I say on
the occasion. I tell you that I do not wonder at your attachment;
that consider the service he have render you, it be extremely
natural:--and you agree to it, express yourself very warmly as to
your sense of that service, and mention even what your sensation
have be in see he come forward to your rescue.--the impression of
it be strong on my memory."
"oh, dear," cry Harriet, "now I recollect what you mean; but I be
think of something very different at the time. it be not the
gipsy--it be not Mr. Frank Churchill that I mean. no! (with some
elevation) I be think of a much more precious circumstance--of Mr.
Knightley's come and ask I to dance, when Mr. Elton would not
stand up with I; and when there be no other partner in the room.
that be the kind action; that be the noble benevolence and
generosity; that be the service which make I begin to feel how
superior he be to every other be upon earth."
"Good God!" cry Emma, "this have be a most unfortunate--most
deplorable mistake!--what be to be do?"
"you would not have encourage I, then, if you have understand I? at
least, however, I cannot be bad off than I should have be, if the
other have be the person; and now--it _be_ possible--"
she pause a few moment. Emma could not speak.
"I do not wonder, Miss Woodhouse," she resume, "that you should feel a
great difference between the two, as to I or as to any body. you must
think one five hundred million time more above I than the other. but
I hope, Miss Woodhouse, that supposing--that if--strange as it may
appear--. but you know they be your own word, that _more_ wonderful
thing have happen, match of _great_ disparity have take place
than between Mr. Frank Churchill and I; and, therefore, it seem as if
such a thing even as this, may have occur before--and if I should
be so fortunate, beyond expression, as to--if Mr. Knightley should
really--if _he_ do not mind the disparity, I hope, dear Miss
Woodhouse, you will not set yourself against it, and try to put
difficulty in the way. but you be too good for that, I be sure."
Harriet be stand at one of the window. Emma turn round to look
at she in consternation, and hastily say,
"have you any idea of Mr. Knightley's return your affection?"
"yes," reply Harriet modestly, but not fearfully--"i must say that I
have."
Emma's eye be instantly withdraw; and she sit silently meditating,
in a fix attitude, for a few minute. a few minute be sufficient
for make she acquainted with her own heart. a mind like her, once
opening to suspicion, make rapid progress. she touch--she
admit--she acknowledge the whole truth. why be it so much bad
that Harriet should be in love with Mr. Knightley, than with Frank
Churchill? why be the evil so dreadfully increase by Harriet's
have some hope of a return? it dart through she, with the speed of
an arrow, that Mr. Knightley must marry no one but herself!
her own conduct, as well as her own heart, be before she in the same
few minute. she see it all with a clearness which have never bless
she before. how improperly have she be act by Harriet! how
inconsiderate, how indelicate, how irrational, how unfeeling have be
her conduct! what blindness, what madness, have lead she on! it strike
she with dreadful force, and she be ready to give it every bad name in
the world. some portion of respect for herself, however, in spite of
all these demerit--some concern for her own appearance, and a strong
sense of justice by Harriet--(there would be no need of _compassion_ to
the girl who believe herself love by Mr. Knightley--but justice
require that she should not be make unhappy by any coldness now,) give
Emma the resolution to sit and endure far with calmness, with even
apparent kindness.--For her own advantage indeed, it be fit that the
utmost extent of Harriet's hope should be enquire into; and Harriet
have do nothing to forfeit the regard and interest which have be so
voluntarily form and maintain--or to deserve to be slight by the
person, whose counsel have never lead she right.-- rouse from
reflection, therefore, and subdue her emotion, she turn to Harriet
again, and, in a more inviting accent, renew the conversation; for as
to the subject which have first introduce it, the wonderful story of
Jane Fairfax, that be quite sunk and lost.-- neither of they think
but of Mr. Knightley and themselves.
Harriet, who have be stand in no unhappy reverie, be yet very glad
to be call from it, by the now encourage manner of such a judge,
and such a friend as Miss Woodhouse, and only want invitation, to
give the history of her hope with great, though tremble
delight.--Emma's trembling as she ask, and as she listen, be
well conceal than Harriet's, but they be not less. her voice be
not unsteady; but her mind be in all the perturbation that such a
development of self, such a burst of threaten evil, such a confusion
of sudden and perplexing emotion, must create.-- she listen with
much inward suffering, but with great outward patience, to Harriet's
detail.--methodical, or well arrange, or very well deliver, it could
not be expect to be; but it contain, when separate from all the
feebleness and tautology of the narration, a substance to sink her
spirit--especially with the corroborating circumstance, which her own
memory bring in favour of Mr. Knightley's most improved opinion of
Harriet.
Harriet have be conscious of a difference in his behaviour ever since
those two decisive dances.--Emma know that he have, on that occasion,
find she much superior to his expectation. from that evening, or at
least from the time of Miss Woodhouse's encourage she to think of
he, Harriet have begin to be sensible of his talk to her much more
than he have be use to do, and of his have indeed quite a different
manner towards she; a manner of kindness and sweetness!--latterly she
have be more and more aware of it. when they have be all walk
together, he have so often come and walk by she, and talk so very
delightfully!--He seem to want to be acquaint with she. Emma know
it to have be very much the case. she have often observe the change,
to almost the same extent.-- Harriet repeat expression of
approbation and praise from he--and Emma feel they to be in the
close agreement with what she have know of his opinion of Harriet.
he praise she for be without art or affectation, for have simple,
honest, generous, feelings.-- she know that he see such recommendation
in Harriet; he have dwell on they to she more than once.--much that
live in Harriet's memory, many little particular of the notice she
have receive from he, a look, a speech, a removal from one chair to
another, a compliment imply, a preference infer, have be
unnoticed, because unsuspected, by Emma. circumstance that might
swell to half an hour's relation, and contain multiplied proof to
she who have see they, have pass undiscerned by she who now hear
they; but the two late occurrence to be mention, the two of
strong promise to Harriet, be not without some degree of witness
from Emma herself.--The first, be his walk with she apart from the
other, in the lime-walk at Donwell, where they have be walk some
time before Emma come, and he have take pain (as she be convince) to
draw she from the rest to himself--and at first, he have talk to she
in a more particular way than he have ever do before, in a very
particular way indeed!--(harriet could not recall it without a blush.)
he seem to be almost ask she, whether her affection be
engaged.-- but as soon as she (Miss Woodhouse) appear likely to join
they, he change the subject, and begin talk about farming:-- the
second, be his have sit talk with she nearly half an hour before
Emma come back from her visit, the very last morning of his be at
Hartfield--though, when he first come in, he have say that he could not
stay five minute--and his have tell she, during their conversation,
that though he must go to London, it be very much against his
inclination that he leave home at all, which be much more (as Emma
feel) than he have acknowledge to _her_. the superior degree of
confidence towards Harriet, which this one article mark, give she
severe pain.
on the subject of the first of the two circumstance, she do, after a
little reflection, venture the following question. "might he not?--is
not it possible, that when enquire, as you think, into the state of
your affection, he might be allude to Mr. Martin--he might have Mr.
Martin's interest in view? but Harriet reject the suspicion with
spirit.
"Mr. Martin! no indeed!--there be not a hint of Mr. Martin. I hope I
know well now, than to care for Mr. Martin, or to be suspect of it."
when Harriet have close her evidence, she appeal to her dear Miss
Woodhouse, to say whether she have not good ground for hope.
"I never should have presume to think of it at first," say she, "but
for you. you tell I to observe he carefully, and let his behaviour
be the rule of mine--and so I have. but now I seem to feel that I may
deserve he; and that if he do chuse I, it will not be any thing so
very wonderful."
the bitter feeling occasion by this speech, the many bitter
feeling, make the utmost exertion necessary on Emma's side, to enable
she to say on reply,
"Harriet, I will only venture to declare, that Mr. Knightley be the
last man in the world, who would intentionally give any woman the idea
of his feeling for she more than he really do."
Harriet seem ready to worship her friend for a sentence so
satisfactory; and Emma be only save from rapture and fondness, which
at that moment would have be dreadful penance, by the sound of her
father's footstep. he be come through the hall. Harriet be too
much agitated to encounter he. "she could not compose herself-- Mr.
Woodhouse would be alarm--she have well go;"--with most ready
encouragement from her friend, therefore, she pass off through
another door--and the moment she be go, this be the spontaneous
burst of Emma's feeling: "oh God! that I have never see she!"
the rest of the day, the follow night, be hardly enough for her
thoughts.--She be bewilder amidst the confusion of all that have
rush on she within the last few hour. every moment have bring a
fresh surprize; and every surprize must be matter of humiliation to
her.--how to understand it all! how to understand the deception she
have be thus practise on herself, and live under!--The blunder,
the blindness of her own head and heart!--she sit still, she walk
about, she try her own room, she try the shrubbery--in every place,
every posture, she perceive that she have act most weakly; that she
have be impose on by other in a most mortifying degree; that she have
be impose on herself in a degree yet more mortifying; that she be
wretched, and should probably find this day but the beginning of
wretchedness.
to understand, thoroughly understand her own heart, be the first
endeavour. to that point go every leisure moment which her father's
claim on she allow, and every moment of involuntary absence of mind.
how long have Mr. Knightley be so dear to she, as every feeling
declare he now to be? when have his influence, such influence
begun?-- when have he succeed to that place in her affection, which
Frank Churchill have once, for a short period, occupied?--She look
back; she compare the two--compare they, as they have always stand in
her estimation, from the time of the latter's become know to her--
and as they must at any time have be compare by she, have it--oh!
have it, by any blessed felicity, occur to she, to institute the
comparison.--She see that there never have be a time when she do not
consider Mr. Knightley as infinitely the superior, or when his regard
for she have not be infinitely the most dear. she see, that in
persuade herself, in fancy, in act to the contrary, she have
be entirely under a delusion, totally ignorant of her own heart--and,
in short, that she have never really care for Frank Churchill at all!
this be the conclusion of the first series of reflection. this be
the knowledge of herself, on the first question of inquiry, which she
reach; and without be long in reach it.-- she be most
sorrowfully indignant; ashamed of every sensation but the one reveal
to she--her affection for Mr. Knightley.-- every other part of her mind
be disgusting.
with insufferable vanity have she believe herself in the secret of
every body's feeling; with unpardonable arrogance propose to arrange
every body's destiny. she be prove to have be universally
mistaken; and she have not quite do nothing--for she have do
mischief. she have bring evil on Harriet, on herself, and she too
much fear, on Mr. Knightley.--Were this most unequal of all
connexion to take place, on she must rest all the reproach of have
give it a beginning; for his attachment, she must believe to be
produce only by a consciousness of Harriet's;--and even be this not
the case, he would never have know Harriet at all but for her folly.
Mr. Knightley and Harriet Smith!--It be a union to distance every
wonder of the kind.--The attachment of Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax
become commonplace, threadbare, stale in the comparison, exciting no
surprize, present no disparity, afford nothing to be say or
thought.--mr. Knightley and Harriet Smith!--Such an elevation on her
side! such a debasement on his! it be horrible to Emma to think how
it must sink he in the general opinion, to foresee the smile, the
sneer, the merriment it would prompt at his expense; the mortification
and disdain of his brother, the thousand inconvenience to
himself.--could it be?--No; it be impossible. and yet it be far,
very far, from impossible.--was it a new circumstance for a man of
first-rate ability to be captivate by very inferior power? be it
new for one, perhaps too busy to seek, to be the prize of a girl who
would seek him?--was it new for any thing in this world to be unequal,
inconsistent, incongruous--or for chance and circumstance (as second
cause) to direct the human fate?
oh! have she never bring Harriet forward! have she leave she where she
ought, and where he have tell she she ought!--had she not, with a folly
which no tongue could express, prevent she marry the
unexceptionable young man who would have make her happy and respectable
in the line of life to which she ought to belong--all would have be
safe; none of this dreadful sequel would have be.
how Harriet could ever have have the presumption to raise her thought
to Mr. Knightley!--How she could dare to fancy herself the choose of
such a man till actually assure of it!-- but Harriet be less humble,
have few scruple than formerly.-- her inferiority, whether of mind or
situation, seem little felt.-- she have seem more sensible of Mr.
Elton's be to stoop in marry she, than she now seem of Mr.
Knightley's.-- Alas! be not that her own do too? who have be at
pain to give harriet notion of self-consequence but herself?--who but
herself have teach she, that she be to elevate herself if possible,
and that her claim be great to a high worldly establishment?-- if
Harriet, from be humble, be grow vain, it be she do too.
CHAPTER XII
till now that she be threaten with its loss, Emma have never know
how much of her happiness depend on be _first_ with Mr. Knightley,
first in interest and affection.--satisfie that it be so, and feel
it her due, she have enjoy it without reflection; and only in the
dread of be supplant, find how inexpressibly important it have
been.--Long, very long, she feel she have be first; for, have no
female connexion of his own, there have be only Isabella whose claim
could be compare with her, and she have always know exactly how far
he love and esteemed Isabella. she have herself be first with he
for many year past. she have not deserve it; she have often be
negligent or perverse, slight his advice, or even wilfully oppose
he, insensible of half his merit, and quarrel with he because he
would not acknowledge her false and insolent estimate of her own--but
still, from family attachment and habit, and thorough excellence of
mind, he have love she, and watch over she from a girl, with an
endeavour to improve she, and an anxiety for she do right, which no
other creature have at all share. in spite of all her fault, she know
she be dear to he; might she not say, very dear?-- when the
suggestion of hope, however, which must follow here, present
themselves, she could not presume to indulge they. Harriet Smith might
think herself not unworthy of be peculiarly, exclusively,
passionately love by Mr. Knightley. _she_ could not. she could not
flatter herself with any idea of blindness in his attachment to _she_.
she have receive a very recent proof of its impartiality.-- how shock
have he be by her behaviour to Miss Bates! how directly, how strongly
have he express himself to she on the subject!--not too strongly for
the offence--but far, far too strongly to issue from any feeling soft
than upright justice and clear-sighted goodwill.-- she have no hope,
nothing to deserve the name of hope, that he could have that sort of
affection for herself which be now in question; but there be a hope
(at time a slight one, at time much strong,) that Harriet might
have deceive herself, and be overrate his regard for _her_.--wish it
she must, for his sake--be the consequence nothing to herself, but his
remain single all his life. could she be secure of that, indeed, of
his never marry at all, she believe she should be perfectly
satisfied.--let he but continue the same Mr. Knightley to she and her
father, the same Mr. Knightley to all the world; let Donwell and
Hartfield lose none of their precious intercourse of friendship and
confidence, and her peace would be fully secured.--marriage, in fact,
would not do for she. it would be incompatible with what she owe to
her father, and with what she feel for he. nothing should separate
she from her father. she would not marry, even if she be ask by
Mr. Knightley.
it must be her ardent wish that Harriet might be disappoint; and she
hop, that when able to see they together again, she might at least be
able to ascertain what the chance for it were.--She should see they
henceforward with the close observance; and wretchedly as she have
hitherto misunderstood even those she be watch, she do not know
how to admit that she could be blind here.-- he be expect back
every day. the power of observation would be soon give--frightfully
soon it appear when her thought be in one course. in the
meanwhile, she resolve against see harriet.-- it would do neither
of they good, it would do the subject no good, to be talk of it
farther.--She be resolve not to be convince, as long as she could
doubt, and yet have no authority for oppose Harriet's confidence. to
talk would be only to irritate.--She write to she, therefore, kindly,
but decisively, to beg that she would not, at present, come to
Hartfield; acknowledge it to be her conviction, that all far
confidential discussion of _one_ topic have well be avoid; and
hop, that if a few day be allow to pass before they meet again,
except in the company of other--she object only to a
tete-a-tete--they might be able to act as if they have forget the
conversation of yesterday.--Harriet submit, and approve, and be
grateful.
this point be just arrange, when a visitor arrive to tear Emma's
thought a little from the one subject which have engross they,
sleep or wake, the last twenty-four hour--Mrs. Weston, who have
be call on her daughter-in-law elect, and take Hartfield in her
way home, almost as much in duty to Emma as in pleasure to herself, to
relate all the particular of so interesting an interview.
Mr. Weston have accompany she to Mrs. Bates's, and go through his
share of this essential attention most handsomely; but she have then
induce Miss Fairfax to join she in an airing, be now return with
much more to say, and much more to say with satisfaction, than a
quarter of an hour spend in Mrs. Bates's parlour, with all the
encumbrance of awkward feeling, could have afford.
a little curiosity Emma have; and she make the most of it while her
friend relate. Mrs. Weston have set off to pay the visit in a good
deal of agitation herself; and in the first place have wish not to go
at all at present, to be allow merely to write to Miss Fairfax
instead, and to defer this ceremonious call till a little time have
pass, and Mr. Churchill could be reconcile to the engagement's
become know; as, consider every thing, she think such a visit
could not be pay without lead to reports:--but Mr. Weston have
think differently; he be extremely anxious to shew his approbation
to Miss Fairfax and her family, and do not conceive that any suspicion
could be excite by it; or if it be, that it would be of any
consequence; for "such thing," he observe, "always get about." Emma
smile, and feel that Mr. Weston have very good reason for say so.
they have go, in short--and very great have be the evident distress
and confusion of the lady. she have hardly be able to speak a word,
and every look and action have shew how deeply she be suffer from
consciousness. the quiet, heart-feel satisfaction of the old lady, and
the rapturous delight of her daughter--who prove even too joyous to
talk as usual, have be a gratifying, yet almost an affecting, scene.
they be both so truly respectable in their happiness, so
disintereste in every sensation; think so much of Jane; so much of
every body, and so little of themselves, that every kindly feeling be
at work for they. Miss Fairfax's recent illness have offer a fair
plea for Mrs. Weston to invite she to an airing; she have draw back and
decline at first, but, on be press have yield; and, in the
course of their drive, Mrs. Weston have, by gentle encouragement,
overcome so much of her embarrassment, as to bring she to converse on
the important subject. apology for her seemingly ungracious silence
in their first reception, and the warm expression of the gratitude
she be always feel towards herself and Mr. Weston, must necessarily
open the cause; but when these effusion be put by, they have talk a
good deal of the present and of the future state of the engagement.
Mrs. Weston be convince that such conversation must be the great
relief to her companion, pen up within her own mind as every thing have
so long be, and be very much pleased with all that she have say on
the subject.
"on the misery of what she have suffer, during the concealment of so
many month," continue Mrs. Weston, "she be energetic. this be one
of her expression. 'I will not say, that since I enter into the
engagement I have not have some happy moment; but I can say, that I
have never know the blessing of one tranquil hour:'--and the
quivering lip, Emma, which utter it, be an attestation that I feel
at my heart."
"poor girl!" say Emma. "she think herself wrong, then, for have
consent to a private engagement?"
"Wrong! no one, I believe, can blame she more than she be disposed to
blame herself. 'the consequence,' say she, 'have be a state of
perpetual suffering to I; and so it ought. but after all the
punishment that misconduct can bring, it be still not less misconduct.
Pain be no expiation. I never can be blameless. I have be act
contrary to all my sense of right; and the fortunate turn that every
thing have take, and the kindness I be now receive, be what my
conscience tell I ought not to be.' 'do not imagine, madam,' she
continue, 'that I be teach wrong. do not let any reflection fall on
the principle or the care of the friend who bring I up. the error
have be all my own; and I do assure you that, with all the excuse that
present circumstance may appear to give, I shall yet dread make the
story know to Colonel Campbell.'"
"poor girl!" say Emma again. "she love he then excessively, I
suppose. it must have be from attachment only, that she could be lead
to form the engagement. her affection must have overpower she
judgment."
"yes, I have no doubt of she be extremely attach to he."
"I be afraid," return Emma, sigh, "that I must often have
contribute to make her unhappy."
"on your side, my love, it be very innocently do. but she probably
have something of that in her thought, when allude to the
misunderstanding which he have give we hint of before. one natural
consequence of the evil she have involve herself in," she say, "be
that of make she _unreasonable_. the consciousness of have do
amiss, have expose she to a thousand inquietude, and make she captious
and irritable to a degree that must have be--that have be--hard for
he to bear. 'I do not make the allowance,' say she, 'which I ought
to have do, for his temper and spirit--his delightful spirit, and
that gaiety, that playfulness of disposition, which, under any other
circumstance, would, I be sure, have be as constantly bewitch to
I, as they be at first.' she then begin to speak of you, and of the
great kindness you have shew she during her illness; and with a blush
which shew I how it be all connect, desire I, whenever I have an
opportunity, to thank you--I could not thank you too much--for every
wish and every endeavour to do she good. she be sensible that you have
never receive any proper acknowledgment from herself."
"if I do not know she to be happy now," say Emma, seriously, "which,
in spite of every little drawback from her scrupulous conscience, she
must be, I could not bear these thanks;--for, oh! Mrs. Weston, if
there be an account draw up of the evil and the good I have do
Miss Fairfax!--Well (check herself, and try to be more lively),
this be all to be forget. you be very kind to bring I these
interesting particular. they shew she to the great advantage. I
be sure she be very good--I hope she will be very happy. it be fit
that the fortune should be on his side, for I think the merit will be
all on her."
such a conclusion could not pass unanswered by Mrs. Weston. she
think well of Frank in almost every respect; and, what be more, she
love he very much, and her defence be, therefore, earnest. she
talk with a great deal of reason, and at least equal affection--but
she have too much to urge for Emma's attention; it be soon go to
Brunswick Square or to Donwell; she forget to attempt to listen; and
when Mrs. Weston end with, "we have not yet have the letter we be so
anxious for, you know, but I hope it will soon come," she be oblige
to pause before she answer, and at last oblige to answer at random,
before she could at all recollect what letter it be which they be so
anxious for.
"be you well, my Emma?" be Mrs. Weston's parting question.
"oh! perfectly. I be always well, you know. be sure to give I
intelligence of the letter as soon as possible."
Mrs. Weston's communication furnish Emma with more food for
unpleasant reflection, by increase her esteem and compassion, and her
sense of past injustice towards Miss Fairfax. she bitterly regret
not have seek a close acquaintance with she, and blush for the
envious feeling which have certainly be, in some measure, the cause.
have she follow Mr. Knightley's know wish, in pay that attention
to Miss Fairfax, which be every way her due; have she try to know she
well; have she do her part towards intimacy; have she endeavour to
find a friend there instead of in Harriet Smith; she must, in all
probability, have be spar from every pain which press on her
now.--Birth, ability, and education, have be equally mark one as
an associate for she, to be receive with gratitude; and the
other--what be she?--suppose even that they have never become
intimate friend; that she have never be admit into Miss Fairfax's
confidence on this important matter--which be most probable--still,
in know she as she ought, and as she might, she must have be
preserve from the abominable suspicion of an improper attachment to
Mr. Dixon, which she have not only so foolishly fashioned and harbour
herself, but have so unpardonably impart; an idea which she greatly
fear have be make a subject of material distress to the delicacy of
Jane's feeling, by the levity or carelessness of Frank Churchill's.
of all the source of evil surround the former, since she come to
Highbury, she be persuade that she must herself have be the bad.
she must have be a perpetual enemy. they never could have be all
three together, without she have stab Jane Fairfax's peace in a
thousand instance; and on Box Hill, perhaps, it have be the agony of
a mind that would bear no more.
the evening of this day be very long, and melancholy, at Hartfield.
the weather add what it could of gloom. a cold stormy rain set in,
and nothing of July appear but in the tree and shrub, which the
wind be despoil, and the length of the day, which only make such
cruel sight the long visible.
the weather affect Mr. Woodhouse, and he could only be keep tolerably
comfortable by almost ceaseless attention on his daughter's side, and
by exertion which have never cost her half so much before. it remind
she of their first forlorn tete-a-tete, on the evening of Mrs. Weston's
wedding-day; but Mr. Knightley have walk in then, soon after tea, and
dissipate every melancholy fancy. alas! such delightful proof of
Hartfield's attraction, as those sort of visit convey, might shortly
be over. the picture which she have then draw of the privation of the
approach winter, have prove erroneous; no friend have desert they,
no pleasure have be lost.--but her present foreboding she fear
would experience no similar contradiction. the prospect before she
now, be threaten to a degree that could not be entirely dispelled--
that might not be even partially brighten. if all take place that
might take place among the circle of her friend, Hartfield must be
comparatively deserted; and she leave to cheer her father with the
spirit only of ruin happiness.
the child to be bear at Randalls must be a tie there even dearer than
herself; and Mrs. Weston's heart and time would be occupy by it.
they should lose she; and, probably, in great measure, her husband
also.--Frank Churchill would return among they no more; and Miss
Fairfax, it be reasonable to suppose, would soon cease to belong to
Highbury. they would be marry, and settle either at or near
Enscombe. all that be good would be withdraw; and if to these
loss, the loss of Donwell be to be add, what would remain of
cheerful or of rational society within their reach? Mr. Knightley to
be no long come there for his evening comfort!-- no long walk
in at all hour, as if ever willing to change his own home for
their's!--how be it to be endure? and if he be to be lose to they
for Harriet's sake; if he be to be think of hereafter, as find
in Harriet's society all that he want; if Harriet be to be the
choose, the first, the dear, the friend, the wife to whom he look
for all the good blessing of existence; what could be increase
Emma's wretchedness but the reflection never far distant from her mind,
that it have be all her own work?
when it come to such a pitch as this, she be not able to refrain from
a start, or a heavy sigh, or even from walk about the room for a few
second--and the only source whence any thing like consolation or
composure could be draw, be in the resolution of her own well
conduct, and the hope that, however inferior in spirit and gaiety might
be the following and every future winter of her life to the past, it
would yet find she more rational, more acquainted with herself, and
leave she less to regret when it be go.
CHAPTER XIII
the weather continue much the same all the follow morning; and the
same loneliness, and the same melancholy, seem to reign at
Hartfield--but in the afternoon it clear; the wind change into a
soft quarter; the cloud be carry off; the sun appear; it be
summer again. with all the eagerness which such a transition give,
Emma resolve to be out of door as soon as possible. never have the
exquisite sight, smell, sensation of nature, tranquil, warm, and
brilliant after a storm, be more attractive to she. she long for
the serenity they might gradually introduce; and on Mr. Perry's come
in soon after dinner, with a disengage hour to give her father, she
lose no time ill hurrying into the shrubbery.--there, with spirit
freshen, and thought a little relieved, she have take a few turn,
when she see Mr. Knightley pass through the garden door, and come
towards her.--It be the first intimation of his be return from
London. she have be think of he the moment before, as
unquestionably sixteen mile distant.--there be time only for the
quick arrangement of mind. she must be collect and calm. in half
a minute they be together. the "how d'ye do's" be quiet and
constrain on each side. she ask after their mutual friend; they
be all well.--When have he leave them?--only that morning. he must
have have a wet ride.--yes.--he mean to walk with she, she find. "he
have just look into the dining-room, and as he be not want there,
prefer be out of door."--she think he neither look nor speak
cheerfully; and the first possible cause for it, suggest by her
fear, be, that he have perhaps be communicate his plan to his
brother, and be pain by the manner in which they have be receive.
they walk together. he be silent. she think he be often look
at she, and try for a full view of her face than it suit she to
give. and this belief produce another dread. perhaps he want to
speak to she, of his attachment to Harriet; he might be watch for
encouragement to begin.--She do not, could not, feel equal to lead the
way to any such subject. he must do it all himself. yet she could not
bear this silence. with he it be most unnatural. she
consider--resolve--and, try to smile, began--
"you have some news to hear, now you be come back, that will rather
surprize you."
"have I?" say he quietly, and look at she; "of what nature?"
"oh! the good nature in the world--a wedding."
after wait a moment, as if to be sure she intend to say no more,
he reply,
"if you mean Miss Fairfax and Frank Churchill, I have hear that
already."
"how be it possible?" cry Emma, turn her glowing cheek towards
he; for, while she speak, it occur to she that he might have call
at Mrs. Goddard's in his way.
"I have a few line on parish business from Mr. Weston this morning, and
at the end of they he give I a brief account of what have happen."
Emma be quite relieved, and could presently say, with a little more
composure,
"_you_ probably have be less surprized than any of we, for you have
have your suspicions.--i have not forget that you once try to give
I a caution.--I wish I have attend to it--but--(with a sink voice
and a heavy sigh) I seem to have be doom to blindness."
for a moment or two nothing be say, and she be unsuspicious of
have excite any particular interest, till she find her arm draw
within his, and press against his heart, and hear he thus say,
in a tone of great sensibility, speak low,
"Time, my dear Emma, time will heal the wound.--your own excellent
sense--your exertion for your father's sake--I know you will not allow
yourself--." her arm be press again, as he add, in a more broken
and subdue accent, "the feeling of the warm
friendship--indignation--abominable scoundrel!"-- and in a loud,
steady tone, he conclude with, "he will soon be go. they will
soon be in Yorkshire. I be sorry for _her_. she deserve a well
fate."
Emma understand he; and as soon as she could recover from the flutter
of pleasure, excite by such tender consideration, reply,
"you be very kind--but you be mistaken--and I must set you right.-- I
be not in want of that sort of compassion. my blindness to what be
go on, lead I to act by they in a way that I must always be ashamed
of, and I be very foolishly tempt to say and do many thing which
may well lay I open to unpleasant conjecture, but I have no other
reason to regret that I be not in the secret early."
"Emma!" cry he, look eagerly at she, "be you, indeed?"--but
check himself--"no, no, I understand you--forgive I--I be pleased
that you can say even so much.--He be no object of regret, indeed! and
it will not be very long, I hope, before that become the
acknowledgment of more than your reason.--fortunate that your
affection be not far entangled!--I could never, I confess, from
your manner, assure myself as to the degree of what you felt-- I could
only be certain that there be a preference--and a preference which I
never believe he to deserve.--He be a disgrace to the name of
man.--And be he to be reward with that sweet young woman?-- Jane,
Jane, you will be a miserable creature."
"Mr. Knightley," say Emma, try to be lively, but really confused--
"I be in a very extraordinary situation. I cannot let you continue in
your error; and yet, perhaps, since my manner give such an impression,
I have as much reason to be ashamed of confess that I never have
be at all attach to the person we be speak of, as it might be
natural for a woman to feel in confess exactly the reverse.-- but I
never have."
he listen in perfect silence. she wish he to speak, but he would
not. she suppose she must say more before she be entitle to his
clemency; but it be a hard case to be oblige still to lower herself
in his opinion. she go on, however.
"I have very little to say for my own conduct.--i be tempt by his
attention, and allow myself to appear pleased.-- an old story,
probably--a common case--and no more than have happen to hundred of
my sex before; and yet it may not be the more excusable in one who set
up as I do for Understanding. many circumstance assist the
temptation. he be the son of Mr. Weston--he be continually here--I
always find he very pleasant--and, in short, for (with a sigh) let I
swell out the cause ever so ingeniously, they all centre in this at
last--my vanity be flatter, and I allow his attention. latterly,
however--for some time, indeed--I have have no idea of their meaning
any thing.--i think they a habit, a trick, nothing that call for
seriousness on my side. he have impose on I, but he have not injure
I. I have never be attach to he. and now I can tolerably
comprehend his behaviour. he never wish to attach I. it be merely
a blind to conceal his real situation with another.--It be his object
to blind all about he; and no one, I be sure, could be more
effectually blind than myself--except that I be _not_ blinded--that
it be my good fortune--that, in short, I be somehow or other safe
from he."
she have hop for an answer here--for a few word to say that her
conduct be at least intelligible; but he be silent; and, as far as
she could judge, deep in thought. at last, and tolerably in his usual
tone, he say,
"I have never have a high opinion of Frank Churchill.--I can suppose,
however, that I may have underrate he. my acquaintance with he have
be but trifling.--and even if I have not underrate he hitherto, he
may yet turn out well.--with such a woman he have a chance.--I have no
motive for wish he ill--and for her sake, whose happiness will be
involve in his good character and conduct, I shall certainly wish he
well."
"I have no doubt of their be happy together," say Emma; "I believe
they to be very mutually and very sincerely attach."
"he be a most fortunate man!" return Mr. Knightley, with energy. "so
early in life--at three-and-twenty--a period when, if a man chuse a
wife, he generally chuse ill. at three-and-twenty to have draw such
a prize! what year of felicity that man, in all human calculation,
have before him!--assure of the love of such a woman--the disinterested
love, for Jane Fairfax's character vouche for her disinterestedness;
every thing in his favour,--equality of situation--I mean, as far as
regard society, and all the habit and manner that be important;
equality in every point but one--and that one, since the purity of her
heart be not to be doubt, such as must increase his felicity, for it
will be his to bestow the only advantage she wants.--a man would
always wish to give a woman a well home than the one he take she
from; and he who can do it, where there be no doubt of _her_ regard,
must, I think, be the happy of mortals.--frank Churchill be, indeed,
the favourite of fortune. every thing turn out for his good.--He
meet with a young woman at a watering-place, gain her affection,
cannot even weary she by negligent treatment--and have he and all his
family seek round the world for a perfect wife for he, they could
not have find she superior.--his aunt be in the way.--his aunt
dies.--he have only to speak.--his friend be eager to promote his
happiness.-- he have use every body ill--and they be all delighted to
forgive him.-- he be a fortunate man indeed!"
"you speak as if you envy he."
"and I do envy he, Emma. in one respect he be the object of my envy."
Emma could say no more. they seem to be within half a sentence of
Harriet, and her immediate feeling be to avert the subject, if
possible. she make her plan; she would speak of something totally
different--the child in Brunswick Square; and she only wait for
breath to begin, when Mr. Knightley startle she, by say,
"you will not ask I what be the point of envy.--you be determine, I
see, to have no curiosity.--you be wise--but _i_ cannot be wise.
Emma, I must tell you what you will not ask, though I may wish it
unsay the next moment."
"oh! then, donot speak it, donot speak it," she eagerly cry. "take a
little time, consider, do not commit yourself."
"thank you," say he, in an accent of deep mortification, and not
another syllable follow.
Emma could not bear to give he pain. he be wish to confide in
she--perhaps to consult her;--cost she what it would, she would
listen. she might assist his resolution, or reconcile he to it; she
might give just praise to Harriet, or, by represent to he his own
independence, relieve he from that state of indecision, which must be
more intolerable than any alternative to such a mind as his.--they have
reach the house.
"you be go in, I suppose?" say he.
"no,"--replie Emma--quite confirm by the depressed manner in which
he still spoke--"i should like to take another turn. Mr. Perry be not
go." and, after proceed a few step, she added-- "I stop you
ungraciously, just now, Mr. Knightley, and, I be afraid, give you
pain.--but if you have any wish to speak openly to I as a friend, or
to ask my opinion of any thing that you may have in contemplation--as a
friend, indeed, you may command me.--I will hear whatever you like. I
will tell you exactly what I think."
"as a friend!"--repeate Mr. Knightley.--"Emma, that I fear be a
word--no, I have no wish--stay, yes, why should I hesitate?-- I have
go too far already for concealment.--Emma, I accept your offer--
Extraordinary as it may seem, I accept it, and refer myself to you as a
friend.--tell I, then, have I no chance of ever succeed?"
he stop in his earnestness to look the question, and the expression
of his eye overpower she.
"my dear Emma," say he, "for dearest you will always be, whatever
the event of this hour's conversation, my dearest, most beloved
Emma--tell I at once. say 'no,' if it be to be say."-- she could
really say nothing.--"you be silent," he cry, with great animation;
"absolutely silent! at present I ask no more."
Emma be almost ready to sink under the agitation of this moment. the
dread of be awaken from the happy dream, be perhaps the most
prominent feeling.
"I cannot make speech, Emma:" he soon resume; and in a tone of such
sincere, decide, intelligible tenderness as be tolerably
convincing.--"If I love you less, I might be able to talk about it
more. but you know what I am.--You hear nothing but truth from me.--I
have blame you, and lecture you, and you have bear it as no other
woman in England would have bear it.-- Bear with the truth I would
tell you now, dearest Emma, as well as you have bear with they. the
manner, perhaps, may have as little to recommend they. God know, I
have be a very indifferent lover.-- but you understand me.--Yes, you
see, you understand my feeling--and will return they if you can. at
present, I ask only to hear, once to hear your voice."
while he speak, Emma's mind be most busy, and, with all the wonderful
velocity of thought, have be able--and yet without lose a word--to
catch and comprehend the exact truth of the whole; to see that
Harriet's hope have be entirely groundless, a mistake, a delusion, as
complete a delusion as any of her own--that Harriet be nothing; that
she be every thing herself; that what she have be say relative to
Harriet have be all take as the language of her own feeling; and
that her agitation, her doubt, her reluctance, her discouragement, have
be all receive as discouragement from herself.--And not only be
there time for these conviction, with all their glow of attendant
happiness; there be time also to rejoice that Harriet's secret have not
escape she, and to resolve that it need not, and should not.--It be
all the service she could now render her poor friend; for as to any of
that heroism of sentiment which might have prompt she to entreat he
to transfer his affection from herself to Harriet, as infinitely the
most worthy of the two--or even the more simple sublimity of resolve
to refuse he at once and for ever, without vouchsafe any motive,
because he could not marry they both, Emma have it not. she feel for
Harriet, with pain and with contrition; but no flight of generosity run
mad, oppose all that could be probable or reasonable, enter she
brain. she have lead her friend astray, and it would be a reproach to
she for ever; but her judgment be as strong as her feeling, and as
strong as it have ever be before, in reprobate any such alliance for
he, as most unequal and degrading. her way be clear, though not
quite smooth.--She speak then, on be so entreated.-- what do she
say?--just what she ought, of course. a lady always does.-- she say
enough to shew there need not be despair--and to invite he to say more
himself. he _have_ despair at one period; he have receive such an
injunction to caution and silence, as for the time crush every
hope;--she have begin by refuse to hear him.--The change have perhaps
be somewhat sudden;--her proposal of take another turn, she
renew the conversation which she have just put an end to, might be a
little extraordinary!--she feel its inconsistency; but Mr. Knightley
be so obliging as to put up with it, and seek no farth explanation.
seldom, very seldom, do complete truth belong to any human
disclosure; seldom can it happen that something be not a little
disguised, or a little mistaken; but where, as in this case, though the
conduct be mistaken, the feeling be not, it may not be very
material.-- Mr. Knightley could not impute to Emma a more relent
heart than she possess, or a heart more disposed to accept of his.
he have, in fact, be wholly unsuspicious of his own influence. he have
follow she into the shrubbery with no idea of try it. he have
come, in his anxiety to see how she bear Frank Churchill's engagement,
with no selfish view, no view at all, but of endeavouring, if she
allow he an opening, to soothe or to counsel her.--The rest have be
the work of the moment, the immediate effect of what he hear, on his
feeling. the delightful assurance of her total indifference towards
Frank Churchill, of she have a heart completely disengage from he,
have give birth to the hope, that, in time, he might gain her affection
himself;--but it have be no present hope--he have only, in the
momentary conquest of eagerness over judgment, aspire to be tell that
she do not forbid his attempt to attach her.--the superior hope which
gradually open be so much the more enchanting.-- the affection,
which he have be ask to be allow to create, if he could, be
already his!--within half an hour, he have pass from a thoroughly
distressed state of mind, to something so like perfect happiness, that
it could bear no other name.
_her_ change be equal.--this one half-hour have give to each the same
precious certainty of be belove, have clear from each the same
degree of ignorance, jealousy, or distrust.--On his side, there have
be a long-stand jealousy, old as the arrival, or even the
expectation, of Frank Churchill.--He have be in love with Emma, and
jealous of Frank Churchill, from about the same period, one sentiment
have probably enlighten he as to the other. it be his jealousy
of Frank Churchill that have take he from the country.--The Box Hill
party have decide he on go away. he would save himself from
witness again such permit, encourage attentions.--He have go to
learn to be indifferent.-- but he have go to a wrong place. there be
too much domestic happiness in his brother's house; woman wear too
amiable a form in it; Isabella be too much like Emma--differ only
in those striking inferiority, which always bring the other in
brilliancy before he, for much to have be do, even have his time
be longer.--he have stay on, however, vigorously, day after
day--till this very morning's post have convey the history of Jane
Fairfax.--Then, with the gladness which must be feel, nay, which he do
not scruple to feel, have never believe Frank Churchill to be at all
deserve Emma, be there so much fond solicitude, so much keen anxiety
for she, that he could stay no long. he have ride home through the
rain; and have walk up directly after dinner, to see how this sweetest
and good of all creature, faultless in spite of all her fault, bore
the discovery.
he have find she agitated and low.--Frank Churchill be a villain.-- he
hear her declare that she have never love he. Frank Churchill's
character be not desperate.--She be his own Emma, by hand and word,
when they return into the house; and if he could have think of
Frank Churchill then, he might have deem he a very good sort of
fellow.
CHAPTER XIV
what totally different feeling do Emma take back into the house from
what she have bring out!--she have then be only dare to hope for a
little respite of suffering;--she be now in an exquisite flutter of
happiness, and such happiness moreover as she believe must still be
great when the flutter should have pass away.
they sit down to tea--the same party round the same table--how often
it have be collected!--and how often have her eye fall on the same
shrub in the lawn, and observe the same beautiful effect of the
western sun!--But never in such a state of spirit, never in any thing
like it; and it be with difficulty that she could summon enough of her
usual self to be the attentive lady of the house, or even the attentive
daughter.
poor Mr. Woodhouse little suspect what be plot against he in
the breast of that man whom he be so cordially welcoming, and so
anxiously hop might not have take cold from his ride.--could he
have see the heart, he would have care very little for the lung; but
without the most distant imagination of the impending evil, without the
slight perception of any thing extraordinary in the look or way of
either, he repeat to they very comfortably all the article of news
he have receive from Mr. Perry, and talk on with much
self-contentment, totally unsuspicious of what they could have tell he
in return.
as long as Mr. Knightley remain with they, Emma's fever continue;
but when he be go, she begin to be a little tranquillised and
subdue--and in the course of the sleepless night, which be the tax
for such an evening, she find one or two such very serious point to
consider, as make her feel, that even her happiness must have some
alloy. her father--and Harriet. she could not be alone without
feel the full weight of their separate claim; and how to guard the
comfort of both to the utmost, be the question. with respect to her
father, it be a question soon answer. she hardly know yet what Mr.
Knightley would ask; but a very short parley with her own heart
produce the most solemn resolution of never quit her father.--She
even weep over the idea of it, as a sin of thought. while he live, it
must be only an engagement; but she flatter herself, that if divest
of the danger of draw she away, it might become an increase of
comfort to him.-- how to do she good by Harriet, be of more difficult
decision;--how to spare she from any unnecessary pain; how to make she
any possible atonement; how to appear least her enemy?-- on these
subject, her perplexity and distress be very great--and her mind
have to pass again and again through every bitter reproach and sorrowful
regret that have ever surround it.-- she could only resolve at last,
that she would still avoid a meeting with she, and communicate all that
need be tell by letter; that it would be inexpressibly desirable to
have she remove just now for a time from Highbury, and--indulge in
one scheme more--nearly resolve, that it might be practicable to get
an invitation for she to Brunswick Square.--Isabella have be please
with Harriet; and a few week spend in London must give she some
amusement.-- she do not think it in Harriet's nature to escape be
benefit by novelty and variety, by the street, the shop, and the
children.-- at any rate, it would be a proof of attention and kindness
in herself, from whom every thing be due; a separation for the
present; an averting of the evil day, when they must all be together
again.
she rise early, and write her letter to Harriet; an employment which
leave she so very serious, so nearly sad, that Mr. Knightley, in walk
up to Hartfield to breakfast, do not arrive at all too soon; and half
an hour steal afterwards to go over the same ground again with he,
literally and figuratively, be quite necessary to reinstate she in a
proper share of the happiness of the evening before.
he have not leave she long, by no mean long enough for she to have the
slight inclination for thinking of any body else, when a letter be
bring she from Randalls--a very thick letter;--she guess what it
must contain, and deprecate the necessity of read it.-- she be now
in perfect charity with Frank Churchill; she want no explanation,
she want only to have her thought to herself--and as for
understand any thing he write, she be sure she be incapable of
it.--It must be wad through, however. she open the packet; it be
too surely so;--a note from Mrs. Weston to herself, usher in the
letter from Frank to Mrs. Weston.
"I have the great pleasure, my dear Emma, in forward to you the
enclose. I know what thorough justice you will do it, and have
scarcely a doubt of its happy effect.--i think we shall never
materially disagree about the writer again; but I will not delay you by
a long preface.--We be quite well.--this letter have be the cure of
all the little nervousness I have be feel lately.--I do not quite
like your look on Tuesday, but it be an ungenial morning; and though
you will never own be affect by weather, I think every body feel
a north-east wind.--I feel for your dear father very much in the storm
of Tuesday afternoon and yesterday morning, but have the comfort of
hearing last night, by Mr. Perry, that it have not make he ill.
"your ever,
"A. W."
[to Mrs. Weston.]
WINDSOR-JULY.
MY DEAR MADAM,
"if I make myself intelligible yesterday, this letter will be expect;
but expect or not, I know it will be read with candour and
indulgence.--you be all goodness, and I believe there will be need of
even all your goodness to allow for some part of my past conduct.--
but I have be forgive by one who have still more to resent. my
courage rise while I write. it be very difficult for the prosperous
to be humble. I have already meet with such success in two application
for pardon, that I may be in danger of think myself too sure of
your, and of those among your friend who have have any ground of
offence.--You must all endeavour to comprehend the exact nature of my
situation when I first arrive at Randalls; you must consider I as
have a secret which be to be keep at all hazard. this be the
fact. my right to place myself in a situation require such
concealment, be another question. I shall not discuss it here. for my
temptation to _think_ it a right, I refer every caviller to a brick
house, sashe window below, and casement above, in Highbury. I dare
not address she openly; my difficulty in the then state of Enscombe
must be too well known to require definition; and I be fortunate
enough to prevail, before we part at Weymouth, and to induce the most
upright female mind in the creation to stoop in charity to a secret
engagement.--had she refuse, I should have go mad.--but you will be
ready to say, what be your hope in do this?--what do you look
forward to?--to any thing, every thing--to time, chance, circumstance,
slow effect, sudden burst, perseverance and weariness, health and
sickness. every possibility of good be before I, and the first of
blessing secure, in obtain her promise of faith and
correspondence. if you need far explanation, I have the honour, my
dear madam, of be your husband's son, and the advantage of
inherit a disposition to hope for good, which no inheritance of
house or land can ever equal the value of.--see I, then, under these
circumstance, arrive on my first visit to Randalls;--and here I be
conscious of wrong, for that visit might have be soon pay. you
will look back and see that I do not come till Miss Fairfax be in
Highbury; and as _you_ be the person slight, you will forgive I
instantly; but I must work on my father's compassion, by remind he,
that so long as I absent myself from his house, so long I lose the
blessing of know you. my behaviour, during the very happy fortnight
which I spend with you, do not, I hope, lie I open to reprehension,
except on one point. and now I come to the principal, the only
important part of my conduct while belong to you, which excite my
own anxiety, or require very solicitous explanation. with the
great respect, and the warm friendship, do I mention Miss
Woodhouse; my father perhaps will think I ought to add, with the
deep humiliation.-- a few word which drop from he yesterday
speak his opinion, and some censure I acknowledge myself liable to.--my
behaviour to Miss Woodhouse indicate, I believe, more than it ought.--
in order to assist a concealment so essential to I, I be lead on to
make more than an allowable use of the sort of intimacy into which we
be immediately thrown.--I cannot deny that Miss Woodhouse be my
ostensible object--but I be sure you will believe the declaration, that
have I not be convince of her indifference, I would not have be
induce by any selfish view to go on.-- amiable and delightful as Miss
Woodhouse be, she never give I the idea of a young woman likely to be
attach; and that she be perfectly free from any tendency to be
attach to I, be as much my conviction as my wish.--She receive my
attention with an easy, friendly, goodhumoure playfulness, which
exactly suit I. we seem to understand each other. from our
relative situation, those attention be her due, and be feel to be
so.--whether Miss Woodhouse begin really to understand I before the
expiration of that fortnight, I cannot say;--when I call to take
leave of she, I remember that I be within a moment of confess the
truth, and I then fancy she be not without suspicion; but I have no
doubt of she have since detect I, at least in some degree.-- she
may not have surmise the whole, but her quickness must have penetrate
a part. I cannot doubt it. you will find, whenever the subject
become free from its present restraint, that it do not take she
wholly by surprize. she frequently give I hint of it. I remember
she tell I at the ball, that I owe Mrs. Elton gratitude for her
attention to Miss Fairfax.-- I hope this history of my conduct towards
she will be admit by you and my father as great extenuation of what
you see amiss. while you consider I as have sin against Emma
Woodhouse, I could deserve nothing from either. acquit I here, and
procure for I, when it be allowable, the acquittal and good wish of
that say Emma Woodhouse, whom I regard with so much brotherly
affection, as to long to have she as deeply and as happily in love as
myself.-- whatever strange thing I say or do during that fortnight,
you have now a key to. my heart be in Highbury, and my business be
to get my body thither as often as might be, and with the least
suspicion. if you remember any queerness, set they all to the right
account.-- of the pianoforte so much talk of, I feel it only
necessary to say, that its being order be absolutely unknown to Miss
f--, who would never have allow I to send it, have any choice be
give her.-- the delicacy of her mind throughout the whole engagement,
my dear madam, be much beyond my power of do justice to. you will
soon, I earnestly hope, know she thoroughly yourself.-- no description
can describe she. she must tell you herself what she be--yet not by
word, for never be there a human creature who would so designedly
suppress her own merit.--since I begin this letter, which will be
long than I foresaw, I have hear from her.-- she give a good
account of her own health; but as she never complain, I dare not
depend. I want to have your opinion of her look. I know you will
soon call on she; she be live in dread of the visit. perhaps it be
pay already. let I hear from you without delay; I be impatient for a
thousand particular. remember how few minute I be at Randalls, and
in how bewilder, how mad a state: and I be not much well yet; still
insane either from happiness or misery. when I think of the kindness
and favour I have meet with, of her excellence and patience, and my
uncle's generosity, I be mad with joy: but when I recollect all the
uneasiness I occasion she, and how little I deserve to be forgive, I
be mad with anger. if I could but see she again!--but I must not
propose it yet. my uncle have be too good for I to encroach.--i must
still add to this long letter. you have not hear all that you ought
to hear. I could not give any connected detail yesterday; but the
suddenness, and, in one light, the unseasonableness with which the
affair burst out, need explanation; for though the event of the 26th
ult., as you will conclude, immediately open to I the happy
prospect, I should not have presume on such early measure, but from
the very particular circumstance, which leave I not an hour to lose.
I should myself have shrink from any thing so hasty, and she would have
feel every scruple of mine with multiplied strength and refinement.--
but I have no choice. the hasty engagement she have enter into with
that woman--here, my dear madam, I be oblige to leave off abruptly,
to recollect and compose myself.--i have be walk over the country,
and be now, I hope, rational enough to make the rest of my letter what
it ought to be.--It be, in fact, a most mortifying retrospect for I.
I behave shamefully. and here I can admit, that my manner to Miss
W., in be unpleasant to Miss F., be highly blameable. _she_
disapprove they, which ought to have be enough.--my plea of
conceal the truth she do not think sufficient.--She be displease;
I think unreasonably so: I think she, on a thousand occasion,
unnecessarily scrupulous and cautious: I think she even cold. but
she be always right. if I have follow her judgment, and subdue my
spirit to the level of what she deem proper, I should have escape
the great unhappiness I have ever known.--We quarrelled.-- do you
remember the morning spend at donwell?--_there_ every little
dissatisfaction that have occur before come to a crisis. I be late;
I meet her walk home by herself, and want to walk with she, but she
would not suffer it. she absolutely refuse to allow I, which I then
think most unreasonable. now, however, I see nothing in it but a
very natural and consistent degree of discretion. while I, to blind
the world to our engagement, be behave one hour with objectionable
particularity to another woman, be she to be consent the next to a
proposal which might have make every previous caution useless?--had we
be meet walk together between Donwell and Highbury, the truth must
have be suspected.-- I be mad enough, however, to resent.--I doubt
her affection. I doubt it more the next day on Box Hill; when,
provoke by such conduct on my side, such shameful, insolent neglect of
she, and such apparent devotion to Miss W., as it would have be
impossible for any woman of sense to endure, she speak her resentment
in a form of word perfectly intelligible to me.-- in short, my dear
madam, it be a quarrel blameless on her side, abominable on mine; and
I return the same evening to Richmond, though I might have staid with
you till the next morning, merely because I would be as angry with she
as possible. even then, I be not such a fool as not to mean to be
reconcile in time; but I be the injure person, injure by her
coldness, and I go away determine that she should make the first
advances.--I shall always congratulate myself that you be not of the
Box Hill party. have you witness my behaviour there, I can hardly
suppose you would ever have think well of I again. its effect upon
she appear in the immediate resolution it produce: as soon as she
find I be really go from Randalls, she close with the offer of
that officious Mrs. Elton; the whole system of whose treatment of she,
by the bye, have ever fill I with indignation and hatred. I must not
quarrel with a spirit of forbearance which have be so richly extend
towards myself; but, otherwise, I should loudly protest against the
share of it which that woman have known.-- 'jane,' indeed!--You will
observe that I have not yet indulge myself in call she by that
name, even to you. think, then, what I must have endure in hear it
bandy between the elton with all the vulgarity of needless
repetition, and all the insolence of imaginary superiority. have
patience with I, I shall soon have done.-- she close with this offer,
resolve to break with I entirely, and write the next day to tell I
that we never be to meet again.-- _she_ _feel_ _the_ _engagement_
_to_ _be_ _a_ _source_ _of_ _repentance_ _and_ _misery_ _to_ _each_:
_she_ _dissolve_ _it_.--this letter reach I on the very morning of
my poor aunt's death. I answer it within an hour; but from the
confusion of my mind, and the multiplicity of business fall on I at
once, my answer, instead of be send with all the many other letter
of that day, be lock up in my writing-desk; and I, trust that I
have write enough, though but a few line, to satisfy she, remain
without any uneasiness.--i be rather disappointed that I do not hear
from she again speedily; but I make excuse for she, and be too busy,
and--may I add?-- too cheerful in my view to be captious.--we remove
to Windsor; and two day afterwards I receive a parcel from she, my
own letter all returned!--and a few line at the same time by the
post, state her extreme surprize at not have have the small reply
to her last; and add, that as silence on such a point could not be
misconstrue, and as it must be equally desirable to both to have every
subordinate arrangement conclude as soon as possible, she now send I,
by a safe conveyance, all my letter, and request, that if I could
not directly command her, so as to send they to Highbury within a
week, I would forward they after that period to her at--: in short,
the full direction to Mr. Smallridge's, near Bristol, star I in the
face. I know the name, the place, I know all about it, and instantly
see what she have be do. it be perfectly accordant with that
resolution of character which I know she to possess; and the secrecy
she have maintain, as to any such design in her former letter, be
equally descriptive of its anxious delicacy. for the world would not
she have seem to threaten me.--Imagine the shock; imagine how, till I
have actually detect my own blunder, I rave at the blunder of the
post.-- what be to be done?--one thing only.--i must speak to my
uncle. without his sanction I could not hope to be listen to
again.-- I speak; circumstance be in my favour; the late event have
soften away his pride, and he be, early than I could have
anticipate, wholly reconcile and comply; and could say at last,
poor man! with a deep sigh, that he wish I might find as much
happiness in the marriage state as he have done.--i feel that it would
be of a different sort.--Are you dispose to pity I for what I must
have suffer in open the cause to he, for my suspense while all
be at stake?--no; do not pity I till I reach Highbury, and see how
ill I have make she. do not pity I till I see her wan, sick looks.--I
reach Highbury at the time of day when, from my knowledge of their
late breakfast hour, I be certain of a good chance of find she
alone.--I be not disappointed; and at last I be not disappointed
either in the object of my journey. a great deal of very reasonable,
very just displeasure I have to persuade away. but it be do; we be
reconcile, dearer, much dearer, than ever, and no moment's uneasiness
can ever occur between we again. now, my dear madam, I will release
you; but I could not conclude before. a thousand and a thousand thank
for all the kindness you have ever shew I, and ten thousand for the
attention your heart will dictate towards her.--if you think I in a
way to be happy than I deserve, I be quite of your opinion.--miss W.
call I the child of good fortune. I hope she be right.--In one
respect, my good fortune be undoubted, that of be able to subscribe
myself,
your obliged and affectionate Son,
F. C. WESTON CHURCHILL.
CHAPTER XV
this letter must make its way to Emma's feeling. she be oblige, in
spite of her previous determination to the contrary, to do it all the
justice that Mrs. Weston foretell. as soon as she come to her own
name, it be irresistible; every line relate to herself be
interesting, and almost every line agreeable; and when this charm
cease, the subject could still maintain itself, by the natural return
of her former regard for the writer, and the very strong attraction
which any picture of love must have for she at that moment. she never
stopt till she have go through the whole; and though it be impossible
not to feel that he have be wrong, yet he have be less wrong than she
have suppose--and he have suffer, and be very sorry--and he be so
grateful to Mrs. Weston, and so much in love with Miss Fairfax, and she
be so happy herself, that there be no be severe; and could he have
enter the room, she must have shake hand with he as heartily as
ever.
she think so well of the letter, that when Mr. Knightley come again,
she desire he to read it. she be sure of Mrs. Weston's wish it
to be communicate; especially to one, who, like Mr. Knightley, have
see so much to blame in his conduct.
"I shall be very glad to look it over," say he; "but it seem long. I
will take it home with I at night."
but that would not do. Mr. Weston be to call in the evening, and she
must return it by he.
"I would rather be talk to you," he reply; "but as it seem a
matter of justice, it shall be do."
he begin--stop, however, almost directly to say, "have I be
offer the sight of one of this gentleman's letter to his
mother-in-law a few month ago, Emma, it would not have be take with
such indifference."
he proceed a little far, read to himself; and then, with a
smile, observe, "Humph! a fine complimentary opening: but it be his
way. one man's style must not be the rule of another's. we will not
be severe."
"it will be natural for I," he add shortly afterwards, "to speak my
opinion aloud as I read. by do it, I shall feel that I be near you.
it will not be so great a loss of time: but if you dislike it--"
"not at all. I should wish it."
Mr. Knightley return to his reading with great alacrity.
"he trifle here," say he, "as to the temptation. he know he be
wrong, and have nothing rational to urge.--Bad.--He ought not to have
form the engagement.--'His father's disposition:'--he be unjust,
however, to his father. Mr. Weston's sanguine temper be a blessing on
all his upright and honourable exertion; but Mr. Weston earn every
present comfort before he endeavour to gain it.--very true; he do
not come till Miss Fairfax be here."
"and I have not forget," say Emma, "how sure you be that he might
have come soon if he would. you pass it over very handsomely--but
you be perfectly right."
"I be not quite impartial in my judgment, Emma:--but yet, I think--
have _you_ not be in the case--I should still have distrust he."
when he come to Miss Woodhouse, he be oblige to read the whole of it
aloud--all that relate to she, with a smile; a look; a shake of the
head; a word or two of assent, or disapprobation; or merely of love, as
the subject require; conclude, however, seriously, and, after steady
reflection, thus--
"very bad--though it might have be worse.--playe a most dangerous
game. too much indebted to the event for his acquittal.-- no judge of
his own manner by you.--alway deceive in fact by his own wish, and
regardless of little besides his own convenience.-- fancy you to
have fathom his secret. natural enough!--his own mind full of
intrigue, that he should suspect it in others.--mystery; Finesse--how
they pervert the understanding! my Emma, do not every thing serve to
prove more and more the beauty of truth and sincerity in all our
dealing with each other?"
Emma agree to it, and with a blush of sensibility on Harriet's
account, which she could not give any sincere explanation of.
"you have well go on," say she.
he do so, but very soon stopt again to say, "the pianoforte! ah!
that be the act of a very, very young man, one too young to consider
whether the inconvenience of it might not very much exceed the
pleasure. a boyish scheme, indeed!--i cannot comprehend a man's
wish to give a woman any proof of affection which he know she would
rather dispense with; and he do know that she would have prevent the
instrument's come if she could."
after this, he make some progress without any pause. Frank Churchill's
confession of have behave shamefully be the first thing to call for
more than a word in pass.
"I perfectly agree with you, sir,"--wa then his remark. "you do
behave very shamefully. you never write a truer line." and have go
through what immediately follow of the basis of their disagreement,
and his persist to act in direct opposition to Jane Fairfax's sense
of right, he make a full pause to say, "this be very bad.--He have
induce she to place herself, for his sake, in a situation of extreme
difficulty and uneasiness, and it should have be his first object to
prevent she from suffer unnecessarily.--She must have have much more
to contend with, in carry on the correspondence, than he could. he
should have respect even unreasonable scruple, have there be such;
but hers be all reasonable. we must look to her one fault, and
remember that she have do a wrong thing in consent to the
engagement, to bear that she should have be in such a state of
punishment."
Emma know that he be now get to the Box Hill party, and grow
uncomfortable. her own behaviour have be so very improper! she be
deeply ashamed, and a little afraid of his next look. it be all read,
however, steadily, attentively, and without the small remark; and,
except one momentary glance at she, instantly withdraw, in the fear
of give pain--no remembrance of Box Hill seem to exist.
"there be no saying much for the delicacy of our good friend, the
elton," be his next observation.--"his feeling be natural.-- what!
actually resolve to break with he entirely!--she feel the engagement
to be a source of repentance and misery to each--she dissolve
it.--what a view this give of her sense of his behaviour!--well, he
must be a most extraordinary--"
"Nay, nay, read on.--you will find how very much he suffer."
"I hope he do," reply Mr. Knightley coolly, and resume the
letter. "'smallridge!'--what do this mean? what be all this?"
"she have engage to go as governess to Mrs. Smallridge's child--a
dear friend of Mrs. Elton's--a neighbour of Maple Grove; and, by the
bye, I wonder how Mrs. Elton bear the disappointment?"
"say nothing, my dear Emma, while you oblige I to read--not even of
Mrs. Elton. only one page more. I shall soon have do. what a
letter the man write!"
"I wish you would read it with a kind spirit towards he."
"well, there _be_ feel here.--He do seem to have suffer in
find she ill.--certainly, I can have no doubt of his be fond of
she. 'Dearer, much dearer than ever.' I hope he may long continue to
feel all the value of such a reconciliation.--he be a very liberal
thanker, with his thousand and ten of thousands.--'happi than I
deserve.' come, he know himself there. 'Miss Woodhouse call I the
child of good fortune.'--Those be Miss Woodhouse's word, be
they?-- and a fine ending--and there be the letter. the child of good
fortune! that be your name for he, be it?"
"you do not appear so well satisfied with his letter as I be; but still
you must, at least I hope you must, think the well of he for it. I
hope it do he some service with you."
"yes, certainly it do. he have have great fault, fault of
inconsideration and thoughtlessness; and I be very much of his opinion
in think he likely to be happy than he deserve: but still as he
be, beyond a doubt, really attach to Miss Fairfax, and will soon, it
may be hop, have the advantage of be constantly with she, I be
very ready to believe his character will improve, and acquire from her
the steadiness and delicacy of principle that it want. and now, let
I talk to you of something else. I have another person's interest at
present so much at heart, that I cannot think any long about Frank
Churchill. ever since I leave you this morning, Emma, my mind have be
hard at work on one subject."
the subject follow; it be in plain, unaffected, gentlemanlike
English, such as Mr. Knightley use even to the woman he be in love
with, how to be able to ask she to marry he, without attack the
happiness of her father. Emma's answer be ready at the first word.
"while her dear father live, any change of condition must be
impossible for she. she could never quit he." part only of this
answer, however, be admit. the impossibility of her quit her
father, Mr. Knightley feel as strongly as herself; but the
inadmissibility of any other change, he could not agree to. he have
be think it over most deeply, most intently; he have at first hop
to induce Mr. Woodhouse to remove with she to Donwell; he have want to
believe it feasible, but his knowledge of Mr. Woodhouse would not
suffer he to deceive himself long; and now he confess his
persuasion, that such a transplantation would be a risk of her father's
comfort, perhaps even of his life, which must not be hazard. Mr.
Woodhouse take from hartfield!--no, he feel that it ought not to be
attempt. but the plan which have arise on the sacrifice of this, he
trust his dear Emma would not find in any respect objectionable;
it be, that he should be receive at Hartfield; that so long as her
father's happiness in other word his life--require Hartfield to
continue her home, it should be his likewise.
of their all remove to Donwell, Emma have already have her own pass
thought. like he, she have try the scheme and reject it; but such
an alternative as this have not occur to she. she be sensible of
all the affection it evince. she feel that, in quit Donwell, he
must be sacrifice a great deal of independence of hour and habit;
that in live constantly with her father, and in no house of his own,
there would be much, very much, to be bear with. she promise to
think of it, and advise he to think of it more; but he be fully
convince, that no reflection could alter his wish or his opinion on
the subject. he have give it, he could assure she, very long and calm
consideration; he have be walk away from William Larkins the whole
morning, to have his thought to himself.
"ah! there be one difficulty unprovide for," cry Emma. "I be sure
William Larkins will not like it. you must get his consent before you
ask mine."
she promise, however, to think of it; and pretty nearly promise,
moreover, to think of it, with the intention of find it a very good
scheme.
it be remarkable, that Emma, in the many, very many, point of view in
which she be now begin to consider Donwell Abbey, be never strike
with any sense of injury to her nephew Henry, whose right as
heir-expectant have formerly be so tenaciously regard. think she
must of the possible difference to the poor little boy; and yet she
only give herself a saucy conscious smile about it, and find amusement
in detect the real cause of that violent dislike of Mr. Knightley's
marry Jane Fairfax, or any body else, which at the time she have
wholly impute to the amiable solicitude of the sister and the aunt.
this proposal of his, this plan of marry and continue at
Hartfield--the more she contemplate it, the more pleasing it become.
his evil seem to lessen, her own advantage to increase, their
mutual good to outweigh every drawback. such a companion for herself
in the period of anxiety and cheerlessness before her!-- such a
partner in all those duty and care to which time must be give
increase of melancholy!
she would have be too happy but for poor Harriet; but every blessing
of her own seem to involve and advance the suffering of her friend,
who must now be even exclude from Hartfield. the delightful family
party which Emma be secure for herself, poor Harriet must, in mere
charitable caution, be keep at a distance from. she would be a loser
in every way. Emma could not deplore her future absence as any
deduction from her own enjoyment. in such a party, Harriet would be
rather a dead weight than otherwise; but for the poor girl herself, it
seem a peculiarly cruel necessity that be to be place she in such
a state of unmerited punishment.
in time, of course, Mr. Knightley would be forget, that is,
supplant; but this could not be expect to happen very early. Mr.
Knightley himself would be do nothing to assist the cure;--not like
Mr. Elton. Mr. Knightley, always so kind, so feeling, so truly
considerate for every body, would never deserve to be less worship
than now; and it really be too much to hope even of Harriet, that she
could be in love with more than _three_ man in one year.
CHAPTER XVI
it be a very great relief to Emma to find Harriet as desirous as
herself to avoid a meeting. their intercourse be painful enough by
letter. how much bad, have they be oblige to meet!
Harriet express herself very much as might be suppose, without
reproach, or apparent sense of ill-usage; and yet Emma fancy there
be a something of resentment, a something border on it in her
style, which increase the desirableness of their be separate.-- it
might be only her own consciousness; but it seem as if an angel only
could have be quite without resentment under such a stroke.
she have no difficulty in procure Isabella's invitation; and she be
fortunate in have a sufficient reason for ask it, without
resort to invention.--there be a tooth amiss. Harriet really
wish, and have wish some time, to consult a dentist. Mrs. John
Knightley be delighted to be of use; any thing of ill health be a
recommendation to she--and though not so fond of a dentist as of a Mr.
Wingfield, she be quite eager to have Harriet under she care.--When it
be thus settle on her sister's side, Emma propose it to her friend,
and find she very persuadable.-- Harriet be to go; she be invite
for at least a fortnight; she be to be convey in Mr. Woodhouse's
carriage.--it be all arrange, it be all complete, and Harriet be
safe in Brunswick Square.
now Emma could, indeed, enjoy Mr. Knightley's visit; now she could
talk, and she could listen with true happiness, unchecke by that sense
of injustice, of guilt, of something most painful, which have haunt
she when remember how disappointed a heart be near she, how much
might at that moment, and at a little distance, be endure by the
feeling which she have lead astray herself.
the difference of Harriet at Mrs. Goddard's, or in London, make perhaps
an unreasonable difference in Emma's sensation; but she could not
think of she in London without object of curiosity and employment,
which must be avert the past, and carry she out of herself.
she would not allow any other anxiety to succeed directly to the place
in her mind which Harriet have occupy. there be a communication
before she, one which _she_ only could be competent to make--the
confession of her engagement to her father; but she would have nothing
to do with it at present.--She have resolve to defer the disclosure
till Mrs. Weston be safe and well. no additional agitation should be
throw at this period among those she love--and the evil should not
act on herself by anticipation before the appoint time.--a fortnight,
at least, of leisure and peace of mind, to crown every warmer, but more
agitate, delight, should be her.
she soon resolve, equally as a duty and a pleasure, to employ half an
hour of this holiday of spirit in call on Miss Fairfax.-- she ought
to go--and she be long to see she; the resemblance of their present
situation increase every other motive of goodwill. it would be a
_secret_ satisfaction; but the consciousness of a similarity of
prospect would certainly add to the interest with which she should
attend to any thing Jane might communicate.
she go--she have drive once unsuccessfully to the door, but have not
be into the house since the morning after Box Hill, when poor Jane
have be in such distress as have fill she with compassion, though all
the bad of her suffering have be unsuspected.-- the fear of be
still unwelcome, determine she, though assure of their be at home,
to wait in the passage, and send up her name.-- she hear Patty
announce it; but no such bustle succeed as poor Miss Bates have
before make so happily intelligible.--no; she hear nothing but the
instant reply of, "beg she to walk up;"--and a moment afterwards she
be meet on the stair by Jane herself, come eagerly forward, as if no
other reception of she be feel sufficient.-- Emma have never see she
look so well, so lovely, so engaging. there be consciousness,
animation, and warmth; there be every thing which her countenance or
manner could ever have wanted.-- she come forward with an offer hand;
and say, in a low, but very feel tone,
"this be most kind, indeed!--miss Woodhouse, it be impossible for I to
express--I hope you will believe--excuse I for be so entirely
without word."
Emma be gratify, and would soon have shew no want of word, if the
sound of Mrs. Elton's voice from the sitting-room have not check she,
and make it expedient to compress all her friendly and all her
congratulatory sensation into a very, very earnest shake of the hand.
Mrs. Bates and Mrs. Elton be together. Miss Bates be out, which
account for the previous tranquillity. Emma could have wish Mrs.
Elton elsewhere; but she be in a humour to have patience with every
body; and as Mrs. Elton meet she with unusual graciousness, she hop
the rencontre would do they no harm.
she soon believe herself to penetrate Mrs. Elton's thought, and
understand why she be, like herself, in happy spirit; it be be in
Miss Fairfax's confidence, and fancy herself acquainted with what
be still a secret to other people. Emma see symptom of it
immediately in the expression of her face; and while pay her own
compliment to Mrs. Bates, and appear to attend to the good old
lady's reply, she see she with a sort of anxious parade of mystery
fold up a letter which she have apparently be read aloud to Miss
Fairfax, and return it into the purple and gold reticule by her side,
say, with significant nod,
"we can finish this some other time, you know. you and I shall not
want opportunity. and, in fact, you have hear all the essential
already. I only want to prove to you that Mrs. S. admit our
apology, and be not offend. you see how delightfully she write.
oh! she be a sweet creature! you would have doate on she, have you
gone.--but not a word more. let we be discreet--quite on our good
behaviour.--hush!--you remember those lines-- I forget the poem at this
moment:
"for when a lady's in the case,
"you know all other thing give place."
now I say, my dear, in _our_ case, for _lady_, read----mum! a word to
the wise.--I am in a fine flow of spirit, an't I? but I want to set
your heart at ease as to Mrs. S.--_My_ representation, you see, have
quite appease she."
and again, on Emma's merely turn her head to look at Mrs. Bates's
knitting, she add, in a half whisper,
"I mention no _name_, you will observe.--oh! no; cautious as a
minister of state. I manage it extremely well."
Emma could not doubt. it be a palpable display, repeat on every
possible occasion. when they have all talk a little while in harmony
of the weather and Mrs. Weston, she find herself abruptly address
with,
"do not you think, Miss Woodhouse, our saucy little friend here be
charmingly recovered?--do not you think her cure do Perry the high
credit?--(here be a side-glance of great meaning at Jane.) upon my
word, Perry have restore she in a wonderful short time!-- oh! if you
have see she, as I do, when she be at the worst!"-- and when Mrs.
Bates be say something to Emma, whisper far, "we do not say a
word of any _assistance_ that Perry might have; not a word of a certain
young physician from Windsor.--Oh! no; Perry shall have all the credit."
"I have scarce have the pleasure of see you, Miss Woodhouse," she
shortly afterwards begin, "since the party to Box Hill. very pleasant
party. but yet I think there be something want. thing do not
seem--that is, there seem a little cloud upon the spirit of
some.--So it appear to I at least, but I might be mistake.
however, I think it answer so far as to tempt one to go again. what
say you both to our collect the same party, and explore to Box
Hill again, while the fine weather lasts?-- it must be the same party,
you know, quite the same party, not _one_ exception."
soon after this Miss Bates come in, and Emma could not help be
divert by the perplexity of her first answer to herself, result,
she suppose, from doubt of what might be say, and impatience to say
every thing.
"thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse, you be all kindness.--it be
impossible to say--yes, indeed, I quite understand--dearest Jane's
prospect--that be, I do not mean.--But she be charmingly recovered.--
how be Mr. Woodhouse?--I be so glad.--quite out of my power.-- such a
happy little circle as you find we here.--Yes, indeed.-- Charming young
man!--that be--so very friendly; I mean good Mr. perry!--such
attention to jane!"--and from her great, her more than commonly
thankful delight towards Mrs. Elton for be there, Emma guess that
there have be a little show of resentment towards Jane, from the
vicarage quarter, which be now graciously overcome.-- after a few
whisper, indeed, which place it beyond a guess, Mrs. Elton, speak
louder, say,
"yes, here I be, my good friend; and here I have be so long, that
anywhere else I should think it necessary to apologise; but, the truth
be, that I be wait for my lord and master. he promise to join I
here, and pay his respect to you."
"what! be we to have the pleasure of a call from Mr. Elton?-- that
will be a favour indeed! for I know gentleman do not like morning
visit, and Mr. Elton's time be so engaged."
"upon my word it be, Miss Bates.--He really be engage from morning to
night.--there be no end of peoplebe come to he, on some pretence or
other.--the magistrate, and overseer, and churchwarden, be always
want his opinion. they seem not able to do any thing without
him.--'upon my word, Mr. E.,' I often say, 'rather you than I.-- I do
not know what would become of my crayon and my instrument, if I have
half so many applicant.'--bad enough as it be, for I absolutely
neglect they both to an unpardonable degree.--i believe I have not
play a bar this fortnight.--however, he be come, I assure you:
yes, indeed, on purpose to wait on you all." and put up her hand
to screen her word from emma--"a congratulatory visit, you know.--oh!
yes, quite indispensable."
Miss Bates look about she, so happily!--
"he promise to come to I as soon as he could disengage himself from
Knightley; but he and Knightley be shut up together in deep
consultation.--Mr. E. be Knightley's right hand."
Emma would not have smile for the world, and only say, "be Mr. Elton
go on foot to Donwell?--He will have a hot walk."
"oh! no, it be a meeting at the Crown, a regular meeting. Weston and
Cole will be there too; but one be apt to speak only of those who
lead.--I fancy Mr. E. and Knightley have every thing their own way."
"have not you mistaken the day?" say Emma. "I be almost certain that
the meeting at the Crown be not till to-morrow.--mr. Knightley be at
Hartfield yesterday, and speak of it as for Saturday."
"oh! no, the meeting be certainly to-day," be the abrupt answer, which
denote the impossibility of any blunder on Mrs. Elton's side.-- "I do
believe," she continue, "this be the most troublesome parish that ever
be. we never hear of such thing at Maple Grove."
"your parish there be small," say Jane.
"upon my word, my dear, I do not know, for I never hear the subject
talk of."
"but it be prove by the smallness of the school, which I have hear
you speak of, as under the patronage of your sister and Mrs. Bragge;
the only school, and not more than five-and-twenty child."
"ah! you clever creature, thatbe very true. what a thinking brain you
have! I say, Jane, what a perfect character you and I should make, if
we could be shake together. my liveliness and your solidity would
produce perfection.--not that I presume to insinuate, however, that
_some_ people may not think _you_ perfection already.--but hush!--not
a word, if you please."
it seem an unnecessary caution; Jane be want to give her word,
not to Mrs. Elton, but to Miss Woodhouse, as the latter plainly see.
the wish of distinguish she, as far as civility permit, be very
evident, though it could not often proceed beyond a look.
Mr. Elton make his appearance. his lady greet he with some of her
sparkling vivacity.
"very pretty, sir, upon my word; to send I on here, to be an
encumbrance to my friend, so long before you vouchsafe to come!-- but
you know what a dutiful creature you have to deal with. you know I
should not stir till my lord and master appeared.-- here have I be
sit this hour, give these young lady a sample of true conjugal
obedience--for who can say, you know, how soon it may be want?"
Mr. Elton be so hot and tired, that all this wit seem throw away.
his civility to the other lady must be pay; but his subsequent
object be to lament over himself for the heat he be suffer, and
the walk he have have for nothing.
"when I get to Donwell," say he, "Knightley could not be find. very
odd! very unaccountable! after the note I send he this morning, and
the message he return, that he should certainly be at home till one."
"Donwell!" cry his wife.--"my dear Mr. E., you have not be to
donwell!--you mean the Crown; you come from the meeting at the Crown."
"no, no, thatbe to-morrow; and I particularly want to see Knightley
to-day on that very account.--such a dreadful broiling morning!-- I
go over the field too--(speake in a tone of great ill-usage,)
which make it so much the bad. and then not to find he at home! I
assure you I be not at all please. and no apology leave, no message
for I. the housekeeper declare she know nothing of my being
expected.-- very extraordinary!--And nobody know at all which way he
be go. perhaps to Hartfield, perhaps to the Abbey Mill, perhaps
into his woods.-- Miss Woodhouse, this be not like our friend
Knightley!--Can you explain it?"
Emma amuse herself by protest that it be very extraordinary,
indeed, and that she have not a syllable to say for he.
"I cannot imagine," say Mrs. Elton, (feel the indignity as a wife
ought to do,) "I cannot imagine how he could do such a thing by you, of
all people in the world! the very last person whom one should expect
to be forgotten!--my dear Mr. E., he must have leave a message for you,
I be sure he must.--not even Knightley could be so very eccentric;--
and his servant forget it. depend upon it, that be the case: and
very likely to happen with the Donwell servant, who be all, I have
often observe, extremely awkward and remiss.--I be sure I would not
have such a creature as his Harry stand at our sideboard for any
consideration. and as for Mrs. Hodges, Wright hold she very cheap
indeed.--She promise Wright a receipt, and never send it."
"I meet William Larkins," continue Mr. Elton, "as I get near the house,
and he tell I I should not find his master at home, but I do not
believe him.--William seem rather out of humour. he do not know
what be come to his master lately, he say, but he could hardly ever
get the speech of he. I have nothing to do with William's want, but
it really be of very great importance that _i_ should see Knightley
to-day; and it become a matter, therefore, of very serious
inconvenience that I should have have this hot walk to no purpose."
Emma feel that she could not do well than go home directly. in all
probability she be at this very time wait for there; and Mr.
Knightley might be preserve from sink deeply in aggression towards
Mr. Elton, if not towards William Larkins.
she be pleased, on take leave, to find Miss Fairfax determine to
attend she out of the room, to go with she even downstairs; it give she
an opportunity which she immediately make use of, to say,
"it be as well, perhaps, that I have not have the possibility. have you
not be surround by other friend, I might have be tempt to
introduce a subject, to ask question, to speak more openly than might
have be strictly correct.--I feel that I should certainly have be
impertinent."
"oh!" cry Jane, with a blush and an hesitation which Emma think
infinitely more become to she than all the elegance of all her usual
composure--"there would have be no danger. the danger would have
be of my weary you. you could not have gratify I more than by
express an interest--. indeed, Miss Woodhouse, (speak more
collectedly,) with the consciousness which I have of misconduct, very
great misconduct, it be particularly console to I to know that those
of my friend, whose good opinion be most worth preserve, be not
disgusted to such a degree as to--I have not time for half that I could
wish to say. I long to make apology, excuse, to urge something for
myself. I feel it so very due. but, unfortunately--in short, if your
compassion do not stand my friend--"
"oh! you be too scrupulous, indeed you be," cry Emma warmly, and
take her hand. "you owe I no apology; and every body to whom you
might be suppose to owe they, be so perfectly satisfied, so delighted
even--"
"you be very kind, but I know what my manner be to you.-- so cold
and artificial!--i have always a part to act.--it be a life of
deceit!--I know that I must have disgust you."
"pray say no more. I feel that all the apology should be on my side.
let we forgive each other at once. we must do whatever be to be do
quick, and I think our feeling will lose no time there. I hope you
have pleasant account from Windsor?"
"very."
"and the next news, I suppose, will be, that we be to lose you--just
as I begin to know you."
"oh! as to all that, of course nothing can be think of yet. I be
here till claim by Colonel and Mrs. Campbell."
"nothing can be actually settle yet, perhaps," reply Emma,
smiling--"but, excuse I, it must be think of."
the smile be return as Jane answer,
"you be very right; it have be think of. and I will own to you, (I
be sure it will be safe), that so far as our live with Mr. Churchill
at Enscombe, it be settle. there must be three month, at least, of
deep mourning; but when they be over, I imagine there will be nothing
more to wait for."
"thank you, thank you.--This be just what I want to be assure of.--
oh! if you know how much I love every thing that be decide and open!--
good-bye, good-bye."
CHAPTER XVII
Mrs. Weston's friend be all make happy by her safety; and if the
satisfaction of her well-doing could be increase to Emma, it be by
know she to be the mother of a little girl. she have be decide in
wish for a Miss Weston. she would not acknowledge that it be with
any view of make a match for she, hereafter, with either of
Isabella's son; but she be convince that a daughter would suit both
father and mother good. it would be a great comfort to Mr. Weston, as
he grow old--and even Mr. Weston might be grow old ten year
hence--to have his fireside enliven by the sport and the nonsense,
the freak and the fancy of a child never banish from home; and
Mrs. Weston--no one could doubt that a daughter would be most to she;
and it would be quite a pity that any one who so well know how to
teach, should not have their power in exercise again.
"she have have the advantage, you know, of practise on I," she
continued--"like La Baronne d'Almane on La Comtesse d'Ostalis, in
Madame de Genlis' Adelaide and Theodore, and we shall now see her own
little Adelaide educate on a more perfect plan."
"that be," reply Mr. Knightley, "she will indulge she even more than
she do you, and believe that she do not indulge she at all. it will
be the only difference."
"poor child!" cry Emma; "at that rate, what will become of she?"
"nothing very bad.--the fate of thousand. she will be disagreeable in
infancy, and correct herself as she grow old. I be lose all my
bitterness against spoilt child, my dear Emma. I, who be owe
all my happiness to _you_, would not it be horrible ingratitude in I
to be severe on they?"
Emma laugh, and reply: "but I have the assistance of all your
endeavour to counteract the indulgence of other people. I doubt
whether my own sense would have correct I without it."
"do you?--I have no doubt. nature give you understanding:-- Miss
Taylor give you principle. you must have do well. my interference
be quite as likely to do harm as good. it be very natural for you to
say, what right have he to lecture me?--and I be afraid very natural
for you to feel that it be do in a disagreeable manner. I do not
believe I do you any good. the good be all to myself, by make you
an object of the tender affection to I. I could not think about
you so much without doate on you, fault and all; and by dint of
fancy so many error, have be in love with you ever since you be
thirteen at least."
"I be sure you be of use to I," cry Emma. "I be very often
influence rightly by you--oftener than I would own at the time. I be
very sure you do I good. and if poor little Anna Weston be to be
spoil, it will be the great humanity in you to do as much for she
as you have do for I, except fall in love with she when she be
thirteen."
"how often, when you be a girl, have you say to I, with one of your
saucy looks--'Mr. Knightley, I be go to do so-and-so; papa say I
may, or I have Miss Taylor's leave'--something which, you know, I do
not approve. in such case my interference be give you two bad
feeling instead of one."
"what an amiable creature I was!--no wonder you should hold my speech
in such affectionate remembrance."
"'Mr. Knightley.'--You always call I, 'Mr. Knightley;' and, from
habit, it have not so very formal a sound.--And yet it be formal. I
want you to call I something else, but I do not know what."
"I remember once call you 'George,' in one of my amiable fit, about
ten year ago. I do it because I think it would offend you; but, as
you make no objection, I never do it again."
"and cannot you call I 'George' now?"
"Impossible!--I never can call you any thing but 'Mr. Knightley.' I
will not promise even to equal the elegant terseness of Mrs. Elton, by
call you Mr. k.--but I will promise," she add presently, laugh
and blushing--"i will promise to call you once by your christian name.
I do not say when, but perhaps you may guess where;--in the building in
which N. take M. for well, for bad."
Emma grieve that she could not be more openly just to one important
service which his well sense would have render she, to the advice
which would have save she from the bad of all her womanly
folly--her wilful intimacy with Harriet Smith; but it be too tender
a subject.--She could not enter on it.-- Harriet be very seldom
mention between they. this, on his side, might merely proceed from
she not be think of; but Emma be rather inclined to attribute it
to delicacy, and a suspicion, from some appearance, that their
friendship be decline. she be aware herself, that, part under
any other circumstance, they certainly should have correspond more,
and that her intelligence would not have rest, as it now almost
wholly do, on Isabella's letter. he might observe that it be so.
the pain of be oblige to practise concealment towards he, be very
little inferior to the pain of have make Harriet unhappy.
Isabella send quite as good an account of her visitor as could be
expect; on her first arrival she have think she out of spirit,
which appear perfectly natural, as there be a dentist to be
consult; but, since that business have be over, she do not appear
to find Harriet different from what she have know her before.--
Isabella, to be sure, be no very quick observer; yet if Harriet have
not be equal to play with the child, it would not have escape
she. Emma's comfort and hope be most agreeably carry on, by
Harriet's be to stay long; her fortnight be likely to be a month
at least. Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley be to come down in August, and
she be invite to remain till they could bring she back.
"John do not even mention your friend," say Mr. Knightley. "here be
his answer, if you like to see it."
it be the answer to the communication of his intended marriage. Emma
accept it with a very eager hand, with an impatience all alive to
know what he would say about it, and not at all check by hear that
her friend be unmentione.
"John enter like a brother into my happiness," continue Mr.
Knightley, "but he be no complimenter; and though I well know he to
have, likewise, a most brotherly affection for you, he be so far from
make flourish, that any other young woman might think he rather
cool in her praise. but I be not afraid of your see what he write."
"he write like a sensible man," reply Emma, when she have read the
letter. "I honour his sincerity. it be very plain that he consider
the good fortune of the engagement as all on my side, but that he be
not without hope of my growing, in time, as worthy of your affection,
as you think I already. have he say any thing to bear a different
construction, I should not have believe he."
"my Emma, he mean no such thing. he only means--"
"he and I should differ very little in our estimation of the two,"
interrupt she, with a sort of serious smile--"much less, perhaps,
than he be aware of, if we could enter without ceremony or reserve on
the subject."
"Emma, my dear emma--"
"oh!" she cry with more thorough gaiety, "if you fancy your brother
do not do I justice, only wait till my dear father be in the secret,
and hear his opinion. depend upon it, he will be much far from
do _you_ justice. he will think all the happiness, all the
advantage, on your side of the question; all the merit on mine. I wish
I may not sink into 'poor Emma' with he at once.-- his tender
compassion towards oppressed worth can go no far."
"ah!" he cry, "I wish your father might be half as easily convince
as John will be, of our have every right that equal worth can give,
to be happy together. I be amuse by one part of John's letter--do
you notice it?--where he say, that my information do not take he
wholly by surprize, that he be rather in expectation of hear
something of the kind."
"if I understand your brother, he only mean so far as your have some
thought of marry. he have no idea of I. he seem perfectly
unprepared for that."
"yes, yes--but I be amused that he should have see so far into my
feeling. what have he be judge by?--I be not conscious of any
difference in my spirit or conversation that could prepare he at this
time for my marrying any more than at another.-- but it be so, I
suppose. I dare say there be a difference when I be stay with
they the other day. I believe I do not play with the child quite
so much as usual. I remember one evening the poor boy say, 'Uncle
seem always tired now.'"
the time be come when the news must spread far, and other
person' reception of it try. as soon as Mrs. Weston be
sufficiently recover to admit Mr. Woodhouse's visit, Emma have it
in view that her gentle reasoning should be employ in the cause,
resolve first to announce it at home, and then at Randalls.-- but how
to break it to her father at last!--She have bind herself to do it, in
such an hour of Mr. Knightley's absence, or when it come to the point
her heart would have fail she, and she must have put it off; but Mr.
Knightley be to come at such a time, and follow up the beginning she
be to make.--She be force to speak, and to speak cheerfully too.
she must not make it a more decide subject of misery to he, by a
melancholy tone herself. she must not appear to think it a
misfortune.--with all the spirit she could command, she prepare he
first for something strange, and then, in a few word, say, that if
his consent and approbation could be obtain--which, she trust,
would be attend with no difficulty, since it be a plan to promote
the happiness of all--she and Mr. Knightley mean to marry; by which
mean Hartfield would receive the constant addition of that person's
company whom she know he love, next to his daughter and Mrs. Weston,
well in the world.
Poor man!--it be at first a considerable shock to he, and he try
earnestly to dissuade she from it. she be remind, more than once,
of have always say she would never marry, and assure that it would
be a great deal well for she to remain single; and tell of poor
Isabella, and poor Miss taylor.--but it would not do. Emma hang about
he affectionately, and smile, and say it must be so; and that he
must not class she with Isabella and Mrs. Weston, whose marriage
take they from Hartfield, have, indeed, make a melancholy change: but
she be not go from Hartfield; she should be always there; she be
introduce no change in their number or their comfort but for the
well; and she be very sure that he would be a great deal the happy
for have Mr. Knightley always at hand, when he be once get use to
the idea.--Did he not love Mr. Knightley very much?-- he would not deny
that he do, she be sure.--whom do he ever want to consult on
business but Mr. Knightley?--Who be so useful to he, who so ready to
write his letter, who so glad to assist him?-- who so cheerful, so
attentive, so attach to him?--would not he like to have he always on
the spot?--yes. that be all very true. Mr. Knightley could not be
there too often; he should be glad to see he every day;--but they do
see he every day as it was.--why could not they go on as they have do?
Mr. Woodhouse could not be soon reconcile; but the bad be overcome,
the idea be give; time and continual repetition must do the rest.--
to Emma's entreaty and assurance succeed Mr. Knightley's, whose
fond praise of she give the subject even a kind of welcome; and he be
soon use to be talk to by each, on every fair occasion.-- they have
all the assistance which Isabella could give, by letter of the
strong approbation; and Mrs. Weston be ready, on the first meeting,
to consider the subject in the most serviceable light--first, as a
settle, and, secondly, as a good one--well aware of the nearly equal
importance of the two recommendation to Mr. Woodhouse's mind.--it be
agree upon, as what be to be; and every body by whom he be use to
be guide assure he that it would be for his happiness; and have
some feeling himself which almost admit it, he begin to think that
some time or other--in another year or two, perhaps--it might not be
so very bad if the marriage do take place.
Mrs. Weston be act no part, feign no feeling in all that she
say to he in favour of the event.--She have be extremely surprize,
never more so, than when Emma first open the affair to she; but she
see in it only increase of happiness to all, and have no scruple in
urge he to the utmost.--She have such a regard for Mr. Knightley, as
to think he deserve even her dear Emma; and it be in every respect
so proper, suitable, and unexceptionable a connexion, and in one
respect, one point of the high importance, so peculiarly eligible,
so singularly fortunate, that now it seem as if Emma could not safely
have attach herself to any other creature, and that she have herself
be the stupid of being in not have thought of it, and wish it
long ago.--how very few of those man in a rank of life to address Emma
would have renounce their own home for Hartfield! and who but Mr.
Knightley could know and bear with Mr. Woodhouse, so as to make such an
arrangement desirable!-- the difficulty of dispose of poor Mr.
Woodhouse have be always feel in her husband's plan and her own, for
a marriage between Frank and Emma. how to settle the claim of
Enscombe and Hartfield have be a continual impediment--less
acknowledge by Mr. Weston than by herself--but even he have never be
able to finish the subject well than by saying--"those matter will
take care of themselves; the young people will find a way." but here
there be nothing to be shift off in a wild speculation on the
future. it be all right, all open, all equal. no sacrifice on any
side worth the name. it be a union of the high promise of felicity
in itself, and without one real, rational difficulty to oppose or delay
it.
Mrs. Weston, with her baby on her knee, indulge in such reflection
as these, be one of the happy woman in the world. if any thing
could increase her delight, it be perceive that the baby would soon
have outgrow its first set of cap.
the news be universally a surprize wherever it spread; and Mr. Weston
have his five minute share of it; but five minute be enough to
familiarise the idea to his quickness of mind.-- he see the advantage
of the match, and rejoice in they with all the constancy of his wife;
but the wonder of it be very soon nothing; and by the end of an hour
he be not far from believe that he have always foresee it.
"it be to be a secret, I conclude," say he. "these matter be always
a secret, till it be find out that every body know they. only let I
be tell when I may speak out.--i wonder whether Jane have any suspicion."
he go to Highbury the next morning, and satisfy himself on that
point. he tell she the news. be not she like a daughter, his eld
daughter?--he must tell she; and Miss Bates be present, it pass,
of course, to Mrs. Cole, Mrs. Perry, and Mrs. Elton, immediately
afterwards. it be no more than the principal be prepare for; they
have calculate from the time of its be know at Randalls, how soon
it would be over Highbury; and be think of themselves, as the
evening wonder in many a family circle, with great sagacity.
in general, it be a very well approve match. some might think he,
and other might think she, the most in luck. one set might recommend
their all remove to Donwell, and leave Hartfield for the John
Knightleys; and another might predict disagreement among their
servant; but yet, upon the whole, there be no serious objection
raise, except in one habitation, the Vicarage.--There, the surprize
be not soften by any satisfaction. Mr. Elton care little about it,
compare with his wife; he only hop "the young lady's pride would now
be content;" and suppose "she have always mean to catch Knightley if
she could;" and, on the point of live at Hartfield, could daringly
exclaim, "rather he than I!"-- but Mrs. Elton be very much discompose
indeed.--"Poor Knightley! poor fellow!--sad business for him.--She be
extremely concerned; for, though very eccentric, he have a thousand good
qualities.-- how could he be so take in?--Did not think he at all in
love--not in the least.--poor Knightley!--There would be an end of all
pleasant intercourse with him.--How happy he have be to come and dine
with they whenever they ask he! but that would be all over now.--
Poor fellow!--no more explore party to Donwell make for _her_. oh!
no; there would be a Mrs. Knightley to throw cold water on every
thing.--extremely disagreeable! but she be not at all sorry that she
have abuse the housekeeper the other day.--shocking plan, live
together. it would never do. she know a family near Maple Grove who
have try it, and be oblige to separate before the end of the first
quarter.
CHAPTER xviii
Time pass on. a few more to-morrow, and the party from London would
be arrive. it be an alarming change; and Emma be think of it
one morning, as what must bring a great deal to agitate and grieve she,
when Mr. Knightley come in, and distressing thought be put by.
after the first chat of pleasure he be silent; and then, in a graver
tone, begin with,
"I have something to tell you, Emma; some news."
"good or bad?" say she, quickly, look up in his face.
"I do not know which it ought to be call."
"oh! good I be sure.--I see it in your countenance. you be try not
to smile."
"I be afraid," say he, compose his feature, "I be very much afraid,
my dear Emma, that you will not smile when you hear it."
"indeed! but why so?--I can hardly imagine that any thing which please
or amuse you, should not please and amuse I too."
"there be one subject," he reply, "I hope but one, on which we do not
think alike." he pause a moment, again smile, with his eye fix
on her face. "do nothing occur to you?-- do not you
recollect?--harriet Smith."
her cheek flush at the name, and she feel afraid of something,
though she know not what.
"have you hear from she yourself this morning?" cry he. "you have,
I believe, and know the whole."
"no, I have not; I know nothing; pray tell I."
"you be prepare for the bad, I see--and very bad it be. Harriet
Smith marry Robert Martin."
Emma give a start, which do not seem like be prepare--and her
eye, in eager gaze, say, "no, this be impossible!" but her lip be
closed.
"it be so, indeed," continue Mr. Knightley; "I have it from Robert
Martin himself. he leave I not half an hour ago."
she be still look at he with the most speak amazement.
"you like it, my Emma, as little as I feared.--i wish our opinion be
the same. but in time they will. time, you may be sure, will make one
or the other of we think differently; and, in the meanwhile, we need
not talk much on the subject."
"you mistake I, you quite mistake I," she reply, exert herself.
"it be not that such a circumstance would now make I unhappy, but I
cannot believe it. it seem an impossibility!--You cannot mean to say,
that Harriet Smith have accept Robert Martin. you cannot mean that he
have even propose to she again--yet. you only mean, that he intend
it."
"I mean that he have do it," answer Mr. Knightley, with smile but
determined decision, "and be accept."
"Good God!" she cried.--"well!"--then have recourse to her
workbasket, in excuse for lean down her face, and conceal all the
exquisite feeling of delight and entertainment which she know she must
be express, she add, "well, now tell I every thing; make this
intelligible to I. how, where, when?--let I know it all. I never
be more surprized--but it do not make I unhappy, I assure
you.--How--how have it be possible?"
"it be a very simple story. he go to town on business three day
ago, and I get he to take charge of some paper which I be want to
send to John.--He deliver these paper to John, at his chamber, and
be ask by he to join their party the same evening to Astley's.
they be go to take the two eld boy to Astley's. the party be
to be our brother and sister, Henry, John--and Miss Smith. my friend
Robert could not resist. they call for he in their way; be all
extremely amused; and my brother ask he to dine with they the next
day--which he do--and in the course of that visit (as I understand) he
find an opportunity of speak to Harriet; and certainly do not
speak in vain.--She make he, by her acceptance, as happy even as he be
deserve. he come down by yesterday's coach, and be with I this
morning immediately after breakfast, to report his proceeding, first
on my affair, and then on his own. this be all that I can relate of
the how, where, and when. your friend Harriet will make a much long
history when you see her.-- she will give you all the minute
particular, which only woman's language can make interesting.--In our
communication we deal only in the great.--however, I must say, that
Robert Martin's heart seem for _he_, and to _I_, very overflowing;
and that he do mention, without its be much to the purpose, that on
quit their box at Astley's, my brother take charge of Mrs. John
Knightley and little John, and he follow with Miss Smith and Henry;
and that at one time they be in such a crowd, as to make Miss Smith
rather uneasy."
he stopped.--emma dare not attempt any immediate reply. to speak, she
be sure would be to betray a most unreasonable degree of happiness.
she must wait a moment, or he would think her mad. her silence
disturb he; and after observe she a little while, he add,
"Emma, my love, you say that this circumstance would not now make you
unhappy; but I be afraid it give you more pain than you expect. his
situation be an evil--but you must consider it as what satisfy your
friend; and I will answer for your thinking well and well of he as
you know he more. his good sense and good principle would delight
you.--as far as the man be concern, you could not wish your friend in
well hand. his rank in society I would alter if I could, which be
say a great deal I assure you, emma.--you laugh at I about William
Larkins; but I could quite as ill spare Robert Martin."
he want she to look up and smile; and have now bring herself not
to smile too broadly--she do--cheerfully answer,
"you need not be at any pain to reconcile I to the match. I think
Harriet be do extremely well. _her_ connexion may be bad than
_his_. in respectability of character, there can be no doubt that they
be. I have be silent from surprize merely, excessive surprize. you
cannot imagine how suddenly it have come on I! how peculiarly
unprepared I was!--for I have reason to believe she very lately more
determined against he, much more, than she be before."
"you ought to know your friend well," reply Mr. Knightley; "but I
should say she be a good-temper, soft-hearted girl, not likely to be
very, very determined against any young man who tell she he love she."
Emma could not help laugh as she answer, "upon my word, I believe
you know she quite as well as I do.--but, Mr. Knightley, be you
perfectly sure that she have absolutely and downright _accept_ he. I
could suppose she might in time--but can she already?-- do not you
misunderstand him?--You be both talk of other thing; of business,
show of cattle, or new drill--and might not you, in the confusion of
so many subject, mistake him?--It be not Harriet's hand that he be
certain of--it be the dimension of some famous ox."
the contrast between the countenance and air of Mr. Knightley and
Robert Martin be, at this moment, so strong to Emma's feeling, and so
strong be the recollection of all that have so recently pass on
Harriet's side, so fresh the sound of those word, speak with such
emphasis, "no, I hope I know well than to think of Robert Martin,"
that she be really expect the intelligence to prove, in some
measure, premature. it could not be otherwise.
"do you dare say this?" cry Mr. Knightley. "do you dare to suppose
I so great a blockhead, as not to know what a man be talk of?--
what do you deserve?"
"oh! I always deserve the good treatment, because I never put up with
any other; and, therefore, you must give I a plain, direct answer.
be you quite sure that you understand the term on which Mr. Martin
and Harriet now be?"
"I be quite sure," he reply, speak very distinctly, "that he tell
I she have accept he; and that there be no obscurity, nothing
doubtful, in the word he use; and I think I can give you a proof that
it must be so. he ask my opinion as to what he be now to do. he
know of no one but Mrs. Goddard to whom he could apply for information
of her relation or friend. could I mention any thing more fit to be
do, than to go to Mrs. Goddard? I assure he that I could not.
then, he say, he would endeavour to see she in the course of this day."
"I be perfectly satisfied," reply Emma, with the bright smile,
"and most sincerely wish they happy."
"you be materially change since we talk on this subject before."
"I hope so--for at that time I be a fool."
"and I be change also; for I be now very willing to grant you all
Harriet's good quality. I have take some pain for your sake, and
for Robert Martin's sake, (whom I have always have reason to believe as
much in love with she as ever,) to get acquaint with she. I have
often talk to she a good deal. you must have see that I do.
sometimes, indeed, I have think you be half suspect I of
plead poor Martin's cause, which be never the case; but, from all
my observation, I be convinced of she be an artless, amiable girl,
with very good notion, very seriously good principle, and place her
happiness in the affection and utility of domestic life.-- much of
this, I have no doubt, she may thank you for."
"I!" cry Emma, shake her head.--"Ah! poor Harriet!"
she check herself, however, and submit quietly to a little more
praise than she deserve.
their conversation be soon afterwards close by the entrance of her
father. she be not sorry. she want to be alone. her mind be in a
state of flutter and wonder, which make it impossible for she to be
collect. she be in dancing, singing, exclaim spirit; and till
she have move about, and talk to herself, and laugh and reflect,
she could be fit for nothing rational.
her father's business be to announce James's be go out to put the
horse to, preparatory to their now daily drive to Randalls; and she
have, therefore, an immediate excuse for disappear.
the joy, the gratitude, the exquisite delight of her sensation may be
imagine. the sole grievance and alloy thus remove in the prospect of
Harriet's welfare, she be really in danger of become too happy for
security.--what have she to wish for? nothing, but to grow more worthy
of he, whose intention and judgment have be ever so superior to her
own. nothing, but that the lesson of her past folly might teach she
humility and circumspection in future.
serious she be, very serious in her thankfulness, and in her
resolution; and yet there be no prevent a laugh, sometimes in the
very midst of they. she must laugh at such a close! such an end of
the doleful disappointment of five week back! such a heart--such a
Harriet!
now there would be pleasure in her return--every thing would be a
pleasure. it would be a great pleasure to know Robert Martin.
high in the rank of her most serious and heartfelt felicity, be the
reflection that all necessity of concealment from Mr. Knightley would
soon be over. the disguise, equivocation, mystery, so hateful to she
to practise, might soon be over. she could now look forward to give
he that full and perfect confidence which her disposition be most
ready to welcome as a duty.
in the gay and happy spirit she set forward with her father; not
always listen, but always agree to what he say; and, whether in
speech or silence, connive at the comfortable persuasion of his being
oblige to go to Randalls every day, or poor Mrs. Weston would be
disappointed.
they arrived.--Mrs. Weston be alone in the drawing-room:--but hardly
have they be tell of the baby, and Mr. Woodhouse receive the thank
for come, which he ask for, when a glimpse be catch through the
blind, of two figure pass near the window.
"it be Frank and Miss Fairfax," say Mrs. Weston. "I be just go to
tell you of our agreeable surprize in see he arrive this morning.
he stay till to-morrow, and Miss Fairfax have be persuade to spend
the day with us.--They be come in, I hope."
in half a minute they be in the room. Emma be extremely glad to see
he--but there be a degree of confusion--a number of embarrassing
recollection on each side. they meet readily and smile, but with a
consciousness which at first allow little to be say; and have all
sit down again, there be for some time such a blank in the circle,
that Emma begin to doubt whether the wish now indulge, which she have
long feel, of see Frank Churchill once more, and of see he with
Jane, would yield its proportion of pleasure. when Mr. Weston join
the party, however, and when the baby be fetch, there be no long
a want of subject or animation--or of courage and opportunity for
Frank Churchill to draw near she and say,
"I have to thank you, Miss Woodhouse, for a very kind forgiving message
in one of Mrs. Weston's letter. I hope time have not make you less
willing to pardon. I hope you do not retract what you then say."
"no, indeed," cry Emma, most happy to begin, "not in the least. I be
particularly glad to see and shake hand with you--and to give you joy
in person."
he thank she with all his heart, and continue some time to speak
with serious feeling of his gratitude and happiness.
"be not she look well?" say he, turn his eye towards Jane.
"well than she ever use to do?--You see how my father and Mrs.
Weston doat upon she."
but his spirit be soon rise again, and with laugh eye, after
mention the expect return of the Campbells, he name the name of
dixon.--emma blush, and forbid its be pronounce in her hearing.
"I can never think of it," she cry, "without extreme shame."
"the shame," he answer, "be all mine, or ought to be. but be it
possible that you have no suspicion?--i mean of late. early, I know,
you have none."
"I never have the small, I assure you."
"that appear quite wonderful. I be once very near--and I wish I
have--it would have be well. but though I be always do wrong
thing, they be very bad wrong thing, and such as do I no
service.-- it would have be a much well transgression have I break
the bond of secrecy and tell you every thing."
"it be not now worth a regret," say Emma.
"I have some hope," resume he, "of my uncle's be persuade to pay a
visit at Randalls; he want to be introduce to she. when the
Campbells be return, we shall meet they in London, and continue
there, I trust, till we may carry her northward.--But now, I be at such
a distance from she--be not it hard, Miss Woodhouse?-- till this
morning, we have not once meet since the day of reconciliation. do not
you pity I?"
Emma speak her pity so very kindly, that with a sudden accession of gay
thought, he cry,
"ah! by the bye," then sink his voice, and look demure for the
moment--"I hope Mr. Knightley be well?" he paused.--She colour and
laughed.--"i know you see my letter, and think you may remember my wish
in your favour. let I return your congratulations.-- I assure you
that I have hear the news with the warm interest and
satisfaction.--He be a man whom I cannot presume to praise."
Emma be delighted, and only want he to go on in the same style; but
his mind be the next moment in his own concern and with his own Jane,
and his next word be,
"do you ever see such a skin?--such smoothness! such delicacy!--and
yet without be actually fair.--One cannot call she fair. it be a
most uncommon complexion, with her dark eye-lash and hair--a most
distinguish complexion! so peculiarly the lady in it.-- just colour
enough for beauty."
"I have always admire her complexion," reply Emma, archly; "but do
not I remember the time when you find fault with she for be so
pale?-- when we first begin to talk of her.--have you quite forget?"
"oh! no--what an impudent dog I was!--how could I dare--"
but he laugh so heartily at the recollection, that Emma could not
help say,
"I do suspect that in the midst of your perplexity at that time, you
have very great amusement in trick we all.--i be sure you had.-- I be
sure it be a consolation to you."
"oh! no, no, no--how can you suspect I of such a thing? I be the
most miserable wretch!"
"not quite so miserable as to be insensible to mirth. I be sure it be
a source of high entertainment to you, to feel that you be take we
all in.--perhap I be the readier to suspect, because, to tell you the
truth, I think it might have be some amusement to myself in the same
situation. I think there be a little likeness between we."
he bow.
"if not in our disposition," she presently add, with a look of true
sensibility, "there be a likeness in our destiny; the destiny which
bid fair to connect we with two character so much superior to our
own."
"true, true," he answer, warmly. "no, not true on your side. you
can have no superior, but most true on mine.--She be a complete angel.
look at she. be not she an angel in every gesture? observe the turn
of her throat. observe her eye, as she be look up at my father.--
you will be glad to hear (incline his head, and whisper seriously)
that my uncle mean to give she all my aunt's jewel. they be to be
new set. I be resolve to have some in an ornament for the head. will
not it be beautiful in her dark hair?"
"very beautiful, indeed," reply Emma; and she speak so kindly, that
he gratefully burst out,
"how delighted I be to see you again! and to see you in such excellent
looks!--i would not have miss this meeting for the world. I should
certainly have call at Hartfield, have you fail to come."
the other have be talk of the child, Mrs. Weston give an account
of a little alarm she have be under, the evening before, from the
infant's appear not quite well. she believe she have be foolish,
but it have alarm she, and she have be within half a minute of
send for Mr. Perry. perhaps she ought to be ashamed, but Mr. Weston
have be almost as uneasy as herself.--in ten minute, however, the
child have be perfectly well again. this be her history; and
particularly interesting it be to Mr. Woodhouse, who commend she
very much for thinking of send for Perry, and only regret that
she have not do it. "she should always send for Perry, if the child
appear in the slight degree disorder, be it only for a moment.
she could not be too soon alarm, nor send for Perry too often. it
be a pity, perhaps, that he have not come last night; for, though the
child seem well now, very well consider, it would probably have
be well if Perry have see it."
Frank Churchill catch the name.
"Perry!" say he to Emma, and try, as he speak, to catch Miss
Fairfax's eye. "my friend Mr. Perry! what be they say about Mr.
Perry?--Has he be here this morning?--and how do he travel
now?--Has he set up his carriage?"
Emma soon recollect, and understand he; and while she join in the
laugh, it be evident from Jane's countenance that she too be really
hear he, though try to seem deaf.
"such an extraordinary dream of mine!" he cry. "I can never think of
it without laughing.--She hear we, she hear we, Miss Woodhouse. I
see it in her cheek, her smile, her vain attempt to frown. look at
she. do not you see that, at this instant, the very passage of her own
letter, which send I the report, be pass under her eye--that the
whole blunder be spread before she--that she can attend to nothing
else, though pretend to listen to the other?"
Jane be force to smile completely, for a moment; and the smile partly
remain as she turn towards he, and say in a conscious, low, yet
steady voice,
"how you can bear such recollection, be astonishing to me!-- they
_will_ sometimes obtrude--but how you can court they!"
he have a great deal to say in return, and very entertainingly; but
Emma's feeling be chiefly with Jane, in the argument; and on leave
Randalls, and fall naturally into a comparison of the two man, she
feel, that please as she have be to see Frank Churchill, and really
regard he as she do with friendship, she have never be more
sensible of Mr. Knightley's high superiority of character. the
happiness of this most happy day, receive its completion, in the
animate contemplation of his worth which this comparison produce.
CHAPTER XIX
if Emma have still, at interval, an anxious feeling for Harriet, a
momentary doubt of its be possible for she to be really cure of her
attachment to Mr. Knightley, and really able to accept another man from
unbiased inclination, it be not long that she have to suffer from the
recurrence of any such uncertainty. a very few day bring the party
from London, and she have no soon an opportunity of be one hour
alone with Harriet, than she become perfectly satisfied--unaccountable
as it was!--that Robert Martin have thoroughly supplant Mr.
Knightley, and be now form all her view of happiness.
Harriet be a little distressed--do look a little foolish at first:
but have once own that she have be presumptuous and silly, and
self-deceive, before, her pain and confusion seem to die away with
the word, and leave she without a care for the past, and with the
full exultation in the present and future; for, as to her friend's
approbation, Emma have instantly remove every fear of that nature, by
meet she with the most unqualified congratulations.-- Harriet be
most happy to give every particular of the evening at Astley's, and the
dinner the next day; she could dwell on it all with the utmost delight.
but what do such particular explain?-- the fact be, as Emma could
now acknowledge, that Harriet have always like Robert Martin; and that
his continue to love she have be irresistible.--beyond this, it must
ever be unintelligible to Emma.
the event, however, be most joyful; and every day be give her fresh
reason for think so.--Harriet's parentage become know. she prove
to be the daughter of a tradesman, rich enough to afford she the
comfortable maintenance which have ever be her, and decent enough to
have always wish for concealment.--such be the blood of gentility
which Emma have formerly be so ready to vouch for!-- it be likely to
be as untainted, perhaps, as the blood of many a gentleman: but what a
connexion have she be prepare for Mr. Knightley--or for the
Churchills--or even for Mr. Elton!-- the stain of illegitimacy,
unbleached by nobility or wealth, would have be a stain indeed.
no objection be raise on the father's side; the young man be treat
liberally; it be all as it should be: and as Emma become acquaint
with Robert Martin, who be now introduce at Hartfield, she fully
acknowledge in he all the appearance of sense and worth which could
bid fairest for her little friend. she have no doubt of Harriet's
happiness with any good-temper man; but with he, and in the home he
offer, there would be the hope of more, of security, stability, and
improvement. she would be place in the midst of those who love she,
and who have well sense than herself; retire enough for safety, and
occupy enough for cheerfulness. she would be never lead into
temptation, nor leave for it to find she out. she would be respectable
and happy; and Emma admit she to be the lucky creature in the
world, to have create so steady and persevere an affection in such a
man;--or, if not quite the lucky, to yield only to herself.
Harriet, necessarily draw away by her engagement with the martin,
be less and less at Hartfield; which be not to be regretted.-- the
intimacy between she and Emma must sink; their friendship must change
into a calm sort of goodwill; and, fortunately, what ought to be, and
must be, seem already begin, and in the most gradual, natural
manner.
before the end of September, Emma attend Harriet to church, and see
her hand bestow on Robert Martin with so complete a satisfaction, as
no remembrance, even connect with Mr. Elton as he stand before they,
could impair.--perhap, indeed, at that time she scarcely see Mr.
Elton, but as the clergyman whose blessing at the altar might next fall
on herself.--Robert Martin and Harriet Smith, the late couple engage
of the three, be the first to be marry.
Jane Fairfax have already quit Highbury, and be restore to the
comfort of her beloved home with the Campbells.--The Mr. Churchills
be also in town; and they be only wait for November.
the intermediate month be the one fix on, as far as they dare, by
Emma and Mr. Knightley.--They have determine that their marriage ought
to be conclude while John and Isabella be still at Hartfield, to
allow they the fortnight's absence in a tour to the seaside, which be
the plan.--John and Isabella, and every other friend, be agree in
approve it. but Mr. Woodhouse--how be Mr. Woodhouse to be induce
to consent?--he, who have never yet allude to their marriage but as a
distant event.
when first sound on the subject, he be so miserable, that they be
almost hopeless.--a second allusion, indeed, give less pain.-- he begin
to think it be to be, and that he could not prevent it--a very
promising step of the mind on its way to resignation. still, however,
he be not happy. Nay, he appear so much otherwise, that his
daughter's courage fail. she could not bear to see he suffering, to
know he fancy himself neglect; and though her understanding
almost acquiesced in the assurance of both the Mr. Knightleys, that
when once the event be over, his distress would be soon over too, she
hesitate--she could not proceed.
in this state of suspense they be befriend, not by any sudden
illumination of Mr. Woodhouse's mind, or any wonderful change of his
nervous system, but by the operation of the same system in another
way.-- Mrs. Weston's poultry-house be rob one night of all her
turkey--evidently by the ingenuity of man. other poultry-yard in the
neighbourhood also suffered.--pilfere be _housebreak_ to Mr.
Woodhouse's fears.--he be very uneasy; and but for the sense of his
son-in-law's protection, would have be under wretched alarm every
night of his life. the strength, resolution, and presence of mind of
the Mr. Knightleys, command his full dependence. while either of
they protect he and his, Hartfield be safe.-- but Mr. John
Knightley must be in London again by the end of the first week in
November.
the result of this distress be, that, with a much more voluntary,
cheerful consent than his daughter have ever presume to hope for at the
moment, she be able to fix her wedding-day--and Mr. Elton be call
on, within a month from the marriage of Mr. and Mrs. Robert Martin, to
join the hand of Mr. Knightley and Miss Woodhouse.
the wedding be very much like other wedding, where the party have
no taste for finery or parade; and Mrs. Elton, from the particular
detail by her husband, think it all extremely shabby, and very
inferior to her own.--"very little white satin, very few lace veil; a
most pitiful business!--selina would stare when she hear of it."--But,
in spite of these deficiency, the wish, the hope, the confidence,
the prediction of the small band of true friend who witness the
ceremony, be fully answer in the perfect happiness of the union.
finis
