SENSE and SENSIBILITY
by Jane Austen
(1811)
CHAPTER 1
the family of Dashwood have long be settle in Sussex. their estate
be large, and their residence be at Norland Park, in the centre of
their property, where, for many generation, they have live in so
respectable a manner as to engage the general good opinion of their
surround acquaintance. the late owner of this estate be a single
man, who live to a very advanced age, and who for many year of his
life, have a constant companion and housekeeper in his sister. but her
death, which happen ten year before his own, produce a great
alteration in his home; for to supply her loss, he invite and receive
into his house the family of his nephew Mr. Henry Dashwood, the legal
inheritor of the Norland estate, and the person to whom he intend to
bequeath it. in the society of his nephew and niece, and their
child, the old Gentleman's day be comfortably spend. his
attachment to they all increase. the constant attention of Mr. and
Mrs. Henry Dashwood to his wish, which proceed not merely from
interest, but from goodness of heart, give he every degree of solid
comfort which his age could receive; and the cheerfulness of the
child add a relish to his existence.
by a former marriage, Mr. Henry Dashwood have one son: by his present
lady, three daughter. the son, a steady respectable young man, be
amply provide for by the fortune of his mother, which have be large,
and half of which devolve on he on his coming of age. by his own
marriage, likewise, which happen soon afterwards, he add to his
wealth. to he therefore the succession to the Norland estate be not
so really important as to his sister; for their fortune, independent
of what might arise to they from their father's inheriting that
property, could be but small. their mother have nothing, and their
father only seven thousand pound in his own disposal; for the
remain moiety of his first wife's fortune be also secure to her
child, and he have only a life-interest in it.
the old gentleman die: his will be read, and like almost every other
will, give as much disappointment as pleasure. he be neither so
unjust, nor so ungrateful, as to leave his estate from his nephew;--but
he leave it to he on such term as destroy half the value of the
bequest. Mr. Dashwood have wish for it more for the sake of his wife
and daughter than for himself or his son;--but to his son, and his
son's son, a child of four year old, it be secure, in such a way, as
to leave to himself no power of provide for those who be most dear
to he, and who most need a provision by any charge on the estate, or
by any sale of its valuable wood. the whole be tie up for the
benefit of this child, who, in occasional visit with his father and
mother at Norland, have so far gain on the affection of his uncle, by
such attraction as be by no mean unusual in child of two or three
year old; an imperfect articulation, an earnest desire of have his
own way, many cunning trick, and a great deal of noise, as to outweigh
all the value of all the attention which, for year, he have receive
from his niece and her daughter. he mean not to be unkind, however,
and, as a mark of his affection for the three girl, he leave they a
thousand pound a-piece.
Mr. Dashwood's disappointment be, at first, severe; but his temper be
cheerful and sanguine; and he might reasonably hope to live many year,
and by live economically, lie by a considerable sum from the produce
of an estate already large, and capable of almost immediate
improvement. but the fortune, which have be so tardy in come, be
his only one twelvemonth. he survive his uncle no long; and ten
thousand pound, include the late legacy, be all that remain for
his widow and daughter.
his son be send for as soon as his danger be know, and to he Mr.
Dashwood recommend, with all the strength and urgency which illness
could command, the interest of his mother-in-law and sister.
Mr. John Dashwood have not the strong feeling of the rest of the
family; but he be affect by a recommendation of such a nature at
such a time, and he promise to do every thing in his power to make
they comfortable. his father be render easy by such an assurance,
and Mr. John Dashwood have then leisure to consider how much there might
prudently be in his power to do for they.
he be not an ill-dispose young man, unless to be rather cold hearted
and rather selfish be to be ill-dispose: but he be, in general, well
respect; for he conduct himself with propriety in the discharge of
his ordinary duty. have he marry a more amiable woman, he might
have be make still more respectable than he was:--he might even have
be make amiable himself; for he be very young when he marry, and
very fond of his wife. but Mrs. John Dashwood be a strong caricature
of himself;--more narrow-minded and selfish.
when he give his promise to his father, he meditate within himself to
increase the fortune of his sister by the present of a thousand
pound a-piece. he then really think himself equal to it. the
prospect of four thousand a-year, in addition to his present income,
besides the remain half of his own mother's fortune, warm his
heart, and make he feel capable of generosity.-- "yes, he would give
they three thousand pound: it would be liberal and handsome! it would
be enough to make they completely easy. three thousand pound! he
could spare so considerable a sum with little inconvenience."-- he
think of it all day long, and for many day successively, and he do
not repent.
no soon be his father's funeral over, than Mrs. John Dashwood,
without send any notice of her intention to her mother-in-law,
arrive with her child and their attendant. no one could dispute she
right to come; the house be her husband's from the moment of his
father's decease; but the indelicacy of her conduct be so much the
great, and to a woman in Mrs. Dashwood's situation, with only common
feeling, must have be highly unpleasing;--but in her mind there be
a sense of honor so keen, a generosity so romantic, that any offence of
the kind, by whomsoever give or receive, be to she a source of
immoveable disgust. Mrs. John Dashwood have never be a favourite with
any of her husband's family; but she have have no opportunity, till the
present, of shew they with how little attention to the comfort of
other people she could act when occasion require it.
so acutely do Mrs. Dashwood feel this ungracious behaviour, and so
earnestly do she despise her daughter-in-law for it, that, on the
arrival of the latter, she would have quit the house for ever, have
not the entreaty of her eld girl induce she first to reflect on the
propriety of go, and her own tender love for all her three child
determine she afterwards to stay, and for their sake avoid a breach
with their brother.
Elinor, this eld daughter, whose advice be so effectual, possess
a strength of understanding, and coolness of judgment, which qualify
she, though only nineteen, to be the counsellor of her mother, and
enable she frequently to counteract, to the advantage of they all,
that eagerness of mind in Mrs. Dashwood which must generally have lead
to imprudence. she have an excellent heart;--her disposition be
affectionate, and her feeling be strong; but she know how to govern
they: it be a knowledge which her mother have yet to learn; and which
one of her sister have resolve never to be teach.
Marianne's ability be, in many respect, quite equal to Elinor's.
she be sensible and clever; but eager in everything: her sorrow, her
joy, could have no moderation. she be generous, amiable,
interesting: she be everything but prudent. the resemblance between
she and her mother be strikingly great.
Elinor see, with concern, the excess of her sister's sensibility; but
by Mrs. Dashwood it be value and cherish. they encourage each
other now in the violence of their affliction. the agony of grief
which overpower they at first, be voluntarily renew, be seek
for, be create again and again. they give themselves up wholly to
their sorrow, seek increase of wretchedness in every reflection that
could afford it, and resolve against ever admit consolation in
future. elinor, too, be deeply afflict; but still she could
struggle, she could exert herself. she could consult with her brother,
could receive her sister-in-law on her arrival, and treat she with
proper attention; and could strive to rouse her mother to similar
exertion, and encourage she to similar forbearance.
Margaret, the other sister, be a good-humor, well-dispose girl; but
as she have already imbibe a good deal of Marianne's romance, without
have much of her sense, she do not, at thirteen, bid fair to equal
her sister at a more advanced period of life.
CHAPTER 2
Mrs. John Dashwood now instal herself mistress of Norland; and her
mother and sister-in-law be degrade to the condition of visitor.
as such, however, they be treat by she with quiet civility; and by
her husband with as much kindness as he could feel towards anybody
beyond himself, his wife, and their child. he really press they,
with some earnestness, to consider Norland as their home; and, as no
plan appear so eligible to Mrs. Dashwood as remain there till she
could accommodate herself with a house in the neighbourhood, his
invitation be accept.
a continuance in a place where everything remind she of former
delight, be exactly what suit her mind. in season of cheerfulness,
no temper could be more cheerful than her, or possess, in a great
degree, that sanguine expectation of happiness which be happiness
itself. but in sorrow she must be equally carry away by her fancy,
and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she be beyond alloy.
Mrs. John Dashwood do not at all approve of what her husband intend
to do for his sister. to take three thousand pound from the fortune
of their dear little boy would be impoverish he to the most
dreadful degree. she beg he to think again on the subject. how
could he answer it to himself to rob his child, and his only child too,
of so large a sum? and what possible claim could the Miss Dashwoods,
who be relate to he only by half blood, which she consider as no
relationship at all, have on his generosity to so large an amount. it
be very well know that no affection be ever suppose to exist
between the child of any man by different marriage; and why be he
to ruin himself, and their poor little Harry, by give away all his
money to his half sister?
"it be my father's last request to I," reply her husband, "that I
should assist his widow and daughter."
"he do not know what he be talk of, I dare say; ten to one but he
be light-headed at the time. have he be in his right sens, he
could not have think of such a thing as beg you to give away half
your fortune from your own child."
"he do not stipulate for any particular sum, my dear fanny; he only
request I, in general term, to assist they, and make their
situation more comfortable than it be in his power to do. perhaps it
would have be as well if he have leave it wholly to myself. he could
hardly suppose I should neglect they. but as he require the promise,
I could not do less than give it; at least I think so at the time.
the promise, therefore, be give, and must be perform. something
must be do for they whenever they leave Norland and settle in a new
home."
"well, then, let something be do for they; but that something need
not be three thousand pound. consider," she add, "that when the
money be once part with, it never can return. your sister will
marry, and it will be go for ever. if, indeed, it could be restore
to our poor little boy--"
"why, to be sure," say her husband, very gravely, "that would make
great difference. the time may come when Harry will regret that so
large a sum be part with. if he should have a numerous family, for
instance, it would be a very convenient addition."
"to be sure it would."
"perhaps, then, it would be well for all party, if the sum be
diminish one half.--five hundred pound would be a prodigious
increase to their fortune!"
"oh! beyond anything great! what brother on earth would do half so
much for his sister, even if REALLY his sister! and as it be--only
half blood!--but you have such a generous spirit!"
"I would not wish to do any thing mean," he reply. "one have rather,
on such occasion, do too much than too little. no one, at least, can
think I have not do enough for they: even themselves, they can hardly
expect more."
"there be no knowing what they may expect," say the lady, "but we be
not to think of their expectation: the question be, what you can
afford to do."
"certainly--and I think I may afford to give they five hundred pound
a-piece. as it be, without any addition of mine, they will each have
about three thousand pound on their mother's death--a very comfortable
fortune for any young woman."
"to be sure it be; and, indeed, it strike I that they can want no
addition at all. they will have ten thousand pound divide amongst
they. if they marry, they will be sure of do well, and if they do
not, they may all live very comfortably together on the interest of ten
thousand pound."
"that be very true, and, therefore, I do not know whether, upon the
whole, it would not be more advisable to do something for their mother
while she live, rather than for they--something of the annuity kind I
mean.--my sister would feel the good effect of it as well as herself.
a hundred a year would make they all perfectly comfortable."
his wife hesitate a little, however, in give her consent to this
plan.
"to be sure," say she, "it be well than part with fifteen hundred
pound at once. but, then, if Mrs. Dashwood should live fifteen year
we shall be completely take in."
"fifteen year! my dear Fanny; her life cannot be worth half that
purchase."
"certainly not; but if you observe, people always live for ever when
there be an annuity to be pay they; and she be very stout and healthy,
and hardly forty. an annuity be a very serious business; it come over
and over every year, and there be no getting rid of it. you be not
aware of what you be do. I have know a great deal of the trouble
of annuity; for my mother be clog with the payment of three to
old superannuated servant by my father's will, and it be amazing how
disagreeable she find it. twice every year these annuity be to be
pay; and then there be the trouble of get it to they; and then
one of they be say to have die, and afterwards it turn out to be
no such thing. my mother be quite sick of it. her income be not her
own, she say, with such perpetual claim on it; and it be the more
unkind in my father, because, otherwise, the money would have be
entirely at my mother's disposal, without any restriction whatever. it
have give I such an abhorrence of annuity, that I be sure I would
not pin myself down to the payment of one for all the world."
"it be certainly an unpleasant thing," reply Mr. Dashwood, "to have
those kind of yearly drain on one's income. one's fortune, as your
mother justly say, be not one's own. to be tie down to the regular
payment of such a sum, on every rent day, be by no mean desirable: it
take away one's independence."
"undoubtedly; and after all you have no thank for it. they think
themselves secure, you do no more than what be expect, and it raise
no gratitude at all. if I be you, whatever I do should be do at
my own discretion entirely. I would not bind myself to allow they any
thing yearly. it may be very inconvenient some year to spare a
hundred, or even fifty pound from our own expense."
"I believe you be right, my love; it will be well that there should
by no annuity in the case; whatever I may give they occasionally will
be of far great assistance than a yearly allowance, because they
would only enlarge their style of live if they feel sure of a large
income, and would not be sixpence the rich for it at the end of the
year. it will certainly be much the good way. a present of fifty
pound, now and then, will prevent their ever be distressed for
money, and will, I think, be amply discharge my promise to my father."
"to be sure it will. indeed, to say the truth, I be convince within
myself that your father have no idea of your give they any money at
all. the assistance he think of, I dare say, be only such as might
be reasonably expect of you; for instance, such as look out for a
comfortable small house for they, help they to move their thing,
and send they present of fish and game, and so forth, whenever they
be in season. Iwill lay my life that he mean nothing far; indeed,
it would be very strange and unreasonable if he do. do but consider,
my dear Mr. Dashwood, how excessively comfortable your mother-in-law
and her daughter may live on the interest of seven thousand pound,
besides the thousand pound belong to each of the girl, which
bring they in fifty pound a year a-piece, and, of course, they will
pay their mother for their board out of it. altogether, they will have
five hundred a-year amongst they, and what on earth can four woman want
for more than that?--they will live so cheap! their housekeeping will
be nothing at all. they will have no carriage, no horse, and hardly
any servant; they will keep no company, and can have no expense of
any kind! only conceive how comfortable they will be! five hundred a
year! I be sure I cannot imagine how they will spend half of it; and as
to your give they more, it be quite absurd to think of it. they will
be much more able to give you something."
"upon my word," say Mr. Dashwood, "I believe you be perfectly right.
my father certainly could mean nothing more by his request to I than
what you say. I clearly understand it now, and I will strictly fulfil
my engagement by such act of assistance and kindness to they as you
have describe. when my mother remove into another house my service
shall be readily give to accommodate she as far as I can. some little
present of furniture too may be acceptable then."
"certainly," return Mrs. John Dashwood. "but, however, one thing
must be consider. when your father and mother move to Norland,
though the furniture of Stanhill be sell, all the china, plate, and
linen be save, and be now leave to your mother. her house will
therefore be almost completely fit up as soon as she take it."
"that be a material consideration undoubtedly. a valuable legacy
indeed! and yet some of the plate would have be a very pleasant
addition to our own stock here."
"yes; and the set of breakfast china be twice as handsome as what
belong to this house. a great deal too handsome, in my opinion, for
any place they can ever afford to live in. but, however, so it be.
your father think only of they. and I must say this: that you owe no
particular gratitude to he, nor attention to his wish; for we very
well know that if he could, he would have leave almost everything in the
world to they."
this argument be irresistible. it give to his intention whatever of
decision be want before; and he finally resolve, that it would be
absolutely unnecessary, if not highly indecorous, to do more for the
widow and child of his father, than such kind of neighbourly act as
his own wife point out.
CHAPTER 3
Mrs. Dashwood remain at Norland several month; not from any
disinclination to move when the sight of every well know spot cease
to raise the violent emotion which it produce for a while; for when
her spirit begin to revive, and her mind become capable of some other
exertion than that of heighten its affliction by melancholy
remembrance, she be impatient to be go, and indefatigable in her
inquiry for a suitable dwelling in the neighbourhood of Norland; for
to remove far from that beloved spot be impossible. but she could
hear of no situation that at once answer her notion of comfort and
ease, and suit the prudence of her eld daughter, whose steady
judgment reject several house as too large for their income, which
her mother would have approve.
Mrs. Dashwood have be inform by her husband of the solemn promise on
the part of his son in their favour, which give comfort to his last
earthly reflection. she doubt the sincerity of this assurance no
more than he have doubt it himself, and she think of it for her
daughter' sake with satisfaction, though as for herself she be
persuade that a much small provision than 7000L would support she in
affluence. for their brother's sake, too, for the sake of his own
heart, she rejoice; and she reproach herself for be unjust to his
merit before, in believe he incapable of generosity. his attentive
behaviour to herself and his sister convince she that their welfare
be dear to he, and, for a long time, she firmly rely on the
liberality of his intention.
the contempt which she have, very early in their acquaintance, feel for
her daughter-in-law, be very much increase by the farth knowledge
of her character, which half a year's residence in her family afford;
and perhaps in spite of every consideration of politeness or maternal
affection on the side of the former, the two lady might have find it
impossible to have live together so long, have not a particular
circumstance occur to give still great eligibility, accord to
the opinion of Mrs. Dashwood, to her daughter' continuance at Norland.
this circumstance be a grow attachment between her eld girl and
the brother of Mrs. John Dashwood, a gentleman-like and please young
man, who be introduce to their acquaintance soon after his sister's
establishment at Norland, and who have since spend the great part of
his time there.
some mother might have encourage the intimacy from motif of
interest, for Edward Ferrars be the eld son of a man who have die
very rich; and some might have repress it from motif of prudence,
for, except a trifling sum, the whole of his fortune depend on the
will of his mother. but Mrs. Dashwood be alike uninfluence by either
consideration. it be enough for she that he appear to be amiable,
that he love her daughter, and that Elinor return the partiality.
it be contrary to every doctrine of shebe that difference of fortune
should keep any couple asunder who be attract by resemblance of
disposition; and that Elinor's merit should not be acknowledge by
every one who know she, be to her comprehension impossible.
Edward Ferrars be not recommend to their good opinion by any
peculiar grace of person or address. he be not handsome, and his
manner require intimacy to make they pleasing. he be too diffident
to do justice to himself; but when his natural shyness be overcome,
his behaviour give every indication of an open, affectionate heart.
his understanding be good, and his education have give it solid
improvement. but he be neither fit by ability nor disposition to
answer the wish of his mother and sister, who long to see he
distinguish--as--they hardly know what. they want he to make a
fine figure in the world in some manner or other. his mother wish to
interest he in political concern, to get he into parliament, or to
see he connect with some of the great man of the day. Mrs. John
Dashwood wish it likewise; but in the mean while, till one of these
superior blessing could be attain, it would have quiet she
ambition to see he drive a barouche. but Edward have no turn for
great man or barouche. all his wish center in domestic comfort
and the quiet of private life. fortunately he have a young brother
who be more promising.
Edward have be stay several week in the house before he engage
much of Mrs. Dashwood's attention; for she be, at that time, in such
affliction as render her careless of surround object. she see
only that he be quiet and unobtrusive, and she like he for it. he
do not disturb the wretchedness of her mind by ill-timed conversation.
she be first call to observe and approve he far, by a
reflection which Elinor chance one day to make on the difference
between he and his sister. it be a contrast which recommend he
most forcibly to her mother.
"it be enough," say she; "to say that he be unlike Fanny be enough.
it imply everything amiable. I love he already."
"I think you will like he," say Elinor, "when you know more of he."
"like he!" reply her mother with a smile. "I feel no sentiment of
approbation inferior to love."
"you may esteem he."
"I have never yet know what it be to separate esteem and love."
Mrs. Dashwood now take pain to get acquaint with he. her manner
be attach, and soon banish his reserve. she speedily
comprehend all his merit; the persuasion of his regard for Elinor
perhaps assist her penetration; but she really feel assured of his
worth: and even that quietness of manner, which militate against all
her establish idea of what a young man's address ought to be, be no
long uninteresting when she know his heart to be warm and his temper
affectionate.
no soon do she perceive any symptom of love in his behaviour to
Elinor, than she consider their serious attachment as certain, and
look forward to their marriage as rapidly approach.
"in a few month, my dear Marianne." say she, "Elinor will, in all
probability be settle for life. we shall miss she; but she will be
happy."
"oh! Mamma, how shall we do without she?"
"my love, it will be scarcely a separation. we shall live within a few
mile of each other, and shall meet every day of our life. you will
gain a brother, a real, affectionate brother. I have the high
opinion in the world of Edward's heart. but you look grave, Marianne;
do you disapprove your sister's choice?"
"perhaps," say Marianne, "I may consider it with some surprise.
Edward be very amiable, and I love he tenderly. but yet--he be not
the kind of young man--there be something want--his figure be not
strike; it have none of that grace which I should expect in the man
who could seriously attach my sister. his eye want all that spirit,
that fire, which at once announce virtue and intelligence. and besides
all this, I be afraid, Mamma, he have no real taste. music seem
scarcely to attract he, and though he admire Elinor's drawing very
much, it be not the admiration of a person who can understand their
worth. it be evident, in spite of his frequent attention to she while
she draw, that in fact he know nothing of the matter. he admire as
a lover, not as a connoisseur. to satisfy I, those character must be
united. I could not be happy with a man whose taste do not in every
point coincide with my own. he must enter into all my feeling; the
same book, the same music must charm we both. oh! mama, how
spiritless, how tame be Edward's manner in read to we last night!
I feel for my sister most severely. yet she bear it with so much
composure, she seem scarcely to notice it. I could hardly keep my
seat. to hear those beautiful line which have frequently almost
drive I wild, pronounce with such impenetrable calmness, such
dreadful indifference!"-- "he would certainly have do more justice to
simple and elegant prose. I think so at the time; but you would give
he Cowper."
"Nay, Mamma, if he be not to be animate by Cowper!--but we must allow
for difference of taste. Elinor have not my feeling, and therefore she
may overlook it, and be happy with he. but it would have break my
heart, have I love he, to hear he read with so little sensibility.
Mama, the more I know of the world, the more be I convince that I
shall never see a man whom I can really love. I require so much! he
must have all Edward's virtue, and his person and manner must
ornament his goodness with every possible charm."
"remember, my love, that you be not seventeen. it be yet too early in
life to despair of such a happiness. why should you be less fortunate
than your mother? in one circumstance only, my Marianne, may your
destiny be different from she's!"
CHAPTER 4
"what a pity it be, Elinor," say Marianne, "that Edward should have no
taste for draw."
"no taste for draw!" reply Elinor, "why should you think so? he
do not draw himself, indeed, but he have great pleasure in see the
performance of other people, and I assure you he be by no mean
deficient in natural taste, though he have not have opportunity of
improve it. have he ever be in the way of learn, I think he
would have draw very well. he distrust his own judgment in such
matter so much, that he be always unwilling to give his opinion on any
picture; but he have an innate propriety and simplicity of taste, which
in general direct he perfectly right."
Marianne be afraid of offend, and say no more on the subject; but
the kind of approbation which Elinor describe as excited in he by the
drawing of other people, be very far from that rapturous delight,
which, in her opinion, could alone be call taste. yet, though
smile within herself at the mistake, she honour her sister for that
blind partiality to Edward which produce it.
"I hope, Marianne," continue Elinor, "you do not consider he as
deficient in general taste. indeed, I think I may say that you cannot,
for your behaviour to he be perfectly cordial, and if that be your
opinion, I be sure you could never be civil to he."
Marianne hardly know what to say. she would not wound the feeling of
her sister on any account, and yet to say what she do not believe be
impossible. at length she reply:
"do not be offend, Elinor, if my praise of he be not in every thing
equal to your sense of his merit. I have not have so many
opportunity of estimate the minuter propensity of his mind, his
inclination and taste, as you have; but I have the high opinion in
the world of his goodness and sense. I think he every thing that be
worthy and amiable."
"I be sure," reply Elinor, with a smile, "that his dear friend
could not be dissatisfied with such commendation as that. I do not
perceive how you could express yourself more warmly."
Marianne be rejoice to find her sister so easily please.
"of his sense and his goodness," continue Elinor, "no one can, I
think, be in doubt, who have see he often enough to engage he in
unreserved conversation. the excellence of his understanding and his
principle can be conceal only by that shyness which too often keep
he silent. you know enough of he to do justice to his solid worth.
but of his minuter propensity, as you call they you have from
peculiar circumstance be keep more ignorant than myself. he and I
have be at time throw a good deal together, while you have be
wholly engross on the most affectionate principle by my mother. I
have see a great deal of he, have study his sentiment and hear
his opinion on subject of literature and taste; and, upon the whole, I
venture to pronounce that his mind be well-inform, enjoyment of book
exceedingly great, his imagination lively, his observation just and
correct, and his taste delicate and pure. his ability in every
respect improve as much upon acquaintance as his manner and person.
at first sight, his address be certainly not strike; and his person
can hardly be call handsome, till the expression of his eye, which
be uncommonly good, and the general sweetness of his countenance, be
perceive. at present, I know he so well, that I think he really
handsome; or at least, almost so. what say you, Marianne?"
"I shall very soon think he handsome, Elinor, if I do not now. when
you tell I to love he as a brother, I shall no more see imperfection
in his face, than I now do in his heart."
Elinor start at this declaration, and be sorry for the warmth she
have be betray into, in speak of he. she feel that Edward stand
very high in her opinion. she believe the regard to be mutual; but
she require great certainty of it to make Marianne's conviction of
their attachment agreeable to she. she know that what Marianne and her
mother conjecture one moment, they believe the next--that with they,
to wish be to hope, and to hope be to expect. she try to explain
the real state of the case to her sister.
"I do not attempt to deny," say she, "that I think very highly of
he--that I greatly esteem, that I like he."
Marianne here burst forth with indignation--
"esteem he! like he! cold-hearted Elinor! oh! bad than
cold-hearted! ashamed of be otherwise. use those word again, and I
will leave the room this moment."
Elinor could not help laugh. "excuse I," say she; "and be assure
that I mean no offence to you, by speak, in so quiet a way, of my
own feeling. believe they to be strong than I have declare;
believe they, in short, to be such as his merit, and the suspicion--the
hope of his affection for I may warrant, without imprudence or folly.
but far than this you must not believe. I be by no mean assure
of his regard for I. there be moment when the extent of it seem
doubtful; and till his sentiment be fully know, you cannot wonder at
my wishing to avoid any encouragement of my own partiality, by
believe or call it more than it be. in my heart I feel
little--scarcely any doubt of his preference. but there be other
point to be consider besides his inclination. he be very far from
be independent. what his mother really be we cannot know; but, from
Fanny's occasional mention of her conduct and opinion, we have never
be dispose to think she amiable; and I be very much mistaken if
Edward be not himself aware that there would be many difficulty in
his way, if he be to wish to marry a woman who have not either a great
fortune or high rank."
Marianne be astonish to find how much the imagination of her mother
and herself have outstrip the truth.
"and you really be not engage to he!" say she. "yet it certainly
soon will happen. but two advantage will proceed from this delay. I
shall not lose you so soon, and Edward will have great opportunity of
improve that natural taste for your favourite pursuit which must be
so indispensably necessary to your future felicity. oh! if he should
be so far stimulate by your genius as to learn to draw himself, how
delightful it would be!"
Elinor have give her real opinion to her sister. she could not
consider her partiality for Edward in so prosperous a state as Marianne
have believe it. there be, at time, a want of spirit about he
which, if it do not denote indifference, speak of something almost as
unpromising. a doubt of her regard, suppose he to feel it, need not
give he more than inquietude. it would not be likely to produce that
dejection of mind which frequently attend he. a more reasonable
cause might be find in the dependent situation which forbid the
indulgence of his affection. she know that his mother neither behave
to he so as to make his home comfortable at present, nor to give he
any assurance that he might form a home for himself, without strictly
attend to her view for his aggrandizement. with such a knowledge
as this, it be impossible for Elinor to feel easy on the subject. she
be far from depend on that result of his preference of she, which
her mother and sister still consider as certain. Nay, the long
they be together the more doubtful seem the nature of his regard;
and sometimes, for a few painful minute, she believe it to be no more
than friendship.
but, whatever might really be its limit, it be enough, when perceive
by his sister, to make she uneasy, and at the same time, (which be
still more common,) to make her uncivil. she take the first
opportunity of affront her mother-in-law on the occasion, talk to
she so expressively of her brother's great expectation, of Mrs.
Ferrars's resolution that both her son should marry well, and of the
danger attend any young woman who attempt to draw HIM in; that
Mrs. Dashwood could neither pretend to be unconscious, nor endeavor to
be calm. she give she an answer which mark her contempt, and
instantly leave the room, resolve that, whatever might be the
inconvenience or expense of so sudden a removal, her beloved Elinor
should not be expose another week to such insinuation.
in this state of her spirit, a letter be deliver to she from the
post, which contain a proposal particularly well time. it be the
offer of a small house, on very easy term, belong to a relation of
her own, a gentleman of consequence and property in Devonshire. the
letter be from this gentleman himself, and write in the true spirit
of friendly accommodation. he understand that she be in need of a
dwelling; and though the house he now offer she be merely a cottage,
he assure she that everything should be do to it which she might
think necessary, if the situation please she. he earnestly press
she, after give the particular of the house and garden, to come with
her daughter to Barton Park, the place of his own residence, from
whence she might judge, herself, whether Barton Cottage, for the house
be in the same parish, could, by any alteration, be make comfortable
to she. he seem really anxious to accommodate they and the whole of
his letter be write in so friendly a style as could not fail of
give pleasure to his cousin; more especially at a moment when she be
suffer under the cold and unfeele behaviour of her nearer
connection. she need no time for deliberation or inquiry. her
resolution be form as she read. the situation of Barton, in a
county so far distant from Sussex as Devonshire, which, but a few hour
before, would have be a sufficient objection to outweigh every
possible advantage belong to the place, be now its first
recommendation. to quit the neighbourhood of Norland be no long an
evil; it be an object of desire; it be a blessing, in comparison of
the misery of continue her daughter-in-law's guest; and to remove for
ever from that beloved place would be less painful than to inhabit or
visit it while such a woman be its mistress. she instantly write Sir
John Middleton her acknowledgment of his kindness, and her acceptance
of his proposal; and then hasten to shew both letter to her
daughter, that she might be secure of their approbation before she
answer be send.
Elinor have always think it would be more prudent for they to settle
at some distance from Norland, than immediately amongst their present
acquaintance. on that head, therefore, it be not for she to oppose
her mother's intention of remove into Devonshire. the house, too, as
describe by Sir John, be on so simple a scale, and the rent so
uncommonly moderate, as to leave she no right of objection on either
point; and, therefore, though it be not a plan which bring any charm
to her fancy, though it be a removal from the vicinity of Norland
beyond her wish, she make no attempt to dissuade her mother from
send a letter of acquiescence.
CHAPTER 5
no soon be her answer dispatch, than Mrs. Dashwood indulge
herself in the pleasure of announce to her son-in-law and his wife
that she be provide with a house, and should incommode they no long
than till every thing be ready for she inhabit it. they hear she
with surprise. Mrs. John Dashwood say nothing; but her husband
civilly hop that she would not be settle far from Norland. she have
great satisfaction in reply that she be go into
Devonshire.--Edward turn hastily towards she, on hear this, and,
in a voice of surprise and concern, which require no explanation to
she, repeat, "Devonshire! be you, indeed, go there? so far from
hence! and to what part of it?" she explain the situation. it be
within four mile northward of Exeter.
"it be but a cottage," she continue, "but I hope to see many of my
friend in it. a room or two can easily be add; and if my friend
find no difficulty in travel so far to see I, I be sure I will
find none in accommodate they."
she conclude with a very kind invitation to Mr. and Mrs. John Dashwood
to visit she at Barton; and to Edward she give one with still great
affection. though her late conversation with her daughter-in-law have
make her resolve on remain at Norland no long than be
unavoidable, it have not produce the small effect on she in that
point to which it principally tend. to separate Edward and Elinor
be as far from be her object as ever; and she wish to show Mrs.
John Dashwood, by this pointed invitation to her brother, how totally
she disregard her disapprobation of the match.
Mr. John Dashwood tell his mother again and again how exceedingly sorry
he be that she have take a house at such a distance from Norland as to
prevent his being of any service to she in remove her furniture. he
really feel conscientiously vex on the occasion; for the very
exertion to which he have limit the performance of his promise to his
father be by this arrangement render impracticable.-- the furniture
be all send around by water. it chiefly consist of household linen,
plate, china, and book, with a handsome pianoforte of Marianne's.
Mrs. John Dashwood see the package depart with a sigh: she could not
help feel it hard that as Mrs. Dashwood's income would be so
trifle in comparison with their own, she should have any handsome
article of furniture.
Mrs. Dashwood take the house for a twelvemonth; it be ready furnish,
and she might have immediate possession. no difficulty arise on either
side in the agreement; and she wait only for the disposal of her
effect at Norland, and to determine her future household, before she
set off for the west; and this, as she be exceedingly rapid in the
performance of everything that interest she, be soon done.--the
horse which be leave she by her husband have be sell soon after his
death, and an opportunity now offer of dispose of her carriage,
she agree to sell that likewise at the earnest advice of her eld
daughter. for the comfort of her child, have she consult only her
own wish, she would have keep it; but the discretion of Elinor
prevail. she wisdom too limit the number of their servant to
three; two maid and a man, with whom they be speedily provide from
amongst those who have form their establishment at Norland.
the man and one of the maid be send off immediately into Devonshire,
to prepare the house for their mistress's arrival; for as Lady
Middleton be entirely unknown to Mrs. Dashwood, she prefer go
directly to the cottage to be a visitor at Barton Park; and she
rely so undoubtingly on Sir John's description of the house, as to
feel no curiosity to examine it herself till she enter it as her own.
her eagerness to be go from Norland be preserve from diminution by
the evident satisfaction of her daughter-in-law in the prospect of her
removal; a satisfaction which be but feebly attempt to be conceal
under a cold invitation to she to defer she departure. now be the
time when her son-in-law's promise to his father might with particular
propriety be fulfil. since he have neglect to do it on first
come to the estate, their quit his house might be look on as
the most suitable period for its accomplishment. but Mrs. Dashwood
begin shortly to give over every hope of the kind, and to be convince,
from the general drift of his discourse, that his assistance extend
no far than their maintenance for six month at Norland. he so
frequently talk of the increase expense of housekeeping, and of
the perpetual demand upon his purse, which a man of any consequence in
the world be beyond calculation expose to, that he seem rather to
stand in need of more money himself than to have any design of give
money away.
in a very few week from the day which bring Sir John Middleton's
first letter to Norland, every thing be so far settle in their future
abode as to enable Mrs. Dashwood and her daughter to begin their
journey.
many be the tear shed by they in their last adieus to a place so
much beloved. "dear, dear Norland!" say Marianne, as she wander
alone before the house, on the last evening of their be there; "when
shall I cease to regret you!--when learn to feel a home elsewhere!--oh!
happy house, could you know what I suffer in now view you from this
spot, from whence perhaps I may view you no more!--and you, ye
well-know trees!--but you will continue the same.--No leaf will decay
because we be remove, nor any branch become motionless although we
can observe you no longer!--no; you will continue the same; unconscious
of the pleasure or the regret you occasion, and insensible of any
change in those who walk under your shade!--but who will remain to
enjoy you?"
CHAPTER 6
the first part of their journey be perform in too melancholy a
disposition to be otherwise than tedious and unpleasant. but as they
draw towards the end of it, their interest in the appearance of a
country which they be to inhabit overcome their dejection, and a view
of Barton Valley as they enter it give they cheerfulness. it be a
pleasant fertile spot, well woode, and rich in pasture. after wind
along it for more than a mile, they reach their own house. a small
green court be the whole of its demesne in front; and a neat wicket
gate admit they into it.
as a house, Barton Cottage, though small, be comfortable and compact;
but as a cottage it be defective, for the building be regular, the
roof be tile, the window shutter be not paint green, nor be
the wall cover with honeysuckle. a narrow passage lead directly
through the house into the garden behind. on each side of the entrance
be a sit room, about sixteen foot square; and beyond they be the
office and the stair. four bed-room and two garret form the rest
of the house. it have not be build many year and be in good repair.
in comparison of Norland, it be poor and small indeed!--but the tear
which recollection call forth as they enter the house be soon
dry away. they be cheer by the joy of the servant on their
arrival, and each for the sake of the other resolve to appear happy.
it be very early in September; the season be fine, and from first
see the place under the advantage of good weather, they receive an
impression in its favour which be of material service in recommend
it to their last approbation.
the situation of the house be good. high hill rise immediately
behind, and at no great distance on each side; some of which be open
down, the other cultivate and woody. the village of Barton be
chiefly on one of these hill, and form a pleasant view from the
cottage window. the prospect in front be more extensive; it
command the whole of the valley, and reach into the country beyond.
the hill which surround the cottage terminate the valley in that
direction; under another name, and in another course, it branch out
again between two of the steep of they.
with the size and furniture of the house Mrs. Dashwood be upon the
whole well satisfied; for though her former style of life render many
addition to the latter indispensable, yet to add and improve be a
delight to she; and she have at this time ready money enough to supply
all that be want of great elegance to the apartment. "as for the
house itself, to be sure," say she, "it be too small for our family,
but we will make ourselves tolerably comfortable for the present, as it
be too late in the year for improvement. perhaps in the spring, if I
have plenty of money, as I dare say I shall, we may think about
building. these parlor be both too small for such party of our
friend as I hope to see often collect here; and I have some thought
of throw the passage into one of they with perhaps a part of the
other, and so leave the remainder of that other for an entrance; this,
with a new drawing room which may be easily add, and a bed-chamber
and garret above, will make it a very snug little cottage. I could
wish the stair be handsome. but one must not expect every thing;
though I suppose it would be no difficult matter to widen they. I
shall see how much I be before-hand with the world in the spring, and
we will plan our improvement accordingly."
in the mean time, till all these alteration could be make from the
saving of an income of five hundred a-year by a woman who never save
in her life, they be wise enough to be content with the house as it
be; and each of they be busy in arrange their particular concern,
and endeavoring, by place around they book and other possession, to
form themselves a home. Marianne's pianoforte be unpacked and
properly dispose of; and Elinor's drawing be affix to the wall
of their sitting room.
in such employment as these they be interrupt soon after breakfast
the next day by the entrance of their landlord, who call to welcome
they to Barton, and to offer they every accommodation from his own
house and garden in which theirs might at present be deficient. Sir
John Middleton be a good look man about forty. he have formerly
visit at Stanhill, but it be too long for his young cousin to
remember he. his countenance be thoroughly good-humour; and his
manner be as friendly as the style of his letter. their arrival
seem to afford he real satisfaction, and their comfort to be an
object of real solicitude to he. he say much of his earnest desire
of their living in the most sociable term with his family, and press
they so cordially to dine at Barton Park every day till they be
well settle at home, that, though his entreaty be carry to a
point of perseverance beyond civility, they could not give offence.
his kindness be not confine to word; for within an hour after he
leave they, a large basket full of garden stuff and fruit arrive from
the park, which be follow before the end of the day by a present of
game. he insist, moreover, on convey all their letter to and
from the post for they, and would not be deny the satisfaction of
send they his newspaper every day.
Lady Middleton have send a very civil message by he, denote she
intention of wait on Mrs. Dashwood as soon as she could be assure
that her visit would be no inconvenience; and as this message be
answer by an invitation equally polite, her ladyship be introduce
to they the next day.
they be, of course, very anxious to see a person on whom so much of
their comfort at Barton must depend; and the elegance of her appearance
be favourable to their wish. Lady Middleton be not more than six
or seven and twenty; her face be handsome, her figure tall and
striking, and her address graceful. her manner have all the elegance
which her husband's want. but they would have be improve by some
share of his frankness and warmth; and her visit be long enough to
detract something from their first admiration, by shew that, though
perfectly well-breed, she be reserve, cold, and have nothing to say for
herself beyond the most common-place inquiry or remark.
Conversation however be not want, for Sir John be very chatty, and
Lady Middleton have take the wise precaution of bring with she their
eld child, a fine little boy about six year old, by which mean
there be one subject always to be recur to by the lady in case of
extremity, for they have to enquire his name and age, admire his beauty,
and ask he question which his mother answer for he, while he hang
about she and hold down his head, to the great surprise of her
ladyship, who wonder at his be so shy before company, as he could
make noise enough at home. on every formal visit a child ought to be
of the party, by way of provision for discourse. in the present case
it take up ten minute to determine whether the boy be most like his
father or mother, and in what particular he resemble either, for of
course every body differ, and every body be astonish at the
opinion of the other.
an opportunity be soon to be give to the Dashwoods of debate on the
rest of the child, as Sir John would not leave the house without
secure their promise of dining at the park the next day.
CHAPTER 7
Barton Park be about half a mile from the cottage. the lady have
pass near it in their way along the valley, but it be screen from
their view at home by the projection of a hill. the house be large
and handsome; and the Middletons live in a style of equal hospitality
and elegance. the former be for Sir John's gratification, the latter
for that of his lady. they be scarcely ever without some friend
stay with they in the house, and they keep more company of every
kind than any other family in the neighbourhood. it be necessary to
the happiness of both; for however dissimilar in temper and outward
behaviour, they strongly resemble each other in that total want of
talent and taste which confine their employment, unconnected with
such as society produce, within a very narrow compass. Sir John be a
sportsman, Lady Middleton a mother. he hunt and shoot, and she
humour her child; and these be their only resource. Lady
Middleton have the advantage of be able to spoil her child all the
year round, while Sir John's independent employment be in existence
only half the time. continual engagement at home and abroad, however,
supply all the deficiency of nature and education; support the
good spirit of Sir John, and give exercise to the good breeding of his
wife.
Lady Middleton pique herself upon the elegance of her table, and of
all her domestic arrangement; and from this kind of vanity be her
great enjoyment in any of their party. but Sir John's
satisfaction in society be much more real; he delight in collect
about he more young people than his house would hold, and the noisy
they be the well be he please. he be a blessing to all the
juvenile part of the neighbourhood, for in summer he be for ever
form party to eat cold ham and chicken out of door, and in winter
his private ball be numerous enough for any young lady who be not
suffer under the unsatiable appetite of fifteen.
the arrival of a new family in the country be always a matter of joy
to he, and in every point of view he be charm with the inhabitant
he have now procure for his cottage at Barton. the Miss Dashwoods be
young, pretty, and unaffected. it be enough to secure his good
opinion; for to be unaffected be all that a pretty girl could want to
make her mind as captivate as her person. the friendliness of his
disposition make he happy in accommodate those, whose situation
might be consider, in comparison with the past, as unfortunate. in
show kindness to his cousin therefore he have the real satisfaction
of a good heart; and in settle a family of female only in his
cottage, he have all the satisfaction of a sportsman; for a sportsman,
though he esteem only those of his sex who be sportsman likewise, be
not often desirous of encourage their taste by admit they to a
residence within his own manor.
Mrs. Dashwood and her daughter be meet at the door of the house by
Sir John, who welcome they to Barton Park with unaffected sincerity;
and as he attend they to the drawing room repeat to the young
lady the concern which the same subject have draw from he the day
before, at be unable to get any smart young man to meet they. they
would see, he say, only one gentleman there besides himself; a
particular friend who be stay at the park, but who be neither very
young nor very gay. he hop they would all excuse the smallness of
the party, and could assure they it should never happen so again. he
have be to several family that morning in hope of procure some
addition to their number, but it be moonlight and every body be full
of engagement. luckily Lady Middleton's mother have arrive at Barton
within the last hour, and as she be a very cheerful agreeable woman,
he hop the young lady would not find it so very dull as they might
imagine. the young lady, as well as their mother, be perfectly
satisfied with have two entire stranger of the party, and wish for
no more.
Mrs. Jennings, Lady Middleton's mother, be a good-humour, merry,
fat, elderly woman, who talk a great deal, seem very happy, and
rather vulgar. she be full of joke and laughter, and before dinner
be over have say many witty thing on the subject of lover and
husband; hop they have not leave their heart behind they in Sussex,
and pretend to see they blush whether they do or not. Marianne be
vex at it for her sister's sake, and turn her eye towards Elinor
to see how she bear these attack, with an earnestness which give
Elinor far more pain than could arise from such common-place raillery
as Mrs. Jennings's.
Colonel Brandon, the friend of Sir John, seem no more adapt by
resemblance of manner to be his friend, than Lady Middleton be to be
his wife, or Mrs. Jennings to be Lady Middleton's mother. he be
silent and grave. his appearance however be not unpleasing, in spite
of his be in the opinion of Marianne and Margaret an absolute old
bachelor, for he be on the wrong side of five and thirty; but though
his face be not handsome, his countenance be sensible, and his
address be particularly gentlemanlike.
there be nothing in any of the party which could recommend they as
companion to the Dashwoods; but the cold insipidity of Lady Middleton
be so particularly repulsive, that in comparison of it the gravity of
Colonel Brandon, and even the boisterous mirth of Sir John and his
mother-in-law be interesting. Lady Middleton seem to be rouse to
enjoyment only by the entrance of her four noisy child after dinner,
who pull she about, tear her clothe, and put an end to every kind of
discourse except what relate to themselves.
in the evening, as Marianne be discover to be musical, she be
invite to play. the instrument be unlocked, every body prepare to
be charm, and Marianne, who sing very well, at their request go
through the chief of the song which Lady Middleton have bring into
the family on her marriage, and which perhaps have lie ever since in
the same position on the pianoforte, for her ladyship have celebrate
that event by give up music, although by her mother's account, she
have play extremely well, and by her own be very fond of it.
Marianne's performance be highly applaud. Sir John be loud in his
admiration at the end of every song, and as loud in his conversation
with the other while every song last. Lady Middleton frequently
call he to order, wonder how any one's attention could be divert
from music for a moment, and ask Marianne to sing a particular song
which Marianne have just finish. Colonel Brandon alone, of all the
party, hear she without be in rapture. he pay she only the
compliment of attention; and she feel a respect for he on the
occasion, which the other have reasonably forfeit by their shameless
want of taste. his pleasure in music, though it amount not to that
ecstatic delight which alone could sympathize with her own, be
estimable when contrast against the horrible insensibility of the
other; and she be reasonable enough to allow that a man of five and
thirty might well have outlive all acuteness of feeling and every
exquisite power of enjoyment. she be perfectly disposed to make every
allowance for the colonel's advanced state of life which humanity
require.
CHAPTER 8
Mrs. Jennings be a widow with an ample jointure. she have only two
daughter, both of whom she have live to see respectably marry, and
she have now therefore nothing to do but to marry all the rest of the
world. in the promotion of this object she be zealously active, as
far as her ability reach; and miss no opportunity of project
wedding among all the young people of her acquaintance. she be
remarkably quick in the discovery of attachment, and have enjoy the
advantage of raise the blush and the vanity of many a young lady by
insinuation of her power over such a young man; and this kind of
discernment enable she soon after her arrival at Barton decisively to
pronounce that Colonel Brandon be very much in love with Marianne
Dashwood. she rather suspect it to be so, on the very first evening
of their be together, from his listening so attentively while she
sing to they; and when the visit be return by the Middletons' dining
at the cottage, the fact be ascertain by his listening to she again.
it must be so. she be perfectly convinced of it. it would be an
excellent match, for he be rich, and SHE be handsome. Mrs. Jennings
have be anxious to see Colonel Brandon well marry, ever since her
connection with Sir John first bring he to her knowledge; and she
be always anxious to get a good husband for every pretty girl.
the immediate advantage to herself be by no mean inconsiderable, for
it supply she with endless joke against they both. at the park she
laugh at the colonel, and in the cottage at Marianne. to the former
her raillery be probably, as far as it regard only himself,
perfectly indifferent; but to the latter it be at first
incomprehensible; and when its object be understand, she hardly know
whether most to laugh at its absurdity, or censure its impertinence,
for she consider it as an unfeeling reflection on the colonel's
advanced year, and on his forlorn condition as an old bachelor.
Mrs. Dashwood, who could not think a man five year young than
herself, so exceedingly ancient as he appear to the youthful fancy of
her daughter, venture to clear Mrs. Jennings from the probability of
wish to throw ridicule on his age.
"but at least, Mamma, you cannot deny the absurdity of the accusation,
though you may not think it intentionally ill-natured. Colonel Brandon
be certainly young than Mrs. Jennings, but he be old enough to be MY
father; and if he be ever animate enough to be in love, must have
long outlive every sensation of the kind. it be too ridiculous! when
be a man to be safe from such wit, if age and infirmity will not
protect he?"
"Infirmity!" say Elinor, "do you call Colonel Brandon infirm? I can
easily suppose that his age may appear much great to you than to my
mother; but you can hardly deceive yourself as to his have the use of
his limb!"
"do not you hear he complain of the rheumatism? and be not that the
commonest infirmity of decline life?"
"my dear child," say her mother, laugh, "at this rate you must
be in continual terror of MY decay; and it must seem to you a miracle
that my life have be extend to the advanced age of forty."
"Mamma, you be not do I justice. I know very well that Colonel
Brandon be not old enough to make his friend yet apprehensive of
lose he in the course of nature. he may live twenty year long.
but thirty-five have nothing to do with matrimony."
"perhaps," say Elinor, "thirty-five and seventeen have well not have
any thing to do with matrimony together. but if there should by any
chance happen to be a woman who be single at seven and twenty, I should
not think Colonel Brandon's be thirty-five any objection to his
marry she."
"a woman of seven and twenty," say Marianne, after pause a moment,
"can never hope to feel or inspire affection again, and if her home be
uncomfortable, or her fortune small, I can suppose that she might bring
herself to submit to the office of a nurse, for the sake of the
provision and security of a wife. in his marrying such a woman
therefore there would be nothing unsuitable. it would be a compact of
convenience, and the world would be satisfy. in my eye it would be
no marriage at all, but that would be nothing. to I it would seem
only a commercial exchange, in which each wish to be benefit at the
expense of the other."
"it would be impossible, I know," reply Elinor, "to convince you that
a woman of seven and twenty could feel for a man of thirty-five
anything near enough to love, to make he a desirable companion to she.
but I must object to your doom Colonel Brandon and his wife to the
constant confinement of a sick chamber, merely because he chance to
complain yesterday (a very cold damp day) of a slight rheumatic feel in
one of his shoulder."
"but he talk of flannel waistcoat," say Marianne; "and with I a
flannel waistcoat be invariably connect with ache, cramp,
rheumatism, and every specie of ailment that can afflict the old and
the feeble."
"have he be only in a violent fever, you would not have despise he
half so much. Confess, Marianne, be not there something interesting to
you in the flushed cheek, hollow eye, and quick pulse of a fever?"
soon after this, upon Elinor's leave the room, "Mamma," say
Marianne, "I have an alarm on the subject of illness which I cannot
conceal from you. I be sure Edward Ferrars be not well. we have now
be here almost a fortnight, and yet he do not come. nothing but
real indisposition could occasion this extraordinary delay. what else
can detain he at Norland?"
"have you any idea of his come so soon?" say Mrs. Dashwood. "I have
none. on the contrary, if I have feel any anxiety at all on the
subject, it have be in recollect that he sometimes show a want of
pleasure and readiness in accept my invitation, when I talk of his
come to Barton. do Elinor expect he already?"
"I have never mention it to she, but of course she must."
"I rather think you be mistaken, for when I be talk to she
yesterday of get a new grate for the spare bedchamber, she observe
that there be no immediate hurry for it, as it be not likely that the
room would be want for some time."
"how strange this be! what can be the meaning of it! but the whole of
their behaviour to each other have be unaccountable! how cold, how
compose be their last adieus! how languid their conversation the
last evening of their be together! in Edward's farewell there be no
distinction between Elinor and I: it be the good wish of an
affectionate brother to both. twice do I leave they purposely
together in the course of the last morning, and each time do he most
unaccountably follow I out of the room. and Elinor, in quit
Norland and Edward, cry not as I do. even now her self-command be
invariable. when be she deject or melancholy? when do she try to
avoid society, or appear restless and dissatisfied in it?"
CHAPTER 9
the Dashwoods be now settle at Barton with tolerable comfort to
themselves. the house and the garden, with all the object surround
they, be now become familiar, and the ordinary pursuit which have
give to Norland half its charm be engage in again with far great
enjoyment than Norland have be able to afford, since the loss of their
father. Sir John Middleton, who call on they every day for the first
fortnight, and who be not in the habit of see much occupation at
home, could not conceal his amazement on find they always employ.
their visitor, except those from Barton Park, be not many; for, in
spite of Sir John's urgent entreaty that they would mix more in the
neighbourhood, and repeat assurance of his carriage be always at
their service, the independence of Mrs. Dashwood's spirit overcome the
wish of society for her child; and she be resolute in decline to
visit any family beyond the distance of a walk. there be but few who
could be so classed; and it be not all of they that be attainable.
about a mile and a half from the cottage, along the narrow winding
valley of Allenham, which issue from that of Barton, as formerly
describe, the girl have, in one of their early walk, discover an
ancient respectable look mansion which, by remind they a little
of Norland, interest their imagination and make they wish to be
well acquaint with it. but they learn, on enquiry, that its
possessor, an elderly lady of very good character, be unfortunately
too infirm to mix with the world, and never stir from home.
the whole country about they abound in beautiful walk. the high
down which invite they from almost every window of the cottage to
seek the exquisite enjoyment of air on their summit, be a happy
alternative when the dirt of the valley beneath shut up their superior
beauty; and towards one of these hill do Marianne and Margaret one
memorable morning direct their step, attract by the partial sunshine
of a showery sky, and unable long to bear the confinement which the
settle rain of the two precede day have occasion. the weather be
not tempt enough to draw the two other from their pencil and their
book, in spite of Marianne's declaration that the day would be
lastingly fair, and that every threatening cloud would be draw off
from their hill; and the two girl set off together.
they gaily ascend the down, rejoice in their own penetration at
every glimpse of blue sky; and when they catch in their face the
animating gale of a high south-westerly wind, they pity the fear
which have prevent their mother and Elinor from share such
delightful sensation.
"be there a felicity in the world," say Marianne, "superior to
this?--margaret, we will walk here at least two hour."
Margaret agree, and they pursue their way against the wind, resist
it with laugh delight for about twenty minute long, when suddenly
the cloud unite over their head, and a drive rain set full in
their face.-- chagrined and surprised, they be oblige, though
unwillingly, to turn back, for no shelter be near than their own
house. one consolation however remain for they, to which the
exigence of the moment give more than usual propriety; it be that of
run with all possible speed down the steep side of the hill which
lead immediately to their garden gate.
they set off. Marianne have at first the advantage, but a false step
bring she suddenly to the ground; and Margaret, unable to stop
herself to assist she, be involuntarily hurry along, and reach the
bottom in safety.
a gentleman carry a gun, with two pointer play round he, be
pass up the hill and within a few yard of Marianne, when her
accident happen. he put down his gun and run to her assistance. she
have raise herself from the ground, but her foot have be twist in
her fall, and she be scarcely able to stand. the gentleman offer
his service; and perceive that her modesty decline what her
situation render necessary, take she up in his arm without farther
delay, and carry she down the hill. then pass through the garden,
the gate of which have be leave open by Margaret, he bear she directly
into the house, whither Margaret be just arrive, and quit not his
hold till he have seat she in a chair in the parlour.
Elinor and her mother rise up in amazement at their entrance, and while
the eye of both be fix on he with an evident wonder and a secret
admiration which equally spring from his appearance, he apologize for
his intrusion by relate its cause, in a manner so frank and so
graceful that his person, which be uncommonly handsome, receive
additional charm from his voice and expression. have he be even old,
ugly, and vulgar, the gratitude and kindness of Mrs. Dashwood would
have be secure by any act of attention to her child; but the
influence of youth, beauty, and elegance, give an interest to the
action which come home to her feeling.
she thank he again and again; and, with a sweetness of address which
always attend she, invite he to be seat. but this he decline,
as he be dirty and wet. Mrs. Dashwood then beg to know to whom she
be oblige. his name, he reply, be Willoughby, and his present
home be at Allenham, from whence he hop she would allow he the
honour of call tomorrow to enquire after Miss Dashwood. the honour
be readily grant, and he then depart, to make himself still more
interesting, in the midst of a heavy rain.
his manly beauty and more than common gracefulness be instantly the
theme of general admiration, and the laugh which his gallantry raise
against Marianne receive particular spirit from his exterior
attractions.-- Marianne herself have see less of his person that the
rest, for the confusion which crimson over her face, on his lifting
she up, have rob she of the power of regard he after their
enter the house. but she have see enough of he to join in all the
admiration of the other, and with an energy which always adorn she
praise. his person and air be equal to what her fancy have ever draw
for the hero of a favourite story; and in his carry she into the
house with so little previous formality, there be a rapidity of
think which particularly recommend the action to she. every
circumstance belong to he be interesting. his name be good, his
residence be in their favourite village, and she soon find out that
of all manly dress a shooting-jacket be the most become. her
imagination be busy, her reflection be pleasant, and the pain of a
sprain ankle be disregard.
Sir John call on they as soon as the next interval of fair weather
that morning allow he to get out of door; and Marianne's accident
be relate to he, he be eagerly ask whether he know any
gentleman of the name of Willoughby at Allenham.
"Willoughby!" cry Sir John; "what, be he in the country? that be good
news however; I will ride over tomorrow, and ask he to dinner on
Thursday."
"you know he then," say Mrs. Dashwood.
"know he! to be sure I do. why, he be down here every year."
"and what sort of a young man be he?"
"as good a kind of fellow as ever live, I assure you. a very decent
shot, and there be not a bold rider in England."
"and be that all you can say for he?" cry Marianne, indignantly.
"but what be his manner on more intimate acquaintance? what his
pursuit, his talent, and genius?"
Sir John be rather puzzle.
"upon my soul," say he, "I do not know much about he as to all that.
but he be a pleasant, good humour fellow, and have get the nice
little black bitch of a pointer I ever see. be she out with he
today?"
but Marianne could no more satisfy he as to the colour of Mr.
Willoughby's pointer, than he could describe to she the shade of his
mind.
"but who be he?" say Elinor. "where do he come from? have he a
house at Allenham?"
on this point Sir John could give more certain intelligence; and he
tell they that Mr. Willoughby have no property of his own in the
country; that he reside there only while he be visit the old lady
at Allenham Court, to whom he be relate, and whose possession he be
to inherit; add, "yes, yes, he be very well worth catch I can
tell you, Miss Dashwood; he have a pretty little estate of his own in
Somersetshire besides; and if I be you, I would not give he up to my
young sister, in spite of all this tumble down hill. Miss
Marianne must not expect to have all the man to herself. Brandon will
be jealous, if she do not take care."
"I do not believe," say Mrs. Dashwood, with a good humour smile,
"that Mr. Willoughby will be incommode by the attempt of either of MY
daughter towards what you call catch he. it be not an employment
to which they have be bring up. man be very safe with we, let
they be ever so rich. I be glad to find, however, from what you say,
that he be a respectable young man, and one whose acquaintance will not
be ineligible."
"he be as good a sort of fellow, I believe, as ever live," repeat
Sir John. "I remember last Christmas at a little hop at the park, he
dance from eight o'clock till four, without once sit down."
"do he indeed?" cry Marianne with sparkle eye, "and with
elegance, with spirit?"
"yes; and he be up again at eight to ride to covert."
"that be what I like; that be what a young man ought to be. whatever
be his pursuit, his eagerness in they should know no moderation, and
leave he no sense of fatigue."
"aye, aye, I see how it will be," say Sir John, "I see how it will be.
you will be set your cap at he now, and never think of poor
Brandon."
"that be an expression, Sir John," say Marianne, warmly, "which I
particularly dislike. I abhor every common-place phrase by which wit
be intend; and 'set one's cap at a man,' or 'make a conquest,'
be the most odious of all. their tendency be gross and illiberal; and
if their construction could ever be deem clever, time have long ago
destroy all its ingenuity."
Sir John do not much understand this reproof; but he laugh as
heartily as if he do, and then reply,
"ay, you will make conquest enough, I dare say, one way or other.
Poor Brandon! he be quite smite already, and he be very well worth
set your cap at, I can tell you, in spite of all this tumbling
about and spraining of ankle."
CHAPTER 10
Marianne's preserver, as Margaret, with more elegance than precision,
style Willoughby, call at the cottage early the next morning to make
his personal enquiry. he be receive by Mrs. Dashwood with more
than politeness; with a kindness which Sir John's account of he and
her own gratitude prompt; and every thing that pass during the
visit tend to assure he of the sense, elegance, mutual affection,
and domestic comfort of the family to whom accident have now introduce
he. of their personal charm he have not require a second interview
to be convince.
Miss Dashwood have a delicate complexion, regular feature, and a
remarkably pretty figure. Marianne be still handsomer. her form,
though not so correct as her sister's, in have the advantage of
height, be more striking; and her face be so lovely, that when in the
common cannot of praise, she be call a beautiful girl, truth be less
violently outraged than usually happen. her skin be very brown, but,
from its transparency, her complexion be uncommonly brilliant; her
feature be all good; her smile be sweet and attractive; and in her
eye, which be very dark, there be a life, a spirit, an eagerness,
which could hardily be see without delight. from Willoughby their
expression be at first hold back, by the embarrassment which the
remembrance of his assistance create. but when this pass away, when
her spirit become collect, when she see that to the perfect
good-breeding of the gentleman, he unite frankness and vivacity, and
above all, when she hear he declare, that of music and dancing he be
passionately fond, she give he such a look of approbation as secure
the large share of his discourse to herself for the rest of his stay.
it be only necessary to mention any favourite amusement to engage she
to talk. she could not be silent when such point be introduce, and
she have neither shyness nor reserve in their discussion. they speedily
discover that their enjoyment of dancing and music be mutual, and
that it arise from a general conformity of judgment in all that relate
to either. encourage by this to a further examination of his
opinion, she proceed to question he on the subject of book; her
favourite author be bring forward and dwell upon with so rapturous
a delight, that any young man of five and twenty must have be
insensible indeed, not to become an immediate convert to the excellence
of such work, however disregard before. their taste be strikingly
alike. the same book, the same passage be idolize by each--or if
any difference appear, any objection arise, it last no long than
till the force of her argument and the brightness of her eye could be
display. he acquiesce in all her decision, catch all her
enthusiasm; and long before his visit conclude, they converse with
the familiarity of a long-establish acquaintance.
"well, Marianne," say Elinor, as soon as he have leave they, "for one
morning I think you have do pretty well. you have already
ascertain Mr. Willoughby's opinion in almost every matter of
importance. you know what he think of Cowper and Scott; you be
certain of his estimate their beauty as he ought, and you have
receive every assurance of his admire Pope no more than be proper.
but how be your acquaintance to be long support, under such
extraordinary despatch of every subject for discourse? you will soon
have exhaust each favourite topic. another meeting will suffice to
explain his sentiment on picturesque beauty, and second marriage, and
then you can have nothing farth to ask."--
"Elinor," cry Marianne, "be this fair? be this just? be my idea so
scanty? but I see what you mean. I have be too much at my ease, too
happy, too frank. I have err against every common-place notion of
decorum; I have be open and sincere where I ought to have be
reserve, spiritless, dull, and deceitful--have I talk only of the
weather and the road, and have I speak only once in ten minute, this
reproach would have be spar."
"my love," say her mother, "you must not be offend with Elinor--she
be only in jest. I should scold she myself, if she be capable of
wish to check the delight of your conversation with our new
friend."-- Marianne be soften in a moment.
Willoughby, on his side, give every proof of his pleasure in their
acquaintance, which an evident wish of improve it could offer. he
come to they every day. to enquire after Marianne be at first his
excuse; but the encouragement of his reception, to which every day give
great kindness, make such an excuse unnecessary before it have cease
to be possible, by Marianne's perfect recovery. she be confine for
some day to the house; but never have any confinement be less
irksome. Willoughby be a young man of good ability, quick
imagination, lively spirit, and open, affectionate manner. he be
exactly form to engage Marianne's heart, for with all this, he join
not only a captivate person, but a natural ardour of mind which be
now rouse and increase by the example of her own, and which
recommend he to her affection beyond every thing else.
his society become gradually her most exquisite enjoyment. they read,
they talk, they sing together; his musical talent be considerable;
and he read with all the sensibility and spirit which Edward have
unfortunately want.
in Mrs. Dashwood's estimation he be as faultless as in Marianne's; and
Elinor see nothing to censure in he but a propensity, in which he
strongly resemble and peculiarly delight her sister, of say too
much what he think on every occasion, without attention to person or
circumstance. in hastily form and give his opinion of other
people, in sacrifice general politeness to the enjoyment of undivided
attention where his heart be engage, and in slight too easily the
form of worldly propriety, he display a want of caution which Elinor
could not approve, in spite of all that he and Marianne could say in
its support.
Marianne begin now to perceive that the desperation which have seize
she at sixteen and a half, of ever see a man who could satisfy her
idea of perfection, have be rash and unjustifiable. Willoughby be
all that her fancy have delineate in that unhappy hour and in every
bright period, as capable of attach she; and his behaviour
declare his wish to be in that respect as earnest, as his ability
be strong.
her mother too, in whose mind not one speculative thought of their
marriage have be raise, by his prospect of rich, be lead before the
end of a week to hope and expect it; and secretly to congratulate
herself on have gain two such son-in-law as Edward and Willoughby.
Colonel Brandon's partiality for Marianne, which have so early be
discover by his friend, now first become perceptible to Elinor, when
it cease to be notice by they. their attention and wit be draw
off to his more fortunate rival; and the raillery which the other have
incur before any partiality arise, be remove when his feeling
begin really to call for the ridicule so justly annexed to sensibility.
Elinor be oblige, though unwillingly, to believe that the sentiment
which Mrs. Jennings have assign he for her own satisfaction, be now
actually excited by her sister; and that however a general resemblance
of disposition between the party might forward the affection of Mr.
Willoughby, an equally striking opposition of character be no
hindrance to the regard of Colonel Brandon. she see it with concern;
for what could a silent man of five and thirty hope, when oppose to a
very lively one of five and twenty? and as she could not even wish he
successful, she heartily wish he indifferent. she like he--in
spite of his gravity and reserve, she behold in he an object of
interest. his manner, though serious, be mild; and his reserve
appear rather the result of some oppression of spirit than of any
natural gloominess of temper. Sir John have drop hint of past
injury and disappointment, which justify her belief of his being
an unfortunate man, and she regard he with respect and compassion.
perhaps she pity and esteem he the more because he be slight by
Willoughby and Marianne, who, prejudice against he for be neither
lively nor young, seem resolve to undervalue his merit.
"Brandon be just the kind of man," say Willoughby one day, when they
be talk of he together, "whom every body speak well of, and
nobody care about; whom all be delighted to see, and nobody remember
to talk to."
"that be exactly what I think of he," cry Marianne.
"do not boast of it, however," say Elinor, "for it be injustice in
both of you. he be highly esteemed by all the family at the park, and
I never see he myself without take pain to converse with he."
"that he be patronise by you," reply Willoughby, "be certainly in
his favour; but as for the esteem of the other, it be a reproach in
itself. who would submit to the indignity of be approve by such a
woman as Lady Middleton and Mrs. Jennings, that could command the
indifference of any body else?"
"but perhaps the abuse of such people as yourself and Marianne will
make amend for the regard of Lady Middleton and her mother. if their
praise be censure, your censure may be praise, for they be not more
undiscerning, than you be prejudiced and unjust."
"in defence of your protege you can even be saucy."
"my protege, as you call he, be a sensible man; and sense will always
have attraction for I. yes, Marianne, even in a man between thirty
and forty. he have see a great deal of the world; have be abroad, have
read, and have a thinking mind. I have find he capable of give I
much information on various subject; and he have always answer my
inquiry with readiness of good-breeding and good nature."
"that be to say," cry Marianne contemptuously, "he have tell you, that
in the East Indies the climate be hot, and the mosquito be
troublesome."
"he would have tell I so, I doubt not, have I make any such inquiry,
but they happen to be point on which I have be previously inform."
"perhaps," say Willoughby, "his observation may have extend to the
existence of nabob, gold mohrs, and palanquin."
"I may venture to say that his observation have stretch much far
than your candour. but why should you dislike he?"
"I do not dislike he. I consider he, on the contrary, as a very
respectable man, who have every body's good word, and nobody's notice;
who, have more money than he can spend, more time than he know how to
employ, and two new coat every year."
"add to which," cry Marianne, "that he have neither genius, taste, nor
spirit. that his understanding have no brilliancy, his feeling no
ardour, and his voice no expression."
"you decide on his imperfection so much in the mass," reply Elinor,
"and so much on the strength of your own imagination, that the
commendation I be able to give of he be comparatively cold and
insipid. I can only pronounce he to be a sensible man, well-breed,
well-inform, of gentle address, and, I believe, possess an amiable
heart."
"Miss Dashwood," cry Willoughby, "you be now use I unkindly. you
be endeavour to disarm I by reason, and to convince I against my
will. but it will not do. you shall find I as stubborn as you can be
artful. I have three unanswerable reason for dislike Colonel
Brandon; he threaten I with rain when I want it to be fine; he have
find fault with the hanging of my curricle, and I cannot persuade he
to buy my brown mare. if it will be any satisfaction to you, however,
to be tell, that I believe his character to be in other respect
irreproachable, I be ready to confess it. and in return for an
acknowledgment, which must give I some pain, you cannot deny I the
privilege of dislike he as much as ever."
CHAPTER 11
Little have Mrs. Dashwood or her daughter imagine when they first come
into Devonshire, that so many engagement would arise to occupy their
time as shortly present themselves, or that they should have such
frequent invitation and such constant visitor as to leave they little
leisure for serious employment. yet such be the case. when Marianne
be recover, the scheme of amusement at home and abroad, which Sir
John have be previously form, be put into execution. the private
ball at the park then begin; and party on the water be make and
accomplish as often as a showery October would allow. in every
meeting of the kind Willoughby be include; and the ease and
familiarity which naturally attend these party be exactly
calculate to give increase intimacy to his acquaintance with the
Dashwoods, to afford he opportunity of witness the excellency of
Marianne, of mark his animate admiration of she, and of receive,
in her behaviour to himself, the most pointed assurance of her
affection.
Elinor could not be surprised at their attachment. she only wish
that it be less openly shewn; and once or twice do venture to
suggest the propriety of some self-command to Marianne. but Marianne
abhor all concealment where no real disgrace could attend unreserve;
and to aim at the restraint of sentiment which be not in themselves
illaudable, appear to she not merely an unnecessary effort, but a
disgraceful subjection of reason to common-place and mistaken notion.
Willoughby think the same; and their behaviour at all time, be an
illustration of their opinion.
when he be present she have no eye for any one else. every thing he
do, be right. every thing he say, be clever. if their evening at
the park be conclude with card, he cheat himself and all the rest
of the party to get she a good hand. if dancing form the amusement
of the night, they be partner for half the time; and when oblige to
separate for a couple of dance, be careful to stand together and
scarcely speak a word to any body else. such conduct make they of
course most exceedingly laugh at; but ridicule could not shame, and
seem hardly to provoke they.
Mrs. Dashwood enter into all their feeling with a warmth which leave
she no inclination for check this excessive display of they. to she
it be but the natural consequence of a strong affection in a young and
ardent mind.
this be the season of happiness to Marianne. her heart be devoted to
Willoughby, and the fond attachment to Norland, which she bring with
she from Sussex, be more likely to be soften than she have think it
possible before, by the charm which his society bestow on her
present home.
Elinor's happiness be not so great. her heart be not so much at
ease, nor her satisfaction in their amusement so pure. they afford
her no companion that could make amend for what she have leave behind,
nor that could teach she to think of Norland with less regret than
ever. neither Lady Middleton nor Mrs. Jennings could supply to her the
conversation she miss; although the latter be an everlasting talker,
and from the first have regard she with a kindness which ensure she a
large share of her discourse. she have already repeat her own history
to Elinor three or four time; and have Elinor's memory be equal to
her mean of improvement, she might have know very early in their
acquaintance all the particular of Mr. Jenning's last illness, and
what he say to his wife a few minute before he die. Lady Middleton
be more agreeable than her mother only in be more silent. elinor
need little observation to perceive that her reserve be a mere
calmness of manner with which sense have nothing to do. towards her
husband and mother she be the same as to they; and intimacy be
therefore neither to be look for nor desire. she have nothing to say
one day that she have not say the day before. her insipidity be
invariable, for even her spirit be always the same; and though she
do not oppose the party arrange by her husband, provide every
thing be conduct in style and her two eld child attend she,
she never appear to receive more enjoyment from they than she might
have experience in sit at home;--and so little do her presence
add to the pleasure of the other, by any share in their conversation,
that they be sometimes only remind of she be amongst they by her
solicitude about her troublesome boy.
in Colonel Brandon alone, of all her new acquaintance, do Elinor find
a person who could in any degree claim the respect of ability, excite
the interest of friendship, or give pleasure as a companion.
Willoughby be out of the question. her admiration and regard, even
her sisterly regard, be all his own; but he be a lover; his
attention be wholly Marianne's, and a far less agreeable man might
have be more generally pleasing. Colonel Brandon, unfortunately for
himself, have no such encouragement to think only of Marianne, and in
converse with Elinor he find the great consolation for the
indifference of her sister.
Elinor's compassion for he increase, as she have reason to suspect
that the misery of disappointed love have already be know to he.
this suspicion be give by some word which accidently drop from
he one evening at the park, when they be sit down together by
mutual consent, while the other be dance. his eye be fix on
Marianne, and, after a silence of some minute, he say, with a faint
smile, "your sister, I understand, do not approve of second
attachment."
"no," reply Elinor, "her opinion be all romantic."
"or rather, as I believe, she consider they impossible to exist."
"I believe she do. but how she contrive it without reflect on
the character of her own father, who have himself two wife, I know not.
a few year however will settle her opinion on the reasonable basis of
common sense and observation; and then they may be more easy to define
and to justify than they now be, by any body but herself."
"this will probably be the case," he reply; "and yet there be
something so amiable in the prejudice of a young mind, that one be
sorry to see they give way to the reception of more general opinion."
"I cannot agree with you there," say Elinor. "there be
inconvenience attend such feeling as Marianne's, which all the
charm of enthusiasm and ignorance of the world cannot atone for. her
system have all the unfortunate tendency of set propriety at
nought; and a well acquaintance with the world be what I look forward
to as her great possible advantage."
after a short pause he resume the conversation by saying,--
"do your sister make no distinction in her objection against a
second attachment? or be it equally criminal in every body? be those
who have be disappoint in their first choice, whether from the
inconstancy of its object, or the perverseness of circumstance, to be
equally indifferent during the rest of their life?"
"upon my word, I be not acquaint with the minutia of her principle.
I only know that I never yet hear she admit any instance of a second
attachment's be pardonable."
"this," say he, "cannot hold; but a change, a total change of
sentiment--no, no, do not desire it; for when the romantic refinement
of a young mind be oblige to give way, how frequently be they
succeed by such opinion as be but too common, and too dangerous! I
speak from experience. I once know a lady who in temper and mind
greatly resemble your sister, who think and judge like she, but who
from an inforced change--from a series of unfortunate circumstances"--
here he stopt suddenly; appear to think that he have say too much,
and by his countenance give rise to conjecture, which might not
otherwise have enter Elinor's head. the lady would probably have
pass without suspicion, have he not convince Miss Dashwood that what
concern she ought not to escape his lip. as it be, it require but
a slight effort of fancy to connect his emotion with the tender
recollection of past regard. Elinor attempt no more. but Marianne,
in her place, would not have do so little. the whole story would
have be speedily form under her active imagination; and every thing
establish in the most melancholy order of disastrous love.
CHAPTER 12
as Elinor and Marianne be walk together the next morning the
latter communicate a piece of news to her sister, which in spite of
all that she know before of Marianne's imprudence and want of thought,
surprise she by its extravagant testimony of both. Marianne tell she,
with the great delight, that Willoughby have give she a horse, one
that he have breed himself on his estate in Somersetshire, and which be
exactly calculate to carry a woman. without consider that it be
not in her mother's plan to keep any horse, that if she be to alter
her resolution in favour of this gift, she must buy another for the
servant, and keep a servant to ride it, and after all, build a stable
to receive they, she have accept the present without hesitation, and
tell her sister of it in rapture.
"he intend to send his groom into Somersetshire immediately for it,"
she add, "and when it arrive we will ride every day. you shall
share its use with I. imagine to yourself, my dear Elinor, the
delight of a gallop on some of these down."
most unwilling be she to awaken from such a dream of felicity to
comprehend all the unhappy truth which attend the affair; and for
some time she refuse to submit to they. as to an additional servant,
the expense would be a trifle; Mamma she be sure would never object to
it; and any horse would do for HIM; he might always get one at the
park; as to a stable, the mere shed would be sufficient. Elinor then
venture to doubt the propriety of she receive such a present from a
man so little, or at least so lately know to she. this be too much.
"you be mistaken, Elinor," say she warmly, "in suppose I know very
little of Willoughby. I have not know he long indeed, but I be much
well acquaint with he, than I be with any other creature in the
world, except yourself and mama. it be not time or opportunity that be
to determine intimacy;--it be disposition alone. seven year would be
insufficient to make some people acquaint with each other, and seven
day be more than enough for other. I should hold myself guilty of
great impropriety in accept a horse from my brother, than from
Willoughby. of John I know very little, though we have live together
for year; but of Willoughby my judgment have long be form."
Elinor think it wisest to touch that point no more. she know her
sister's temper. opposition on so tender a subject would only attach
she the more to her own opinion. but by an appeal to her affection for
her mother, by represent the inconvenience which that indulgent
mother must draw on herself, if (as would probably be the case) she
consent to this increase of establishment, Marianne be shortly
subdue; and she promise not to tempt her mother to such imprudent
kindness by mention the offer, and to tell Willoughby when she see
he next, that it must be decline.
she be faithful to her word; and when Willoughby call at the
cottage, the same day, Elinor hear she express her disappointment to
he in a low voice, on be oblige to forego the acceptance of his
present. the reason for this alteration be at the same time
relate, and they be such as to make further entreaty on his side
impossible. his concern however be very apparent; and after
express it with earnestness, he add, in the same low voice,--"But,
Marianne, the horse be still your, though you cannot use it now. I
shall keep it only till you can claim it. when you leave Barton to
form your own establishment in a more lasting home, Queen Mab shall
receive you."
this be all overhear by Miss Dashwood; and in the whole of the
sentence, in his manner of pronounce it, and in his address her
sister by her christian name alone, she instantly see an intimacy so
decide, a meaning so direct, as mark a perfect agreement between
they. from that moment she doubt not of their be engage to each
other; and the belief of it create no other surprise than that she, or
any of their friend, should be leave by temper so frank, to discover
it by accident.
Margaret relate something to she the next day, which place this
matter in a still clear light. Willoughby have spend the precede
evening with they, and Margaret, by be leave some time in the parlour
with only he and Marianne, have have opportunity for observation,
which, with a most important face, she communicate to her eld
sister, when they be next by themselves.
"oh, Elinor!" she cry, "I have such a secret to tell you about
Marianne. I be sure she will be married to Mr. Willoughby very soon."
"you have say so," reply Elinor, "almost every day since they first
meet on high-church down; and they have not know each other a week, I
believe, before you be certain that Marianne wear his picture round
her neck; but it turn out to be only the miniature of our great
uncle."
"but indeed this be quite another thing. I be sure they will be
marry very soon, for he have get a lock of her hair."
"take care, Margaret. it may be only the hair of some great uncle of
HIS."
"but, indeed, Elinor, it be Marianne's. I be almost sure it be, for I
see he cut it off. last night after tea, when you and mama go out
of the room, they be whisper and talk together as fast as could
be, and he seem to be beg something of she, and presently he take
up her scissor and cut off a long lock of her hair, for it be all
tumble down her back; and he kiss it, and fold it up in a piece of
white paper; and put it into his pocket-book."
for such particular, state on such authority, Elinor could not
withhold her credit; nor be she disposed to it, for the circumstance
be in perfect unison with what she have hear and see herself.
Margaret's sagacity be not always display in a way so satisfactory
to her sister. when Mrs. Jennings attack her one evening at the
park, to give the name of the young man who be Elinor's particular
favourite, which have be long a matter of great curiosity to she,
Margaret answer by look at her sister, and say, "I must not
tell, may I, Elinor?"
this of course make every body laugh; and Elinor try to laugh too.
but the effort be painful. she be convince that Margaret have fix
on a person whose name she could not bear with composure to become a
stand joke with Mrs. Jennings.
Marianne feel for she most sincerely; but she do more harm than good
to the cause, by turn very red and say in an angry manner to
Margaret,
"remember that whatever your conjecture may be, you have no right to
repeat they."
"I never have any conjecture about it," reply Margaret; "it be you
who tell I of it yourself."
this increase the mirth of the company, and Margaret be eagerly
pressed to say something more.
"oh! pray, Miss Margaret, let we know all about it," say Mrs.
Jennings. "what be the gentleman's name?"
"I must not tell, ma'am. but I know very well what it be; and I know
where he be too."
"yes, yes, we can guess where he be; at his own house at Norland to be
sure. he be the curate of the parish I dare say."
"no, that he be not. he be of no profession at all."
"Margaret," say Marianne with great warmth, "you know that all this be
an invention of your own, and that there be no such person in
existence."
"well, then, he be lately dead, Marianne, for I be sure there be such
a man once, and his name begin with an F."
most grateful do Elinor feel to Lady Middleton for observe, at this
moment, "that it rain very hard," though she believe the
interruption to proceed less from any attention to she, than from her
ladyship's great dislike of all such inelegant subject of raillery as
delight her husband and mother. the idea however start by she, be
immediately pursue by Colonel Brandon, who be on every occasion
mindful of the feeling of other; and much be say on the subject of
rain by both of they. Willoughby open the piano-forte, and ask
Marianne to sit down to it; and thus amidst the various endeavour of
different people to quit the topic, it fall to the ground. but not so
easily do Elinor recover from the alarm into which it have throw she.
a party be form this evening for go on the following day to see a
very fine place about twelve mile from Barton, belong to a
brother-in-law of Colonel Brandon, without whose interest it could not
be see, as the proprietor, who be then abroad, have leave strict order
on that head. the ground be declare to be highly beautiful, and
Sir John, who be particularly warm in their praise, might be allow
to be a tolerable judge, for he have form party to visit they, at
least, twice every summer for the last ten year. they contain a
noble piece of water; a sail on which be to a form a great part of the
morning's amusement; cold provision be to be take, open carriage
only to be employ, and every thing conduct in the usual style of a
complete party of pleasure.
to some few of the company it appear rather a bold undertaking,
consider the time of year, and that it have rain every day for the
last fortnight;--and Mrs. Dashwood, who have already a cold, be
persuade by Elinor to stay at home.
CHAPTER 13
their intended excursion to Whitwell turn out very different from
what Elinor have expect. she be prepared to be wet through,
fatigue, and frighten; but the event be still more unfortunate, for
they do not go at all.
by ten o'clock the whole party be assemble at the park, where they
be to breakfast. the morning be rather favourable, though it have
rain all night, as the cloud be then disperse across the sky,
and the sun frequently appear. they be all in high spirit and
good humour, eager to be happy, and determine to submit to the
great inconvenience and hardship rather than be otherwise.
while they be at breakfast the letter be bring in. among the
rest there be one for Colonel Brandon;--he take it, look at the
direction, change colour, and immediately leave the room.
"what be the matter with Brandon?" say Sir John.
nobody could tell.
"I hope he have have no bad news," say Lady Middleton. "it must be
something extraordinary that could make Colonel Brandon leave my
breakfast table so suddenly."
in about five minute he return.
"no bad news, Colonel, I hope;" say Mrs. Jennings, as soon as he
enter the room.
"none at all, ma'am, I thank you."
"be it from Avignon? I hope it be not to say that your sister be
bad."
"no, ma'am. it come from town, and be merely a letter of business."
"but how come the hand to discompose you so much, if it be only a
letter of business? come, come, this willnot do, Colonel; so let we hear
the truth of it."
"my dear madam," say Lady Middleton, "recollect what you be say."
"perhaps it be to tell you that your cousin Fanny be marry?" say
Mrs. Jennings, without attend to her daughter's reproof.
"no, indeed, it be not."
"well, then, I know who it be from, Colonel. and I hope she be well."
"whom do you mean, ma'am?" say he, colour a little.
"oh! you know who I mean."
"I be particularly sorry, ma'am," say he, address Lady Middleton,
"that I should receive this letter today, for it be on business which
require my immediate attendance in town."
"in town!" cry Mrs. Jennings. "what can you have to do in town at
this time of year?"
"my own loss be great," he continue, "in be oblige to leave so
agreeable a party; but I be the more concerned, as I fear my presence
be necessary to gain your admittance at Whitwell."
what a blow upon they all be this!
"but if you write a note to the housekeeper, Mr. Brandon," say
Marianne, eagerly, "will it not be sufficient?"
he shake his head.
"we must go," say Sir John.--"It shall not be put off when we be so
near it. you cannot go to town till tomorrow, Brandon, that be all."
"I wish it could be so easily settle. but it be not in my power to
delay my journey for one day!"
"if you would but let we know what your business be," say Mrs.
Jennings, "we might see whether it could be put off or not."
"you would not be six hour later," say Willoughby, "if you be to
defer your journey till our return."
"I cannot afford to lose one hour."--
Elinor then hear Willoughby say, in a low voice to Marianne, "there
be some people who cannot bear a party of pleasure. Brandon be one of
they. he be afraid of catch cold I dare say, and invent this
trick for get out of it. I would lay fifty guineas the letter be
of his own writing."
"I have no doubt of it," reply Marianne.
"there be no persuade you to change your mind, Brandon, I know of
old," say Sir John, "when once you be determined on anything. but,
however, I hope you will think well of it. consider, here be the
two Miss Careys come over from Newton, the three Miss Dashwoods walk
up from the cottage, and Mr. Willoughby get up two hour before his
usual time, on purpose to go to Whitwell."
Colonel Brandon again repeat his sorrow at be the cause of
disappoint the party; but at the same time declare it to be
unavoidable.
"well, then, when will you come back again?"
"I hope we shall see you at Barton," add her ladyship, "as soon as
you can conveniently leave town; and we must put off the party to
Whitwell till you return."
"you be very obliging. but it be so uncertain, when I may have it in
my power to return, that I dare not engage for it at all."
"oh! he must and shall come back," cry Sir John. "if he be not here
by the end of the week, I shall go after he."
"ay, so do, Sir John," cry Mrs. Jennings, "and then perhaps you may
find out what his business be."
"I do not want to pry into other man's concern. I suppose it be
something he be ashamed of."
Colonel Brandon's horse be announce.
"you do not go to town on horseback, do you?" add Sir John.
"no. only to Honiton. I shall then go post."
"well, as you be resolve to go, I wish you a good journey. but you
have well change your mind."
"I assure you it be not in my power."
he then take leave of the whole party.
"be there no chance of my see you and your sister in town this
winter, Miss Dashwood?"
"I be afraid, none at all."
"then I must bid you farewell for a long time than I should wish to
do."
to Marianne, he merely bow and say nothing.
"come Colonel," say Mrs. Jennings, "before you go, do let we know what
you be go about."
he wish she a good morning, and, attend by Sir John, leave the room.
the complaint and lamentation which politeness have hitherto
restrain, now burst forth universally; and they all agree again and
again how provoking it be to be so disappointed.
"I can guess what his business be, however," say Mrs. Jennings
exultingly.
"can you, ma'am?" say almost every body.
"yes; it be about Miss Williams, I be sure."
"and who be Miss Williams?" ask Marianne.
"what! do not you know who Miss Williams be? I be sure you must have
hear of she before. she be a relation of the Colonel's, my dear; a
very near relation. we will not say how near, for fear of shock the
young lady." then, lower her voice a little, she say to Elinor,
"she be his natural daughter."
"indeed!"
"oh, yes; and as like he as she can stare. I dare say the Colonel
will leave she all his fortune."
when Sir John return, he join most heartily in the general regret
on so unfortunate an event; conclude however by observe, that as
they be all get together, they must do something by way of be
happy; and after some consultation it be agree, that although
happiness could only be enjoy at Whitwell, they might procure a
tolerable composure of mind by drive about the country. the
carriage be then order; Willoughby's be first, and Marianne never
look happy than when she get into it. he drive through the park
very fast, and they be soon out of sight; and nothing more of they
be see till their return, which do not happen till after the return
of all the rest. they both seem delighted with their drive; but say
only in general term that they have keep in the lane, while the other
go on the down.
it be settle that there should be a dance in the evening, and that
every body should be extremely merry all day long. some more of the
Careys come to dinner, and they have the pleasure of sit down nearly
twenty to table, which Sir John observe with great contentment.
Willoughby take his usual place between the two eld Miss Dashwoods.
Mrs. Jennings sit on Elinor's right hand; and they have not be long
seat, before she leant behind she and Willoughby, and say to
Marianne, loud enough for they both to hear, "I have find you out in
spite of all your trick. I know where you spend the morning."
Marianne colour, and reply very hastily, "where, pray?"--
"do not you know," say Willoughby, "that we have be out in my
curricle?"
"yes, yes, Mr. Impudence, I know that very well, and I be determine
to find out where you have be to.-- I hope you like your house, Miss
Marianne. it be a very large one, I know; and when I come to see you,
I hope you will have new-furnish it, for it want it very much when
I be there six year ago."
Marianne turn away in great confusion. Mrs. Jennings laugh
heartily; and Elinor find that in her resolution to know where they
have be, she have actually make her own woman enquire of Mr.
Willoughby's groom; and that she have by that method be inform that
they have go to Allenham, and spend a considerable time there in
walk about the garden and go all over the house.
Elinor could hardly believe this to be true, as it seem very unlikely
that Willoughby should propose, or Marianne consent, to enter the house
while Mrs. Smith be in it, with whom Marianne have not the small
acquaintance.
as soon as they leave the dining-room, Elinor enquire of she about it;
and great be her surprise when she find that every circumstance
relate by Mrs. Jennings be perfectly true. Marianne be quite angry
with she for doubt it.
"why should you imagine, Elinor, that we do not go there, or that we
do not see the house? be not it what you have often wish to do
yourself?"
"yes, Marianne, but I would not go while Mrs. Smith be there, and with
no other companion than Mr. Willoughby."
"Mr. Willoughby however be the only person who can have a right to shew
that house; and as he go in an open carriage, it be impossible to
have any other companion. I never spend a pleasanter morning in my
life."
"I be afraid," reply Elinor, "that the pleasantness of an employment
do not always evince its propriety."
"on the contrary, nothing can be a strong proof of it, Elinor; for if
there have be any real impropriety in what I do, I should have be
sensible of it at the time, for we always know when we be act
wrong, and with such a conviction I could have have no pleasure."
"but, my dear Marianne, as it have already expose you to some very
impertinent remark, do you not now begin to doubt the discretion of
your own conduct?"
"if the impertinent remark of Mrs. Jennings be to be the proof of
impropriety in conduct, we be all offend every moment of our life.
I value not her censure any more than I should do her commendation. I
be not sensible of have do anything wrong in walk over Mrs.
Smith's ground, or in see her house. they will one day be Mr.
Willoughby's, and--"
"if they be one day to be your own, Marianne, you would not be
justify in what you have do."
she blush at this hint; but it be even visibly gratify to she;
and after a ten minute' interval of earnest thought, she come to her
sister again, and say with great good humour, "perhaps, Elinor, it be
rather ill-judge in I to go to Allenham; but Mr. Willoughby want
particularly to shew I the place; and it be a charming house, I assure
you.--there be one remarkably pretty sit room up stair; of a nice
comfortable size for constant use, and with modern furniture it would
be delightful. it be a corner room, and have window on two side. on
one side you look across the bowling-green, behind the house, to a
beautiful hang wood, and on the other you have a view of the church
and village, and, beyond they, of those fine bold hill that we have so
often admire. I do not see it to advantage, for nothing could be
more forlorn than the furniture,--but if it be newly fit up--a
couple of hundred pound, Willoughby say, would make it one of the
pleasantest summer-room in England."
could Elinor have listen to she without interruption from the other,
she would have describe every room in the house with equal delight.
CHAPTER 14
the sudden termination of Colonel Brandon's visit at the park, with his
steadiness in conceal its cause, fill the mind, and raise the
wonder of Mrs. Jennings for two or three day; she be a great
wonderer, as every one must be who take a very lively interest in all
the coming and going of all their acquaintance. she wonder, with
little intermission what could be the reason of it; be sure there must
be some bad news, and think over every kind of distress that could
have befall he, with a fix determination that he should not escape
they all.
"something very melancholy must be the matter, I be sure," say she.
"I could see it in his face. poor man! I be afraid his circumstance
may be bad. the estate at Delaford be never reckon more than two
thousand a year, and his brother leave everything sadly involve. I do
think he must have be send for about money matter, for what else can
it be? I wonder whether it be so. I would give anything to know the
truth of it. perhaps it be about Miss Williams and, by the bye, I dare
say it be, because he look so conscious when I mention she. may be
she be ill in town; nothing in the world more likely, for I have a
notion she be always rather sickly. I would lay any wager it be about
Miss Williams. it be not so very likely he should be distress in his
circumstance now, for he be a very prudent man, and to be sure must
have clear the estate by this time. I wonder what it can be! may be
his sister be bad at Avignon, and have send for he over. his setting
off in such a hurry seem very like it. well, I wish he out of all
his trouble with all my heart, and a good wife into the bargain."
so wonder, so talk Mrs. Jennings. her opinion vary with every
fresh conjecture, and all seem equally probable as they arise.
Elinor, though she feel really interested in the welfare of Colonel
Brandon, could not bestow all the wonder on his go so suddenly away,
which Mrs. Jennings be desirous of her feeling; for besides that the
circumstance do not in her opinion justify such last amazement or
variety of speculation, her wonder be otherwise disposed of. it be
engross by the extraordinary silence of her sister and Willoughby on
the subject, which they must know to be peculiarly interesting to they
all. as this silence continue, every day make it appear more strange
and more incompatible with the disposition of both. why they should
not openly acknowledge to her mother and herself, what their constant
behaviour to each other declare to have take place, Elinor could not
imagine.
she could easily conceive that marriage might not be immediately in
their power; for though Willoughby be independent, there be no reason
to believe he rich. his estate have be rat by Sir John at about
six or seven hundred a year; but he live at an expense to which that
income could hardly be equal, and he have himself often complain of
his poverty. but for this strange kind of secrecy maintain by they
relative to their engagement, which in fact conceal nothing at all,
she could not account; and it be so wholly contradictory to their
general opinion and practice, that a doubt sometimes enter her mind
of their be really engage, and this doubt be enough to prevent she
make any inquiry of Marianne.
nothing could be more expressive of attachment to they all, than
Willoughby's behaviour. to Marianne it have all the distinguishing
tenderness which a lover's heart could give, and to the rest of the
family it be the affectionate attention of a son and a brother. the
cottage seem to be consider and love by he as his home; many more
of his hour be spend there than at Allenham; and if no general
engagement collect they at the park, the exercise which call he
out in the morning be almost certain of end there, where the rest
of the day be spend by himself at the side of Marianne, and by his
favourite pointer at her foot.
one evening in particular, about a week after Colonel Brandon leave the
country, his heart seem more than usually open to every feeling of
attachment to the object around he; and on Mrs. Dashwood's happen
to mention her design of improve the cottage in the spring, he warmly
oppose every alteration of a place which affection have establish as
perfect with he.
"what!" he exclaimed--"improve this dear cottage! no. that I will
never consent to. not a stone must be add to its wall, not an inch
to its size, if my feeling be regard."
"do not be alarm," say Miss Dashwood, "nothing of the kind will be
do; for my mother will never have money enough to attempt it."
"I be heartily glad of it," he cry. "may she always be poor, if she
can employ her rich no well."
"thank you, Willoughby. but you may be assure that I would not
sacrifice one sentiment of local attachment of your, or of any one
whom I love, for all the improvement in the world. depend upon it
that whatever unemployed sum may remain, when I make up my account in
the spring, I would even rather lay it uselessly by than dispose of it
in a manner so painful to you. but be you really so attached to this
place as to see no defect in it?"
"I be," say he. "to I it be faultless. Nay, more, I consider it as
the only form of building in which happiness be attainable, and be I
rich enough I would instantly pull Combe down, and build it up again in
the exact plan of this cottage."
"with dark narrow stair and a kitchen that smoke, I suppose," say
Elinor.
"yes," cry he in the same eager tone, "with all and every thing
belong to it;--in no one convenience or INconvenience about it,
should the least variation be perceptible. then, and then only, under
such a roof, I might perhaps be as happy at Combe as I have be at
Barton."
"I flatter myself," reply Elinor, "that even under the disadvantage
of well room and a broad staircase, you will hereafter find your
own house as faultless as you now do this."
"there certainly be circumstance," say Willoughby, "which might
greatly endear it to I; but this place will always have one claim of
my affection, which no other can possibly share."
Mrs. Dashwood look with pleasure at Marianne, whose fine eye be
fix so expressively on Willoughby, as plainly denote how well she
understand he.
"how often do I wish," add he, "when I be at Allenham this time
twelvemonth, that Barton cottage be inhabit! I never pass within
view of it without admire its situation, and grieve that no one
should live in it. how little do I then think that the very first
news I should hear from Mrs. Smith, when I next come into the country,
would be that Barton cottage be take: and I feel an immediate
satisfaction and interest in the event, which nothing but a kind of
prescience of what happiness I should experience from it, can account
for. must it not have be so, Marianne?" speak to she in a lowered
voice. then continue his former tone, he say, "and yet this house
you would spoil, Mrs. Dashwood? you would rob it of its simplicity by
imaginary improvement! and this dear parlour in which our acquaintance
first begin, and in which so many happy hour have be since spend by
we together, you would degrade to the condition of a common entrance,
and every body would be eager to pass through the room which have
hitherto contain within itself more real accommodation and comfort
than any other apartment of the handsome dimension in the world
could possibly afford."
Mrs. Dashwood again assure he that no alteration of the kind should
be attempt.
"you be a good woman," he warmly reply. "your promise make I
easy. extend it a little far, and it will make I happy. tell I
that not only your house will remain the same, but that I shall ever
find you and your as unchanged as your dwelling; and that you will
always consider I with the kindness which have make everything
belong to you so dear to I."
the promise be readily give, and Willoughby's behaviour during the
whole of the evening declare at once his affection and happiness.
"shall we see you tomorrow to dinner?" say Mrs. Dashwood, when he be
leave they. "I do not ask you to come in the morning, for we must
walk to the park, to call on Lady Middleton."
he engage to be with they by four o'clock.
CHAPTER 15
Mrs. Dashwood's visit to Lady Middleton take place the next day, and
two of her daughter go with she; but Marianne excuse herself from
be of the party, under some trifling pretext of employment; and her
mother, who conclude that a promise have be make by Willoughby the
night before of call on she while they be absent, be perfectly
satisfied with she remain at home.
on their return from the park they find Willoughby's curricle and
servant in wait at the cottage, and Mrs. Dashwood be convince that
her conjecture have be just. so far it be all as she have foresee;
but on enter the house she behold what no foresight have teach she
to expect. they be no soon in the passage than Marianne come
hastily out of the parlour apparently in violent affliction, with her
handkerchief at her eye; and without notice they run up stair.
surprise and alarmed they proceed directly into the room she have
just quit, where they find only Willoughby, who be lean against
the mantel-piece with his back towards they. he turn round on their
come in, and his countenance shew that he strongly partook of the
emotion which over-power Marianne.
"be anything the matter with she?" cry Mrs. Dashwood as she
entered--"is she ill?"
"I hope not," he reply, try to look cheerful; and with a forced
smile presently add, "it be I who may rather expect to be ill--for I
be now suffer under a very heavy disappointment!"
"disappointment?"
"yes, for I be unable to keep my engagement with you. Mrs. Smith have
this morning exercise the privilege of rich upon a poor dependent
cousin, by send I on business to London. I have just receive my
dispatch, and take my farewell of Allenham; and by way of
exhilaration I be now come to take my farewell of you."
"to London!--and be you go this morning?"
"almost this moment."
"this be very unfortunate. but Mrs. Smith must be obliged;--and her
business will not detain you from we long I hope."
he colour as he reply, "you be very kind, but I have no idea of
return into Devonshire immediately. my visit to Mrs. Smith be
never repeat within the twelvemonth."
"and be Mrs. Smith your only friend? be Allenham the only house in the
neighbourhood to which you will be welcome? for shame, Willoughby, can
you wait for an invitation here?"
his colour increase; and with his eye fix on the ground he only
reply, "you be too good."
Mrs. Dashwood look at Elinor with surprise. Elinor feel equal
amazement. for a few moment every one be silent. Mrs. Dashwood
first speak.
"I have only to add, my dear Willoughby, that at Barton cottage you
will always be welcome; for I will not press you to return here
immediately, because you only can judge how far that might be pleasing
to Mrs. Smith; and on this head I shall be no more disposed to question
your judgment than to doubt your inclination."
"my engagement at present," reply Willoughby, confusedly, "be of
such a nature--that--I dare not flat myself"--
he stopt. Mrs. Dashwood be too much astonished to speak, and another
pause succeed. this be break by Willoughby, who say with a faint
smile, "it be folly to linger in this manner. I will not torment
myself any long by remain among friend whose society it be
impossible for I now to enjoy."
he then hastily take leave of they all and leave the room. they see he
step into his carriage, and in a minute it be out of sight.
Mrs. Dashwood feel too much for speech, and instantly quit the
parlour to give way in solitude to the concern and alarm which this
sudden departure occasion.
Elinor's uneasiness be at least equal to her mother's. she think of
what have just pass with anxiety and distrust. Willoughby's behaviour
in take leave of they, his embarrassment, and affectation of
cheerfulness, and, above all, his unwillingness to accept her mother's
invitation, a backwardness so unlike a lover, so unlike himself,
greatly disturb she. one moment she fear that no serious design
have ever be form on his side; and the next that some unfortunate
quarrel have take place between he and her sister;--the distress in
which Marianne have quit the room be such as a serious quarrel could
most reasonably account for, though when she consider what Marianne's
love for he be, a quarrel seem almost impossible.
but whatever might be the particular of their separation, her sister's
affliction be indubitable; and she think with the tender
compassion of that violent sorrow which Marianne be in all probability
not merely give way to as a relief, but feed and encouraging as a
duty.
in about half an hour her mother return, and though her eye be
red, her countenance be not uncheerful.
"our dear Willoughby be now some mile from Barton, Elinor," say she,
as she sit down to work, "and with how heavy a heart do he travel?"
"it be all very strange. so suddenly to be go! it seem but the work
of a moment. and last night he be with we so happy, so cheerful, so
affectionate? and now, after only ten minute notice--go too without
intend to return!--Something more than what he own to we must have
happen. he do not speak, he do not behave like himself. you must
have see the difference as well as I. what can it be? can they have
quarrel? why else should he have shew such unwillingness to accept
your invitation here?"--
"it be not inclination that he want, Elinor; I could plainly see
THAT. he have not the power of accept it. I have think it all
over I assure you, and I can perfectly account for every thing that at
first seem strange to I as well as to you."
"can you, indeed!"
"yes. I have explain it to myself in the most satisfactory way;--but
you, Elinor, who love to doubt where you can--it will not satisfy you,
I know; but you shall not talk I out of my trust in it. I be
persuade that Mrs. Smith suspect his regard for Marianne, disapprove
of it, (perhaps because she have other view for he,) and on that
account be eager to get he away;--and that the business which she
send he off to transact be invent as an excuse to dismiss he.
this be what I believe to have happen. he be, moreover, aware that
she do disapprove the connection, he dare not therefore at present
confess to she his engagement with Marianne, and he feel himself
oblige, from his dependent situation, to give into her scheme, and
absent himself from Devonshire for a while. you will tell I, I know,
that this may or may not have happen; but I will listen to no cavil,
unless you can point out any other method of understand the affair
as satisfactory at this. and now, Elinor, what have you to say?"
"nothing, for you have anticipate my answer."
"then you would have tell I, that it might or might not have happen.
oh, Elinor, how incomprehensible be your feeling! you have rather
take evil upon credit than good. you have rather look out for misery
for Marianne, and guilt for poor Willoughby, than an apology for the
latter. you be resolve to think he blameable, because he take leave
of we with less affection than his usual behaviour have shew. and be
no allowance to be make for inadvertence, or for spirit depress by
recent disappointment? be no probability to be accept, merely
because they be not certainty? be nothing due to the man whom we
have all such reason to love, and no reason in the world to think ill
of? to the possibility of motif unanswerable in themselves, though
unavoidably secret for a while? and, after all, what be it you suspect
he of?"
"I can hardly tell myself. but suspicion of something unpleasant be
the inevitable consequence of such an alteration as we just witness
in he. there be great truth, however, in what you have now urge of
the allowance which ought to be make for he, and it be my wish to be
candid in my judgment of every body. Willoughby may undoubtedly have
very sufficient reason for his conduct, and I will hope that he have.
but it would have be more like Willoughby to acknowledge they at
once. Secrecy may be advisable; but still I cannot help wonder at
its be practice by he."
"do not blame he, however, for depart from his character, where the
deviation be necessary. but you really do admit the justice of what I
have say in his defence?--I be happy--and he be acquit."
"not entirely. it may be proper to conceal their engagement (if they
be engage) from Mrs. Smith--and if that be the case, it must be
highly expedient for Willoughby to be but little in Devonshire at
present. but this be no excuse for their conceal it from we."
"conceal it from we! my dear child, do you accuse Willoughby and
Marianne of concealment? this be strange indeed, when your eye have
be reproach they every day for incautiousness."
"I want no proof of their affection," say Elinor; "but of their
engagement I do."
"I be perfectly satisfied of both."
"yet not a syllable have be say to you on the subject, by either of
they."
"I have not want syllable where action have speak so plainly. have
not his behaviour to Marianne and to all of we, for at least the last
fortnight, declare that he love and consider she as his future
wife, and that he feel for we the attachment of the near relation?
have we not perfectly understand each other? have not my consent be
daily ask by his look, his manner, his attentive and affectionate
respect? my Elinor, be it possible to doubt their engagement? how
could such a thought occur to you? how be it to be suppose that
Willoughby, persuade as he must be of your sister's love, should leave
she, and leave she perhaps for month, without tell she of his
affection;--that they should part without a mutual exchange of
confidence?"
"I confess," reply Elinor, "that every circumstance except one be in
favour of their engagement; but that one be the total silence of both
on the subject, and with I it almost outweigh every other."
"how strange this be! you must think wretchedly indeed of Willoughby,
if, after all that have openly pass between they, you can doubt the
nature of the term on which they be together. have he be act a
part in his behaviour to your sister all this time? do you suppose he
really indifferent to she?"
"no, I cannot think that. he must and do love she I be sure."
"but with a strange kind of tenderness, if he can leave she with such
indifference, such carelessness of the future, as you attribute to he."
"you must remember, my dear mother, that I have never consider this
matter as certain. I have have my doubt, I confess; but they be
fainter than they be, and they may soon be entirely do away. if we
find they correspond, every fear of mine will be remove."
"a mighty concession indeed! if you be to see they at the altar, you
would suppose they be go to be marry. ungracious girl! but I
require no such proof. nothing in my opinion have ever pass to
justify doubt; no secrecy have be attempt; all have be uniformly
open and unreserved. you cannot doubt your sister's wish. it must
be Willoughby therefore whom you suspect. but why? be he not a man of
honour and feeling? have there be any inconsistency on his side to
create alarm? can he be deceitful?"
"I hope not, I believe not," cry Elinor. "I love Willoughby,
sincerely love he; and suspicion of his integrity cannot be more
painful to yourself than to I. it have be involuntary, and I will
not encourage it. I be startle, I confess, by the alteration in his
manner this morning;--he do not speak like himself, and do not
return your kindness with any cordiality. but all this may be
explain by such a situation of his affair as you have suppose. he
have just part from my sister, have see she leave he in the great
affliction; and if he feel oblige, from a fear of offend Mrs.
Smith, to resist the temptation of return here soon, and yet aware
that by decline your invitation, by say that he be go away for
some time, he should seem to act an ungenerous, a suspicious part by
our family, he might well be embarrassed and disturb. in such a
case, a plain and open avowal of his difficulty would have be more
to his honour I think, as well as more consistent with his general
character;--but I will not raise objection against any one's conduct
on so illiberal a foundation, as a difference in judgment from myself,
or a deviation from what I may think right and consistent."
"you speak very properly. Willoughby certainly do not deserve to be
suspect. though we have not know he long, he be no stranger in
this part of the world; and who have ever speak to his disadvantage?
have he be in a situation to act independently and marry immediately,
it might have be odd that he should leave we without acknowledge
everything to I at once: but this be not the case. it be an
engagement in some respect not prosperously begin, for their marriage
must be at a very uncertain distance; and even secrecy, as far as it
can be observe, may now be very advisable."
they be interrupt by the entrance of Margaret; and Elinor be then
at liberty to think over the representation of her mother, to
acknowledge the probability of many, and hope for the justice of all.
they see nothing of Marianne till dinner time, when she enter the
room and take her place at the table without say a word. her eye
be red and swollen; and it seem as if her tear be even then
restrain with difficulty. she avoid the look of they all, could
neither eat nor speak, and after some time, on her mother's silently
press her hand with tender compassion, her small degree of fortitude
be quite overcome, she burst into tear and leave the room.
this violent oppression of spirit continue the whole evening. she
be without any power, because she be without any desire of command
over herself. the slight mention of anything relative to Willoughby
overpower she in an instant; and though her family be most
anxiously attentive to her comfort, it be impossible for they, if they
speak at all, to keep clear of every subject which her feeling
connect with he.
CHAPTER 16
Marianne would have think herself very inexcusable have she be able
to sleep at all the first night after part from Willoughby. she
would have be ashamed to look her family in the face the next
morning, have she not rise from her bed in more need of repose than
when she lie down in it. but the feeling which make such composure a
disgrace, leave she in no danger of incur it. she be awake the
whole night, and she weep the great part of it. she get up with a
headache, be unable to talk, and unwilling to take any nourishment;
give pain every moment to her mother and sister, and forbid all
attempt at consolation from either. her sensibility be potent enough!
when breakfast be over she walk out by herself, and wander about
the village of Allenham, indulge the recollection of past enjoyment
and cry over the present reverse for the chief of the morning.
the evening pass off in the equal indulgence of feeling. she play
over every favourite song that she have be use to play to Willoughby,
every air in which their voice have be oftenest join, and sit at
the instrument gaze on every line of music that he have write out
for she, till her heart be so heavy that no farth sadness could be
gain; and this nourishment of grief be every day apply. she spend
whole hour at the pianoforte alternately sing and cry; her voice
often totally suspend by her tear. in book too, as well as in
music, she court the misery which a contrast between the past and
present be certain of give. she read nothing but what they have be
use to read together.
such violence of affliction indeed could not be support for ever; it
sink within a few day into a calm melancholy; but these employment,
to which she daily recur, her solitary walk and silent meditation,
still produce occasional effusion of sorrow as lively as ever.
no letter from Willoughby come; and none seem expect by Marianne.
her mother be surprised, and Elinor again become uneasy. but Mrs.
Dashwood could find explanation whenever she want they, which at
least satisfied herself.
"remember, Elinor," say she, "how very often Sir John fetch our
letter himself from the post, and carry they to it. we have already
agree that secrecy may be necessary, and we must acknowledge that it
could not be maintain if their correspondence be to pass through
Sir John's hand."
Elinor could not deny the truth of this, and she try to find in it a
motive sufficient for their silence. but there be one method so
direct, so simple, and in her opinion so eligible of know the real
state of the affair, and of instantly remove all mystery, that she
could not help suggest it to her mother.
"why do you not ask Marianne at once," say she, "whether she be or she
be not engage to Willoughby? from you, her mother, and so kind, so
indulgent a mother, the question could not give offence. it would be
the natural result of your affection for she. she use to be all
unreserve, and to you more especially."
"I would not ask such a question for the world. suppose it possible
that they be not engage, what distress would not such an enquiry
inflict! at any rate it would be most ungenerous. I should never
deserve her confidence again, after force from she a confession of
what be mean at present to be unacknowledge to any one. I know
Marianne's heart: I know that she dearly love I, and that I shall not
be the last to whom the affair be make known, when circumstance make
the revealment of it eligible. I would not attempt to force the
confidence of any one; of a child much less; because a sense of duty
would prevent the denial which her wish might direct."
Elinor think this generosity overstrain, consider her sister's
youth, and urge the matter far, but in vain; common sense, common
care, common prudence, be all sink in Mrs. Dashwood's romantic
delicacy.
it be several day before Willoughby's name be mention before
Marianne by any of her family; Sir John and Mrs. Jennings, indeed, be
not so nice; their witticism add pain to many a painful hour;--but
one evening, Mrs. Dashwood, accidentally take up a volume of
Shakespeare, exclaim,
"we have never finish Hamlet, Marianne; our dear Willoughby go away
before we could get through it. we will put it by, that when he come
again...but it may be month, perhaps, before that happen."
"month!" cry Marianne, with strong surprise. "no--nor many week."
Mrs. Dashwood be sorry for what she have say; but it give Elinor
pleasure, as it produce a reply from Marianne so expressive of
confidence in Willoughby and knowledge of his intention.
one morning, about a week after his leave the country, Marianne be
prevail on to join her sister in their usual walk, instead of
wander away by herself. Hitherto she have carefully avoid every
companion in her ramble. if her sister intend to walk on the
down, she directly steal away towards the lane; if they talk of the
valley, she be as speedy in climb the hill, and could never be
find when the other set off. but at length she be secure by the
exertion of Elinor, who greatly disapprove such continual seclusion.
they walk along the road through the valley, and chiefly in silence,
for Marianne's MIND could not be control, and Elinor, satisfied with
gain one point, would not then attempt more. beyond the entrance of
the valley, where the country, though still rich, be less wild and
more open, a long stretch of the road which they have travel on first
come to Barton, lie before they; and on reach that point, they
stop to look around they, and examine a prospect which form the
distance of their view from the cottage, from a spot which they have
never happen to reach in any of their walk before.
amongst the object in the scene, they soon discover an animate one;
it be a man on horseback riding towards they. in a few minute they
could distinguish he to be a gentleman; and in a moment afterwards
Marianne rapturously exclaim,
"it be he; it be indeed;--i know it is!"--and be hasten to meet
he, when Elinor cry out,
"indeed, Marianne, I think you be mistaken. it be not Willoughby.
the person be not tall enough for he, and have not his air."
"he have, he have," cry Marianne, "I be sure he have. his air, his
coat, his horse. I know how soon he would come."
she walk eagerly on as she speak; and Elinor, to screen Marianne from
particularity, as she feel almost certain of its not be Willoughby,
quicken her pace and keep up with she. they be soon within thirty
yard of the gentleman. Marianne look again; her heart sink within
she; and abruptly turn round, she be hurry back, when the voice
of both her sister be raise to detain she; a third, almost as well
know as Willoughby's, join they in beg she to stop, and she
turn round with surprise to see and welcome Edward Ferrars.
he be the only person in the world who could at that moment be
forgive for not be Willoughby; the only one who could have gain a
smile from she; but she disperse her tear to smile on HIM, and in her
sister's happiness forget for a time her own disappointment.
he dismount, and give his horse to his servant, walk back with
they to Barton, whither he be purposely come to visit they.
he be welcome by they all with great cordiality, but especially by
Marianne, who show more warmth of regard in her reception of he than
even Elinor herself. to Marianne, indeed, the meeting between Edward
and her sister be but a continuation of that unaccountable coldness
which she have often observe at Norland in their mutual behaviour. on
Edward's side, more particularly, there be a deficiency of all that a
lover ought to look and say on such an occasion. he be confused,
seem scarcely sensible of pleasure in see they, look neither
rapturous nor gay, say little but what be force from he by
question, and distinguish Elinor by no mark of affection. Marianne
see and listen with increase surprise. she begin almost to feel a
dislike of Edward; and it end, as every feeling must end with she, by
carry back her thought to Willoughby, whose manner form a
contrast sufficiently strike to those of his brother elect.
after a short silence which succeed the first surprise and enquiry
of meeting, Marianne ask Edward if he come directly from London. no,
he have be in Devonshire a fortnight.
"a fortnight!" she repeat, surprised at his be so long in the same
county with Elinor without see she before.
he look rather distressed as he add, that he have be stay with
some friend near Plymouth.
"have you be lately in Sussex?" say Elinor.
"I be at Norland about a month ago."
"and how do dear, dear Norland look?" cry Marianne.
"dear, dear Norland," say Elinor, "probably look much as it always
do at this time of the year. the wood and walk thickly cover
with dead leaf."
"oh," cry Marianne, "with what transporting sensation have I formerly
see they fall! how have I delight, as I walk, to see they drive
in shower about I by the wind! what feeling have they, the season,
the air altogether inspire! now there be no one to regard they. they
be see only as a nuisance, sweep hastily off, and drive as much as
possible from the sight."
"it be not every one," say Elinor, "who have your passion for dead
leaf."
"no; my feeling be not often share, not often understand. but
sometimes they be."--As she say this, she sink into a reverie for a
few moments;--but rouse herself again, "now, Edward," say she,
call his attention to the prospect, "here be Barton valley. look up
to it, and be tranquil if you can. look at those hill! do you ever
see their equal? to the left be Barton park, amongst those wood and
plantation. you may see the end of the house. and there, beneath
that farth hill, which rise with such grandeur, be our cottage."
"it be a beautiful country," he reply; "but these bottom must be
dirty in winter."
"how can you think of dirt, with such object before you?"
"because," reply he, smile, "among the rest of the object before
I, I see a very dirty lane."
"how strange!" say Marianne to herself as she walk on.
"have you an agreeable neighbourhood here? be the Middletons pleasant
people?"
"no, not all," answer Marianne; "we could not be more unfortunately
situate."
"Marianne," cry her sister, "how can you say so? how can you be so
unjust? they be a very respectable family, Mr. Ferrars; and towards
we have behave in the friendly manner. have you forget, Marianne,
how many pleasant day we have owe to they?"
"no," say Marianne, in a low voice, "nor how many painful moment."
Elinor take no notice of this; and direct her attention to their
visitor, endeavour to support something like discourse with he, by
talk of their present residence, its convenience, &c. extorting
from he occasional question and remark. his coldness and reserve
mortify she severely; she be vex and half angry; but resolve to
regulate her behaviour to he by the past rather than the present, she
avoid every appearance of resentment or displeasure, and treat he
as she think he ought to be treat from the family connection.
CHAPTER 17
Mrs. Dashwood be surprised only for a moment at see he; for his
come to Barton be, in her opinion, of all thing the most natural.
her joy and expression of regard long outlive her wonder. he receive
the kind welcome from she; and shyness, coldness, reserve could not
stand against such a reception. they have begin to fail he before he
enter the house, and they be quite overcome by the captivating
manner of Mrs. Dashwood. indeed a man could not very well be in love
with either of her daughter, without extend the passion to she; and
Elinor have the satisfaction of see he soon become more like
himself. his affection seem to reanimate towards they all, and his
interest in their welfare again become perceptible. he be not in
spirit, however; he praise their house, admire its prospect, be
attentive, and kind; but still he be not in spirit. the whole family
perceive it, and Mrs. Dashwood, attribute it to some want of
liberality in his mother, sit down to table indignant against all
selfish parent.
"what be Mrs. Ferrars's view for you at present, Edward?" say she,
when dinner be over and they have draw round the fire; "be you still
to be a great orator in spite of yourself?"
"no. I hope my mother be now convinced that I have no more talent than
inclination for a public life!"
"but how be your fame to be establish? for famous you must be to
satisfy all your family; and with no inclination for expense, no
affection for stranger, no profession, and no assurance, you may find
it a difficult matter."
"I shall not attempt it. I have no wish to be distinguish; and have
every reason to hope I never shall. thank Heaven! I cannot be force
into genius and eloquence."
"you have no ambition, I well know. your wish be all moderate."
"as moderate as those of the rest of the world, I believe. I wish as
well as every body else to be perfectly happy; but, like every body
else it must be in my own way. greatness will not make I so."
"strange that it would!" cry Marianne. "what have wealth or grandeur
to do with happiness?"
"Grandeur have but little," say Elinor, "but wealth have much to do with
it."
"Elinor, for shame!" say Marianne, "money can only give happiness
where there be nothing else to give it. beyond a competence, it can
afford no real satisfaction, as far as mere self be concern."
"perhaps," say Elinor, smile, "we may come to the same point. your
competence and my wealth be very much alike, I dare say; and without
they, as the world go now, we shall both agree that every kind of
external comfort must be want. your idea be only more noble than
mine. come, what be your competence?"
"about eighteen hundred or two thousand a year; not more than that."
Elinor laugh. "two thousand a year! one be my wealth! I guess how
it would end."
"and yet two thousand a-year be a very moderate income," say Marianne.
"a family cannot well be maintain on a small. I be sure I be not
extravagant in my demand. a proper establishment of servant, a
carriage, perhaps two, and hunter, cannot be support on less."
Elinor smile again, to hear her sister describe so accurately their
future expense at Combe Magna.
"hunter!" repeat Edward--"but why must you have hunter? every body
do not hunt."
Marianne colour as she reply, "but most people do."
"I wish," say Margaret, strike out a novel thought, "that somebody
would give we all a large fortune apiece!"
"oh that they would!" cry Marianne, her eye sparkle with
animation, and her cheek glow with the delight of such imaginary
happiness.
"we be all unanimous in that wish, I suppose," say Elinor, "in spite
of the insufficiency of wealth."
"oh dear!" cry Margaret, "how happy I should be! I wonder what I
should do with it!"
Marianne look as if she have no doubt on that point.
"I should be puzzle to spend so large a fortune myself," say Mrs.
Dashwood, "if my child be all to be rich without my help."
"you must begin your improvement on this house," observe Elinor, "and
your difficulty will soon vanish."
"what magnificent order would travel from this family to London," say
Edward, "in such an event! what a happy day for bookseller,
music-seller, and print-shop! you, Miss Dashwood, would give a
general commission for every new print of merit to be send you--and as
for Marianne, I know her greatness of soul, there would not be music
enough in London to content she. and books!--Thomson, Cowper,
Scott--she would buy they all over and over again: she would buy up
every copy, I believe, to prevent their fall into unworthy hand;
and she would have every book that tell she how to admire an old
twisted tree. should not you, Marianne? forgive I, if I be very
saucy. but I be willing to shew you that I have not forget our old
dispute."
"I love to be remind of the past, Edward--whether it be melancholy or
gay, I love to recall it--and you will never offend I by talk of
former time. you be very right in suppose how my money would be
spend--some of it, at least--my loose cash would certainly be employ
in improve my collection of music and book."
"and the bulk of your fortune would be lay out in annuity on the
author or their heir."
"no, Edward, I should have something else to do with it."
"perhaps, then, you would bestow it as a reward on that person who
write the able defence of your favourite maxim, that no one can ever
be in love more than once in their life--your opinion on that point be
unchanged, I presume?"
"undoubtedly. at my time of life opinion be tolerably fix. it be
not likely that I should now see or hear any thing to change they."
"Marianne be as steadfast as ever, you see," say Elinor, "she be not
at all alter."
"she be only grow a little more grave than she be."
"Nay, Edward," say Marianne, "you need not reproach I. you be not
very gay yourself."
"why should you think so!" reply he, with a sigh. "but gaiety never
be a part of MY character."
"nor do I think it a part of Marianne's," say Elinor; "I should hardly
call she a lively girl--she be very earnest, very eager in all she
do--sometimes talk a great deal and always with animation--but she
be not often really merry."
"I believe you be right," he reply, "and yet I have always set she
down as a lively girl."
"I have frequently detect myself in such kind of mistake," say
Elinor, "in a total misapprehension of character in some point or
other: fancy people so much more gay or grave, or ingenious or
stupid than they really be, and I can hardly tell why or in what the
deception originate. sometimes one be guide by what they say of
themselves, and very frequently by what other people say of they,
without give oneself time to deliberate and judge."
"but I think it be right, Elinor," say Marianne, "to be guide
wholly by the opinion of other people. I think our judgment be
give we merely to be subservient to those of neighbour. this have
always be your doctrine, I be sure."
"no, Marianne, never. my doctrine have never aim at the subjection of
the understanding. all I have ever attempt to influence have be the
behaviour. you must not confound my meaning. I be guilty, I confess,
of have often wish you to treat our acquaintance in general with
great attention; but when have I advise you to adopt their
sentiment or to conform to their judgment in serious matter?"
"you have not be able to bring your sister over to your plan of
general civility," say Edward to Elinor. "do you gain no ground?"
"quite the contrary," reply Elinor, look expressively at Marianne.
"my judgment," he return, "be all on your side of the question; but I
be afraid my practice be much more on your sister's. I never wish to
offend, but I be so foolishly shy, that I often seem negligent, when I
be only keep back by my natural awkwardness. I have frequently think
that I must have be intend by nature to be fond of low company, I
be so little at my ease among stranger of gentility!"
"Marianne have not shyness to excuse any inattention of her," say
Elinor.
"she know her own worth too well for false shame," reply Edward.
"Shyness be only the effect of a sense of inferiority in some way or
other. if I could persuade myself that my manner be perfectly easy
and graceful, I should not be shy."
"but you would still be reserve," say Marianne, "and that be bad."
Edward started--"Reserved! be I reserve, Marianne?"
"yes, very."
"I do not understand you," reply he, colour. "Reserved!--how, in
what manner? what be I to tell you? what can you suppose?"
Elinor look surprised at his emotion; but try to laugh off the
subject, she say to he, "do not you know my sister well enough to
understand what she mean? do not you know she call every one
reserve who do not talk as fast, and admire what she admire as
rapturously as herself?"
Edward make no answer. his gravity and thoughtfulness return on he
in their full extent--and he sit for some time silent and dull.
CHAPTER 18
Elinor see, with great uneasiness the low spirit of her friend. his
visit afford she but a very partial satisfaction, while his own
enjoyment in it appear so imperfect. it be evident that he be
unhappy; she wish it be equally evident that he still distinguish
she by the same affection which once she have feel no doubt of
inspire; but hitherto the continuance of his preference seem very
uncertain; and the reservedness of his manner towards her contradict
one moment what a more animate look have intimate the precede one.
he join she and Marianne in the breakfast-room the next morning
before the other be down; and Marianne, who be always eager to
promote their happiness as far as she could, soon leave they to
themselves. but before she be half way upstairs she hear the parlour
door open, and, turn round, be astonish to see Edward himself
come out.
"I be go into the village to see my horse," say he, "as you be
not yet ready for breakfast; I shall be back again presently."
***
Edward return to they with fresh admiration of the surround
country; in his walk to the village, he have see many part of the
valley to advantage; and the village itself, in a much high situation
than the cottage, afford a general view of the whole, which have
exceedingly pleased he. this be a subject which ensure Marianne's
attention, and she be begin to describe her own admiration of
these scene, and to question he more minutely on the object that have
particularly strike he, when Edward interrupt she by say, "you
must not enquire too far, Marianne--remember I have no knowledge in the
picturesque, and I shall offend you by my ignorance and want of taste
if we come to particular. I shall call hill steep, which ought to be
bold; surface strange and uncouth, which ought to be irregular and
rugge; and distant object out of sight, which ought only to be
indistinct through the soft medium of a hazy atmosphere. you must be
satisfied with such admiration as I can honestly give. I call it a
very fine country--the hill be steep, the wood seem full of fine
timber, and the valley look comfortable and snug--with rich meadow
and several neat farm house scatter here and there. it exactly
answer my idea of a fine country, because it unite beauty with
utility--and I dare say it be a picturesque one too, because you admire
it; I can easily believe it to be full of rock and promontory, grey
moss and brush wood, but these be all lose on I. I know nothing of
the picturesque."
"I be afraid it be but too true," say Marianne; "but why should you
boast of it?"
"I suspect," say Elinor, "that to avoid one kind of affectation,
Edward here fall into another. because he believe many people
pretend to more admiration of the beauty of nature than they really
feel, and be disgust with such pretension, he affect great
indifference and less discrimination in view they himself than he
possess. he be fastidious and will have an affectation of his own."
"it be very true," say Marianne, "that admiration of landscape scenery
be become a mere jargon. every body pretend to feel and try to
describe with the taste and elegance of he who first define what
picturesque beauty be. I det jargon of every kind, and sometimes I
have keep my feeling to myself, because I could find no language to
describe they in but what be wear and hackneye out of all sense and
meaning."
"I be convince," say Edward, "that you really feel all the delight in
a fine prospect which you profess to feel. but, in return, your sister
must allow I to feel no more than I profess. I like a fine prospect,
but not on picturesque principle. I do not like crooked, twisted,
blasted tree. I admire they much more if they be tall, straight, and
flourish. I do not like ruin, tattered cottage. I be not fond
of nettle or thistle, or heath blossom. I have more pleasure in a
snug farm-house than a watch-tower--and a troop of tidy, happy village
please I well than the fine banditti in the world."
Marianne look with amazement at Edward, with compassion at her
sister. Elinor only laugh.
the subject be continue no far; and Marianne remain
thoughtfully silent, till a new object suddenly engage her attention.
she be sit by Edward, and in take his tea from Mrs. Dashwood,
his hand pass so directly before she, as to make a ring, with a plait
of hair in the centre, very conspicuous on one of his finger.
"I never see you wear a ring before, Edward," she cry. "be that
Fanny's hair? I remember she promising to give you some. but I should
have think her hair have be darker."
Marianne speak inconsiderately what she really feel--but when she see
how much she have pain Edward, her own vexation at her want of thought
could not be surpass by his. he colour very deeply, and give a
momentary glance at Elinor, reply, "yes; it be my sister's hair. the
setting always cast a different shade on it, you know."
Elinor have meet his eye, and look conscious likewise. that the hair
be her own, she instantaneously feel as well satisfied as Marianne;
the only difference in their conclusion be, that what Marianne
consider as a free gift from her sister, Elinor be conscious must
have be procure by some theft or contrivance unknown to herself.
she be not in a humour, however, to regard it as an affront, and
affect to take no notice of what pass, by instantly talk of
something else, she internally resolve henceforward to catch every
opportunity of eye the hair and of satisfy herself, beyond all
doubt, that it be exactly the shade of her own.
Edward's embarrassment last some time, and it end in an absence of
mind still more settled. he be particularly grave the whole morning.
Marianne severely censure herself for what she have say; but her own
forgiveness might have be more speedy, have she know how little
offence it have give her sister.
before the middle of the day, they be visit by Sir John and Mrs.
Jennings, who, have hear of the arrival of a gentleman at the
cottage, come to take a survey of the guest. with the assistance of
his mother-in-law, Sir John be not long in discover that the name
of ferrar begin with an F. and this prepare a future mine of raillery
against the devoted Elinor, which nothing but the newness of their
acquaintance with Edward could have prevent from be immediately
sprung. but, as it be, she only learn, from some very significant
look, how far their penetration, found on Margaret's instruction,
extend.
Sir John never come to the Dashwoods without either invite they to
dine at the park the next day, or to drink tea with they that evening.
on the present occasion, for the well entertainment of their visitor,
towards whose amusement he feel himself bind to contribute, he wish
to engage they for both.
"you must drink tea with we to night," say he, "for we shall be quite
alone--and tomorrow you must absolutely dine with we, for we shall be a
large party."
Mrs. Jennings enforce the necessity. "and who know but you may raise
a dance," say she. "and that will tempt you, Miss Marianne."
"a dance!" cry Marianne. "Impossible! who be to dance?"
"who! why yourself, and the Careys, and whitaker to be sure.--what!
you think nobody could dance because a certain person that shall be
nameless be go!"
"I wish with all my soul," cry Sir John, "that Willoughby be among
we again."
this, and Marianne's blushing, give new suspicion to Edward. "and who
be Willoughby?" say he, in a low voice, to Miss Dashwood, by whom he
be sit.
she give he a brief reply. Marianne's countenance be more
communicative. Edward see enough to comprehend, not only the meaning
of other, but such of Marianne's expression as have puzzle he
before; and when their visitor leave they, he go immediately round
she, and say, in a whisper, "I have be guess. shall I tell you
my guess?"
"what do you mean?"
"shall I tell you."
"certainly."
"well then; I guess that Mr. Willoughby hunt."
Marianne be surprised and confused, yet she could not help smile at
the quiet archness of his manner, and after a moment's silence, say,
"oh, Edward! how can you?--But the time will come I hope...I be sure
you will like he."
"I do not doubt it," reply he, rather astonish at her earnestness
and warmth; for have he not imagine it to be a joke for the good of her
acquaintance in general, found only on a something or a nothing
between Mr. Willoughby and herself, he would not have venture to
mention it.
CHAPTER 19
Edward remain a week at the cottage; he be earnestly press by Mrs.
Dashwood to stay long; but, as if he be bent only on
self-mortification, he seem resolve to be go when his enjoyment
among his friend be at the height. his spirit, during the last two
or three day, though still very unequal, be greatly improve--he
grow more and more partial to the house and environ--never speak of
go away without a sigh--declare his time to be wholly
disengage--even doubted to what place he should go when he leave
they--but still, go he must. never have any week pass so quickly--he
could hardly believe it to be go. he say so repeatedly; other
thing he say too, which mark the turn of his feeling and give the
lie to his action. he have no pleasure at Norland; he detest be
in town; but either to Norland or London, he must go. he value their
kindness beyond any thing, and his great happiness be in be with
they. yet, he must leave they at the end of a week, in spite of their
wish and his own, and without any restraint on his time.
Elinor place all that be astonishing in this way of act to his
mother's account; and it be happy for she that he have a mother whose
character be so imperfectly know to she, as to be the general excuse
for every thing strange on the part of her son. disappoint, however,
and vex as she be, and sometimes displeased with his uncertain
behaviour to herself, she be very well disposed on the whole to regard
his action with all the candid allowance and generous qualification,
which have be rather more painfully extort from she, for
Willoughby's service, by her mother. his want of spirit, of openness,
and of consistency, be most usually attribute to his want of
independence, and his well knowledge of Mrs. Ferrars's disposition
and design. the shortness of his visit, the steadiness of his purpose
in leave they, originate in the same fetter inclination, the same
inevitable necessity of temporize with his mother. the old
well-establish grievance of duty against will, parent against child,
be the cause of all. she would have be glad to know when these
difficulty be to cease, this opposition be to yield,--when Mrs.
Ferrars would be reform, and her son be at liberty to be happy. but
from such vain wish she be force to turn for comfort to the renewal
of her confidence in Edward's affection, to the remembrance of every
mark of regard in look or word which fall from he while at Barton, and
above all to that flattering proof of it which he constantly wear round
his finger.
"I think, Edward," say Mrs. Dashwood, as they be at breakfast the
last morning, "you would be a happy man if you have any profession to
engage your time and give an interest to your plan and action. some
inconvenience to your friend, indeed, might result from it--you would
not be able to give they so much of your time. but (with a smile) you
would be materially benefit in one particular at least--you would
know where to go when you leave they."
"I do assure you," he reply, "that I have long think on this point,
as you think now. it have be, and be, and probably will always be a
heavy misfortune to I, that I have have no necessary business to engage
I, no profession to give I employment, or afford I any thing like
independence. but unfortunately my own nicety, and the nicety of my
friend, have make I what I be, an idle, helpless be. we never
could agree in our choice of a profession. I always prefer the
church, as I still do. but that be not smart enough for my family.
they recommend the army. that be a great deal too smart for I.
the law be allow to be genteel enough; many young man, who have
chamber in the Temple, make a very good appearance in the first
circle, and drive about town in very know gig. but I have no
inclination for the law, even in this less abstruse study of it, which
my family approve. as for the navy, it have fashion on its side, but I
be too old when the subject be first start to enter it--and, at
length, as there be no necessity for my have any profession at all,
as I might be as dashing and expensive without a red coat on my back as
with one, idleness be pronounce on the whole to be most advantageous
and honourable, and a young man of eighteen be not in general so
earnestly bent on be busy as to resist the solicitation of his
friend to do nothing. I be therefore enter at Oxford and have be
properly idle ever since."
"the consequence of which, I suppose, will be," say Mrs. Dashwood,
"since leisure have not promote your own happiness, that your son will
be bring up to as many pursuit, employment, profession, and trade
as Columella's."
"they will be bring up," say he, in a serious accent, "to be as
unlike myself as be possible. in feeling, in action, in condition, in
every thing."
"come, come; this be all an effusion of immediate want of spirit,
Edward. you be in a melancholy humour, and fancy that any one unlike
yourself must be happy. but remember that the pain of parting from
friend will be feel by every body at time, whatever be their
education or state. know your own happiness. you want nothing but
patience--or give it a more fascinating name, call it hope. your
mother will secure to you, in time, that independence you be so
anxious for; it be her duty, and it will, it must ere long become her
happiness to prevent your whole youth from be waste in discontent.
how much may not a few month do?"
"I think," reply Edward, "that I may defy many month to produce any
good to I."
this despond turn of mind, though it could not be communicate to
Mrs. Dashwood, give additional pain to they all in the parting, which
shortly take place, and leave an uncomfortable impression on Elinor's
feeling especially, which require some trouble and time to subdue.
but as it be her determination to subdue it, and to prevent herself
from appear to suffer more than what all her family suffer on his
go away, she do not adopt the method so judiciously employ by
Marianne, on a similar occasion, to augment and fix her sorrow, by
seek silence, solitude and idleness. their mean be as different
as their object, and equally suited to the advancement of each.
Elinor sit down to her drawing-table as soon as he be out of the
house, busily employ herself the whole day, neither seek nor
avoid the mention of his name, appear to interest herself almost as
much as ever in the general concern of the family, and if, by this
conduct, she do not lessen her own grief, it be at least prevent
from unnecessary increase, and her mother and sister be spar much
solicitude on her account.
such behaviour as this, so exactly the reverse of her own, appear no
more meritorious to Marianne, than her own have seem faulty to she.
the business of self-command she settle very easily;--with strong
affection it be impossible, with calm one it could have no merit.
that her sister's affection be calm, she dare not deny, though she
blush to acknowledge it; and of the strength of her own, she give a
very striking proof, by still love and respect that sister, in
spite of this mortifying conviction.
without shut herself up from her family, or leave the house in
determined solitude to avoid they, or lie awake the whole night to
indulge meditation, Elinor find every day afford her leisure enough
to think of Edward, and of Edward's behaviour, in every possible
variety which the different state of her spirit at different time
could produce,--with tenderness, pity, approbation, censure, and doubt.
there be moment in abundance, when, if not by the absence of her
mother and sister, at least by the nature of their employment,
conversation be forbid among they, and every effect of solitude be
produce. her mind be inevitably at liberty; her thought could not
be chain elsewhere; and the past and the future, on a subject so
interesting, must be before she, must force her attention, and engross
her memory, her reflection, and her fancy.
from a reverie of this kind, as she sit at her drawing-table, she be
rouse one morning, soon after Edward's leave they, by the arrival of
company. she happen to be quite alone. the closing of the little
gate, at the entrance of the green court in front of the house, draw
her eye to the window, and she see a large party walk up to the
door. amongst they be Sir John and Lady Middleton and Mrs. Jennings,
but there be two other, a gentleman and lady, who be quite unknown
to she. she be sit near the window, and as soon as Sir John
perceive she, he leave the rest of the party to the ceremony of
knock at the door, and step across the turf, oblige she to open
the casement to speak to he, though the space be so short between the
door and the window, as to make it hardly possible to speak at one
without be hear at the other.
"well," say he, "we have bring you some stranger. how do you like
they?"
"Hush! they will hear you."
"never mind if they do. it be only the Palmers. Charlotte be very
pretty, I can tell you. you may see she if you look this way."
as Elinor be certain of see she in a couple of minute, without
take that liberty, she beg to be excuse.
"where be Marianne? have she run away because we be come? I see she
instrument be open."
"she be walk, I believe."
they be now join by Mrs. Jennings, who have not patience enough to
wait till the door be open before she tell she story. she come
halloo to the window, "how do you do, my dear? how do Mrs.
Dashwood do? and where be your sister? what! all alone! you will be
glad of a little company to sit with you. I have bring my other son
and daughter to see you. only think of their come so suddenly! I
think I hear a carriage last night, while we be drink our tea,
but it never enter my head that it could be they. I think of
nothing but whether it might not be Colonel Brandon come back again; so
I say to Sir John, I do think I hear a carriage; perhaps it be Colonel
Brandon come back again"--
Elinor be oblige to turn from she, in the middle of her story, to
receive the rest of the party; Lady Middleton introduce the two
stranger; Mrs. Dashwood and Margaret come down stair at the same
time, and they all sit down to look at one another, while Mrs. Jennings
continue her story as she walk through the passage into the parlour,
attend by Sir John.
Mrs. Palmer be several year young than Lady Middleton, and totally
unlike she in every respect. she be short and plump, have a very
pretty face, and the fine expression of good humour in it that could
possibly be. her manner be by no mean so elegant as her sister's,
but they be much more prepossessing. she come in with a smile,
smile all the time of her visit, except when she laugh, and smile
when she go away. her husband be a grave look young man of five
or six and twenty, with an air of more fashion and sense than his wife,
but of less willingness to please or be please. he enter the room
with a look of self-consequence, slightly bow to the lady, without
speak a word, and, after briefly survey they and their
apartment, take up a newspaper from the table, and continue to read
it as long as he staid.
Mrs. Palmer, on the contrary, who be strongly endow by nature with a
turn for be uniformly civil and happy, be hardly seat before her
admiration of the parlour and every thing in it burst forth.
"well! what a delightful room this be! I never see anything so
charming! only think, Mamma, how it be improve since I be here last!
I always think it such a sweet place, ma'am! (turn to Mrs.
Dashwood) but you have make it so charming! only look, sister, how
delightful every thing be! how I should like such a house for myself!
should not you, Mr. Palmer?"
Mr. Palmer make she no answer, and do not even raise his eye from the
newspaper.
"Mr. Palmer do not hear I," say she, laugh; "he never do
sometimes. it be so ridiculous!"
this be quite a new idea to Mrs. Dashwood; she have never be use to
find wit in the inattention of any one, and could not help look with
surprise at they both.
Mrs. Jennings, in the meantime, talk on as loud as she could, and
continue her account of their surprise, the evening before, on see
their friend, without cease till every thing be tell. Mrs. Palmer
laugh heartily at the recollection of their astonishment, and every
body agree, two or three time over, that it have be quite an
agreeable surprise.
"you may believe how glad we all be to see they," add Mrs.
Jennings, lean forward towards Elinor, and speak in a low voice
as if she mean to be hear by no one else, though they be seat on
different side of the room; "but, however, I cannot help wish they
have not travel quite so fast, nor make such a long journey of it,
for they come all round by London upon account of some business, for
you know (nod significantly and point to her daughter) it be
wrong in her situation. I want she to stay at home and rest this
morning, but she would come with we; she long so much to see you all!"
Mrs. Palmer laugh, and say it would not do she any harm.
"she expect to be confine in February," continue Mrs. Jennings.
Lady Middleton could no long endure such a conversation, and
therefore exert herself to ask Mr. Palmer if there be any news in
the paper.
"no, none at all," he reply, and read on.
"here come Marianne," cry Sir John. "now, Palmer, you shall see a
monstrous pretty girl."
he immediately go into the passage, open the front door, and
usher she in himself. Mrs. Jennings ask she, as soon as she
appear, if she have not be to Allenham; and Mrs. Palmer laugh so
heartily at the question, as to show she understand it. Mr. Palmer
look up on she enter the room, star at she some minute, and
then return to his newspaper. Mrs. Palmer's eye be now catch by
the drawing which hang round the room. she get up to examine they.
"oh! dear, how beautiful these be! well! how delightful! do but
look, mama, how sweet! I declare they be quite charming; I could look
at they for ever." and then sit down again, she very soon forget
that there be any such thing in the room.
when Lady Middleton rise to go away, Mr. Palmer rise also, lay down
the newspaper, stretch himself and look at they all around.
"my love, have you be asleep?" say his wife, laugh.
he make she no answer; and only observe, after again examine the
room, that it be very low pitch, and that the ceiling be crook.
he then make his bow, and depart with the rest.
Sir John have be very urgent with they all to spend the next day at
the park. Mrs. Dashwood, who do not chuse to dine with they oftener
than they din at the cottage, absolutely refuse on her own account;
her daughter might do as they please. but they have no curiosity to
see how Mr. and Mrs. Palmer eat their dinner, and no expectation of
pleasure from they in any other way. they attempt, therefore,
likewise, to excuse themselves; the weather be uncertain, and not
likely to be good. but Sir John would not be satisfy--the carriage
should be send for they and they must come. Lady Middleton too, though
she do not press their mother, press they. Mrs. Jennings and Mrs.
Palmer join their entreaty, all seem equally anxious to avoid a
family party; and the young lady be oblige to yield.
"why should they ask we?" say Marianne, as soon as they be go.
"the rent of this cottage be say to be low; but we have it on very
hard term, if we be to dine at the park whenever any one be stay
either with they, or with we."
"they mean no less to be civil and kind to we now," say Elinor, "by
these frequent invitation, than by those which we receive from they a
few week ago. the alteration be not in they, if their party be
grow tedious and dull. we must look for the change elsewhere."
CHAPTER 20
as the Miss Dashwoods enter the drawing-room of the park the next
day, at one door, Mrs. Palmer come run in at the other, look as
good humour and merry as before. she take they all most
affectionately by the hand, and express great delight in see they
again.
"I be so glad to see you!" say she, seat herself between Elinor and
Marianne, "for it be so bad a day I be afraid you might not come,
which would be a shocking thing, as we go away again tomorrow. we must
go, for the Westons come to we next week you know. it be quite a
sudden thing our come at all, and I know nothing of it till the
carriage be come to the door, and then Mr. Palmer ask I if I
would go with he to Barton. he be so droll! he never tell I any
thing! I be so sorry we cannot stay long; however we shall meet again
in town very soon, I hope."
they be oblige to put an end to such an expectation.
"not go to town!" cry Mrs. Palmer, with a laugh, "I shall be quite
disappointed if you do not. I could get the nice house in world for
you, next door to ours, in Hanover-square. you must come, indeed. I
be sure I shall be very happy to chaperon you at any time till I be
confine, if Mrs. Dashwood should not like to go into public."
they thank she; but be oblige to resist all her entreaty.
"oh, my love," cry Mrs. Palmer to her husband, who just then enter
the room--"you must help I to persuade the Miss Dashwoods to go to
town this winter."
her love make no answer; and after slightly bow to the lady, begin
complain of the weather.
"how horrid all this be!" say he. "such weather make every thing and
every body disgust. Dullness be as much produce within door as
without, by rain. it make one det all one's acquaintance. what
the devil do Sir John mean by not have a billiard room in his
house? how few people know what comfort be! Sir John be as stupid as
the weather."
the rest of the company soon dropt in.
"I be afraid, Miss Marianne," say Sir John, "you have not be able to
take your usual walk to Allenham today."
Marianne look very grave and say nothing.
"oh, donot be so sly before we," say Mrs. Palmer; "for we know all
about it, I assure you; and I admire your taste very much, for I think
he be extremely handsome. we do not live a great way from he in the
country, you know. not above ten mile, I dare say."
"much nearer thirty," say her husband.
"ah, well! there be not much difference. I never be at his house; but
they say it be a sweet pretty place."
"as vile a spot as I ever see in my life," say Mr. Palmer.
Marianne remain perfectly silent, though her countenance betray her
interest in what be say.
"be it very ugly?" continue Mrs. Palmer--"then it must be some other
place that be so pretty I suppose."
when they be seat in the dining room, Sir John observe with regret
that they be only eight all together.
"my dear," say he to his lady, "it be very provoking that we should be
so few. why do not you ask the Gilberts to come to we today?"
"do not I tell you, Sir John, when you speak to I about it before,
that it could not be do? they din with we last."
"you and I, Sir John," say Mrs. Jennings, "should not stand upon such
ceremony."
"then you would be very ill-bred," cry Mr. Palmer.
"my love you contradict every body," say his wife with her usual
laugh. "do you know that you be quite rude?"
"I do not know I contradict any body in call your mother
ill-breed."
"ay, you may abuse I as you please," say the good-natured old lady,
"you have take Charlotte off my hand, and cannot give she back again.
so there I have the whip hand of you."
Charlotte laugh heartily to think that her husband could not get rid
of she; and exultingly say, she do not care how cross he be to she,
as they must live together. it be impossible for any one to be more
thoroughly good-nature, or more determined to be happy than Mrs.
Palmer. the studied indifference, insolence, and discontent of her
husband give she no pain; and when he scold or abuse she, she be
highly divert.
"Mr. Palmer be so droll!" say she, in a whisper, to Elinor. "he be
always out of humour."
Elinor be not inclined, after a little observation, to give he credit
for be so genuinely and unaffectedly ill-natured or ill-breed as he
wish to appear. his temper might perhaps be a little sour by
finding, like many other of his sex, that through some unaccountable
bias in favour of beauty, he be the husband of a very silly
woman,--but she know that this kind of blunder be too common for any
sensible man to be lastingly hurt by it.-- it be rather a wish of
distinction, she believe, which produce his contemptuous treatment of
every body, and his general abuse of every thing before he. it be
the desire of appear superior to other people. the motive be too
common to be wonder at; but the mean, however they might succeed by
establish his superiority in ill-breeding, be not likely to attach
any one to he except his wife.
"oh, my dear Miss Dashwood," say Mrs. Palmer soon afterwards, "I have
get such a favour to ask of you and your sister. will you come and
spend some time at Cleveland this Christmas? now, pray do,--and come
while the Westons be with we. you cannot think how happy I shall be!
it will be quite delightful!--my love," apply to her husband, "donot
you long to have the Miss Dashwoods come to Cleveland?"
"certainly," he reply, with a sneer--"i come into Devonshire with no
other view."
"there now,"--said his lady, "you see Mr. Palmer expect you; so you
cannot refuse to come."
they both eagerly and resolutely decline her invitation.
"but indeed you must and shall come. I be sure you will like it of all
thing. the Westons will be with we, and it will be quite delightful.
you cannot think what a sweet place Cleveland be; and we be so gay
now, for Mr. Palmer be always go about the country canvass
against the election; and so many people come to dine with we that I
never see before, it be quite charming! but, poor fellow! it be very
fatigue to he! for he be force to make every body like he."
Elinor could hardly keep her countenance as she assent to the
hardship of such an obligation.
"how charming it will be," say Charlotte, "when he be in
parliament!--won't it? how I shall laugh! it will be so ridiculous to
see all his letter direct to he with an m.p.--but do you know, he
say, he will never frank for I? he declare he willnot. donot you,
Mr. Palmer?"
Mr. Palmer take no notice of she.
"he cannot bear writing, you know," she continued--"he say it be quite
shocking."
"no," say he, "I never say any thing so irrational. donot palm all
your abuse of language upon I."
"there now; you see how droll he be. this be always the way with he!
sometimes he willnot speak to I for half a day together, and then he
come out with something so droll--all about any thing in the world."
she surprise Elinor very much as they return into the drawing-room,
by ask she whether she do not like Mr. Palmer excessively.
"certainly," say Elinor; "he seem very agreeable."
"well--I be so glad you do. I think you would, he be so pleasant;
and Mr. Palmer be excessively pleased with you and your sister I can
tell you, and you cannot think how disappointed he will be if you donot
come to Cleveland.--I cannot imagine why you should object to it."
Elinor be again oblige to decline her invitation; and by change the
subject, put a stop to her entreaty. she think it probable that as
they live in the same county, Mrs. Palmer might be able to give some
more particular account of Willoughby's general character, than could
be gather from the Middletons' partial acquaintance with he; and she
be eager to gain from any one, such a confirmation of his merit as
might remove the possibility of fear from Marianne. she begin by
inquire if they see much of Mr. Willoughby at Cleveland, and whether
they be intimately acquaint with he.
"oh dear, yes; I know he extremely well," reply Mrs. Palmer;--"Not
that I ever speak to he, indeed; but I have see he for ever in town.
somehow or other I never happen to be stay at Barton while he be
at Allenham. Mama see he here once before;--but I be with my uncle
at Weymouth. however, I dare say we should have see a great deal of
he in Somersetshire, if it have not happen very unluckily that we
should never have be in the country together. he be very little at
Combe, I believe; but if he be ever so much there, I do not think Mr.
Palmer would visit he, for he be in the opposition, you know, and
besides it be such a way off. I know why you inquire about he, very
well; your sister be to marry he. I be monstrous glad of it, for then
I shall have she for a neighbour you know."
"upon my word," reply Elinor, "you know much more of the matter than
I do, if you have any reason to expect such a match."
"donot pretend to deny it, because you know it be what every body talk
of. I assure you I hear of it in my way through town."
"my dear Mrs. Palmer!"
"upon my honour I did.--i meet Colonel Brandon Monday morning in
Bond-street, just before we leave town, and he tell I of it directly."
"you surprise I very much. Colonel Brandon tell you of it! surely
you must be mistake. to give such intelligence to a person who could
not be interested in it, even if it be true, be not what I should
expect Colonel Brandon to do."
"but I do assure you it be so, for all that, and I will tell you how
it happen. when we meet he, he turn back and walk with we; and
so we begin talk of my brother and sister, and one thing and
another, and I say to he, 'so, Colonel, there be a new family come to
Barton cottage, I hear, and mama send I word they be very pretty,
and that one of they be go to be married to Mr. Willoughby of Combe
Magna. be it true, pray? for of course you must know, as you have be
in Devonshire so lately.'"
"and what do the Colonel say?"
"oh--he do not say much; but he look as if he know it to be true, so
from that moment I set it down as certain. it will be quite
delightful, I declare! when be it to take place?"
"Mr. Brandon be very well I hope?"
"oh! yes, quite well; and so full of your praise, he do nothing but
say fine thing of you."
"I be flatter by his commendation. he seem an excellent man; and I
think he uncommonly pleasing."
"so do I.--He be such a charming man, that it be quite a pity he should
be so grave and so dull. Mamma say he be in love with your sister
too.-- I assure you it be a great compliment if he be, for he hardly
ever fall in love with any body."
"be Mr. Willoughby much know in your part of Somersetshire?" say
Elinor.
"oh! yes, extremely well; that be, I do not believe many people be
acquaint with he, because Combe Magna be so far off; but they all
think he extremely agreeable I assure you. nobody be more like than
Mr. Willoughby wherever he go, and so you may tell your sister. she
be a monstrous lucky girl to get he, upon my honour; not but that he
be much more lucky in get she, because she be so very handsome and
agreeable, that nothing can be good enough for she. however, I donot
think she hardly at all handsomer than you, I assure you; for I think
you both excessively pretty, and so do Mr. Palmer too I be sure,
though we could not get he to own it last night."
Mrs. Palmer's information respect Willoughby be not very material;
but any testimony in his favour, however small, be pleasing to she.
"I be so glad we be get acquaint at last," continue
Charlotte.--"And now I hope we shall always be great friend. you
cannot think how much I long to see you! it be so delightful that you
should live at the cottage! nothing can be like it, to be sure! and I
be so glad your sister be go to be well married! I hope you will be
a great deal at Combe Magna. it be a sweet place, by all account."
"you have be long acquaint with Colonel Brandon, have not you?"
"yes, a great while; ever since my sister married.-- he be a
particular friend of Sir John's. I believe," she add in a low voice,
"he would have be very glad to have have I, if he could. Sir John
and Lady Middleton wish it very much. but mama do not think the
match good enough for I, otherwise Sir John would have mention it to
the Colonel, and we should have be marry immediately."
"do not Colonel Brandon know of Sir John's proposal to your mother
before it be make? have he never own his affection to yourself?"
"oh, no; but if mama have not object to it, I dare say he would have
like it of all thing. he have not see I then above twice, for it
be before I leave school. however, I be much happy as I be. Mr.
Palmer be the kind of man I like."
CHAPTER 21
the Palmers return to Cleveland the next day, and the two family at
Barton be again leave to entertain each other. but this do not last
long; Elinor have hardly get their last visitor out of her head, have
hardly do wonder at Charlotte's be so happy without a cause, at
Mr. Palmer's acting so simply, with good ability, and at the strange
unsuitableness which often exist between husband and wife, before Sir
John's and Mrs. Jennings's active zeal in the cause of society,
procure she some other new acquaintance to see and observe.
in a morning's excursion to Exeter, they have meet with two young lady,
whom Mrs. Jennings have the satisfaction of discover to be her
relation, and this be enough for Sir John to invite they directly to
the park, as soon as their present engagement at Exeter be over.
their engagement at Exeter instantly give way before such an
invitation, and Lady Middleton be throw into no little alarm on the
return of Sir John, by hear that she be very soon to receive a
visit from two girl whom she have never see in her life, and of whose
elegance,--whose tolerable gentility even, she could have no proof; for
the assurance of her husband and mother on that subject go for
nothing at all. their be her relation too make it so much the
bad; and Mrs. Jennings's attempt at consolation be therefore
unfortunately found, when she advise her daughter not to care about
their be so fashionable; because they be all cousin and must put
up with one another. as it be impossible, however, now to prevent
their come, Lady Middleton resign herself to the idea of it, with
all the philosophy of a well-breed woman, content herself with merely
give her husband a gentle reprimand on the subject five or six time
every day.
the young lady arrive: their appearance be by no means ungenteel or
unfashionable. their dress be very smart, their manner very civil,
they be delighted with the house, and in rapture with the furniture,
and they happen to be so doatingly fond of child that Lady
Middleton's good opinion be engage in their favour before they have
be an hour at the Park. she declare they to be very agreeable girl
indeed, which for her ladyship be enthusiastic admiration. Sir John's
confidence in his own judgment rise with this animate praise, and he
set off directly for the cottage to tell the Miss Dashwoods of the Miss
Steeles' arrival, and to assure they of their be the sweetest girl
in the world. from such commendation as this, however, there be not
much to be learn; Elinor well know that the sweetest girl in the
world be to be meet with in every part of England, under every
possible variation of form, face, temper and understanding. Sir John
want the whole family to walk to the Park directly and look at his
guest. benevolent, philanthropic man! it be painful to he even to
keep a third cousin to himself.
"do come now," say he--"pray come--you must come--I declare you shall
come--you cannot think how you will like they. Lucy be monstrous
pretty, and so good humour and agreeable! the child be all
hang about she already, as if she be an old acquaintance. and they
both long to see you of all thing, for they have hear at Exeter that
you be the most beautiful creature in the world; and I have tell they
it be all very true, and a great deal more. you will be delighted with
they I be sure. they have bring the whole coach full of plaything
for the child. how can you be so cross as not to come? why they
be your cousin, you know, after a fashion. you be my cousin, and
they be my wife's, so you must be relate."
but Sir John could not prevail. he could only obtain a promise of
their calling at the Park within a day or two, and then leave they in
amazement at their indifference, to walk home and boast anew of their
attraction to the Miss Steeles, as he have be already boast of the
Miss Steeles to they.
when their promise visit to the Park and consequent introduction to
these young lady take place, they find in the appearance of the
eld, who be nearly thirty, with a very plain and not a sensible
face, nothing to admire; but in the other, who be not more than two or
three and twenty, they acknowledge considerable beauty; her feature
be pretty, and she have a sharp quick eye, and a smartness of air,
which though it do not give actual elegance or grace, give distinction
to she person.-- their manner be particularly civil, and Elinor soon
allow they credit for some kind of sense, when she see with what
constant and judicious attention they be make themselves agreeable
to Lady Middleton. with her child they be in continual rapture,
extoll their beauty, court their notice, and humour their
whim; and such of their time as could be spar from the importunate
demand which this politeness make on it, be spend in admiration of
whatever her ladyship be do, if she happen to be do any thing,
or in take pattern of some elegant new dress, in which her
appearance the day before have throw they into uncease delight.
fortunately for those who pay their court through such foible, a fond
mother, though, in pursuit of praise for her child, the most
rapacious of human being, be likewise the most credulous; her demand
be exorbitant; but she will swallow any thing; and the excessive
affection and endurance of the Miss Steeles towards her offspring be
view therefore by Lady Middleton without the small surprise or
distrust. she see with maternal complacency all the impertinent
encroachment and mischievous trick to which her cousin submit.
she see their sash untie, their hair pull about their ear, their
work-bag search, and their knife and scissor steal away, and feel
no doubt of its be a reciprocal enjoyment. it suggest no other
surprise than that Elinor and Marianne should sit so composedly by,
without claim a share in what be pass.
"John be in such spirit today!" say she, on his take Miss Steeles's
pocket handkerchief, and throw it out of window--"He be full of
monkey trick."
and soon afterwards, on the second boybe violently pinch one of the
same lady's finger, she fondly observe, "how playful William be!"
"and here be my sweet little Annamaria," she add, tenderly caressing
a little girl of three year old, who have not make a noise for the last
two minute; "and she be always so gentle and quiet--never be there
such a quiet little thing!"
but unfortunately in bestow these embrace, a pin in her ladyship's
head dress slightly scratch the child's neck, produce from this
pattern of gentleness such violent scream, as could hardly be outdo
by any creature professedly noisy. the mother's consternation be
excessive; but it could not surpass the alarm of the Miss Steeles, and
every thing be do by all three, in so critical an emergency, which
affection could suggest as likely to assuage the agony of the little
sufferer. she be seat in her mother's lap, cover with kiss, her
wound bath with lavender-water, by one of the Miss Steeles, who be
on her knee to attend she, and her mouth stuff with sugar plum by
the other. with such a reward for her tear, the child be too wise to
cease cry. she still scream and sob lustily, kick her two
brother for offer to touch she, and all their united soothing be
ineffectual till Lady Middleton luckily remember that in a scene of
similar distress last week, some apricot marmalade have be
successfully apply for a bruised temple, the same remedy be eagerly
propose for this unfortunate scratch, and a slight intermission of
scream in the young lady on hear it, give they reason to hope that
it would not be rejected.-- she be carry out of the room therefore
in her mother's arm, in quest of this medicine, and as the two boy
choose to follow, though earnestly entreat by their mother to stay
behind, the four young lady be leave in a quietness which the room
have not know for many hour.
"poor little creature!" say Miss Steele, as soon as they be go.
"it might have be a very sad accident."
"yet I hardly know how," cry Marianne, "unless it have be under
totally different circumstance. but this be the usual way of
heighten alarm, where there be nothing to be alarm at in reality."
"what a sweet woman Lady Middleton be!" say Lucy Steele.
Marianne be silent; it be impossible for she to say what she do not
feel, however trivial the occasion; and upon Elinor therefore the whole
task of tell lie when politeness require it, always fall. she do
her good when thus call on, by speak of Lady Middleton with more
warmth than she feel, though with far less than Miss Lucy.
"and Sir John too," cry the eld sister, "what a charming man he be!"
here too, Miss Dashwood's commendation, be only simple and just,
come in without any eclat. she merely observe that he be perfectly
good humour and friendly.
"and what a charming little family they have! I never see such fine
child in my life.--i declare I quite doat upon they already, and
indeed I be always distractedly fond of child."
"I should guess so," say Elinor, with a smile, "from what I have
witness this morning."
"I have a notion," say Lucy, "you think the little Middletons rather
too much indulge; perhaps they may be the outside of enough; but it be
so natural in Lady Middleton; and for my part, I love to see child
full of life and spirit; I cannot bear they if they be tame and
quiet."
"I confess," reply Elinor, "that while I be at Barton Park, I never
think of tame and quiet child with any abhorrence."
a short pause succeed this speech, which be first break by Miss
Steele, who seem very much disposed for conversation, and who now
say rather abruptly, "and how do you like Devonshire, Miss Dashwood?
I suppose you be very sorry to leave Sussex."
in some surprise at the familiarity of this question, or at least of
the manner in which it be speak, Elinor reply that she be.
"Norland be a prodigious beautiful place, be not it?" add Miss Steele.
"we have hear Sir John admire it excessively," say Lucy, who seem
to think some apology necessary for the freedom of her sister.
"I think every one must admire it," reply Elinor, "who ever see the
place; though it be not to be suppose that any one can estimate its
beauty as we do."
"and have you a great many smart beaux there? I suppose you have not so
many in this part of the world; for my part, I think they be a vast
addition always."
"but why should you think," say Lucy, look ashamed of her sister,
"that there be not as many genteel young man in Devonshire as Sussex?"
"Nay, my dear, Ibe sure I donot pretend to say that there an't. Ibe
sure therebe a vast many smart beaux in Exeter; but you know, how could
I tell what smart beaux there might be about Norland; and I be only
afraid the Miss Dashwoods might find it dull at Barton, if they have not
so many as they use to have. but perhaps you young lady may not
care about the beaux, and have as lief be without they as with they.
for my part, I think they be vastly agreeable, provide they dress
smart and behave civil. but I cannot bear to see they dirty and nasty.
now therebe Mr. Rose at Exeter, a prodigious smart young man, quite a
beau, clerk to Mr. Simpson, you know, and yet if you do but meet he of
a morning, he be not fit to be seen.-- I suppose your brother be quite
a beau, Miss Dashwood, before he marry, as he be so rich?"
"upon my word," reply Elinor, "I cannot tell you, for I do not
perfectly comprehend the meaning of the word. but this I can say, that
if he ever be a beau before he marry, he be one still for there be
not the small alteration in he."
"oh! dear! one never think of married man's be beaux--they have
something else to do."
"Lord! Anne," cry her sister, "you can talk of nothing but
beaux;--you will make Miss Dashwood believe you think of nothing else."
and then to turn the discourse, she begin admire the house and the
furniture.
this speciman of the Miss Steeles be enough. the vulgar freedom and
folly of the eld leave she no recommendation, and as Elinor be not
blind by the beauty, or the shrewd look of the young, to her want
of real elegance and artlessness, she leave the house without any wish
of know they well.
not so the Miss Steeles.--They come from Exeter, well provide with
admiration for the use of Sir John Middleton, his family, and all his
relation, and no niggardly proportion be now deal out to his fair
cousin, whom they declare to be the most beautiful, elegant,
accomplish, and agreeable girl they have ever behold, and with whom
they be particularly anxious to be well acquainted.-- and to be
well acquaint therefore, Elinor soon find be their inevitable
lot, for as Sir John be entirely on the side of the Miss Steeles,
their party would be too strong for opposition, and that kind of
intimacy must be submit to, which consist of sit an hour or two
together in the same room almost every day. Sir John could do no more;
but he do not know that any more be require: to be together be, in
his opinion, to be intimate, and while his continual scheme for their
meeting be effectual, he have not a doubt of their be establish
friend.
to do he justice, he do every thing in his power to promote their
unreserve, by make the Miss Steeles acquaint with whatever he know
or suppose of his cousin' situation in the most delicate
particulars,--and Elinor have not see they more than twice, before the
eld of they wish her joy on her sister's have be so lucky as
to make a conquest of a very smart beau since she come to Barton.
"'twill be a fine thing to have she married so young to be sure," say
she, "and I hear he be quite a beau, and prodigious handsome. and I
hope you may have as good luck yourself soon,--but perhaps you may have
a friend in the corner already."
Elinor could not suppose that Sir John would be more nice in
proclaim his suspicion of her regard for Edward, than he have be
with respect to Marianne; indeed it be rather his favourite joke of
the two, as be somewhat new and more conjectural; and since
Edward's visit, they have never din together without his drinking to
her good affection with so much significancy and so many nod and
wink, as to excite general attention. the letter F--have be likewise
invariably bring forward, and find productive of such countless
joke, that its character as the witty letter in the alphabet have
be long establish with Elinor.
the Miss Steeles, as she expect, have now all the benefit of these
joke, and in the eld of they they raise a curiosity to know the
name of the gentleman allude to, which, though often impertinently
express, be perfectly of a piece with her general inquisitiveness
into the concern of their family. but Sir John do not sport long
with the curiosity which he delight to raise, for he have at least as
much pleasure in tell the name, as Miss Steele have in hear it.
"his name be Ferrars," say he, in a very audible whisper; "but pray do
not tell it, for itbe a great secret."
"ferrar!" repeat Miss Steele; "Mr. Ferrars be the happy man, be he?
what! your sister-in-law's brother, Miss Dashwood? a very agreeable
young man to be sure; I know he very well."
"how can you say so, Anne?" cry Lucy, who generally make an amendment
to all her sister's assertion. "though we have see he once or twice
at my uncle's, it be rather too much to pretend to know he very well."
Elinor hear all this with attention and surprise. "and who be this
uncle? where do he live? how come they acquaint?" she wish very
much to have the subject continue, though she do not chuse to join in
it herself; but nothing more of it be say, and for the first time in
her life, she think Mrs. Jennings deficient either in curiosity after
petty information, or in a disposition to communicate it. the manner
in which Miss Steele have speak of Edward, increase her curiosity; for
it strike she as be rather ill-natured, and suggest the suspicion
of that lady's knowing, or fancy herself to know something to his
disadvantage.--but her curiosity be unavaile, for no farth notice
be take of Mr. Ferrars's name by Miss Steele when allude to, or even
openly mention by Sir John.
CHAPTER 22
Marianne, who have never much toleration for any thing like
impertinence, vulgarity, inferiority of part, or even difference of
taste from herself, be at this time particularly ill-dispose, from
the state of her spirit, to be pleased with the Miss Steeles, or to
encourage their advance; and to the invariable coldness of her
behaviour towards they, which check every endeavour at intimacy on
their side, Elinor principally attribute that preference of herself
which soon become evident in the manner of both, but especially of
Lucy, who miss no opportunity of engage she in conversation, or of
strive to improve their acquaintance by an easy and frank
communication of her sentiment.
Lucy be naturally clever; her remark be often just and amusing; and
as a companion for half an hour Elinor frequently find she agreeable;
but her power have receive no aid from education: she be ignorant and
illiterate; and her deficiency of all mental improvement, her want of
information in the most common particular, could not be conceal from
Miss Dashwood, in spite of her constant endeavour to appear to
advantage. Elinor see, and pity she for, the neglect of ability
which education might have render so respectable; but she see, with
less tenderness of feeling, the thorough want of delicacy, of
rectitude, and integrity of mind, which her attention, her
assiduity, her flattery at the Park betray; and she could have no
last satisfaction in the company of a person who join insincerity
with ignorance; whose want of instruction prevent their meeting in
conversation on term of equality, and whose conduct toward other make
every shew of attention and deference towards herself perfectly
valueless.
"you will think my question an odd one, I dare say," say Lucy to her
one day, as they be walk together from the park to the
cottage--"but pray, be you personally acquainted with your
sister-in-law's mother, Mrs. Ferrars?"
Elinor do think the question a very odd one, and her countenance
express it, as she answer that she have never see Mrs. Ferrars.
"indeed!" reply Lucy; "I wonder at that, for I think you must have
see she at Norland sometimes. then, perhaps, you cannot tell I what
sort of a woman she be?"
"no," return Elinor, cautious of give her real opinion of Edward's
mother, and not very desirous of satisfy what seem impertinent
curiosity-- "I know nothing of she."
"I be sure you think I very strange, for enquire about she in such a
way," say Lucy, eye Elinor attentively as she speak; "but perhaps
there may be reason--I wish I might venture; but however I hope you
will do I the justice of believe that I do not mean to be
impertinent."
Elinor make she a civil reply, and they walk on for a few minute in
silence. it be break by Lucy, who renew the subject again by
say, with some hesitation,
"I cannot bear to have you think I impertinently curious. I be sure I
would rather do any thing in the world than be think so by a person
whose good opinion be so well worth have as your. and I be sure I
should not have the small fear of trust you; indeed, I should be
very glad of your advice how to manage in such and uncomfortable
situation as I be; but, however, there be no occasion to trouble you.
I be sorry you do not happen to know Mrs. Ferrars."
"I be sorry I do not," say Elinor, in great astonishment, "if it could
be of any use to you to know my opinion of she. but really I never
understand that you be at all connect with that family, and
therefore I be a little surprised, I confess, at so serious an inquiry
into her character."
"I dare say you be, and I be sure I do not at all wonder at it. but
if I dare tell you all, you would not be so much surprised. Mrs.
Ferrars be certainly nothing to I at present--but the time may
come--how soon it will come must depend upon herself--when we may be
very intimately connect."
she look down as she say this, amiably bashful, with only one side
glance at her companion to observe its effect on she.
"good heaven!" cry Elinor, "what do you mean? be you acquaint
with Mr. Robert Ferrars? can you be?" and she do not feel much
delighted with the idea of such a sister-in-law.
"no," reply Lucy, "not to Mr. ROBERT Ferrars--I never see he in my
life; but," fix her eye upon Elinor, "to his eld brother."
what feel Elinor at that moment? Astonishment, that would have be as
painful as it be strong, have not an immediate disbelief of the
assertion attend it. she turn towards Lucy in silent amazement,
unable to divine the reason or object of such a declaration; and though
her complexion vary, she stand firm in incredulity, and feel in no
danger of an hysterical fit, or a swoon.
"you may well be surprised," continue Lucy; "for to be sure you could
have have no idea of it before; for I dare say he never drop the
small hint of it to you or any of your family; because it be always
mean to be a great secret, and I be sure have be faithfully keep so
by I to this hour. not a soul of all my relation know of it but
Anne, and I never should have mention it to you, if I have not feel
the great dependence in the world upon your secrecy; and I really
think my behaviour in ask so many question about Mrs. Ferrars
must seem so odd, that it ought to be explain. and I do not think
Mr. Ferrars can be displeased, when he know I have trust you,
because I know he have the high opinion in the world of all your
family, and look upon yourself and the other Miss Dashwoods quite as
his own sister."--She pause.
Elinor for a few moment remain silent. her astonishment at what she
hear be at first too great for word; but at length force herself
to speak, and to speak cautiously, she say, with calmness of manner,
which tolerably well conceal her surprise and solicitude-- "may I ask
if your engagement be of long standing?"
"we have be engage these four year."
"four year!"
"yes."
Elinor, though greatly shock, still feel unable to believe it.
"I do not know," say she, "that you be even acquaint till the
other day."
"our acquaintance, however, be of many year date. he be under my
uncle's care, you know, a considerable while."
"your uncle!"
"yes; Mr. Pratt. do you never hear he talk of Mr. Pratt?"
"I think I have," reply Elinor, with an exertion of spirit, which
increase with her increase of emotion.
"he be four year with my uncle, who live at Longstaple, near
Plymouth. it be there our acquaintance begin, for my sister and I
be often stay with my uncle, and it be there our engagement be
form, though not till a year after he have quit as a pupil; but he
be almost always with we afterwards. I be very unwilling to enter
into it, as you may imagine, without the knowledge and approbation of
his mother; but I be too young, and love he too well, to be so
prudent as I ought to have been.-- though you do not know he so well
as I, Miss Dashwood, you must have see enough of he to be sensible
he be very capable of make a woman sincerely attach to he."
"certainly," answer Elinor, without know what she say; but after
a moment's reflection, she add, with revive security of Edward's
honour and love, and her companion's falsehood--"engage to Mr. Edward
Ferrars!--I confess myself so totally surprised at what you tell I,
that really--I beg your pardon; but surely there must be some mistake
of person or name. we cannot mean the same Mr. Ferrars."
"we can mean no other," cry Lucy, smile. "Mr. Edward Ferrars, the
eld son of Mrs. Ferrars, of Park Street, and brother of your
sister-in-law, Mrs. John Dashwood, be the person I mean; you must allow
that I be not likely to be deceive as to the name of the man on who
all my happiness depend."
"it be strange," reply Elinor, in a most painful perplexity, "that I
should never have hear he even mention your name."
"no; consider our situation, it be not strange. our first care have
be to keep the matter secret.-- you know nothing of I, or my family,
and, therefore, there could be no occasion for ever mention my name
to you; and, as he be always particularly afraid of his sister's
suspecting any thing, that be reason enough for his not mention it."
she be silent.--elinor's security sunk; but her self-command do not
sink with it.
"four year you have be engage," say she with a firm voice.
"yes; and heaven know how much long we may have to wait. poor
Edward! it put he quite out of heart." then take a small miniature
from her pocket, she add, "to prevent the possibility of mistake, be
so good as to look at this face. it do not do he justice, to be
sure, but yet I think you cannot be deceive as to the person it be
draw for.--I have have it above these three year."
she put it into her hand as she speak; and when Elinor see the
painting, whatever other doubt her fear of a too hasty decision, or
her wish of detect falsehood might suffer to linger in her mind, she
could have none of its be Edward's face. she return it almost
instantly, acknowledge the likeness.
"I have never be able," continue Lucy, "to give he my picture in
return, which I be very much vex at, for he have be always so
anxious to get it! but I be determined to set for it the very first
opportunity."
"you be quite in the right," reply Elinor calmly. they then
proceed a few pace in silence. Lucy speak first.
"I be sure," say she, "I have no doubt in the world of your faithfully
keep this secret, because you must know of what importance it be to
we, not to have it reach his mother; for she would never approve of it,
I dare say. I shall have no fortune, and I fancy she be an exceed
proud woman."
"I certainly do not seek your confidence," say Elinor; "but you do I
no more than justice in imagine that I may be depend on. your
secret be safe with I; but pardon I if I express some surprise at so
unnecessary a communication. you must at least have feel that my being
acquaint with it could not add to its safety."
as she say this, she look earnestly at Lucy, hop to discover
something in her countenance; perhaps the falsehood of the great
part of what she have be say; but Lucy's countenance suffer no
change.
"I be afraid you would think I be take a great liberty with you,"
say she, "in tell you all this. I have not know you long to be
sure, personally at least, but I have know you and all your family by
description a great while; and as soon as I see you, I feel almost as
if you be an old acquaintance. besides in the present case, I really
think some explanation be due to you after my make such particular
inquiry about Edward's mother; and I be so unfortunate, that I have
not a creature whose advice I can ask. Anne be the only person that
know of it, and she have no judgment at all; indeed, she do I a
great deal more harm than good, for I be in constant fear of she
betray I. she do not know how to hold her tongue, as you must
perceive, and I be sure I be in the great fright in the world
t'other day, when Edward's name be mention by Sir John, lest she
should out with it all. you cannot think how much I go through in my
mind from it altogether. I only wonder that I be alive after what I
have suffer for Edward's sake these last four year. every thing in
such suspense and uncertainty; and see he so seldom--we can hardly
meet above twice a-year. I be sure I wonder my heart be not quite
break."
here she take out her handkerchief; but Elinor do not feel very
compassionate.
"sometimes." continue Lucy, after wipe her eye, "I think whether it
would not be well for we both to break off the matter entirely." as
she say this, she look directly at her companion. "but then at
other time I have not resolution enough for it.-- I cannot bear the
thought of make he so miserable, as I know the very mention of such
a thing would do. and on my own account too--so dear as he be to I--I
donot think I could be equal to it. what would you advise I to do in
such a case, Miss Dashwood? what would you do yourself?"
"pardon I," reply Elinor, startle by the question; "but I can give
you no advice under such circumstance. your own judgment must direct
you."
"to be sure," continue Lucy, after a few minute silence on both
side, "his mother must provide for he sometime or other; but poor
Edward be so cast down by it! do you not think he dreadful
low-spirited when he be at Barton? he be so miserable when he leave
we at Longstaple, to go to you, that I be afraid you would think he
quite ill."
"do he come from your uncle's, then, when he visit we?"
"oh, yes; he have be stay a fortnight with we. do you think he
come directly from town?"
"no," reply Elinor, most feelingly sensible of every fresh
circumstance in favour of Lucy's veracity; "I remember he tell we, that
he have be stay a fortnight with some friend near Plymouth." she
remember too, her own surprise at the time, at his mention nothing
far of those friend, at his total silence with respect even to
their name.
"do not you think he sadly out of spirit?" repeat Lucy.
"we do, indeed, particularly so when he first arrive."
"I beg he to exert himself for fear you should suspect what be the
matter; but it make he so melancholy, not be able to stay more than
a fortnight with we, and see I so much affected.-- Poor fellow!--i
be afraid it be just the same with he now; for he write in wretched
spirit. I hear from he just before I leave exeter;" take a letter
from her pocket and carelessly show the direction to Elinor. "you
know his hand, I dare say, a charming one it be; but that be not
write so well as usual.--He be tired, I dare say, for he have just
fill the sheet to I as full as possible."
Elinor see that it be his hand, and she could doubt no long. this
picture, she have allow herself to believe, might have be
accidentally obtain; it might not have be Edward's gift; but a
correspondence between they by letter, could subsist only under a
positive engagement, could be authorise by nothing else; for a few
moment, she be almost overcome--her heart sink within she, and she
could hardly stand; but exertion be indispensably necessary; and she
struggle so resolutely against the oppression of her feeling, that
her success be speedy, and for the time complete.
"write to each other," say Lucy, return the letter into her
pocket, "be the only comfort we have in such long separation. yes, I
have one other comfort in his picture, but poor Edward have not even
that. if he have but my picture, he say he should be easy. I give he
a lock of my hair set in a ring when he be at Longstaple last, and
that be some comfort to he, he say, but not equal to a picture.
perhaps you might notice the ring when you see he?"
"I do," say Elinor, with a composure of voice, under which be
conceal an emotion and distress beyond any thing she have ever feel
before. she be mortify, shock, confound.
fortunately for she, they have now reach the cottage, and the
conversation could be continue no far. after sit with they a
few minute, the Miss Steeles return to the Park, and Elinor be then
at liberty to think and be wretche.
[at this point in the first and second edition, volume 1 end.]
CHAPTER 23
however small Elinor's general dependence on Lucy's veracity might be,
it be impossible for she on serious reflection to suspect it in the
present case, where no temptation could be answerable to the folly of
invent a falsehood of such a description. what Lucy have assert to
be true, therefore, Elinor could not, dare not long doubt; support
as it be too on every side by such probability and proof, and
contradict by nothing but her own wish. their opportunity of
acquaintance in the house of Mr. Pratt be a foundation for the rest,
at once indisputable and alarming; and Edward's visit near Plymouth,
his melancholy state of mind, his dissatisfaction at his own prospect,
his uncertain behaviour towards herself, the intimate knowledge of the
Miss Steeles as to Norland and their family connection, which have
often surprise she, the picture, the letter, the ring, form
altogether such a body of evidence, as overcome every fear of
condemn he unfairly, and establish as a fact, which no partiality
could set aside, his ill-treatment of herself.--her resentment of such
behaviour, her indignation at have be its dupe, for a short time
make she feel only for herself; but other idea, other consideration,
soon arise. have Edward be intentionally deceive she? have he
feign a regard for she which he do not feel? be his engagement to
Lucy an engagement of the heart? no; whatever it might once have be,
she could not believe it such at present. his affection be all her
own. she could not be deceive in that. her mother, sister, Fanny,
all have be conscious of his regard for she at Norland; it be not an
illusion of her own vanity. he certainly love she. what a softener
of the heart be this persuasion! how much could it not tempt she to
forgive! he have be blamable, highly blamable, in remain at
Norland after he first feel her influence over he to be more than it
ought to be. in that, he could not be defend; but if he have injure
she, how much more have he injure himself; if her case be pitiable,
his be hopeless. his imprudence have make she miserable for a while;
but it seem to have deprive himself of all chance of ever be
otherwise. she might in time regain tranquillity; but HE, what have he
to look forward to? could he ever be tolerably happy with Lucy Steele;
could he, be his affection for herself out of the question, with his
integrity, his delicacy, and well-inform mind, be satisfied with a
wife like she--illiterate, artful, and selfish?
the youthful infatuation of nineteen would naturally blind he to every
thing but her beauty and good nature; but the four succeed
year--year, which if rationally spend, give such improvement to the
understanding, must have open his eye to her defect of education,
while the same period of time, spend on her side in inferior society
and more frivolous pursuit, have perhaps rob she of that simplicity
which might once have give an interesting character to her beauty.
if in the supposition of his seeking to marry herself, his difficulty
from his mother have seem great, how much great be they now likely
to be, when the object of his engagement be undoubtedly inferior in
connection, and probably inferior in fortune to herself. these
difficulty, indeed, with a heart so alienated from Lucy, might not
press very hard upon his patience; but melancholy be the state of the
person by whom the expectation of family opposition and unkindness,
could be feel as a relief!
as these consideration occur to she in painful succession, she weep
for he, more than for herself. support by the conviction of have
do nothing to merit her present unhappiness, and console by the
belief that Edward have do nothing to forfeit her esteem, she think
she could even now, under the first smart of the heavy blow, command
herself enough to guard every suspicion of the truth from her mother
and sister. and so well be she able to answer her own expectation,
that when she join they at dinner only two hour after she have first
suffer the extinction of all her dear hop, no one would have
suppose from the appearance of the sister, that Elinor be mourn
in secret over obstacle which must divide she for ever from the object
of her love, and that Marianne be internally dwell on the
perfection of a man, of whose whole heart she feel thoroughly
possess, and whom she expect to see in every carriage which drive
near their house.
the necessity of conceal from her mother and Marianne, what have be
entrust in confidence to herself, though it oblige she to uncease
exertion, be no aggravation of Elinor's distress. on the contrary it
be a relief to she, to be spar the communication of what would give
such affliction to they, and to be save likewise from hear that
condemnation of Edward, which would probably flow from the excess of
their partial affection for herself, and which be more than she feel
equal to support.
from their counsel, or their conversation, she know she could receive
no assistance, their tenderness and sorrow must add to her distress,
while her self-command would neither receive encouragement from their
example nor from their praise. she be strong alone, and her own
good sense so well support she, that her firmness be as unshaken,
her appearance of cheerfulness as invariable, as with regret so
poignant and so fresh, it be possible for they to be.
much as she have suffer from her first conversation with Lucy on the
subject, she soon feel an earnest wish of renew it; and this for
more reason than one. she want to hear many particular of their
engagement repeat again, she want more clearly to understand what
Lucy really feel for Edward, whether there be any sincerity in her
declaration of tender regard for he, and she particularly want to
convince Lucy, by her readiness to enter on the matter again, and her
calmness in converse on it, that she be no otherwise interested in
it than as a friend, which she very much fear her involuntary
agitation, in their morning discourse, must have leave at least
doubtful. that Lucy be dispose to be jealous of she appear very
probable: it be plain that Edward have always speak highly in her
praise, not merely from Lucy's assertion, but from her venture to
trust she on so short a personal acquaintance, with a secret so
confessedly and evidently important. and even Sir John's joking
intelligence must have have some weight. but indeed, while Elinor
remain so well assure within herself of be really belove by
Edward, it require no other consideration of probability to make it
natural that Lucy should be jealous; and that she be so, her very
confidence be a proof. what other reason for the disclosure of the
affair could there be, but that Elinor might be inform by it of
Lucy's superior claim on Edward, and be teach to avoid he in future?
she have little difficulty in understand thus much of her rival's
intention, and while she be firmly resolve to act by she as every
principle of honour and honesty direct, to combat her own affection
for Edward and to see he as little as possible; she could not deny
herself the comfort of endeavour to convince Lucy that her heart be
unwounde. and as she could now have nothing more painful to hear on
the subject than have already be tell, she do not mistrust her own
ability of go through a repetition of particular with composure.
but it be not immediately that an opportunity of do so could be
command, though Lucy be as well disposed as herself to take
advantage of any that occur; for the weather be not often fine
enough to allow of their join in a walk, where they might most
easily separate themselves from the other; and though they meet at
least every other evening either at the park or cottage, and chiefly at
the former, they could not be suppose to meet for the sake of
conversation. such a thought would never enter either Sir John or Lady
Middleton's head; and therefore very little leisure be ever give for
a general chat, and none at all for particular discourse. they meet for
the sake of eating, drinking, and laugh together, play at card,
or consequence, or any other game that be sufficiently noisy.
one or two meeting of this kind have take place, without afford
Elinor any chance of engage Lucy in private, when Sir John call at
the cottage one morning, to beg, in the name of charity, that they
would all dine with Lady Middleton that day, as he be oblige to
attend the club at Exeter, and she would otherwise be quite alone,
except her mother and the two Miss Steeles. Elinor, who foresaw a
fair opening for the point she have in view, in such a party as this
be likely to be, more at liberty among themselves under the tranquil
and well-breed direction of Lady Middleton than when her husband unite
they together in one noisy purpose, immediately accept the
invitation; Margaret, with her mother's permission, be equally
compliant, and Marianne, though always unwilling to join any of their
party, be persuade by her mother, who could not bear to have she
seclude herself from any chance of amusement, to go likewise.
the young lady go, and Lady Middleton be happily preserve from
the frightful solitude which have threaten she. the insipidity of the
meeting be exactly such as Elinor have expect; it produce not one
novelty of thought or expression, and nothing could be less interesting
than the whole of their discourse both in the dining parlour and
drawing room: to the latter, the child accompany they, and while
they remain there, she be too well convinced of the impossibility of
engage Lucy's attention to attempt it. they quit it only with the
removal of the tea-thing. the card-table be then place, and Elinor
begin to wonder at herself for have ever entertain a hope of
find time for conversation at the park. they all rise up in
preparation for a round game.
"I be glad," say Lady Middleton to Lucy, "you be not go to finish
poor little Annamaria's basket this evening; for I be sure it must hurt
your eye to work filigree by candlelight. and we will make the dear
little love some amend for her disappointment to-morrow, and then I
hope she will not much mind it."
this hint be enough, Lucy recollect herself instantly and reply,
"indeed you be very much mistaken, Lady Middleton; I be only wait
to know whether you can make your party without I, or I should have
be at my filigree already. I would not disappoint the little angel
for all the world: and if you want I at the card-table now, I be
resolve to finish the basket after supper."
"you be very good, I hope it willnot hurt your eye--will you ring the
bell for some work candle? my poor little girl would be sadly
disappoint, I know, if the basket be not finish tomorrow, for
though I tell she it certainly would not, I be sure she depend upon
have it do."
Lucy directly draw her work table near she and reseat herself with an
alacrity and cheerfulness which seem to infer that she could taste no
great delight than in make a filigree basket for a spoilt child.
Lady Middleton propose a rubber of casino to the other. no one make
any objection but Marianne, who with her usual inattention to the form
of general civility, exclaim, "your ladyship will have the goodness
to excuse ME--you know I det card. I shall go to the piano-forte;
I have not touch it since it be tune." and without farth
ceremony, she turn away and walk to the instrument.
Lady Middleton look as if she thank heaven that SHE have never make
so rude a speech.
"Marianne can never keep long from that instrument you know, ma'am,"
say Elinor, endeavour to smooth away the offence; "and I do not
much wonder at it; for it be the very well tone piano-forte I ever
hear."
the remain five be now to draw their card.
"perhaps," continue Elinor, "if I should happen to cut out, I may be
of some use to Miss Lucy Steele, in roll her paper for she; and
there be so much still to be do to the basket, that it must be
impossible I think for her labour singly, to finish it this evening. I
should like the work exceedingly, if she would allow I a share in it."
"indeed I shall be very much oblige to you for your help," cry Lucy,
"for I find there be more to be do to it than I think there be;
and it would be a shocking thing to disappoint dear Annamaria after
all."
"oh! that would be terrible, indeed," say Miss steele-- "dear little
soul, how I do love she!"
"you be very kind," say Lady Middleton to Elinor; "and as you really
like the work, perhaps you will be as well pleased not to cut in till
another rubber, or will you take your chance now?"
Elinor joyfully profit by the first of these proposal, and thus by a
little of that address which Marianne could never condescend to
practise, gain her own end, and please Lady Middleton at the same
time. Lucy make room for she with ready attention, and the two fair
rival be thus seat side by side at the same table, and, with the
utmost harmony, engage in forward the same work. the pianoforte at
which Marianne, wrap up in her own music and her own thought, have
by this time forget that any body be in the room besides herself,
be luckily so near they that Miss Dashwood now judge she might
safely, under the shelter of its noise, introduce the interesting
subject, without any risk of be hear at the card-table.
CHAPTER 24
in a firm, though cautious tone, Elinor thus begin.
"I should be undeserving of the confidence you have honour I with,
if I feel no desire for its continuance, or no farth curiosity on its
subject. I will not apologize therefore for bring it forward again."
"thank you," cry Lucy warmly, "for break the ice; you have set my
heart at ease by it; for I be somehow or other afraid I have offend
you by what I tell you that Monday."
"offended I! how could you suppose so? believe I," and Elinor speak
it with the true sincerity, "nothing could be far from my
intention than to give you such an idea. could you have a motive for
the trust, that be not honourable and flattering to I?"
"and yet I do assure you," reply Lucy, her little sharp eye full of
meaning, "there seem to I to be a coldness and displeasure in your
manner that make I quite uncomfortable. I feel sure that you be
angry with I; and have be quarrel with myself ever since, for
have take such a liberty as to trouble you with my affair. but I be
very glad to find it be only my own fancy, and that you really do not
blame I. if you know what a consolation it be to I to relieve my
heart speak to you of what I be always think of every moment of
my life, your compassion would make you overlook every thing else I be
sure."
"indeed, I can easily believe that it be a very great relief to you,
to acknowledge your situation to I, and be assure that you shall
never have reason to repent it. your case be a very unfortunate one;
you seem to I to be surround with difficulty, and you will have
need of all your mutual affection to support you under they. Mr.
Ferrars, I believe, be entirely dependent on his mother."
"he have only two thousand pound of his own; it would be madness to
marry upon that, though for my own part, I could give up every prospect
of more without a sigh. I have be always use to a very small
income, and could struggle with any poverty for he; but I love he too
well to be the selfish mean of rob he, perhaps, of all that his
mother might give he if he marry to please she. we must wait, it
may be for many year. with almost every other man in the world, it
would be an alarming prospect; but Edward's affection and constancy
nothing can deprive I of I know."
"that conviction must be every thing to you; and he be undoubtedly
support by the same trust in your's. if the strength of your
reciprocal attachment have fail, as between many people, and under
many circumstance it naturally would during a four year' engagement,
your situation would have be pitiable, indeed."
Lucy here look up; but Elinor be careful in guard her countenance
from every expression that could give her word a suspicious tendency.
"Edward's love for I," say Lucy, "have be pretty well put to the
test, by our long, very long absence since we be first engage, and
it have stand the trial so well, that I should be unpardonable to doubt
it now. I can safely say that he have never give I one moment's alarm
on that account from the first."
Elinor hardly know whether to smile or sigh at this assertion.
Lucy go on. "I be rather of a jealous temper too by nature, and from
our different situation in life, from his be so much more in the
world than I, and our continual separation, I be enough inclined for
suspicion, to have find out the truth in an instant, if there have be
the slight alteration in his behaviour to I when we meet, or any
lowness of spirit that I could not account for, or if he have talk
more of one lady than another, or seem in any respect less happy at
Longstaple than he use to be. I do not mean to say that I be
particularly observant or quick-sighted in general, but in such a case
I be sure I could not be deceive."
"all this," think Elinor, "be very pretty; but it can impose upon
neither of we."
"but what," say she after a short silence, "be your view? or have
you none but that of wait for Mrs. Ferrars's death, which be a
melancholy and shocking extremity?--is her son determine to submit to
this, and to all the tediousness of the many year of suspense in which
it may involve you, rather than run the risk of her displeasure for a
while by own the truth?"
"if we could be certain that it would be only for a while! but Mrs.
Ferrars be a very headstrong proud woman, and in her first fit of anger
upon hear it, would very likely secure every thing to Robert, and
the idea of that, for Edward's sake, frighten away all my inclination
for hasty measure."
"and for your own sake too, or you be carry your disinterestedness
beyond reason."
Lucy look at Elinor again, and be silent.
"do you know Mr. Robert Ferrars?" ask Elinor.
"not at all--I never see he; but I fancy he be very unlike his
brother--silly and a great coxcomb."
"a great coxcomb!" repeat Miss Steele, whose ear have catch those
word by a sudden pause in Marianne's music.-- "oh, they be talk of
their favourite beaux, I dare say."
"no sister," cry Lucy, "you be mistaken there, our favourite beaux
be not great coxcomb."
"I can answer for it that Miss Dashwood's be not," say Mrs. Jennings,
laugh heartily; "for he be one of the modest, prettiest behave
young man I ever see; but as for Lucy, she be such a sly little
creature, there be no finding out who she like."
"oh," cry Miss Steele, look significantly round at they, "I dare
say Lucy's beau be quite as modest and pretty behave as Miss
Dashwood's."
Elinor blush in spite of herself. Lucy bite her lip, and look
angrily at her sister. a mutual silence take place for some time.
Lucy first put an end to it by say in a low tone, though Marianne
be then give they the powerful protection of a very magnificent
concerto--
"I will honestly tell you of one scheme which have lately come into my
head, for bring matter to bear; indeed I be bind to let you into
the secret, for you be a party concern. I dare say you have see
enough of Edward to know that he would prefer the church to every other
profession; now my plan be that he should take order as soon as he
can, and then through your interest, which I be sure you would be kind
enough to use out of friendship for he, and I hope out of some regard
to I, your brother might be persuade to give he Norland living;
which I understand be a very good one, and the present incumbent not
likely to live a great while. that would be enough for we to marry
upon, and we might trust to time and chance for the rest."
"I should always be happy," reply Elinor, "to show any mark of my
esteem and friendship for Mr. Ferrars; but do you not perceive that my
interest on such an occasion would be perfectly unnecessary? he be
brother to Mrs. John Dashwood--that must be recommendation enough to
her husband."
"but Mrs. John Dashwood would not much approve of Edward's go into
order."
"then I rather suspect that my interest would do very little."
they be again silent for many minute. at length Lucy exclaim with
a deep sigh,
"I believe it would be the wise way to put an end to the business at
once by dissolve the engagement. we seem so beset with difficulty
on every side, that though it would make we miserable for a time, we
should be happy perhaps in the end. but you will not give I your
advice, Miss Dashwood?"
"no," answer Elinor, with a smile, which conceal very agitated
feeling, "on such a subject I certainly will not. you know very well
that my opinion would have no weight with you, unless it be on the
side of your wish."
"indeed you wrong I," reply Lucy, with great solemnity; "I know
nobody of whose judgment I think so highly as I do of your; and I do
really believe, that if you be to say to I, 'I advise you by all
mean to put an end to your engagement with Edward Ferrars, it will be
more for the happiness of both of you,' I should resolve upon do it
immediately."
Elinor blush for the insincerity of Edward's future wife, and
reply, "this compliment would effectually frighten I from give any
opinion on the subject have I form one. it raise my influence much
too high; the power of divide two people so tenderly attach be too
much for an indifferent person."
"'tis because you be an indifferent person," say Lucy, with some
pique, and lay a particular stress on those word, "that your
judgment might justly have such weight with I. if you could be
suppose to be bias in any respect by your own feeling, your opinion
would not be worth have."
Elinor think it wisest to make no answer to this, lest they might
provoke each other to an unsuitable increase of ease and unreserve; and
be even partly determined never to mention the subject again. another
pause therefore of many minute' duration, succeed this speech, and
Lucy be still the first to end it.
"shall you be in town this winter, Miss Dashwood?" say she with all
her accustomary complacency.
"certainly not."
"I be sorry for that," return the other, while her eye brighten at
the information, "it would have give I such pleasure to meet you
there! but I dare say you will go for all that. to be sure, your
brother and sister will ask you to come to they."
"it will not be in my power to accept their invitation if they do."
"how unlucky that be! I have quite depend upon meet you there.
Anne and I be to go the latter end of January to some relation who
have be want we to visit they these several year! but I only go
for the sake of see Edward. he will be there in February, otherwise
London would have no charm for I; I have not spirit for it."
Elinor be soon call to the card-table by the conclusion of the first
rubber, and the confidential discourse of the two lady be therefore
at an end, to which both of they submit without any reluctance, for
nothing have be say on either side to make they dislike each other
less than they have do before; and Elinor sit down to the card table
with the melancholy persuasion that Edward be not only without
affection for the person who be to be his wife; but that he have not
even the chance of be tolerably happy in marriage, which sincere
affection on her side would have give, for self-interest alone could
induce a woman to keep a man to an engagement, of which she seem so
thoroughly aware that he be weary.
from this time the subject be never revive by Elinor, and when
enter on by Lucy, who seldom miss an opportunity of introduce it,
and be particularly careful to inform her confidante, of her happiness
whenever she receive a letter from Edward, it be treat by the
former with calmness and caution, and dismiss as soon as civility
would allow; for she feel such conversation to be an indulgence which
Lucy do not deserve, and which be dangerous to herself.
the visit of the Miss Steeles at Barton Park be lengthen far beyond
what the first invitation imply. their favour increase; they could
not be spar; Sir John would not hear of their go; and in spite of
their numerous and long arranged engagement in Exeter, in spite of the
absolute necessity of return to fulfill they immediately, which be
in full force at the end of every week, they be prevail on to stay
nearly two month at the park, and to assist in the due celebration of
that festival which require a more than ordinary share of private
ball and large dinner to proclaim its importance.
CHAPTER 25
Though Mrs. Jennings be in the habit of spend a large portion of
the year at the house of her child and friend, she be not without
a settle habitation of her own. since the death of her husband, who
have trade with success in a less elegant part of the town, she have
reside every winter in a house in one of the street near Portman
Square. towards this home, she begin on the approach of January to
turn her thought, and thither she one day abruptly, and very
unexpectedly by they, ask the eld Misses Dashwood to accompany she.
Elinor, without observe the vary complexion of her sister, and the
animate look which speak no indifference to the plan, immediately give
a grateful but absolute denial for both, in which she believe herself
to be speak their united inclination. the reason allege be their
determined resolution of not leave their mother at that time of the
year. Mrs. Jennings receive the refusal with some surprise, and
repeat her invitation immediately.
"oh, Lord! I be sure your mother can spare you very well, and I do beg
you will favour I with your company, for Ihave quite set my heart upon
it. donot fancy that you will be any inconvenience to I, for I shallnot
put myself at all out of my way for you. it will only be send Betty
by the coach, and I hope I can afford that. we three shall be able to
go very well in my chaise; and when we be in town, if you do not like
to go wherever I do, well and good, you may always go with one of my
daughter. I be sure your mother will not object to it; for I have have
such good luck in get my own child off my hand that she will
think I a very fit person to have the charge of you; and if I donot
get one of you at least well married before I have do with you, it
shall not be my fault. I shall speak a good word for you to all the
young man, you may depend upon it."
"I have a notion," say Sir John, "that Miss Marianne would not object
to such a scheme, if her eld sister would come into it. it be very
hard indeed that she should not have a little pleasure, because Miss
Dashwood do not wish it. so I would advise you two, to set off for
town, when you be tired of Barton, without say a word to Miss
Dashwood about it."
"Nay," cry Mrs. Jennings, "I be sure I shall be monstrous glad of
Miss Marianne's company, whether Miss Dashwood will go or not, only the
more the merry say I, and I think it would be more comfortable for
they to be together; because, if they get tired of I, they might talk
to one another, and laugh at my old way behind my back. but one or
the other, if not both of they, I must have. Lord bless I! how do you
think I can live poking by myself, I who have be always use till
this winter to have Charlotte with I. come, Miss Marianne, let we
strike hand upon the bargain, and if Miss Dashwood will change she
mind by and bye, why so much the well."
"I thank you, ma'am, sincerely thank you," say Marianne, with warmth:
"your invitation have insure my gratitude for ever, and it would give
I such happiness, yes, almost the great happiness I be capable of,
to be able to accept it. but my mother, my dearest, kindest mother,--I
feel the justice of what Elinor have urge, and if she be to be make
less happy, less comfortable by our absence--oh! no, nothing should
tempt I to leave she. it should not, must not be a struggle."
Mrs. Jennings repeat her assurance that Mrs. Dashwood could spare
they perfectly well; and Elinor, who now understand her sister, and see
to what indifference to almost every thing else she be carry by her
eagerness to be with Willoughby again, make no far direct
opposition to the plan, and merely refer it to her mother's
decision, from whom however she scarcely expect to receive any
support in her endeavour to prevent a visit, which she could not
approve of for Marianne, and which on her own account she have
particular reason to avoid. whatever Marianne be desirous of, her
mother would be eager to promote--she could not expect to influence the
latter to cautiousness of conduct in an affair respecting which she have
never be able to inspire she with distrust; and she dare not explain
the motive of her own disinclination for go to London. that
Marianne, fastidious as she be, thoroughly acquaint with Mrs.
Jennings' manner, and invariably disgust by they, should overlook
every inconvenience of that kind, should disregard whatever must be
most wound to her irritable feeling, in her pursuit of one object,
be such a proof, so strong, so full, of the importance of that object
to she, as Elinor, in spite of all that have pass, be not prepared to
witness.
on be inform of the invitation, Mrs. Dashwood, persuade that such
an excursion would be productive of much amusement to both her
daughter, and perceive through all her affectionate attention to
herself, how much the heart of Marianne be in it, would not hear of
their decline the offer upon she account; insist on their both
accept it directly; and then begin to foresee, with her usual
cheerfulness, a variety of advantage that would accrue to they all,
from this separation.
"I be delighted with the plan," she cry, "it be exactly what I could
wish. Margaret and I shall be as much benefit by it as yourself.
when you and the Middletons be go, we shall go on so quietly and
happily together with our book and our music! you will find Margaret
so improve when you come back again! I have a little plan of
alteration for your bedroom too, which may now be perform without
any inconvenience to any one. it be very right that you should go to
town; I would have every young woman of your condition in life
acquaint with the manner and amusement of London. you will be
under the care of a motherly good sort of woman, of whose kindness to
you I can have no doubt. and in all probability you will see your
brother, and whatever may be his fault, or the fault of his wife,
when I consider whose son he be, I cannot bear to have you so wholly
estrange from each other."
"though with your usual anxiety for our happiness," say Elinor, "you
have be obviate every impediment to the present scheme which
occur to you, there be still one objection which, in my opinion,
cannot be so easily remove."
Marianne's countenance sunk.
"and what," say Mrs. Dashwood, "be my dear prudent Elinor go to
suggest? what formidable obstacle be she now to bring forward? do let
I hear a word about the expense of it."
"my objection be this; though I think very well of Mrs. Jennings's
heart, she be not a woman whose society can afford we pleasure, or
whose protection will give we consequence."
"that be very true," reply her mother, "but of her society,
separately from that of other people, you will scarcely have any thing
at all, and you will almost always appear in public with Lady
Middleton."
"if Elinor be frighten away by her dislike of Mrs. Jennings," say
Marianne, "at least it need not prevent MY accept her invitation. I
have no such scruple, and I be sure I could put up with every
unpleasantness of that kind with very little effort."
Elinor could not help smile at this display of indifference towards
the manner of a person, to whom she have often have difficulty in
persuade Marianne to behave with tolerable politeness; and resolve
within herself, that if her sister persist in go, she would go
likewise, as she do not think it proper that Marianne should be leave
to the sole guidance of her own judgment, or that Mrs. Jennings should
be abandon to the mercy of Marianne for all the comfort of her
domestic hour. to this determination she be the more easily
reconcile, by recollect that Edward Ferrars, by Lucy's account, be
not to be in town before February; and that their visit, without any
unreasonable abridgement, might be previously finish.
"I will have you both go," say Mrs. Dashwood; "these objection be
nonsensical. you will have much pleasure in be in London, and
especially in be together; and if Elinor would ever condescend to
anticipate enjoyment, she would foresee it there from a variety of
source; she would, perhaps, expect some from improve her
acquaintance with her sister-in-law's family."
Elinor have often wish for an opportunity of attempt to weaken she
mother's dependence on the attachment of Edward and herself, that the
shock might be less when the whole truth be reveal, and now on this
attack, though almost hopeless of success, she force herself to begin
her design by say, as calmly as she could, "I like Edward Ferrars
very much, and shall always be glad to see he; but as to the rest of
the family, it be a matter of perfect indifference to I, whether I be
ever know to they or not."
Mrs. Dashwood smile, and say nothing. Marianne lift up her eye in
astonishment, and Elinor conjecture that she might as well have hold
her tongue.
after very little far discourse, it be finally settle that the
invitation should be fully accept. Mrs. Jennings receive the
information with a great deal of joy, and many assurance of kindness
and care; nor be it a matter of pleasure merely to she. Sir John be
delighted; for to a man, whose prevail anxiety be the dread of
be alone, the acquisition of two, to the number of inhabitant in
London, be something. even Lady Middleton take the trouble of be
delight, which be put herself rather out of her way; and as for
the Miss Steeles, especially Lucy, they have never be so happy in
their life as this intelligence make they.
Elinor submit to the arrangement which counteract she wish with
less reluctance than she have expect to feel. with regard to herself,
it be now a matter of unconcern whether she go to town or not, and
when she see her mother so thoroughly pleased with the plan, and her
sister exhilarate by it in look, voice, and manner, restore to all
her usual animation, and elevate to more than her usual gaiety, she
could not be dissatisfied with the cause, and would hardly allow
herself to distrust the consequence.
Marianne's joy be almost a degree beyond happiness, so great be the
perturbation of her spirit and her impatience to be go. her
unwillingness to quit her mother be her only restorative to calmness;
and at the moment of part her grief on that score be excessive.
her mother's affliction be hardly less, and Elinor be the only one of
the three, who seem to consider the separation as any thing short of
eternal.
their departure take place in the first week in January. the
Middletons be to follow in about a week. the Miss Steeles keep their
station at the park, and be to quit it only with the rest of the
family.
CHAPTER 26
Elinor could not find herself in the carriage with Mrs. Jennings, and
begin a journey to London under her protection, and as her guest,
without wonder at her own situation, so short have their acquaintance
with that lady be, so wholly unsuited be they in age and
disposition, and so many have be her objection against such a measure
only a few day before! but these objection have all, with that happy
ardour of youth which Marianne and her mother equally share, be
overcome or overlook; and Elinor, in spite of every occasional doubt
of Willoughby's constancy, could not witness the rapture of delightful
expectation which fill the whole soul and beam in the eye of
Marianne, without feel how blank be her own prospect, how cheerless
her own state of mind in the comparison, and how gladly she would
engage in the solicitude of Marianne's situation to have the same
animating object in view, the same possibility of hope. a short, a
very short time however must now decide what Willoughby's intention
be; in all probability he be already in town. Marianne's eagerness
to be go declare her dependence on find he there; and Elinor be
resolve not only upon gain every new light as to his character
which her own observation or the intelligence of other could give she,
but likewise upon watch his behaviour to her sister with such
zealous attention, as to ascertain what he be and what he mean,
before many meeting have take place. should the result of her
observation be unfavourable, she be determine at all event to open
the eye of her sister; should it be otherwise, her exertion would be
of a different nature--she must then learn to avoid every selfish
comparison, and banish every regret which might lessen her satisfaction
in the happiness of Marianne.
they be three day on their journey, and Marianne's behaviour as they
travel be a happy speciman of what future complaisance and
companionableness to Mrs. Jennings might be expect to be. she sit in
silence almost all the way, wrapt in her own meditation, and scarcely
ever voluntarily speak, except when any object of picturesque beauty
within their view draw from she an exclamation of delight exclusively
address to her sister. to atone for this conduct therefore, Elinor
take immediate possession of the post of civility which she have
assign herself, behave with the great attention to Mrs. Jennings,
talk with she, laugh with she, and listen to she whenever she
could; and Mrs. Jennings on her side treat they both with all
possible kindness, be solicitous on every occasion for their ease and
enjoyment, and only disturb that she could not make they choose their
own dinner at the inn, nor extort a confession of their preferring
salmon to cod, or boil fowl to veal cutlet. they reach town by
three o'clock the third day, glad to be release, after such a journey,
from the confinement of a carriage, and ready to enjoy all the luxury
of a good fire.
the house be handsome, and handsomely fit up, and the young lady
be immediately put in possession of a very comfortable apartment. it
have formerly be Charlotte's, and over the mantelpiece still hang a
landscape in coloured silk of her performance, in proof of she have
spend seven year at a great school in town to some effect.
as dinner be not to be ready in less than two hour from their
arrival, Elinor determine to employ the interval in write to her
mother, and sit down for that purpose. in a few moment Marianne do
the same. "I be write home, Marianne," say Elinor; "have not you
well defer your letter for a day or two?"
"I be not go to write to my mother," reply Marianne, hastily, and
as if wish to avoid any farth inquiry. Elinor say no more; it
immediately strike she that she must then be write to Willoughby; and
the conclusion which as instantly follow be, that, however
mysteriously they might wish to conduct the affair, they must be
engage. this conviction, though not entirely satisfactory, give she
pleasure, and she continue her letter with great alacrity.
Marianne's be finish in a very few minute; in length it could be no
more than a note; it be then fold up, seal, and direct with
eager rapidity. Elinor think she could distinguish a large w in the
direction; and no soon be it complete than Marianne, ring the
bell, request the footman who answer it to get that letter convey
for she to the two-penny post. this decide the matter at once.
her spirit still continue very high; but there be a flutter in they
which prevent their give much pleasure to her sister, and this
agitation increase as the evening draw on. she could scarcely eat any
dinner, and when they afterwards return to the drawing room, seem
anxiously listen to the sound of every carriage.
it be a great satisfaction to Elinor that Mrs. Jennings, by be much
engage in her own room, could see little of what be pass. the tea
thing be bring in, and already have Marianne be disappoint more
than once by a rap at a neighbouring door, when a loud one be suddenly
hear which could not be mistake for one at any other house, Elinor
feel secure of its announce Willoughby's approach, and Marianne,
start up, move towards the door. every thing be silent; this
could not be bear many second; she open the door, advance a few
step towards the stair, and after listen half a minute, return
into the room in all the agitation which a conviction of have hear
he would naturally produce; in the ecstasy of her feeling at that
instant she could not help exclaim, "oh, Elinor, it be Willoughby,
indeed it be!" and seem almost ready to throw herself into his arm,
when Colonel Brandon appear.
it be too great a shock to be bear with calmness, and she immediately
leave the room. Elinor be disappoint too; but at the same time she
regard for Colonel Brandon ensure his welcome with she; and she feel
particularly hurt that a man so partial to her sister should perceive
that she experience nothing but grief and disappointment in see
he. she instantly see that it be not unnoticed by he, that he even
observe Marianne as she quit the room, with such astonishment and
concern, as hardly leave he the recollection of what civility demand
towards herself.
"be your sister ill?" say he.
Elinor answer in some distress that she be, and then talk of
head-ache, low spirit, and over fatigue; and of every thing to which
she could decently attribute her sister's behaviour.
he hear she with the most earnest attention, but seem to recollect
himself, say no more on the subject, and begin directly to speak of
his pleasure at see they in London, make the usual inquiry about
their journey, and the friend they have leave behind.
in this calm kind of way, with very little interest on either side,
they continue to talk, both of they out of spirit, and the thought
of both engage elsewhere. Elinor wish very much to ask whether
Willoughby be then in town, but she be afraid of give he pain by
any enquiry after his rival; and at length, by way of say something,
she ask if he have be in London ever since she have see he last.
"yes," he reply, with some embarrassment, "almost ever since; I have
be once or twice at Delaford for a few day, but it have never be in
my power to return to Barton."
this, and the manner in which it be say, immediately bring back to
her remembrance all the circumstance of his quit that place, with
the uneasiness and suspicion they have cause to Mrs. Jennings, and she
be fearful that her question have imply much more curiosity on the
subject than she have ever feel.
Mrs. Jennings soon come in. "oh! Colonel," say she, with her usual
noisy cheerfulness, "I be monstrous glad to see you--sorry I could not
come before--beg your pardon, but I have be force to look about I a
little, and settle my matter; for it be a long while since I have be
at home, and you know one have always a world of little odd thing to do
after one have be away for any time; and then I have have Cartwright to
settle with-- Lord, I have be as busy as a bee ever since dinner!
but pray, Colonel, how come you to conjure out that I should be in town
today?"
"I have the pleasure of hear it at Mr. Palmer's, where I have be
dining."
"oh, you do; well, and how do they all do at their house? how do
Charlotte do? I warrant you she be a fine size by this time."
"Mrs. Palmer appear quite well, and I be commission to tell you,
that you will certainly see she to-morrow."
"ay, to be sure, I think as much. well, Colonel, I have bring two
young lady with I, you see--that is, you see but one of they now,
but there be another somewhere. your friend, Miss Marianne, too--which
you will not be sorry to hear. I do not know what you and Mr.
Willoughby will do between you about she. ay, it be a fine thing to be
young and handsome. well! I be young once, but I never be very
handsome--bad luck for I. however, I get a very good husband, and I
donot know what the great beauty can do more. ah! poor man! he have
be dead these eight year and well. but Colonel, where have you
be to since we part? and how do your business go on? come,
come, letus have no secret among friend."
he reply with his accustomary mildness to all her inquiry, but
without satisfy she in any. Elinor now begin to make the tea, and
Marianne be oblige to appear again.
after her entrance, Colonel Brandon become more thoughtful and silent
than he have be before, and Mrs. Jennings could not prevail on he to
stay long. no other visitor appear that evening, and the lady be
unanimous in agree to go early to bed.
Marianne rise the next morning with recover spirit and happy look.
the disappointment of the evening before seem forget in the
expectation of what be to happen that day. they have not long finish
their breakfast before Mrs. Palmer's barouche stop at the door, and
in a few minute she come laugh into the room: so delighted to see
they all, that it be hard to say whether she receive most pleasure
from meet her mother or the Miss Dashwoods again. so surprised at
their come to town, though it be what she have rather expect all
along; so angry at their accept her mother's invitation after have
decline her own, though at the same time she would never have forgive
they if they have not come!
"Mr. Palmer will be so happy to see you," say she; "what do you think
he say when he hear of your come with Mamma? I forget what it be
now, but it be something so droll!"
after an hour or two spend in what her mother call comfortable chat,
or in other word, in every variety of inquiry concern all their
acquaintance on Mrs. Jennings's side, and in laughter without cause on
Mrs. Palmer's, it be propose by the latter that they should all
accompany she to some shop where she have business that morning, to
which Mrs. Jennings and Elinor readily consent, as have likewise
some purchase to make themselves; and Marianne, though decline it at
first be induce to go likewise.
wherever they go, she be evidently always on the watch. in Bond
Street especially, where much of their business lay, her eye be in
constant inquiry; and in whatever shop the party be engage, her mind
be equally abstract from every thing actually before they, from all
that interested and occupy the other. Restless and dissatisfy
every where, her sister could never obtain her opinion of any article
of purchase, however it might equally concern they both: she receive
no pleasure from anything; be only impatient to be at home again, and
could with difficulty govern her vexation at the tediousness of Mrs.
Palmer, whose eye be catch by every thing pretty, expensive, or new;
who be wild to buy all, could determine on none, and dawdle away her
time in rapture and indecision.
it be late in the morning before they return home; and no soon have
they enter the house than Marianne fly eagerly up stair, and when
Elinor follow, she find she turn from the table with a sorrowful
countenance, which declare that no Willoughby have be there.
"have no letter be leave here for I since we go out?" say she to
the footman who then enter with the parcel. she be answer in the
negative. "be you quite sure of it?" she reply. "be you certain
that no servant, no porter have leave any letter or note?"
the man reply that none have.
"how very odd!" say she, in a low and disappointed voice, as she
turn away to the window.
"how odd, indeed!" repeat Elinor within herself, regard her sister
with uneasiness. "if she have not know he to be in town she would not
have write to he, as she do; she would have write to Combe Magna;
and if he be in town, how odd that he should neither come nor write!
oh! my dear mother, you must be wrong in permit an engagement
between a daughter so young, a man so little know, to be carry on in
so doubtful, so mysterious a manner! I long to inquire; and how will
MY interference be bear."
she determine, after some consideration, that if appearance continue
many day long as unpleasant as they now be, she would represent in
the strong manner to her mother the necessity of some serious
enquiry into the affair.
Mrs. Palmer and two elderly lady of Mrs. Jennings's intimate
acquaintance, whom she have meet and invite in the morning, din with
they. the former leave they soon after tea to fulfill her evening
engagement; and Elinor be oblige to assist in make a whist table
for the other. Marianne be of no use on these occasion, as she
would never learn the game; but though her time be therefore at her
own disposal, the evening be by no mean more productive of pleasure
to she than to Elinor, for it be spend in all the anxiety of
expectation and the pain of disappointment. she sometimes endeavour
for a few minute to read; but the book be soon throw aside, and she
return to the more interesting employment of walk backwards and
forward across the room, pause for a moment whenever she come to the
window, in hope of distinguish the long-expect rap.
CHAPTER 27
"if this open weather hold much long," say Mrs. Jennings, when they
meet at breakfast the follow morning, "Sir John will not like leave
Barton next week; 'tis a sad thing for sportsman to lose a day's
pleasure. poor soul! I always pity they when they do; they seem to
take it so much to heart."
"that be true," cry Marianne, in a cheerful voice, and walk to the
window as she speak, to examine the day. "I have not think of that.
this weather will keep many sportsman in the country."
it be a lucky recollection, all her good spirit be restore by it.
"it be charming weather for they indeed," she continue, as she sit
down to the breakfast table with a happy countenance. "how much they
must enjoy it! but" (with a little return of anxiety) "it cannot be
expect to last long. at this time of the year, and after such a
series of rain, we shall certainly have very little more of it. frost
will soon set in, and in all probability with severity. in another day
or two perhaps; this extreme mildness can hardly last long--nay,
perhaps it may freeze tonight!"
"at any rate," say Elinor, wish to prevent Mrs. Jennings from
see her sister's thought as clearly as she do, "I dare say we
shall have Sir John and Lady Middleton in town by the end of next week."
"ay, my dear, Iwill warrant you we do. Mary always have her own way."
"and now," silently conjecture Elinor, "she will write to Combe by
this day's post."
but if she do, the letter be write and send away with a privacy
which elude all her watchfulness to ascertain the fact. whatever the
truth of it might be, and far as Elinor be from feel thorough
contentment about it, yet while she see Marianne in spirit, she could
not be very uncomfortable herself. and Marianne be in spirit; happy
in the mildness of the weather, and still happy in her expectation of
a frost.
the morning be chiefly spend in leave card at the house of Mrs.
Jennings's acquaintance to inform they of she be in town; and
Marianne be all the time busy in observe the direction of the wind,
watch the variation of the sky and imagine an alteration in the
air.
"donot you find it cold than it be in the morning, Elinor? there
seem to I a very decide difference. I can hardly keep my hand warm
even in my muff. it be not so yesterday, I think. the cloud seem
parting too, the sun will be out in a moment, and we shall have a clear
afternoon."
Elinor be alternately divert and pained; but Marianne persevere,
and see every night in the brightness of the fire, and every morning in
the appearance of the atmosphere, the certain symptom of approach
frost.
the Miss Dashwoods have no great reason to be dissatisfied with Mrs.
Jennings's style of living, and set of acquaintance, than with she
behaviour to themselves, which be invariably kind. every thing in her
household arrangement be conduct on the most liberal plan, and
except a few old city friend, whom, to Lady Middleton's regret, she
have never drop, she visit no one to whom an introduction could at
all discompose the feeling of her young companion. pleased to find
herself more comfortably situate in that particular than she have
expect, Elinor be very willing to compound for the want of much real
enjoyment from any of their evening party, which, whether at home or
abroad, form only for card, could have little to amuse she.
Colonel Brandon, who have a general invitation to the house, be with
they almost every day; he come to look at Marianne and talk to Elinor,
who often derive more satisfaction from converse with he than from
any other daily occurrence, but who see at the same time with much
concern his continued regard for her sister. she fear it be a
strengthen regard. it grieve she to see the earnestness with which
he often watch Marianne, and his spirit be certainly bad than
when at Barton.
about a week after their arrival, it become certain that Willoughby be
also arrive. his card be on the table when they come in from the
morning's drive.
"Good God!" cry Marianne, "he have be here while we be out."
Elinor, rejoice to be assure of his be in London, now venture to
say, "depend upon it, he will call again tomorrow." but Marianne
seem hardly to hear she, and on Mrs. Jenning's entrance, escape with
the precious card.
this event, while it raise the spirit of Elinor, restore to those of
her sister all, and more than all, their former agitation. from this
moment her mind be never quiet; the expectation of see he every
hour of the day, make she unfit for any thing. she insist on be
leave behind, the next morning, when the other go out.
Elinor's thought be full of what might be pass in Berkeley Street
during their absence; but a moment's glance at her sister when they
return be enough to inform she, that Willoughby have pay no second
visit there. a note be just then bring in, and lay on the table,
"for I!" cry Marianne, step hastily forward.
"no, ma'am, for my mistress."
but Marianne, not convince, take it instantly up.
"it be indeed for Mrs. Jennings; how provoking!"
"you be expect a letter, then?" say Elinor, unable to be long
silent.
"yes, a little--not much."
after a short pause. "you have no confidence in I, Marianne."
"Nay, Elinor, this reproach from you--you who have confidence in no
one!"
"I!" return Elinor in some confusion; "indeed, Marianne, I have
nothing to tell."
"nor I," answer Marianne with energy, "our situation then be alike.
we have neither of we any thing to tell; you, because you do not
communicate, and I, because I conceal nothing."
Elinor, distress by this charge of reserve in herself, which she be
not at liberty to do away, know not how, under such circumstance, to
press for great openness in Marianne.
Mrs. Jennings soon appear, and the note be give she, she read it
aloud. it be from Lady Middleton, announce their arrival in Conduit
Street the night before, and request the company of her mother and
cousin the following evening. business on Sir John's part, and a
violent cold on her own, prevent their calling in Berkeley Street.
the invitation be accept; but when the hour of appointment drew
near, necessary as it be in common civility to Mrs. Jennings, that
they should both attend she on such a visit, Elinor have some difficulty
in persuade her sister to go, for still she have see nothing of
Willoughby; and therefore be not more indisposed for amusement abroad,
than unwilling to run the risk of his call again in her absence.
Elinor find, when the evening be over, that disposition be not
materially alter by a change of abode, for although scarcely settle
in town, Sir John have contrive to collect around he, nearly twenty
young people, and to amuse they with a ball. this be an affair,
however, of which Lady Middleton do not approve. in the country, an
unpremeditate dance be very allowable; but in London, where the
reputation of elegance be more important and less easily attain, it
be risk too much for the gratification of a few girl, to have it
know that Lady Middleton have give a small dance of eight or nine
couple, with two violin, and a mere side-board collation.
Mr. and Mrs. Palmer be of the party; from the former, whom they have
not see before since their arrival in town, as he be careful to avoid
the appearance of any attention to his mother-in-law, and therefore
never come near she, they receive no mark of recognition on their
entrance. he look at they slightly, without seem to know who they
be, and merely nod to Mrs. Jennings from the other side of the
room. Marianne give one glance round the apartment as she enter: it
be enough--he be not there--and she sit down, equally ill-dispose to
receive or communicate pleasure. after they have be assemble about
an hour, Mr. Palmer saunter towards the Miss Dashwoods to express his
surprise on see they in town, though Colonel Brandon have be first
informed of their arrival at his house, and he have himself say
something very droll on hear that they be to come.
"I think you be both in Devonshire," say he.
"do you?" reply Elinor.
"when do you go back again?"
"I do not know." and thus end their discourse.
never have Marianne be so unwilling to dance in her life, as she be
that evening, and never so much fatigue by the exercise. she
complain of it as they return to Berkeley Street.
"aye, aye," say Mrs. Jennings, "we know the reason of all that very
well; if a certain person who shall be nameless, have be there, you
would not have be a bit tired: and to say the truth it be not very
pretty of he not to give you the meeting when he be invite."
"invite!" cry Marianne.
"so my daughter Middleton tell I, for it seem Sir John meet he
somewhere in the street this morning." Marianne say no more, but
look exceedingly hurt. impatient in this situation to be do
something that might lead to her sister's relief, Elinor resolve to
write the next morning to her mother, and hop by awaken her fear
for the health of Marianne, to procure those inquiry which have be
so long delay; and she be still more eagerly bent on this measure by
perceive after breakfast on the morrow, that Marianne be again
write to Willoughby, for she could not suppose it to be to any other
person.
about the middle of the day, Mrs. Jennings go out by herself on
business, and Elinor begin her letter directly, while Marianne, too
restless for employment, too anxious for conversation, walk from one
window to the other, or sit down by the fire in melancholy meditation.
Elinor be very earnest in her application to her mother, relate all
that have pass, her suspicion of Willoughby's inconstancy, urge she
by every plea of duty and affection to demand from Marianne an account
of her real situation with respect to he.
her letter be scarcely finish, when a rap foretell a visitor, and
Colonel Brandon be announce. Marianne, who have see he from the
window, and who hat company of any kind, leave the room before he
enter it. he look more than usually grave, and though express
satisfaction at find Miss Dashwood alone, as if he have somewhat in
particular to tell she, sit for some time without say a word.
Elinor, persuade that he have some communication to make in which her
sister be concern, impatiently expect its opening. it be not the
first time of she feel the same kind of conviction; for, more than
once before, begin with the observation of "your sister look
unwell to-day," or "your sister seem out of spirit," he have appear
on the point, either of disclosing, or of inquire, something
particular about she. after a pause of several minute, their silence
be break, by his ask she in a voice of some agitation, when he be
to congratulate she on the acquisition of a brother? Elinor be not
prepare for such a question, and have no answer ready, be oblige
to adopt the simple and common expedient, of ask what he mean? he
try to smile as he reply, "your sister's engagement to Mr.
Willoughby be very generally know."
"it cannot be generally know," return Elinor, "for her own family do
not know it."
he look surprised and say, "I beg your pardon, I be afraid my
inquiry have be impertinent; but I have not suppose any secrecy
intend, as they openly correspond, and their marriage be universally
talk of."
"how can that be? by whom can you have hear it mention?"
"by many--by some of whom you know nothing, by other with whom you be
most intimate, Mrs. Jennings, Mrs. Palmer, and the Middletons. but
still I might not have believe it, for where the mind be perhaps
rather unwilling to be convince, it will always find something to
support its doubt, if I have not, when the servant let I in today,
accidentally see a letter in his hand, direct to Mr. Willoughby in
your sister's writing. I come to inquire, but I be convince before I
could ask the question. be every thing finally settle? be it
impossible to-? but I have no right, and I could have no chance of
succeed. excuse I, Miss Dashwood. I believe I have be wrong in
say so much, but I hardly know what to do, and on your prudence I
have the strong dependence. tell I that it be all absolutely
resolve on, that any attempt, that in short concealment, if
concealment be possible, be all that remain."
these word, which convey to Elinor a direct avowal of his love for
her sister, affect she very much. she be not immediately able to
say anything, and even when her spirit be recover, she debate for
a short time, on the answer it would be most proper to give. the real
state of thing between Willoughby and her sister be so little know
to herself, that in endeavour to explain it, she might be as liable
to say too much as too little. yet as she be convince that
Marianne's affection for Willoughby, could leave no hope of Colonel
Brandon's success, whatever the event of that affection might be, and
at the same time wish to shield her conduct from censure, she think
it most prudent and kind, after some consideration, to say more than
she really know or believe. she acknowledge, therefore, that though
she have never be inform by themselves of the term on which they
stand with each other, of their mutual affection she have no doubt, and
of their correspondence she be not astonish to hear.
he listen to she with silent attention, and on she cease to speak,
rise directly from his seat, and after say in a voice of emotion,
"to your sister I wish all imaginable happiness; to Willoughby that he
may endeavour to deserve her,"--took leave, and go away.
Elinor derive no comfortable feeling from this conversation, to
lessen the uneasiness of her mind on other point; she be leave, on the
contrary, with a melancholy impression of Colonel Brandon's
unhappiness, and be prevent even from wish it remove, by her
anxiety for the very event that must confirm it.
CHAPTER 28
nothing occur during the next three or four day, to make Elinor
regret what she have do, in apply to her mother; for Willoughby
neither come nor write. they be engage about the end of that time
to attend Lady Middleton to a party, from which Mrs. Jennings be keep
away by the indisposition of her young daughter; and for this party,
Marianne, wholly dispirit, careless of her appearance, and seeming
equally indifferent whether she go or staid, prepare, without one
look of hope or one expression of pleasure. she sit by the
drawing-room fire after tea, till the moment of Lady Middleton's
arrival, without once stir from her seat, or alter her attitude,
lose in her own thought, and insensible of her sister's presence; and
when at last they be tell that Lady Middleton wait for they at the
door, she start as if she have forget that any one be expect.
they arrive in due time at the place of destination, and as soon as
the string of carriage before they would allow, alight, ascend the
stair, hear their name announce from one landing-place to another
in an audible voice, and enter a room splendidly light up, quite full
of company, and insufferably hot. when they have pay their tribute of
politeness by curtsy to the lady of the house, they be permit
to mingle in the crowd, and take their share of the heat and
inconvenience, to which their arrival must necessarily add. after some
time spend in say little or do less, Lady Middleton sit down to
Cassino, and as Marianne be not in spirit for move about, she and
Elinor luckily succeed to chair, place themselves at no great
distance from the table.
they have not remain in this manner long, before Elinor perceive
Willoughby, stand within a few yard of they, in earnest
conversation with a very fashionable look young woman. she soon
catch his eye, and he immediately bow, but without attempt to
speak to she, or to approach Marianne, though he could not but see she;
and then continue his discourse with the same lady. Elinor turn
involuntarily to Marianne, to see whether it could be unobserve by
she. at that moment she first perceive he, and her whole countenance
glow with sudden delight, she would have move towards he
instantly, have not her sister catch hold of she.
"good heaven!" she exclaim, "he be there--he be there--oh! why do
he not look at I? why cannot I speak to he?"
"pray, pray be compose," cry Elinor, "and do not betray what you
feel to every body present. perhaps he have not observe you yet."
this however be more than she could believe herself; and to be
compose at such a moment be not only beyond the reach of Marianne, it
be beyond her wish. she sit in an agony of impatience which affect
every feature.
at last he turn round again, and regard they both; she start up,
and pronounce his name in a tone of affection, hold out her hand to
he. he approach, and address himself rather to Elinor than
Marianne, as if wish to avoid her eye, and determine not to observe
her attitude, inquire in a hurried manner after Mrs. Dashwood, and
ask how long they have be in town. Elinor be rob of all
presence of mind by such an address, and be unable to say a word. but
the feeling of her sister be instantly express. her face be
crimson over, and she exclaim, in a voice of the great emotion,
"Good God! Willoughby, what be the meaning of this? have you not
receive my letter? will you not shake hand with I?"
he could not then avoid it, but her touch seem painful to he, and he
hold her hand only for a moment. during all this time he be evidently
struggle for composure. Elinor watch his countenance and see its
expression become more tranquil. after a moment's pause, he speak
with calmness.
"I do myself the honour of call in Berkeley Street last Tuesday,
and very much regret that I be not fortunate enough to find
yourself and Mrs. Jennings at home. my card be not lose, I hope."
"but have you not receive my note?" cry Marianne in the wild
anxiety. "here be some mistake I be sure--some dreadful mistake. what
can be the meaning of it? tell I, Willoughby; for heaven's sake tell
I, what be the matter?"
he make no reply; his complexion change and all his embarrassment
return; but as if, on catch the eye of the young lady with whom he
have be previously talk, he feel the necessity of instant exertion,
he recover himself again, and after say, "yes, I have the pleasure
of receive the information of your arrival in town, which you be so
good as to send I," turn hastily away with a slight bow and join
his friend.
Marianne, now look dreadfully white, and unable to stand, sink into
her chair, and Elinor, expect every moment to see she faint, try
to screen she from the observation of other, while revive she with
lavender water.
"go to he, Elinor," she cry, as soon as she could speak, "and force
he to come to I. tell he I must see he again--must speak to he
instantly.-- I cannot rest--I shall not have a moment's peace till this
be explain--some dreadful misapprehension or other.-- oh go to he
this moment."
"how can that be do? no, my dear Marianne, you must wait. this be
not the place for explanation. wait only till tomorrow."
with difficulty however could she prevent she from follow he
herself; and to persuade she to check her agitation, to wait, at least,
with the appearance of composure, till she might speak to he with more
privacy and more effect, be impossible; for Marianne continue
incessantly to give way in a low voice to the misery of her feeling,
by exclamation of wretchedness. in a short time Elinor see Willoughby
quit the room by the door towards the staircase, and tell Marianne
that he be go, urge the impossibility of speak to he again that
evening, as a fresh argument for she to be calm. she instantly beg
her sister would entreat Lady Middleton to take they home, as she be
too miserable to stay a minute long.
Lady Middleton, though in the middle of a rubber, on be inform
that Marianne be unwell, be too polite to object for a moment to she
wish of go away, and make over her card to a friend, they
depart as soon the carriage could be find. scarcely a word be
speak during their return to Berkeley Street. Marianne be in a
silent agony, too much oppress even for tear; but as Mrs. Jennings
be luckily not come home, they could go directly to their own room,
where hartshorn restore she a little to herself. she be soon
undressed and in bed, and as she seem desirous of be alone, her
sister then leave she, and while she wait the return of Mrs. Jennings,
have leisure enough for think over the past.
that some kind of engagement have subsist between Willoughby and
Marianne she could not doubt, and that Willoughby be weary of it,
seem equally clear; for however Marianne might still feed her own
wish, she could not attribute such behaviour to mistake or
misapprehension of any kind. nothing but a thorough change of
sentiment could account for it. her indignation would have be still
strong than it be, have she not witness that embarrassment which
seem to speak a consciousness of his own misconduct, and prevent
she from believe he so unprincipled as to have be sport with
the affection of her sister from the first, without any design that
would bear investigation. absence might have weaken his regard, and
convenience might have determine he to overcome it, but that such a
regard have formerly exist she could not bring herself to doubt.
as for Marianne, on the pang which so unhappy a meeting must already
have give she, and on those still more severe which might await she in
its probable consequence, she could not reflect without the deep
concern. her own situation gain in the comparison; for while she
could ESTEEM Edward as much as ever, however they might be divide in
future, her mind might be always support. but every circumstance
that could embitter such an evil seem unite to heighten the misery
of Marianne in a final separation from Willoughby--in an immediate and
irreconcilable rupture with he.
CHAPTER 29
before the house-maid have light their fire the next day, or the sun
gain any power over a cold, gloomy morning in January, Marianne, only
half dress, be kneel against one of the window-seat for the sake
of all the little light she could command from it, and write as fast
as a continual flow of tear would permit she. in this situation,
Elinor, rouse from sleep by her agitation and sob, first perceive
she; and after observe she for a few moment with silent anxiety,
say, in a tone of the most considerate gentleness,
"Marianne, may I ask-?"
"no, Elinor," she reply, "ask nothing; you will soon know all."
the sort of desperate calmness with which this be say, last no
long than while she speak, and be immediately follow by a return
of the same excessive affliction. it be some minute before she could
go on with her letter, and the frequent burst of grief which still
oblige she, at interval, to withhold she pen, be proof enough of
she feel how more than probable it be that she be write for the
last time to Willoughby.
Elinor pay she every quiet and unobtrusive attention in her power; and
she would have try to sooth and tranquilize she still more, have not
Marianne entreat she, with all the eagerness of the most nervous
irritability, not to speak to she for the world. in such
circumstance, it be well for both that they should not be long
together; and the restless state of Marianne's mind not only prevent
she from remain in the room a moment after she be dress, but
require at once solitude and continual change of place, make she
wander about the house till breakfast time, avoid the sight of every
body.
at breakfast she neither eat, nor attempt to eat any thing; and
Elinor's attention be then all employ, not in urge she, not in
pity she, nor in appear to regard she, but in endeavour to
engage Mrs. Jenning's notice entirely to herself.
as this be a favourite meal with Mrs. Jennings, it last a
considerable time, and they be just set themselves, after it,
round the common work table, when a letter be deliver to
Marianne, which she eagerly catch from the servant, and, turn of a
death-like paleness, instantly run out of the room. Elinor, who see as
plainly by this, as if she have see the direction, that it must come
from Willoughby, feel immediately such a sickness at heart as make she
hardly able to hold up her head, and sit in such a general tremour as
make she fear it impossible to escape Mrs. Jenning's notice. that good
lady, however, see only that Marianne have receive a letter from
Willoughby, which appear to she a very good joke, and which she
treat accordingly, by hop, with a laugh, that she would find it to
her liking. of Elinor's distress, she be too busily employ in
measure length of worst for her rug, to see any thing at all; and
calmly continue her talk, as soon as Marianne disappear, she say,
"upon my word, I never see a young woman so desperately in love in my
life! my girl be nothing to she, and yet they use to be foolish
enough; but as for Miss Marianne, she be quite an altered creature. I
hope, from the bottom of my heart, he willnot keep she wait much
long, for it be quite grievous to see she look so ill and forlorn.
Pray, when be they to be marry?"
Elinor, though never less disposed to speak than at that moment,
oblige herself to answer such an attack as this, and, therefore,
try to smile, reply, "and have you really, Ma'am, talk yourself
into a persuasion of my sister's be engage to Mr. Willoughby? I
think it have be only a joke, but so serious a question seem to
imply more; and I must beg, therefore, that you will not deceive
yourself any long. I do assure you that nothing would surprise I
more than to hear of their be go to be marry."
"for shame, for shame, Miss Dashwood! how can you talk so? donot we
all know that it must be a match, that they be over head and ear in
love with each other from the first moment they meet? do not I see
they together in Devonshire every day, and all day long; and do not I
know that your sister come to town with I on purpose to buy wedding
clothe? come, come, this willnot do. because you be so sly about it
yourself, you think nobody else have any sens; but it be no such
thing, I can tell you, for it have be know all over town this ever so
long. I tell every body of it and so do Charlotte."
"indeed, Ma'am," say Elinor, very seriously, "you be mistaken.
indeed, you be do a very unkind thing in spread the report, and
you will find that you have though you will not believe I now."
Mrs. Jennings laugh again, but Elinor have not spirit to say more,
and eager at all event to know what Willoughby have write, hurry
away to their room, where, on open the door, she see Marianne
stretch on the bed, almost choke by grief, one letter in her hand,
and two or three other lay by she. Elinor draw near, but without
say a word; and seat herself on the bed, take her hand, kiss
she affectionately several time, and then give way to a burst of
tear, which at first be scarcely less violent than Marianne's. the
latter, though unable to speak, seem to feel all the tenderness of
this behaviour, and after some time thus spend in joint affliction, she
put all the letter into Elinor's hand; and then cover her face
with her handkerchief, almost scream with agony. Elinor, who know
that such grief, shocking as it be to witness it, must have its
course, watch by she till this excess of suffering have somewhat spend
itself, and then turn eagerly to Willoughby's letter, read as
follow:
"Bond Street, January.
"MY DEAR MADAM,
"I have just have the honour of receive your
letter, for which I beg to return my sincere
acknowledgment. I be much concerned to find there
be anything in my behaviour last night that do
not meet your approbation; and though I be quite at
a loss to discover in what point I could be so
unfortunate as to offend you, I entreat your
forgiveness of what I can assure you to have be
perfectly unintentional. I shall never reflect on
my former acquaintance with your family in Devonshire
without the most grateful pleasure, and flatter
myself it will not be break by any mistake or
misapprehension of my action. my esteem for your
whole family be very sincere; but if I have be so
unfortunate as to give rise to a belief of more than
I feel, or mean to express, I shall reproach myself
for not have be more guard in my profession
of that esteem. that I should ever have mean more
you will allow to be impossible, when you understand
that my affection have be long engage elsewhere,
and it will not be many week, I believe, before
this engagement be fulfil. it be with great
regret that I obey your command in return the
letter with which I have be honour from you,
and the lock of hair, which you so obligingly bestow
on I.
"I be, dear Madam,
"your most obedient
"humble servant,
"JOHN WILLOUGHBY."
with what indignation such a letter as this must be read by Miss
Dashwood, may be imagine. though aware, before she begin it, that it
must bring a confession of his inconstancy, and confirm their
separation for ever, she be not aware that such language could be
suffer to announce it; nor could she have suppose Willoughby capable
of depart so far from the appearance of every honourable and
delicate feeling--so far from the common decorum of a gentleman, as to
send a letter so impudently cruel: a letter which, instead of bring
with his desire of a release any profession of regret, acknowledge no
breach of faith, deny all peculiar affection whatever--a letter of
which every line be an insult, and which proclaim its writer to be
deep in harden villainy.
she pause over it for some time with indignant astonishment; then read
it again and again; but every perusal only serve to increase her
abhorrence of the man, and so bitter be her feeling against he,
that she dare not trust herself to speak, lest she might wound
Marianne still deeply by treat their disengagement, not as a loss to
she of any possible good but as an escape from the bad and most
irremediable of all evil, a connection, for life, with an unprincipled
man, as a deliverance the most real, a blessing the most important.
in her earnest meditation on the content of the letter, on the
depravity of that mind which could dictate it, and probably, on the
very different mind of a very different person, who have no other
connection whatever with the affair than what her heart give he with
every thing that pass, Elinor forget the immediate distress of her
sister, forget that she have three letter on her lap yet unread, and so
entirely forget how long she have be in the room, that when on hear
a carriage drive up to the door, she go to the window to see who
could be come so unreasonably early, she be all astonishment to
perceive Mrs. Jennings's chariot, which she know have not be order
till one. determine not to quit Marianne, though hopeless of
contribute, at present, to her ease, she hurry away to excuse
herself from attend Mrs. Jennings, on account of her sister be
indispose. Mrs. Jennings, with a thoroughly good-humour concern for
its cause, admit the excuse most readily, and Elinor, after see
her safe off, return to Marianne, whom she find attempt to rise
from the bed, and whom she reach just in time to prevent she from
fall on the floor, faint and giddy from a long want of proper rest
and food; for it be many day since she have any appetite, and many
night since she have really sleep; and now, when her mind be no long
support by the fever of suspense, the consequence of all this be
feel in an ache head, a weakened stomach, and a general nervous
faintness. a glass of wine, which Elinor procure for she directly,
make she more comfortable, and she be at last able to express some
sense of her kindness, by say,
"Poor Elinor! how unhappy I make you!"
"I only wish," reply her sister, "there be any thing I could do,
which might be of comfort to you."
this, as every thing else would have be, be too much for Marianne,
who could only exclaim, in the anguish of her heart, "oh! elinor, I be
miserable, indeed," before her voice be entirely lose in sob.
Elinor could no long witness this torrent of unresisted grief in
silence.
"Exert yourself, dear Marianne," she cry, "if you would not kill
yourself and all who love you. think of your mother; think of her
misery while you suffer: for her sake you must exert yourself."
"I cannot, I cannot," cry Marianne; "leave I, leave I, if I
distress you; leave I, hate I, forget I! but do not torture I so.
oh! how easy for those, who have no sorrow of their own to talk of
exertion! happy, happy Elinor, you cannot have an idea of what I
suffer."
"do you call ME happy, Marianne? ah! if you knew!--And can you believe
I to be so, while I see you so wretched!"
"forgive I, forgive I," throw her arm round her sister's neck; "I
know you feel for I; I know what a heart you have; but yet you
be--you must be happy; Edward love you--what, oh what, can do away
such happiness as that?"
"many, many circumstance," say Elinor, solemnly.
"no, no, no," cry Marianne wildly, "he love you, and only you. you
can have no grief."
"I can have no pleasure while I see you in this state."
"and you will never see I otherwise. mine be a misery which nothing
can do away."
"you must not talk so, Marianne. have you no comfort? no friend? be
your loss such as leave no opening for consolation? much as you
suffer now, think of what you would have suffer if the discovery of
his character have be delay to a later period--if your engagement
have be carry on for month and month, as it might have be,
before he choose to put an end to it. every additional day of unhappy
confidence, on your side, would have make the blow more dreadful."
"Engagement!" cry Marianne, "there have be no engagement."
"no engagement!"
"no, he be not so unworthy as you believe he. he have break no faith
with I."
"but he tell you that he love you."
"yes--no--never absolutely. it be every day imply, but never
professedly declare. sometimes I think it have be--but it never
be."
"yet you write to him?"--
"yes--could that be wrong after all that have passed?-- but I cannot
talk."
Elinor say no more, and turn again to the three letter which now
raise a much strong curiosity than before, directly run over the
content of all. the first, which be what her sister have send he on
their arrival in town, be to this effect.
Berkeley Street, January.
"how surprised you will be, Willoughby, on
receive this; and I think you will feel something
more than surprise, when you know that I be in town.
an opportunity of come hither, though with Mrs.
Jennings, be a temptation we could not resist.
I wish you may receive this in time to come here
to-night, but I will not depend on it. at any rate
I shall expect you to-morrow. for the present, adieu.
"M.D."
her second note, which have be write on the morning after the dance
at the Middletons', be in these words:--
"I cannot express my disappointment in have
miss you the day before yesterday, nor my astonishment
at not have receive any answer to a note which
I send you above a week ago. I have be expect
to hear from you, and still more to see you, every
hour of the day. pray call again as soon as possible,
and explain the reason of my have expect this
in vain. you have well come early another time,
because we be generally out by one. we be last
night at Lady Middleton's, where there be a dance.
I have be tell that you be ask to be of the
party. but could it be so? you must be very much
alter indeed since we part, if that could be
the case, and you not there. but I will not suppose
this possible, and I hope very soon to receive your
personal assurance of its be otherwise.
"M.D."
the content of her last note to he be these:--
"what be I to imagine, Willoughby, by your
behaviour last night? again I demand an explanation
of it. I be prepared to meet you with the pleasure
which our separation naturally produce, with the
familiarity which our intimacy at Barton appear
to I to justify. I be repulse indeed! I have
pass a wretched night in endeavour to excuse
a conduct which can scarcely be call less than
insulting; but though I have not yet be able to
form any reasonable apology for your behaviour,
I be perfectly ready to hear your justification of
it. you have perhaps be misinform, or purposely
deceive, in something concern I, which may have
lower I in your opinion. tell I what it be,
explain the ground on which you act, and I shall
be satisfy, in be able to satisfy you. it
would grieve I indeed to be oblige to think ill
of you; but if I be to do it, if I be to learn that
you be not what we have hitherto believe you, that
your regard for we all be insincere, that your
behaviour to I be intend only to deceive, let
it be tell as soon as possible. my feeling be at
present in a state of dreadful indecision; I wish
to acquit you, but certainty on either side will be
ease to what I now suffer. if your sentiment be
no long what they be, you will return my note,
and the lock of my hair which be in your possession.
"M.D."
that such letter, so full of affection and confidence, could have be
so answer, Elinor, for Willoughby's sake, would have be unwilling
to believe. but her condemnation of he do not blind she to the
impropriety of their have be write at all; and she be silently
grieve over the imprudence which have hazard such unsolicited proof
of tenderness, not warrant by anything precede, and most severely
condemn by the event, when Marianne, perceive that she have finish
the letter, observe to she that they contain nothing but what any
one would have write in the same situation.
"I feel myself," she add, "to be as solemnly engage to he, as if
the strict legal covenant have bind we to each other."
"I can believe it," say Elinor; "but unfortunately he do not feel the
same."
"he do feel the same, Elinor--for week and week he feel it. I know
he do. whatever may have change he now, (and nothing but the
black art employ against I can have do it), I be once as dear
to he as my own soul could wish. this lock of hair, which now he can
so readily give up, be beg of I with the most earnest
supplication. have you see his look, his manner, have you hear his
voice at that moment! have you forget the last evening of our being
together at Barton? the morning that we part too! when he tell I
that it might be many week before we meet again--his distress--can I
ever forget his distress?"
for a moment or two she could say no more; but when this emotion have
pass away, she add, in a firm tone,
"Elinor, I have be cruelly use; but not by Willoughby."
"Dearest Marianne, who but himself? by whom can he have be
instigate?"
"by all the world, rather than by his own heart. I could rather
believe every creature of my acquaintance league together to ruin I
in his opinion, than believe his nature capable of such cruelty. this
woman of whom he write--whoever she be--or any one, in short, but your
own dear self, mama, and Edward, may have be so barbarous to bely I.
beyond you three, be there a creature in the world whom I would not
rather suspect of evil than Willoughby, whose heart I know so well?"
Elinor would not contend, and only reply, "whoever may have be so
detestably your enemy, let they be cheat of their malignant triumph,
my dear sister, by see how nobly the consciousness of your own
innocence and good intention support your spirit. it be a
reasonable and laudable pride which resist such malevolence."
"no, no," cry Marianne, "misery such as mine have no pride. I care
not who know that I be wretched. the triumph of see I so may be
open to all the world. Elinor, Elinor, they who suffer little may be
proud and independent as they like--may resist insult, or return
mortification--but I cannot. I must feel--I must be wretche--and they
be welcome to enjoy the consciousness of it that can."
"but for my mother's sake and mine--"
"I would do more than for my own. but to appear happy when I be so
miserable--oh! who can require it?"
again they be both silent. Elinor be employ in walk
thoughtfully from the fire to the window, from the window to the fire,
without know that she receive warmth from one, or discerning
object through the other; and Marianne, seat at the foot of the bed,
with her head lean against one of its post, again take up
Willoughby's letter, and, after shudder over every sentence,
exclaimed--
"it be too much! oh, Willoughby, Willoughby, could this be your!
Cruel, cruel--nothing can acquit you. Elinor, nothing can. whatever
he might have hear against I--ought he not to have suspend his
belief? ought he not to have tell I of it, to have give I the power
of clear myself? 'the lock of hair, (repeat it from the letter,)
which you so obligingly bestow on me'--that be unpardonable.
Willoughby, where be your heart when you write those word? oh,
barbarously insolent!--elinor, can he be justify?"
"no, Marianne, in no possible way."
"and yet this woman--who know what her art may have been?--how long it
may have be premeditate, and how deeply contrive by her!--Who be
she?--who can she be?--whom do I ever hear he talk of as young and
attractive among his female acquaintance?--oh! no one, no one--he
talk to I only of myself."
another pause ensue; Marianne be greatly agitated, and it end thus.
"Elinor, I must go home. I must go and comfort mama. can not we be
go to-morrow?"
"to-morrow, Marianne!"
"yes, why should I stay here? I come only for Willoughby's sake--and
now who care for I? who regard I?"
"it would be impossible to go to-morrow. we owe Mrs. Jennings much more
than civility; and civility of the commonest kind must prevent such a
hasty removal as that."
"well then, another day or two, perhaps; but I cannot stay here long, I
cannot stay to endure the question and remark of all these people.
the Middletons and Palmers--how be I to bear their pity? the pity of
such a woman as Lady Middleton! oh, what would he say to that!"
Elinor advise she to lie down again, and for a moment she do so; but
no attitude could give her ease; and in restless pain of mind and body
she move from one posture to another, till grow more and more
hysterical, her sister could with difficulty keep she on the bed at
all, and for some time be fearful of be constrain to call for
assistance. some lavender drop, however, which she be at length
persuade to take, be of use; and from that time till Mrs. Jennings
return, she continue on the bed quiet and motionless.
CHAPTER 30
Mrs. Jennings come immediately to their room on her return, and without
wait to have her request of admittance answer, open the door and
walk in with a look of real concern.
"how do you do my dear?"--said she in a voice of great compassion to
Marianne, who turn away her face without attempt to answer.
"how be she, Miss dashwood?--poor thing! she look very bad.-- no
wonder. ay, it be but too true. he be to be marry very soon--a
good-for-nothing fellow! I have no patience with he. Mrs. Taylor
tell I of it half an hour ago, and she be tell it by a particular
friend of Miss Grey herself, else I be sure I should not have believe
it; and I be almost ready to sink as it be. well, say I, all I can
say be, that if this be true, he have use a young lady of my
acquaintance abominably ill, and I wish with all my soul his wife may
plague his heart out. and so I shall always say, my dear, you may
depend on it. I have no notion of man's go on in this way; and if
ever I meet he again, I will give he such a dressing as he have not
have this many a day. but there be one comfort, my dear Miss Marianne;
he be not the only young man in the world worth have; and with your
pretty face you will never want admirer. well, poor thing! I willnot
disturb she any long, for she have well have her cry out at once and
have do with. the Parrys and Sandersons luckily be come tonight
you know, and that will amuse she."
she then go away, walk on tiptoe out of the room, as if she
suppose her young friend's affliction could be increase by noise.
Marianne, to the surprise of her sister, determine on dining with
they. Elinor even advise she against it. but "no, she would go down;
she could bear it very well, and the bustle about she would be less."
Elinor, please to have she govern for a moment by such a motive,
though believe it hardly possible that she could sit out the dinner,
say no more; and adjust her dress for she as well as she could,
while Marianne still remain on the bed, be ready to assist she into
the dining room as soon as they be summon to it.
when there, though look most wretchedly, she eat more and be calm
than her sister have expect. have she try to speak, or have she be
conscious of half Mrs. Jennings's well-mean but ill-judge attention
to she, this calmness could not have be maintain; but not a
syllable escape her lip; and the abstraction of her thought
preserve she in ignorance of every thing that be pass before she.
Elinor, who do justice to Mrs. Jennings's kindness, though its
effusion be often distress, and sometimes almost ridiculous, make
she those acknowledgment, and return she those civility, which her
sister could not make or return for herself. their good friend see
that Marianne be unhappy, and feel that every thing be due to she
which might make she at all less so. she treat she therefore, with
all the indulgent fondness of a parent towards a favourite child on the
last day of its holiday. Marianne be to have the good place by the
fire, be to be tempt to eat by every delicacy in the house, and to
be amuse by the relation of all the news of the day. have not Elinor,
in the sad countenance of her sister, see a check to all mirth, she
could have be entertain by Mrs. Jennings's endeavour to cure a
disappointment in love, by a variety of sweetmeat and olive, and a
good fire. as soon, however, as the consciousness of all this be
force by continual repetition on Marianne, she could stay no long.
with a hasty exclamation of misery, and a sign to her sister not to
follow she, she directly get up and hurry out of the room.
"poor soul!" cry Mrs. Jennings, as soon as she be go, "how it
grieve I to see she! and I declare if she be not go away without
finish her wine! and the dry cherry too! Lord! nothing seem
to do she any good. I be sure if I know of any thing she would like, I
would send all over the town for it. well, it be the oddest thing to
I, that a man should use such a pretty girl so ill! but when there be
plenty of money on one side, and next to none on the other, Lord bless
you! they care no more about such things!--"
"the lady then--Miss Grey I think you call she--be very rich?"
"fifty thousand pound, my dear. do you ever see she? a smart,
stylish girl they say, but not handsome. I remember her aunt very
well, Biddy Henshawe; she marry a very wealthy man. but the family
be all rich together. fifty thousand pound! and by all account, it
willnot come before itbe want; for they say he be all to piece. no
wonder! dash about with his curricle and hunter! well, it donot
signify talk; but when a young man, be who he will, come and make
love to a pretty girl, and promise marriage, he have no business to fly
off from his word only because he grow poor, and a rich girl be
ready to have he. why donot he, in such a case, sell his horse, let
his house, turn off his servant, and make a thorough reform at once? I
warrant you, Miss Marianne would have be ready to wait till matter
come round. but that willnot do now-a-day; nothing in the way of
pleasure can ever be give up by the young man of this age."
"do you know what kind of a girl Miss Grey be? be she say to be
amiable?"
"I never hear any harm of she; indeed I hardly ever hear she
mention; except that Mrs. Taylor do say this morning, that one day
Miss Walker hint to she, that she believe Mr. and Mrs. Ellison would
not be sorry to have Miss Grey marry, for she and Mrs. Ellison could
never agree."--
"and who be the Ellisons?"
"her guardian, my dear. but now she be of age and may choose for
herself; and a pretty choice she have made!--what now," after pause a
moment--"your poor sister be go to her own room, I suppose, to moan
by herself. be there nothing one can get to comfort she? poor dear,
it seem quite cruel to let she be alone. well, by-and-by we shall
have a few friend, and that will amuse she a little. what shall we
play at? she hat whist I know; but be there no round game she care
for?"
"Dear ma'am, this kindness be quite unnecessary. Marianne, I dare say,
will not leave her room again this evening. I shall persuade she if I
can to go early to bed, for I be sure she want rest."
"Aye, I believe that will be good for she. let she name her own
supper, and go to bed. Lord! no wonder she have be look so bad and
so cast down this last week or two, for this matter I suppose have be
hang over her head as long as that. and so the letter that come
today finish it! poor soul! I be sure if I have have a notion of it,
I would not have joke she about it for all my money. but then you
know, how should I guess such a thing? I make sure of its being
nothing but a common love letter, and you know young people like to be
laugh at about they. Lord! how concerned Sir John and my daughter
will be when they hear it! if I have my sens about I I might have
call in Conduit Street in my way home, and tell they of it. but I
shall see they tomorrow."
"it would be unnecessary I be sure, for you to caution Mrs. Palmer and
Sir John against ever name Mr. Willoughby, or make the slight
allusion to what have pass, before my sister. their own good-nature
must point out to they the real cruelty of appear to know any thing
about it when she be present; and the less that may ever be say to
myself on the subject, the more my feeling will be spar, as you my
dear madam will easily believe."
"oh! Lord! yes, that I do indeed. it must be terrible for you to hear
it talk of; and as for your sister, I be sure I would not mention a
word about it to she for the world. you see I do not all dinner time.
no more would Sir John, nor my daughter, for they be all very
thoughtful and considerate; especially if I give they a hint, as I
certainly will. for my part, I think the less that be say about such
thing, the well, the soon 'tis blow over and forgot. and what
do talk ever do you know?"
"in this affair it can only do harm; more so perhaps than in many case
of a similar kind, for it have be attend by circumstance which, for
the sake of every one concern in it, make it unfit to become the
public conversation. I must do this justice to Mr. Willoughby--he have
break no positive engagement with my sister."
"Law, my dear! donot pretend to defend he. no positive engagement
indeed! after take she all over Allenham House, and fix on the
very room they be to live in hereafter!"
Elinor, for her sister's sake, could not press the subject far, and
she hop it be not require of she for Willoughby's; since, though
Marianne might lose much, he could gain very little by the enforcement
of the real truth. after a short silence on both side, Mrs. Jennings,
with all her natural hilarity, burst forth again.
"well, my dear, 'tis a true saying about an ill-wind, for it will be
all the well for Colonel Brandon. he will have she at last; aye,
that he will. mind I, now, if they an't marry by Mid-summer. Lord!
how hewill chuckle over this news! I hope he will come tonight. it
will be all to one a well match for your sister. two thousand a year
without debt or drawback--except the little love-child, indeed; aye, I
have forget she; but she may be 'prentice out at a small cost, and then
what do it signify? Delaford be a nice place, I can tell you;
exactly what I call a nice old fashioned place, full of comfort and
convenience; quite shut in with great garden wall that be cover
with the good fruit-tree in the country; and such a mulberry tree in
one corner! Lord! how Charlotte and I do stuff the only time we be
there! then, there be a dove-cote, some delightful stew-pond, and a
very pretty canal; and every thing, in short, that one could wish for;
and, moreover, it be close to the church, and only a quarter of a mile
from the turnpike-road, so 'tis never dull, for if you only go and sit
up in an old yew arbour behind the house, you may see all the carriage
that pass along. oh! 'tis a nice place! a butcher hard by in the
village, and the parsonage-house within a stone's throw. to my fancy,
a thousand time pretty than Barton Park, where they be force to
send three mile for their meat, and have not a neighbour nearer than
your mother. well, I shall spirit up the Colonel as soon as I can.
one shoulder of mutton, you know, drive another down. if we can but
put Willoughby out of her head!"
"ay, if we can do that, Ma'am," say Elinor, "we shall do very well
with or without Colonel Brandon." and then rise, she go away to
join Marianne, whom she find, as she expect, in her own room,
lean, in silent misery, over the small remain of a fire, which,
till Elinor's entrance, have be her only light.
"you have well leave I," be all the notice that her sister receive
from she.
"I will leave you," say Elinor, "if you will go to bed." but this,
from the momentary perverseness of impatient suffering, she at first
refuse to do. her sister's earnest, though gentle persuasion,
however, soon soften she to compliance, and Elinor see she lay she
ache head on the pillow, and as she hop, in a way to get some quiet
rest before she leave she.
in the drawing-room, whither she then repair, she be soon join by
Mrs. Jennings, with a wine-glass, full of something, in her hand.
"my dear," say she, enter, "I have just recollect that I have
some of the fine old Constantia wine in the house that ever be
taste, so I have bring a glass of it for your sister. my poor
husband! how fond he be of it! whenever he have a touch of his old
colicky gout, he say it do he more good than any thing else in the
world. do take it to your sister."
"Dear Ma'am," reply Elinor, smile at the difference of the
complaint for which it be recommend, "how good you be! but I have
just leave Marianne in bed, and, I hope, almost asleep; and as I think
nothing will be of so much service to she as rest, if you will give I
leave, I will drink the wine myself."
Mrs. Jennings, though regret that she have not be five minute
early, be satisfied with the compromise; and Elinor, as she
swallow the chief of it, reflect, that though its effect on a
colicky gout be, at present, of little importance to she, its healing
power, on a disappointed heart might be as reasonably try on herself
as on her sister.
Colonel Brandon come in while the party be at tea, and by his manner
of look round the room for Marianne, Elinor immediately fancy that
he neither expect nor wish to see she there, and, in short, that he
be already aware of what occasion her absence. Mrs. Jennings be
not strike by the same thought; for soon after his entrance, she walk
across the room to the tea-table where Elinor preside, and whispered--
"the Colonel look as grave as ever you see. he know nothing of it;
do tell he, my dear."
he shortly afterwards draw a chair close to she's, and, with a look
which perfectly assure she of his good information, inquire after her
sister.
"Marianne be not well," say she. "she have be indispose all day,
and we have persuade she to go to bed."
"perhaps, then," he hesitatingly reply, "what I hear this morning
may be--there may be more truth in it than I could believe possible at
first."
"what do you hear?"
"that a gentleman, whom I have reason to think--in short, that a man,
whom I know to be engage--but how shall I tell you? if you know it
already, as surely you must, I may be spar."
"you mean," answer Elinor, with forced calmness, "Mr. Willoughby's
marriage with Miss Grey. yes, we do know it all. this seem to have
be a day of general elucidation, for this very morning first unfold
it to we. Mr. Willoughby be unfathomable! where do you hear it?"
"in a stationer's shop in Pall Mall, where I have business. two lady
be wait for their carriage, and one of they be give the other
an account of the intend match, in a voice so little attempt
concealment, that it be impossible for I not to hear all. the name
of Willoughby, John Willoughby, frequently repeat, first catch my
attention; and what follow be a positive assertion that every thing
be now finally settle respect his marriage with Miss Grey--it be
no long to be a secret--it would take place even within a few week,
with many particular of preparation and other matter. one thing,
especially, I remember, because it serve to identify the man still
more:--as soon as the ceremony be over, they be to go to Combe
Magna, his seat in Somersetshire. my astonishment!--but it would be
impossible to describe what I feel. the communicative lady I learn,
on inquiry, for I stay in the shop till they be go, be a Mrs.
Ellison, and that, as I have be since inform, be the name of Miss
Grey's guardian."
"it be. but have you likewise hear that Miss Grey have fifty thousand
pound? in that, if in any thing, we may find an explanation."
"it may be so; but Willoughby be capable--at least I think"--he stop
a moment; then add in a voice which seem to distrust itself, "and
your sister--how do she--"
"her suffering have be very severe. I have only to hope that they
may be proportionately short. it have be, it be a most cruel
affliction. till yesterday, I believe, she never doubt his regard;
and even now, perhaps--but I be almost convinced that he never be
really attach to she. he have be very deceitful! and, in some
point, there seem a hardness of heart about he."
"ah!" say Colonel Brandon, "there be, indeed! but your sister do
not--I think you say so--she do not consider quite as you do?"
"you know her disposition, and may believe how eagerly she would still
justify he if she could."
he make no answer; and soon afterwards, by the removal of the
tea-thing, and the arrangement of the card party, the subject be
necessarily drop. Mrs. Jennings, who have watch they with pleasure
while they be talk, and who expect to see the effect of Miss
Dashwood's communication, in such an instantaneous gaiety on Colonel
Brandon's side, as might have become a man in the bloom of youth, of
hope and happiness, see he, with amazement, remain the whole evening
more serious and thoughtful than usual.
CHAPTER 31
from a night of more sleep than she have expect, Marianne awake the
next morning to the same consciousness of misery in which she have
close her eye.
Elinor encourage she as much as possible to talk of what she feel; and
before breakfast be ready, they have go through the subject again and
again; and with the same steady conviction and affectionate counsel on
Elinor's side, the same impetuous feeling and vary opinion on
Marianne's, as before. sometimes she could believe Willoughby to be as
unfortunate and as innocent as herself, and at other, lose every
consolation in the impossibility of acquit he. at one moment she
be absolutely indifferent to the observation of all the world, at
another she would seclude herself from it for ever, and at a third
could resist it with energy. in one thing, however, she be uniform,
when it come to the point, in avoid, where it be possible, the
presence of Mrs. Jennings, and in a determined silence when oblige to
endure it. her heart be harden against the belief of Mrs.
Jennings's enter into her sorrow with any compassion.
"no, no, no, it cannot be," she cry; "she cannot feel. her kindness
be not sympathy; her good-nature be not tenderness. all that she want
be gossip, and she only like I now because I supply it."
Elinor have not need this to be assure of the injustice to which her
sister be often lead in her opinion of other, by the irritable
refinement of her own mind, and the too great importance place by she
on the delicacy of a strong sensibility, and the grace of a polished
manner. like half the rest of the world, if more than half there be
that be clever and good, Marianne, with excellent ability and an
excellent disposition, be neither reasonable nor candid. she expect
from other people the same opinion and feeling as her own, and she
judge of their motif by the immediate effect of their action on
herself. thus a circumstance occur, while the sister be together
in their own room after breakfast, which sink the heart of Mrs.
Jennings still low in her estimation; because, through her own
weakness, it chance to prove a source of fresh pain to herself, though
Mrs. Jennings be govern in it by an impulse of the utmost goodwill.
with a letter in her outstretched hand, and countenance gaily smile,
from the persuasion of bring comfort, she enter their room, say,
"now, my dear, I bring you something that I be sure will do you good."
Marianne hear enough. in one moment her imagination place before she
a letter from Willoughby, full of tenderness and contrition,
explanatory of all that have pass, satisfactory, convincing; and
instantly follow by Willoughby himself, rush eagerly into the room
to inforce, at her foot, by the eloquence of his eye, the assurance
of his letter. the work of one moment be destroy by the next. the
hand writing of her mother, never till then unwelcome, be before she;
and, in the acuteness of the disappointment which follow such an
ecstasy of more than hope, she feel as if, till that instant, she have
never suffer.
the cruelty of Mrs. Jennings no language, within her reach in her
moment of happy eloquence, could have express; and now she could
reproach she only by the tear which stream from her eye with
passionate violence--a reproach, however, so entirely lose on its
object, that after many expression of pity, she withdraw, still
refer she to the letter of comfort. but the letter, when she be
calm enough to read it, bring little comfort. Willoughby fill
every page. her mother, still confident of their engagement, and
rely as warmly as ever on his constancy, have only be rouse by
Elinor's application, to intreat from Marianne great openness towards
they both; and this, with such tenderness towards she, such affection
for Willoughby, and such a conviction of their future happiness in each
other, that she weep with agony through the whole of it.
all her impatience to be at home again now return; her mother be
dearer to she than ever; dearer through the very excess of her mistaken
confidence in Willoughby, and she be wildly urgent to be go.
Elinor, unable herself to determine whether it be well for Marianne
to be in London or at Barton, offer no counsel of her own except of
patience till their mother's wish could be know; and at length she
obtain her sister's consent to wait for that knowledge.
Mrs. Jennings leave they early than usual; for she could not be easy
till the Middletons and Palmers be able to grieve as much as herself;
and positively refuse Elinor's offer attendance, go out alone for
the rest of the morning. Elinor, with a very heavy heart, aware of the
pain she be go to communicate, and perceive, by Marianne's
letter, how ill she have succeed in lay any foundation for it, then
sit down to write her mother an account of what have pass, and entreat
her direction for the future; while Marianne, who come into the
drawing-room on Mrs. Jennings's go away, remain fix at the table
where Elinor write, watch the advancement of her pen, grieve over
she for the hardship of such a task, and grieve still more fondly
over its effect on her mother.
in this manner they have continue about a quarter of an hour, when
Marianne, whose nerve could not then bear any sudden noise, be
startle by a rap at the door.
"who can this be?" cry Elinor. "so early too! I think we had be
safe."
Marianne move to the window--
"it be Colonel Brandon!" say she, with vexation. "we be never safe
from HIM."
"he will not come in, as Mrs. Jennings be from home."
"I will not trust to that," retreat to her own room. "a man who have
nothing to do with his own time have no conscience in his intrusion on
that of other."
the event prove her conjecture right, though it be found on
injustice and error; for Colonel Brandon do come in; and Elinor, who
be convince that solicitude for Marianne bring he thither, and who
see that solicitude in his disturbed and melancholy look, and in his
anxious though brief inquiry after she, could not forgive her sister
for esteem he so lightly.
"I meet Mrs. Jennings in Bond Street," say he, after the first
salutation, "and she encourage I to come on; and I be the more
easily encourage, because I think it probable that I might find you
alone, which I be very desirous of do. my object--my wish--my sole
wish in desire it--I hope, I believe it be--be to be a mean of
give comfort;--no, I must not say comfort--not present comfort--but
conviction, lasting conviction to your sister's mind. my regard for
she, for yourself, for your mother--will you allow I to prove it, by
relate some circumstance which nothing but a very sincere
regard--nothing but an earnest desire of be useful--I think I be
justified--though where so many hour have be spend in convince
myself that I be right, be there not some reason to fear I may be
wrong?" he stop.
"I understand you," say Elinor. "you have something to tell I of Mr.
Willoughby, that will open his character far. your tell it will
be the great act of friendship that can be shewn Marianne. MY
gratitude will be insure immediately by any information tend to
that end, and hers must be gain by it in time. pray, pray let I
hear it."
"you shall; and, to be brief, when I quit Barton last October,--but
this will give you no idea--I must go far back. you will find I a
very awkward narrator, Miss Dashwood; I hardly know where to begin. a
short account of myself, I believe, will be necessary, and it shall be
a short one. on such a subject," sigh heavily, "can I have little
temptation to be diffuse."
he stopt a moment for recollection, and then, with another sigh, go
on.
"you have probably entirely forget a conversation--(it be not to be
suppose that it could make any impression on you)--a conversation
between we one evening at Barton Park--it be the evening of a
dance--in which I allude to a lady I have once know, as resemble, in
some measure, your sister Marianne."
"indeed," answer Elinor, "I have not forget it." he look pleased
by this remembrance, and add,
"if I be not deceive by the uncertainty, the partiality of tender
recollection, there be a very strong resemblance between they, as well
in mind as person. the same warmth of heart, the same eagerness of
fancy and spirit. this lady be one of my near relation, an
orphan from her infancy, and under the guardianship of my father. our
age be nearly the same, and from our early year we be
playfellow and friend. I cannot remember the time when I do not
love Eliza; and my affection for she, as we grow up, be such, as
perhaps, judge from my present forlorn and cheerless gravity, you
might think I incapable of have ever feel. she's, for I, be, I
believe, fervent as the attachment of your sister to Mr. Willoughby and
it be, though from a different cause, no less unfortunate. at
seventeen she be lose to I for ever. she be marry--marry
against her inclination to my brother. her fortune be large, and our
family estate much encumber. and this, I fear, be all that can be
say for the conduct of one, who be at once her uncle and guardian.
my brother do not deserve she; he do not even love she. I have hop
that her regard for I would support she under any difficulty, and for
some time it do; but at last the misery of her situation, for she
experience great unkindness, overcome all her resolution, and though
she have promise I that nothing--but how blindly I relate! I have
never tell you how this be bring on. we be within a few hour of
elope together for Scotland. the treachery, or the folly, of my
cousin's maid betray we. I be banish to the house of a relation
far distant, and she be allow no liberty, no society, no amusement,
till my father's point be gain. I have depend on her fortitude too
far, and the blow be a severe one--but have her marriage be happy, so
young as I then be, a few month must have reconcile I to it, or at
least I should not have now to lament it. this however be not the
case. my brother have no regard for she; his pleasure be not what
they ought to have be, and from the first he treat she unkindly.
the consequence of this, upon a mind so young, so lively, so
inexperienced as Mrs. Brandon's, be but too natural. she resign
herself at first to all the misery of her situation; and happy have it
be if she have not live to overcome those regret which the
remembrance of I occasion. but can we wonder that, with such a
husband to provoke inconstancy, and without a friend to advise or
restrain she (for my father live only a few month after their
marriage, and I be with my regiment in the East Indies) she should
fall? have I remain in England, perhaps--but I mean to promote the
happiness of both by remove from she for year, and for that purpose
have procure my exchange. the shock which her marriage have give I,"
he continue, in a voice of great agitation, "be of trifle
weight--be nothing to what I feel when I hear, about two year
afterwards, of her divorce. it be that which throw this gloom,--even
now the recollection of what I suffered--"
he could say no more, and rise hastily walk for a few minute about
the room. Elinor, affect by his relation, and still more by his
distress, could not speak. he see her concern, and come to she, take
her hand, press it, and kiss it with grateful respect. a few
minute more of silent exertion enable he to proceed with composure.
"it be nearly three year after this unhappy period before I return
to England. my first care, when I do arrive, be of course to seek
for she; but the search be as fruitless as it be melancholy. I could
not trace she beyond her first seducer, and there be every reason to
fear that she have remove from he only to sink deeply in a life of
sin. her legal allowance be not adequate to her fortune, nor
sufficient for her comfortable maintenance, and I learn from my
brother that the power of receive it have be make over some month
before to another person. he imagine, and calmly could he imagine it,
that her extravagance, and consequent distress, have oblige she to
dispose of it for some immediate relief. at last, however, and after I
have be six month in England, I do find she. regard for a former
servant of my own, who have since fall into misfortune, carry I to
visit he in a spunge-house, where he be confine for debt; and
there, the same house, under a similar confinement, be my unfortunate
sister. so alter--so fade--wear down by acute suffering of every
kind! hardly could I believe the melancholy and sickly figure before
I, to be the remain of the lovely, blooming, healthful girl, on whom
I have once dot. what I endure in so behold she--but I have no
right to wound your feeling by attempt to describe it--I have
pain you too much already. that she be, to all appearance, in the
last stage of a consumption, be--yes, in such a situation it be my
great comfort. life could do nothing for she, beyond give time
for a well preparation for death; and that be give. I see she
place in comfortable lodging, and under proper attendant; I visit
she every day during the rest of her short life: I be with she in she
last moment."
again he stop to recover himself; and Elinor speak her feeling in
an exclamation of tender concern, at the fate of his unfortunate friend.
"your sister, I hope, cannot be offend," say he, "by the resemblance
I have fancy between she and my poor disgrace relation. their
fate, their fortune, cannot be the same; and have the natural sweet
disposition of the one be guard by a firm mind, or a happy
marriage, she might have be all that you will live to see the other
be. but to what do all this lead? I seem to have be distress
you for nothing. ah! Miss Dashwood--a subject such as this--untouched
for fourteen year--it be dangerous to handle it at all! I will be
more collected--more concise. she leave to my care her only child, a
little girl, the offspring of her first guilty connection, who be then
about three year old. she love the child, and have always keep it
with she. it be a value, a precious trust to I; and gladly would I
have discharge it in the strict sense, by watch over her
education myself, have the nature of our situation allow it; but I
have no family, no home; and my little Eliza be therefore place at
school. I see she there whenever I could, and after the death of my
brother, (which happen about five year ago, and which leave to I the
possession of the family property,) she visit I at Delaford. I
call she a distant relation; but I be well aware that I have in
general be suspect of a much near connection with she. it be now
three year ago (she have just reach her fourteenth year,) that I
remove she from school, to place she under the care of a very
respectable woman, reside in Dorsetshire, who have the charge of four
or five other girl of about the same time of life; and for two year I
have every reason to be pleased with her situation. but last February,
almost a twelvemonth back, she suddenly disappear. I have allow
she, (imprudently, as it have since turn out,) at her earnest desire,
to go to Bath with one of her young friend, who be attend she
father there for his health. I know he to be a very good sort of man,
and I think well of his daughter--well than she deserve, for, with
a most obstinate and ill-judge secrecy, she would tell nothing, would
give no clue, though she certainly know all. he, her father, a
well-meaning, but not a quick-sighted man, could really, I believe,
give no information; for he have be generally confine to the house,
while the girl be range over the town and make what acquaintance
they choose; and he try to convince I, as thoroughly as he be
convince himself, of his daughter's be entirely unconcerned in the
business. in short, I could learn nothing but that she be go; all
the rest, for eight long month, be leave to conjecture. what I
think, what I fear, may be imagine; and what I suffer too."
"good heaven!" cry Elinor, "could it be--could Willoughby!"--
"the first news that reach I of she," he continue, "come in a
letter from herself, last October. it be forward to I from
Delaford, and I receive it on the very morning of our intended party
to Whitwell; and this be the reason of my leave Barton so suddenly,
which I be sure must at the time have appear strange to every body,
and which I believe give offence to some. little do Mr. Willoughby
imagine, I suppose, when his look censure I for incivility in
break up the party, that I be call away to the relief of one whom
he have make poor and miserable; but had he know it, what would it have
avail? would he have be less gay or less happy in the smile of
your sister? no, he have already do that, which no man who can feel
for another would do. he have leave the girl whose youth and innocence
he have seduce, in a situation of the utmost distress, with no
creditable home, no help, no friend, ignorant of his address! he have
leave she, promise to return; he neither return, nor write, nor
relieve she."
"this be beyond every thing!" exclaim Elinor.
"his character be now before you; expensive, dissipate, and bad than
both. know all this, as I have now know it many week, guess what
I must have feel on see your sister as fond of he as ever, and on
be assure that she be to marry he: guess what I must have feel
for all your sake. when I come to you last week and find you alone,
I come determined to know the truth; though irresolute what to do when
it be know. my behaviour must have seem strange to you then; but
now you will comprehend it. to suffer you all to be so deceived; to
see your sister--but what could I do? I have no hope of interfere
with success; and sometimes I think your sister's influence might yet
reclaim he. but now, after such dishonorable usage, who can tell what
be his design on she. whatever they may have be, however, she may
now, and hereafter doubtless will turn with gratitude towards her own
condition, when she compare it with that of my poor Eliza, when she
consider the wretched and hopeless situation of this poor girl, and
picture she to herself, with an affection for he so strong, still as
strong as her own, and with a mind torment by self-reproach, which
must attend she through life. surely this comparison must have its use
with she. she will feel her own suffering to be nothing. they
proceed from no misconduct, and can bring no disgrace. on the
contrary, every friend must be make still more her friend by they.
concern for her unhappiness, and respect for her fortitude under it,
must strengthen every attachment. use your own discretion, however, in
communicating to she what I have tell you. you must know well what
will be its effect; but have I not seriously, and from my heart believe
it might be of service, might lessen her regret, I would not have
suffer myself to trouble you with this account of my family
affliction, with a recital which may seem to have be intend to
raise myself at the expense of other."
Elinor's thank follow this speech with grateful earnestness;
attend too with the assurance of her expect material advantage to
Marianne, from the communication of what have pass.
"I have be more pained," say she, "by her endeavor to acquit he
than by all the rest; for it irritate her mind more than the most
perfect conviction of his unworthiness can do. now, though at first
she will suffer much, I be sure she will soon become easy. have
you," she continue, after a short silence, "ever see Mr. Willoughby
since you leave he at Barton?"
"yes," he reply gravely, "once I have. one meeting be unavoidable."
Elinor, startle by his manner, look at he anxiously, say,
"what? have you meet he to--"
"I could meet he no other way. Eliza have confess to I, though most
reluctantly, the name of her lover; and when he return to town, which
be within a fortnight after myself, we meet by appointment, he to
defend, I to punish his conduct. we return unwounde, and the
meeting, therefore, never get abroad."
Elinor sigh over the fancied necessity of this; but to a man and a
soldier she presume not to censure it.
"such," say Colonel Brandon, after a pause, "have be the unhappy
resemblance between the fate of mother and daughter! and so imperfectly
have I discharge my trust!"
"be she still in town?"
"no; as soon as she recover from her lying-in, for I find she near
her delivery, I remove she and her child into the country, and there
she remain."
Recollecting, soon afterwards, that he be probably divide Elinor
from her sister, he put an end to his visit, receive from she again
the same grateful acknowledgment, and leave her full of compassion
and esteem for he.
CHAPTER 32
when the particular of this conversation be repeat by Miss
Dashwood to her sister, as they very soon be, the effect on she be
not entirely such as the former have hop to see. not that Marianne
appear to distrust the truth of any part of it, for she listen to
it all with the most steady and submissive attention, make neither
objection nor remark, attempt no vindication of Willoughby, and
seem to shew by her tear that she feel it to be impossible. but
though this behaviour assure Elinor that the conviction of this guilt
be carry home to her mind, though she see with satisfaction the
effect of it, in she no long avoid Colonel Brandon when he call,
in she speak to he, even voluntarily speak, with a kind of
compassionate respect, and though she see her spirit less violently
irritated than before, she do not see she less wretched. her mind do
become settle, but it be settle in a gloomy dejection. she feel the
loss of Willoughby's character yet more heavily than she have feel the
loss of his heart; his seduction and desertion of Miss Williams, the
misery of that poor girl, and the doubt of what his design might once
have be on herself, prey altogether so much on her spirit, that
she could not bring herself to speak of what she feel even to Elinor;
and, brood over her sorrow in silence, give more pain to her sister
than could have be communicate by the most open and most frequent
confession of they.
to give the feeling or the language of Mrs. Dashwood on receive and
answer Elinor's letter would be only to give a repetition of what
her daughter have already feel and say; of a disappointment hardly
less painful than Marianne's, and an indignation even great than
Elinor's. long letter from she, quickly succeed each other,
arrive to tell all that she suffer and think; to express she
anxious solicitude for Marianne, and entreat she would bear up with
fortitude under this misfortune. bad indeed must the nature of
Marianne's affliction be, when her mother could talk of fortitude!
mortifying and humiliating must be the origin of those regret, which
she could wish she not to indulge!
against the interest of her own individual comfort, Mrs. Dashwood have
determine that it would be well for Marianne to be any where, at
that time, than at Barton, where every thing within her view would be
bring back the past in the strong and most afflict manner, by
constantly place Willoughby before she, such as she have always see
he there. she recommend it to her daughter, therefore, by all
mean not to shorten their visit to Mrs. Jennings; the length of which,
though never exactly fix, have be expect by all to comprise at
least five or six week. a variety of occupation, of object, and of
company, which could not be procure at Barton, would be inevitable
there, and might yet, she hop, cheat Marianne, at time, into some
interest beyond herself, and even into some amusement, much as the
idea of both might now be spurn by she.
from all danger of see Willoughby again, her mother consider she
to be at least equally safe in town as in the country, since his
acquaintance must now be drop by all who call themselves her
friend. design could never bring they in each other's way: negligence
could never leave they expose to a surprise; and chance have less in
its favour in the crowd of London than even in the retirement of
Barton, where it might force he before she while pay that visit at
Allenham on his marriage, which Mrs. Dashwood, from foresee at first
as a probable event, have bring herself to expect as a certain one.
she have yet another reason for wish her child to remain where
they be; a letter from her son-in-law have tell she that he and his
wife be to be in town before the middle of February, and she judge
it right that they should sometimes see their brother.
Marianne have promise to be guide by her mother's opinion, and she
submit to it therefore without opposition, though it prove
perfectly different from what she wish and expect, though she feel
it to be entirely wrong, form on mistaken ground, and that by
require her long continuance in London it deprive she of the only
possible alleviation of her wretchedness, the personal sympathy of her
mother, and doom she to such society and such scene as must prevent
she ever know a moment's rest.
but it be a matter of great consolation to she, that what bring evil
to herself would bring good to her sister; and Elinor, on the other
hand, suspect that it would not be in her power to avoid Edward
entirely, comfort herself by think, that though their long stay
would therefore militate against her own happiness, it would be well
for Marianne than an immediate return into Devonshire.
her carefulness in guard her sister from ever hear Willoughby's
name mention, be not throw away. Marianne, though without know
it herself, reap all its advantage; for neither Mrs. Jennings, nor
Sir John, nor even Mrs. Palmer herself, ever speak of he before she.
Elinor wish that the same forbearance could have extend towards
herself, but that be impossible, and she be oblige to listen day
after day to the indignation of they all.
Sir John, could not have think it possible. "a man of whom he have
always have such reason to think well! such a good-natured fellow! he
do not believe there be a bold rider in England! it be an
unaccountable business. he wish he at the devil with all his heart.
he would not speak another word to he, meet he where he might, for
all the world! no, not if it be to be by the side of Barton covert,
and they be keep watch for two hour together. such a scoundrel
of a fellow! such a deceitful dog! it be only the last time they meet
that he have offer he one of Folly's puppy! and this be the end of
it!"
Mrs. Palmer, in her way, be equally angry. "she be determined to
drop his acquaintance immediately, and she be very thankful that she
have never be acquaint with he at all. she wish with all her
heart Combe Magna be not so near Cleveland; but it do not signify,
for it be a great deal too far off to visit; she hat he so much
that she be resolve never to mention his name again, and she should
tell everybody she see, how good-for-nothing he be."
the rest of Mrs. Palmer's sympathy be shewn in procure all the
particular in her power of the approach marriage, and communicate
they to Elinor. she could soon tell at what coachmakerbe the new
carriage be build, by what painter Mr. Willoughby's portrait be
draw, and at what warehouse Miss Grey's clothe might be see.
the calm and polite unconcern of Lady Middleton on the occasion be a
happy relief to Elinor's spirit, oppress as they often be by the
clamorous kindness of the other. it be a great comfort to she to be
sure of exciting no interest in one person at least among their circle
of friend: a great comfort to know that there be one who would meet
she without feel any curiosity after particular, or any anxiety for
her sister's health.
every qualification be raise at time, by the circumstance of the
moment, to more than its real value; and she be sometimes worried down
by officious condolence to rate good-breeding as more indispensable to
comfort than good-nature.
Lady Middleton express her sense of the affair about once every day,
or twice, if the subject occur very often, by say, "it be very
shocking, indeed!" and by the mean of this continual though gentle
vent, be able not only to see the Miss Dashwoods from the first
without the small emotion, but very soon to see they without
recollect a word of the matter; and have thus support the
dignity of her own sex, and speak she decide censure of what be
wrong in the other, she think herself at liberty to attend to the
interest of her own assembly, and therefore determine (though rather
against the opinion of Sir John) that as Mrs. Willoughby would at once
be a woman of elegance and fortune, to leave her card with she as soon
as she marry.
Colonel Brandon's delicate, unobtrusive enquiry be never unwelcome
to Miss Dashwood. he have abundantly earn the privilege of intimate
discussion of her sister's disappointment, by the friendly zeal with
which he have endeavour to soften it, and they always converse with
confidence. his chief reward for the painful exertion of disclose
past sorrow and present humiliation, be give in the pitying eye
with which Marianne sometimes observe he, and the gentleness of her
voice whenever (though it do not often happen) she be oblige, or
could oblige herself to speak to he. these assure he that his
exertion have produce an increase of good-will towards himself, and
these give Elinor hope of its be far augmented hereafter; but
Mrs. Jennings, who know nothing of all this, who know only that the
Colonel continue as grave as ever, and that she could neither prevail
on he to make the offer himself, nor commission she to make it for
he, begin, at the end of two day, to think that, instead of
Midsummer, they would not be marry till Michaelmas, and by the end of
a week that it would not be a match at all. the good understanding
between the Colonel and Miss Dashwood seem rather to declare that the
honour of the mulberry-tree, the canal, and the yew arbour, would all
be make over to she; and Mrs. Jennings have, for some time cease to
think at all of Mrs. Ferrars.
early in February, within a fortnight from the receipt of Willoughby's
letter, Elinor have the painful office of inform her sister that he
be marry. she have take care to have the intelligence convey to
herself, as soon as it be know that the ceremony be over, as she be
desirous that Marianne should not receive the first notice of it from
the public paper, which she see she eagerly examine every morning.
she receive the news with resolute composure; make no observation on
it, and at first shed no tear; but after a short time they would burst
out, and for the rest of the day, she be in a state hardly less
pitiable than when she first learn to expect the event.
the Willoughbys leave town as soon as they be marry; and Elinor now
hop, as there could be no danger of she see either of they, to
prevail on her sister, who have never yet leave the house since the blow
first fall, to go out again by degree as she have do before.
about this time the two Miss Steeles, lately arrive at their cousin's
house in Bartlett's Buildings, Holburn, present themselves again
before their more grand relation in Conduit and Berkeley Streets; and
be welcome by they all with great cordiality.
Elinor only be sorry to see they. their presence always give she
pain, and she hardly know how to make a very gracious return to the
overpowering delight of Lucy in find she STILL in town.
"I should have be quite disappointed if I have not find you here
still," say she repeatedly, with a strong emphasis on the word. "but
I always think I SHOULD. I be almost sure you would not leave
London yet awhile; though you tell I, you know, at Barton, that you
should not stay above a month. but I think, at the time, that you
would most likely change your mind when it come to the point. it would
have be such a great pity to have go away before your brother and
sister come. and now to be sure you will be in no hurry to be go. I
be amazingly glad you do not keep to your word."
Elinor perfectly understand she, and be force to use all her
self-command to make it appear that she do not.
"well, my dear," say Mrs. Jennings, "and how do you travel?"
"not in the stage, I assure you," reply Miss Steele, with quick
exultation; "we come post all the way, and have a very smart beau to
attend we. Dr. Davies be come to town, and so we think wewould join
he in a post-chaise; and he behave very genteelly, and pay ten or
twelve shilling more than we do."
"oh, oh!" cry Mrs. Jennings; "very pretty, indeed! and the doctor be
a single man, I warrant you."
"there now," say Miss Steele, affectedly simpering, "everybody laugh
at I so about the Doctor, and I cannot think why. my cousin say they
be sure I have make a conquest; but for my part I declare I never
think about he from one hour's end to another. 'Lord! here come your
beau, Nancy,' my cousin say t'other day, when she see he cross the
street to the house. my beau, indeed! say I--I cannot think who you
mean. the doctor be no beau of mine."
"aye, aye, that be very pretty talk--but it willnot do--the doctor be
the man, I see."
"no, indeed!" reply her cousin, with affected earnestness, "and I beg
you will contradict it, if you ever hear it talk of."
Mrs. Jennings directly give she the gratifying assurance that she
certainly would not, and Miss Steele be make completely happy.
"I suppose you will go and stay with your brother and sister, Miss
Dashwood, when they come to town," say Lucy, return, after a
cessation of hostile hint, to the charge.
"no, I do not think we shall."
"oh, yes, I dare say you will."
Elinor would not humour she by farth opposition.
"what a charming thing it be that Mrs. Dashwood can spare you both for
so long a time together!"
"long a time, indeed!" interpose Mrs. Jennings. "why, their visit be
but just begin!"
Lucy be silence.
"I be sorry we cannot see your sister, Miss Dashwood," say Miss
Steele. "I be sorry she be not well--" for Marianne have leave the room
on their arrival.
"you be very good. my sister will be equally sorry to miss the
pleasure of see you; but she have be very much plague lately with
nervous head-ache, which make she unfit for company or conversation."
"oh, dear, that be a great pity! but such old friend as Lucy and
me!--I think she might see US; and I be sure we would not speak a word."
Elinor, with great civility, decline the proposal. her sister be
perhaps lay down upon the bed, or in her dressing gown, and therefore
not able to come to they.
"oh, if thatbe all," cry Miss Steele, "we can just as well go and see
she."
Elinor begin to find this impertinence too much for her temper; but she
be save the trouble of check it, by Lucy's sharp reprimand, which
now, as on many occasion, though it do not give much sweetness to the
manner of one sister, be of advantage in govern those of the other.
CHAPTER 33
after some opposition, Marianne yield to her sister's entreaty, and
consent to go out with she and Mrs. Jennings one morning for half an
hour. she expressly condition, however, for pay no visit, and
would do no more than accompany they to Gray's in Sackville Street,
where Elinor be carry on a negotiation for the exchange of a few
old-fashioned jewel of her mother.
when they stop at the door, Mrs. Jennings recollect that there be
a lady at the other end of the street on whom she ought to call; and as
she have no business at Gray's, it be resolve, that while her young
friend transact their's, she should pay her visit and return for
they.
on ascend the stair, the Miss Dashwoods find so many people before
they in the room, that there be not a person at liberty to tend to
their order; and they be oblige to wait. all that could be do
be, to sit down at that end of the counter which seem to promise the
quick succession; one gentleman only be stand there, and it be
probable that Elinor be not without hope of excite his politeness to
a quick despatch. but the correctness of his eye, and the delicacy
of his taste, prove to be beyond his politeness. he be give order
for a toothpick-case for himself, and till its size, shape, and
ornament be determine, all of which, after examine and debating
for a quarter of an hour over every toothpick-case in the shop, be
finally arrange by his own inventive fancy, he have no leisure to
bestow any other attention on the two lady, than what be comprise
in three or four very broad stare; a kind of notice which serve to
imprint on Elinor the remembrance of a person and face, of strong,
natural, sterling insignificance, though adorn in the first style of
fashion.
Marianne be spar from the troublesome feeling of contempt and
resentment, on this impertinent examination of their feature, and on
the puppyism of his manner in decide on all the different horror of
the different toothpick-case present to his inspection, by remain
unconscious of it all; for she be as well able to collect her thought
within herself, and be as ignorant of what be pass around she, in
Mr. Gray's shop, as in her own bedroom.
at last the affair be decide. the ivory, the gold, and the pearl,
all receive their appointment, and the gentleman have name the last
day on which his existence could be continue without the possession of
the toothpick-case, draw on his glove with leisurely care, and
bestow another glance on the Miss Dashwoods, but such a one as
seem rather to demand than express admiration, walk off with a
happy air of real conceit and affected indifference.
Elinor lose no time in bring her business forward, be on the point
of conclude it, when another gentleman present himself at her side.
she turn her eye towards his face, and find he with some surprise
to be her brother.
their affection and pleasure in meeting be just enough to make a very
creditable appearance in Mr. Gray's shop. John Dashwood be really far
from be sorry to see his sister again; it rather give they
satisfaction; and his inquiry after their mother be respectful and
attentive.
Elinor find that he and Fanny have be in town two day.
"I wish very much to call upon you yesterday," say he, "but it be
impossible, for we be oblige to take Harry to see the wild beast at
Exeter Exchange; and we spend the rest of the day with Mrs. Ferrars.
Harry be vastly pleased. this morning I have fully intend to call on
you, if I could possibly find a spare half hour, but one have always so
much to do on first come to town. I be come here to bespeak Fanny a
seal. but tomorrow I think I shall certainly be able to call in
Berkeley Street, and be introduce to your friend Mrs. Jennings. I
understand she be a woman of very good fortune. and the Middletons
too, you must introduce I to they. as my mother-in-law's relation, I
shall be happy to show they every respect. they be excellent
neighbour to you in the country, I understand."
"Excellent indeed. their attention to our comfort, their friendliness
in every particular, be more than I can express."
"I be extremely glad to hear it, upon my word; extremely glad indeed.
but so it ought to be; they be people of large fortune, they be
relate to you, and every civility and accommodation that can serve to
make your situation pleasant might be reasonably expect. and so you
be most comfortably settle in your little cottage and want for
nothing! Edward bring we a most charming account of the place: the
most complete thing of its kind, he say, that ever be, and you all
seem to enjoy it beyond any thing. it be a great satisfaction to we
to hear it, I assure you."
Elinor do feel a little ashamed of her brother; and be not sorry to
be spar the necessity of answer he, by the arrival of Mrs.
Jennings's servant, who come to tell she that his mistress wait for
they at the door.
Mr. Dashwood attend they down stair, be introduce to Mrs. Jennings
at the door of her carriage, and repeat his hope of be able to
call on they the next day, take leave.
his visit be duly pay. he come with a pretence at an apology from
their sister-in-law, for not come too; "but she be so much engage
with her mother, that really she have no leisure for go any where."
Mrs. Jennings, however, assure he directly, that she should not stand
upon ceremony, for they be all cousin, or something like it, and she
should certainly wait on Mrs. John Dashwood very soon, and bring she
sister to see she. his manner to they, though calm, be perfectly
kind; to Mrs. Jennings, most attentively civil; and on Colonel
Brandon's come in soon after himself, he eye he with a curiosity
which seem to say, that he only want to know he to be rich, to be
equally civil to HIM.
after stay with they half an hour, he ask Elinor to walk with he
to Conduit Street, and introduce he to Sir John and Lady Middleton.
the weather be remarkably fine, and she readily consent. as soon as
they be out of the house, his enquiry begin.
"who be Colonel Brandon? be he a man of fortune?"
"yes; he have very good property in Dorsetshire."
"I be glad of it. he seem a most gentlemanlike man; and I think,
Elinor, I may congratulate you on the prospect of a very respectable
establishment in life."
"Me, brother! what do you mean?"
"he like you. I observe he narrowly, and be convince of it. what
be the amount of his fortune?"
"I believe about two thousand a year."
"two thousand a-year;" and then work himself up to a pitch of
enthusiastic generosity, he add, "Elinor, I wish with all my heart it
be twice as much, for your sake."
"indeed I believe you," reply Elinor; "but I be very sure that
Colonel Brandon have not the small wish of marry I."
"you be mistaken, Elinor; you be very much mistaken. a very little
trouble on your side secure he. perhaps just at present he may be
undecided; the smallness of your fortune may make he hang back; his
friend may all advise he against it. but some of those little
attention and encouragement which lady can so easily give will fix
he, in spite of himself. and there can be no reason why you should
not try for he. it be not to be suppose that any prior attachment on
your side--in short, you know as to an attachment of that kind, it be
quite out of the question, the objection be insurmountable--you have
too much sense not to see all that. Colonel Brandon must be the man;
and no civility shall be want on my part to make he pleased with
you and your family. it be a match that must give universal
satisfaction. in short, it be a kind of thing that"--lowere his
voice to an important whisper--"will be exceedingly welcome to all
party." recollect himself, however, he add, "that be, I mean to
say--your friend be all truly anxious to see you well settle; fanny
particularly, for she have your interest very much at heart, I assure
you. and her mother too, Mrs. Ferrars, a very good-natured woman, I be
sure it would give she great pleasure; she say as much the other day."
Elinor would not vouchsafe any answer.
"it would be something remarkable, now," he continue, "something
droll, if Fanny should have a brother and I a sister settle at the
same time. and yet it be not very unlikely."
"be Mr. Edward Ferrars," say Elinor, with resolution, "go to be
marry?"
"it be not actually settle, but there be such a thing in agitation.
he have a most excellent mother. Mrs. Ferrars, with the utmost
liberality, will come forward, and settle on he a thousand a year, if
the match take place. the lady be the Hon. Miss Morton, only daughter
of the late Lord Morton, with thirty thousand pound. a very desirable
connection on both side, and I have not a doubt of its take place in
time. a thousand a-year be a great deal for a mother to give away, to
make over for ever; but Mrs. Ferrars have a noble spirit. to give you
another instance of her liberality:--the other day, as soon as we come
to town, aware that money could not be very plenty with we just now,
she put bank-note into Fanny's hand to the amount of two hundred
pound. and extremely acceptable it be, for we must live at a great
expense while we be here."
he pause for her assent and compassion; and she force herself to say,
"your expense both in town and country must certainly be considerable;
but your income be a large one."
"not so large, I dare say, as many people suppose. I do not mean to
complain, however; it be undoubtedly a comfortable one, and I hope will
in time be well. the enclosure of Norland Common, now carry on,
be a most serious drain. and then I have make a little purchase within
this half year; East Kingham Farm, you must remember the place, where
old Gibson use to live. the land be so very desirable for I in
every respect, so immediately adjoin my own property, that I feel it
my duty to buy it. I could not have answer it to my conscience to
let it fall into any other hand. a man must pay for his convenience;
and it have cost I a vast deal of money."
"More than you think it really and intrinsically worth."
"why, I hope not that. I might have sell it again, the next day, for
more than I give: but, with regard to the purchase-money, I might have
be very unfortunate indeed; for the stock be at that time so low,
that if I have not happen to have the necessary sum in my banker's
hand, I must have sell out to very great loss."
Elinor could only smile.
"other great and inevitable expense too we have have on first come to
Norland. our respected father, as you well know, bequeath all the
Stanhill effect that remain at Norland (and very valuable they be)
to your mother. far be it from I to repine at his do so; he have an
undoubted right to dispose of his own property as he choose, but, in
consequence of it, we have be oblige to make large purchase of
linen, china, &c. to supply the place of what be take away. you may
guess, after all these expense, how very far we must be from be
rich, and how acceptable Mrs. Ferrars's kindness be."
"certainly," say Elinor; "and assist by her liberality, I hope you
may yet live to be in easy circumstance."
"another year or two may do much towards it," he gravely reply; "but
however there be still a great deal to be do. there be not a stone
lay of Fanny's green-house, and nothing but the plan of the
flower-garden mark out."
"where be the green-house to be?"
"upon the knoll behind the house. the old walnut tree be all come
down to make room for it. it will be a very fine object from many
part of the park, and the flower-garden will slope down just before
it, and be exceedingly pretty. we have clear away all the old thorn
that grow in patch over the brow."
Elinor keep her concern and her censure to herself; and be very
thankful that Marianne be not present, to share the provocation.
have now say enough to make his poverty clear, and to do away the
necessity of buy a pair of ear-ring for each of his sister, in his
next visit at Gray's his thought take a cheerfuller turn, and he begin
to congratulate Elinor on have such a friend as Mrs. Jennings.
"she seem a most valuable woman indeed--her house, her style of
living, all bespeak an exceeding good income; and it be an acquaintance
that have not only be of great use to you hitherto, but in the end may
prove materially advantageous.--her invite you to town be certainly a
vast thing in your favour; and indeed, it speak altogether so great a
regard for you, that in all probability when she die you will not be
forgotten.-- she must have a great deal to leave."
"nothing at all, I should rather suppose; for she have only her
jointure, which will descend to her child."
"but it be not to be imagine that she live up to her income. few
people of common prudence will do that; and whatever she save, she
will be able to dispose of."
"and do you not think it more likely that she should leave it to her
daughter, than to we?"
"her daughter be both exceedingly well married, and therefore I
cannot perceive the necessity of she remember they far.
whereas, in my opinion, by her take so much notice of you, and
treat you in this kind of way, she have give you a sort of claim on
her future consideration, which a conscientious woman would not
disregard. nothing can be kind than her behaviour; and she can
hardly do all this, without be aware of the expectation it raise."
"but she raise none in those most concerned. indeed, brother, your
anxiety for our welfare and prosperity carry you too far."
"why, to be sure," say he, seem to recollect himself, "people have
little, have very little in their power. but, my dear Elinor, what be
the matter with Marianne?-- she look very unwell, have lose her colour,
and be grow quite thin. be she ill?"
"she be not well, she have have a nervous complaint on she for several
week."
"I be sorry for that. at her time of life, any thing of an illness
destroy the bloom for ever! she's have be a very short one! she be
as handsome a girl last September, as I ever see; and as likely to
attract the man. there be something in her style of beauty, to please
they particularly. I remember Fanny use to say that she would marry
soon and well than you do; not but what she be exceedingly fond of
you, but so it happen to strike she. she will be mistaken, however.
I question whether Marianne NOW, will marry a man worth more than five
or six hundred a-year, at the utmost, and I be very much deceive if
you do not do well. dorsetshire! I know very little of dorsetshire;
but, my dear Elinor, I shall be exceedingly glad to know more of it;
and I think I can answer for your have Fanny and myself among the
early and well pleased of your visitor."
Elinor try very seriously to convince he that there be no
likelihood of her marry Colonel Brandon; but it be an expectation
of too much pleasure to himself to be relinquish, and he be really
resolve on seek an intimacy with that gentleman, and promote the
marriage by every possible attention. he have just compunction enough
for have do nothing for his sister himself, to be exceedingly
anxious that everybody else should do a great deal; and an offer from
Colonel Brandon, or a legacy from Mrs. Jennings, be the easy mean
of atone for his own neglect.
they be lucky enough to find Lady Middleton at home, and Sir John
come in before their visit end. Abundance of civility pass on
all side. Sir John be ready to like anybody, and though Mr. Dashwood
do not seem to know much about horse, he soon set he down as a very
good-natured fellow: while Lady Middleton see enough of fashion in his
appearance to think his acquaintance worth have; and Mr. Dashwood
go away delighted with both.
"I shall have a charming account to carry to Fanny," say he, as he
walk back with his sister. "Lady Middleton be really a most elegant
woman! such a woman as I be sure Fanny will be glad to know. and Mrs.
Jennings too, an exceedingly well-behave woman, though not so elegant
as her daughter. your sister need not have any scruple even of
visit HER, which, to say the truth, have be a little the case, and
very naturally; for we only know that Mrs. Jennings be the widow of a
man who have get all his money in a low way; and Fanny and Mrs. Ferrars
be both strongly prepossess, that neither she nor her daughter
be such kind of woman as Fanny would like to associate with. but now
I can carry she a most satisfactory account of both."
CHAPTER 34
Mrs. John Dashwood have so much confidence in her husband's judgment,
that she wait the very next day both on Mrs. Jennings and her
daughter; and her confidence be reward by find even the former,
even the woman with whom her sister be stay, by no mean unworthy
her notice; and as for Lady Middleton, she find her one of the most
charming woman in the world!
Lady Middleton be equally pleased with Mrs. Dashwood. there be a
kind of cold hearted selfishness on both side, which mutually
attract they; and they sympathise with each other in an insipid
propriety of demeanor, and a general want of understanding.
the same manner, however, which recommend Mrs. John Dashwood to the
good opinion of Lady Middleton do not suit the fancy of Mrs. Jennings,
and to she she appear nothing more than a little proud-look woman
of uncordial address, who meet her husband's sister without any
affection, and almost without have anything to say to they; for of
the quarter of an hour bestow on Berkeley Street, she sit at least
seven minute and a half in silence.
Elinor want very much to know, though she do not chuse to ask,
whether Edward be then in town; but nothing would have induce Fanny
voluntarily to mention his name before she, till able to tell she that
his marriage with Miss Morton be resolve on, or till her husband's
expectation on Colonel Brandon be answer; because she believe
they still so very much attach to each other, that they could not be
too sedulously divide in word and deed on every occasion. the
intelligence however, which she would not give, soon flow from
another quarter. Lucy come very shortly to claim Elinor's compassion
on be unable to see Edward, though he have arrive in town with Mr.
and Mrs. Dashwood. he dare not come to Bartlett's Buildings for fear
of detection, and though their mutual impatience to meet, be not to be
tell, they could do nothing at present but write.
Edward assure they himself of his be in town, within a very short
time, by twice call in Berkeley Street. twice be his card find on
the table, when they return from their morning's engagement. elinor
be pleased that he have call; and still more pleased that she have
miss he.
the Dashwoods be so prodigiously delighted with the Middletons, that,
though not much in the habit of give anything, they determine to
give they--a dinner; and soon after their acquaintance begin, invite
they to dine in Harley Street, where they have take a very good house
for three month. their sister and Mrs. Jennings be invite
likewise, and John Dashwood be careful to secure Colonel Brandon, who,
always glad to be where the Miss Dashwoods be, receive his eager
civility with some surprise, but much more pleasure. they be to
meet Mrs. Ferrars; but Elinor could not learn whether her son be to
be of the party. the expectation of see she, however, be enough to
make she interested in the engagement; for though she could now meet
Edward's mother without that strong anxiety which have once promise to
attend such an introduction, though she could now see she with perfect
indifference as to her opinion of herself, her desire of be in
company with Mrs. Ferrars, her curiosity to know what she be like, be
as lively as ever.
the interest with which she thus anticipate the party, be soon
afterwards increase, more powerfully than pleasantly, by her hearing
that the Miss Steeles be also to be at it.
so well have they recommend themselves to Lady Middleton, so agreeable
have their assiduity make they to she, that though Lucy be certainly
not so elegant, and her sister not even genteel, she be as ready as
Sir John to ask they to spend a week or two in Conduit Street; and it
happen to be particularly convenient to the Miss Steeles, as soon as
the Dashwoods' invitation be know, that their visit should begin a
few day before the party take place.
their claim to the notice of Mrs. John Dashwood, as the niece of the
gentleman who for many year have have the care of her brother, might not
have do much, however, towards procure they seat at her table; but
as Lady Middleton's guest they must be welcome; and Lucy, who have long
want to be personally know to the family, to have a near view of
their character and her own difficulty, and to have an opportunity
of endeavour to please they, have seldom be happy in her life,
than she be on receive Mrs. John Dashwood's card.
on Elinor its effect be very different. she begin immediately to
determine, that Edward who live with his mother, must be ask as his
mother be, to a party give by his sister; and to see he for the
first time, after all that pass, in the company of Lucy!--she hardly
know how she could bear it!
these apprehension, perhaps, be not found entirely on reason, and
certainly not at all on truth. they be relieve however, not by her
own recollection, but by the good will of Lucy, who believe herself to
be inflict a severe disappointment when she tell she that Edward
certainly would not be in Harley Street on Tuesday, and even hop to
be carry the pain still far by persuade she that he be keep
away by the extreme affection for herself, which he could not conceal
when they be together.
the important Tuesday come that be to introduce the two young lady
to this formidable mother-in-law.
"pity I, dear Miss Dashwood!" say Lucy, as they walk up the stair
together--for the Middletons arrive so directly after Mrs. Jennings,
that they all follow the servant at the same time--"there be nobody
here but you, that can feel for me.--I declare I can hardly stand.
good gracious!--in a moment I shall see the person that all my
happiness depend on--that be to be my mother!"--
Elinor could have give her immediate relief by suggest the
possibility of its be Miss Morton's mother, rather than her own,
whom they be about to behold; but instead of do that, she assure
she, and with great sincerity, that she do pity she--to the utter
beazement of Lucy, who, though really uncomfortable herself, hop at
least to be an object of irrepressible envy to Elinor.
Mrs. Ferrars be a little, thin woman, upright, even to formality, in
her figure, and serious, even to sourness, in her aspect. her
complexion be sallow; and her feature small, without beauty, and
naturally without expression; but a lucky contraction of the brow have
rescue her countenance from the disgrace of insipidity, by give it
the strong character of pride and ill nature. she be not a woman of
many word; for, unlike people in general, she proportion they to the
number of her idea; and of the few syllable that do escape she, not
one fall to the share of Miss Dashwood, whom she eye with the spirited
determination of dislike she at all event.
Elinor could not now be make unhappy by this behaviour.-- a few month
ago it would have hurt she exceedingly; but it be not in Mrs. Ferrars'
power to distress she by it now;--and the difference of her manner to
the Miss Steeles, a difference which seem purposely make to humble
she more, only amuse she. she could not but smile to see the
graciousness of both mother and daughter towards the very person-- for
Lucy be particularly distinguish--whom of all other, have they know
as much as she do, they would have be most anxious to mortify; while
she herself, who have comparatively no power to wound they, sit
pointedly slight by both. but while she smile at a graciousness so
misapply, she could not reflect on the mean-spirited folly from which
it spring, nor observe the study attention with which the Miss
Steeles court its continuance, without thoroughly despise they all
four.
Lucy be all exultation on be so honorably distinguish; and Miss
Steele want only to be teaze about Dr. Davies to be perfectly happy.
the dinner be a grand one, the servant be numerous, and every thing
bespoke the Mistress's inclination for show, and the Master's ability
to support it. in spite of the improvement and addition which be
make to the Norland estate, and in spite of its owner have once
be within some thousand pound of be oblige to sell out at a
loss, nothing give any symptom of that indigence which he have try to
infer from it;--no poverty of any kind, except of conversation,
appear--but there, the deficiency be considerable. John Dashwood
have not much to say for himself that be worth hearing, and his wife
have still less. but there be no peculiar disgrace in this; for it be
very much the case with the chief of their visitor, who almost all
labour under one or other of these disqualification for be
agreeable--want of sense, either natural or improved--want of
elegance--want of spirit--or want of temper.
when the lady withdraw to the drawing-room after dinner, this poverty
be particularly evident, for the gentleman had supply the discourse
with some variety--the variety of politic, inclose land, and
break horse--but then it be all over; and one subject only engage
the lady till coffee come in, which be the comparative height of
Harry Dashwood, and Lady Middleton's second son William, who be
nearly of the same age.
have both the child be there, the affair might have be determine
too easily by measure they at once; but as Harry only be present, it
be all conjectural assertion on both side; and every body have a right
to be equally positive in their opinion, and to repeat it over and over
again as often as they like.
the party stand thus:
the two mother, though each really convince that her own son be the
tallest, politely decide in favour of the other.
the two grandmother, with not less partiality, but more sincerity,
be equally earnest in support of their own descendant.
Lucy, who be hardly less anxious to please one parent than the other,
think the boy be both remarkably tall for their age, and could not
conceive that there could be the small difference in the world
between they; and Miss Steele, with yet great address give it, as
fast as she could, in favour of each.
Elinor, have once deliver her opinion on William's side, by which
she offend Mrs. Ferrars and Fanny still more, do not see the
necessity of enforce it by any farth assertion; and Marianne, when
call on for she's, offend they all, by declare that she have no
opinion to give, as she have never think about it.
before her remove from Norland, Elinor have paint a very pretty pair
of screen for her sister-in-law, which be now just mount and
bring home, ornament her present drawing room; and these screen,
catch the eye of John Dashwood on his follow the other gentleman
into the room, be officiously hand by he to Colonel Brandon for
his admiration.
"these be do by my eld sister," say he; "and you, as a man of
taste, will, I dare say, be pleased with they. I do not know whether
you have ever happen to see any of her performance before, but she
be in general reckon to draw extremely well."
the Colonel, though disclaim all pretension to connoisseurship,
warmly admire the screen, as he would have do any thing paint by
Miss Dashwood; and on the curiosity of the other be of course
excited, they be hand round for general inspection. Mrs. Ferrars,
not aware of their be Elinor's work, particularly request to look
at they; and after they have receive gratify testimony of Lady
Middletons's approbation, Fanny present they to her mother,
considerately inform she, at the same time, that they be do by
Miss Dashwood.
"Hum"--said Mrs. Ferrars--"very pretty,"--and without regard they at
all, return they to her daughter.
perhaps Fanny think for a moment that her mother have be quite rude
enough,--for, colour a little, she immediately say,
"they be very pretty, ma'am--an't they?" but then again, the dread of
have be too civil, too encouraging herself, probably come over she,
for she presently add,
"do you not think they be something in Miss Morton's style of
painting, ma'am?--she do paint most delightfully!--How beautifully
her last landscape be do!"
"beautifully indeed! but SHE do every thing well."
Marianne could not bear this.--She be already greatly displeased with
Mrs. Ferrars; and such ill-time praise of another, at Elinor's
expense, though she have not any notion of what be principally mean by
it, provoke she immediately to say with warmth,
"this be admiration of a very particular kind!--what be Miss Morton to
us?--who know, or who care, for her?--it be Elinor of whom we think
and speak."
and so say, she take the screen out of her sister-in-law's hand,
to admire they herself as they ought to be admire.
Mrs. Ferrars look exceedingly angry, and draw herself up more
stiffly than ever, pronounce in retort this bitter philippic, "Miss
Morton be Lord Morton's daughter."
Fanny look very angry too, and her husband be all in a fright at his
sister's audacity. Elinor be much more hurt by Marianne's warmth than
she have be by what produce it; but Colonel Brandon's eye, as they
be fix on Marianne, declare that he notice only what be amiable
in it, the affectionate heart which could not bear to see a sister
slight in the small point.
Marianne's feeling do not stop here. the cold insolence of Mrs.
Ferrars's general behaviour to her sister, seem, to she, to foretell
such difficulty and distress to Elinor, as her own wound heart
teach she to think of with horror; and urge by a strong impulse of
affectionate sensibility, she move after a moment, to her sister's
chair, and put one arm round her neck, and one cheek close to her,
say in a low, but eager, voice,
"dear, dear Elinor, donot mind they. donot let they make you unhappy."
she could say no more; her spirit be quite overcome, and hide she
face on Elinor's shoulder, she burst into tear. every body's
attention be call, and almost every body be concerned.--colonel
Brandon rise up and go to they without know what he did.--Mrs.
Jennings, with a very intelligent "ah! poor dear," immediately give she
her salt; and Sir John feel so desperately enrage against the author
of this nervous distress, that he instantly change his seat to one
close by Lucy Steele, and give she, in a whisper, a brief account of
the whole shocking affair.
in a few minute, however, Marianne be recover enough to put an end
to the bustle, and sit down among the rest; though her spirit retain
the impression of what have pass, the whole evening.
"Poor Marianne!" say her brother to Colonel Brandon, in a low voice,
as soon as he could secure his attention,-- "she have not such good
health as her sister,--she be very nervous,--she have not Elinor's
constitution;--and one must allow that there be something very try
to a young woman who have be a beauty in the loss of her personal
attraction. you would not think it perhaps, but Marianne WAS
remarkably handsome a few month ago; quite as handsome as Elinor.--
now you see it be all go."
CHAPTER 35
Elinor's curiosity to see Mrs. Ferrars be satisfied.-- she have find
in her every thing that could tend to make a farth connection between
the family undesirable.-- she have see enough of her pride, her
meanness, and her determined prejudice against herself, to comprehend
all the difficulty that must have perplex the engagement, and
retard the marriage, of Edward and herself, have he be otherwise
free;--and she have see almost enough to be thankful for her own sake,
that one great obstacle preserve she from suffer under any other
of Mrs. Ferrars's creation, preserve she from all dependence upon she
caprice, or any solicitude for her good opinion. or at least, if she
do not bring herself quite to rejoice in Edward's be fetter to
Lucy, she determine, that have Lucy be more amiable, she ought to
have rejoice.
she wonder that Lucy's spirit could be so very much elevate by the
civility of Mrs. Ferrars;--that her interest and her vanity should so
very much blind she as to make the attention which seem only pay she
because she be not ELINOR, appear a compliment to herself--or to allow
she to derive encouragement from a preference only give she, because
her real situation be unknown. but that it be so, have not only be
declare by Lucy's eye at the time, but be declare over again the
next morning more openly, for at her particular desire, Lady Middleton
set she down in Berkeley Street on the chance of see Elinor alone,
to tell she how happy she be.
the chance prove a lucky one, for a message from Mrs. Palmer soon
after she arrive, carry Mrs. Jennings away.
"my dear friend," cry Lucy, as soon as they be by themselves, "I
come to talk to you of my happiness. could anything be so flattering
as Mrs. Ferrars's way of treat I yesterday? so exceed affable
as she was!--you know how I dread the thought of see her;--but
the very moment I be introduce, there be such an affability in her
behaviour as really should seem to say, she have quite take a fancy to
I. now be not it so?-- you see it all; and be not you quite strike
with it?"
"she be certainly very civil to you."
"Civil!--Did you see nothing but only civility?-- I see a vast deal
more. such kindness as fall to the share of nobody but me!--No pride,
no hauteur, and your sister just the same--all sweetness and
affability!"
Elinor wish to talk of something else, but Lucy still press she to
own that she have reason for her happiness; and Elinor be oblige to go
on.--
"undoubtedly, if they have know your engagement," say she, "nothing
could be more flattering than their treatment of you;--but as that be
not the case"--
"I guess you would say so"--replie Lucy quickly--"but there be no
reason in the world why Mrs. Ferrars should seem to like I, if she do
not, and her like I be every thing. you shallnot talk I out of my
satisfaction. I be sure it will all end well, and there will be no
difficulty at all, to what I use to think. Mrs. Ferrars be a
charming woman, and so be your sister. they be both delightful woman,
indeed!--i wonder I should never hear you say how agreeable Mrs.
Dashwood be!"
to this Elinor have no answer to make, and do not attempt any.
"be you ill, Miss dashwood?--you seem low--you donot speak;--sure you
an't well."
"I never be in well health."
"I be glad of it with all my heart; but really you do not look it. I
should be sorry to have you ill; you, that have be the great
comfort to I in the world!--heaven know what I should have do
without your friendship."--
Elinor try to make a civil answer, though doubt her own success.
but it seem to satisfy Lucy, for she directly reply,
"indeed I be perfectly convinced of your regard for I, and next to
Edward's love, it be the great comfort I have.--Poor edward!--but
now there be one good thing, we shall be able to meet, and meet pretty
often, for Lady Middleton's delighted with Mrs. Dashwood, so we shall
be a good deal in Harley Street, I dare say, and Edward spend half his
time with his sister--besides, Lady Middleton and Mrs. Ferrars will
visit now;--and Mrs. Ferrars and your sister be both so good to say
more than once, they should always be glad to see me.-- they be such
charming women!--I be sure if ever you tell your sister what I think of
she, you cannot speak too high."
but Elinor would not give she any encouragement to hope that she should
tell her sister. Lucy continue.
"I be sure I should have see it in a moment, if Mrs. Ferrars have take
a dislike to I. if she have only make I a formal courtesy, for
instance, without say a word, and never after have take any notice of
I, and never look at I in a pleasant way--you know what I mean--if
I have be treat in that forbid sort of way, I should have give
it all up in despair. I could not have stand it. for where she do
dislike, I know it be most violent."
Elinor be prevent from make any reply to this civil triumph, by
the door's be throw open, the servant's announce Mr. Ferrars, and
Edwardbe immediately walk in.
it be a very awkward moment; and the countenance of each shew that
it be so. they all look exceedingly foolish; and Edward seem to
have as great an inclination to walk out of the room again, as to
advance far into it. the very circumstance, in its unpleasant
form, which they would each have be most anxious to avoid, have fall
on them.--they be not only all three together, but be together
without the relief of any other person. the lady recover
themselves first. it be not Lucy's business to put herself forward,
and the appearance of secrecy must still be keep up. she could
therefore only look her tenderness, and after slightly address he,
say no more.
but Elinor have more to do; and so anxious be she, for his sake and her
own, to do it well, that she force herself, after a moment's
recollection, to welcome he, with a look and manner that be almost
easy, and almost open; and another struggle, another effort still
improve they. she would not allow the presence of Lucy, nor the
consciousness of some injustice towards herself, to deter she from
say that she be happy to see he, and that she have very much
regret be from home, when he call before in Berkeley Street.
she would not be frighten from pay he those attention which, as
a friend and almost a relation, be his due, by the observant eye of
Lucy, though she soon perceive they to be narrowly watch she.
her manner give some re-assurance to Edward, and he have courage enough
to sit down; but his embarrassment still exceed that of the lady in
a proportion, which the case render reasonable, though his sex might
make it rare; for his heart have not the indifference of Lucy's, nor
could his conscience have quite the ease of Elinor's.
Lucy, with a demure and settle air, seem determined to make no
contribution to the comfort of the other, and would not say a word;
and almost every thing that be say, proceed from Elinor, who be
oblige to volunteer all the information about her mother's health,
their come to town, &c. which Edward ought to have inquire about,
but never do.
her exertion do not stop here; for she soon afterwards feel herself
so heroically dispose as to determine, under pretence of fetch
Marianne, to leave the other by themselves; and she really do it, and
that in the handsome manner, for she loiter away several minute on
the landing-place, with the most high-minded fortitude, before she go
to her sister. when that be once do, however, it be time for the
rapture of Edward to cease; for Marianne's joy hurry she into the
drawing-room immediately. her pleasure in see he be like every
other of her feeling, strong in itself, and strongly speak. she meet
he with a hand that would be take, and a voice that express the
affection of a sister.
"Dear Edward!" she cry, "this be a moment of great happiness!--this
would almost make amend for every thing?"
Edward try to return her kindness as it deserve, but before such
witness he dare not say half what he really feel. again they all
sit down, and for a moment or two all be silent; while Marianne be
look with the most speaking tenderness, sometimes at Edward and
sometimes at Elinor, regret only that their delight in each other
should be check by Lucy's unwelcome presence. Edward be the first
to speak, and it be to notice Marianne's altered look, and express
his fear of she not find London agree with she.
"oh, donot think of I!" she reply with spirited earnestness, though
her eye be fill with tear as she speak, "donot think of MY
health. Elinor be well, you see. that must be enough for we both."
this remark be not calculate to make Edward or Elinor more easy, nor
to conciliate the good will of Lucy, who look up at Marianne with no
very benignant expression.
"do you like London?" say Edward, willing to say any thing that might
introduce another subject.
"not at all. I expect much pleasure in it, but I have find none.
the sight of you, Edward, be the only comfort it have afford; and
thank Heaven! you be what you always be!"
she pause--no one speak.
"I think, Elinor," she presently add, "we must employ Edward to take
care of we in our return to Barton. in a week or two, I suppose, we
shall be go; and, I trust, Edward will not be very unwilling to
accept the charge."
Poor Edward mutter something, but what it be, nobody know, not even
himself. but Marianne, who see his agitation, and could easily trace
it to whatever cause well please herself, be perfectly satisfied, and
soon talk of something else.
"we spend such a day, Edward, in Harley Street yesterday! so dull, so
wretchedly dull!--but I have much to say to you on that head, which
cannot be say now."
and with this admirable discretion do she defer the assurance of she
find their mutual relative more disagreeable than ever, and of she
be particularly disgusted with his mother, till they be more in
private.
"but why be you not there, Edward?--Why do you not come?"
"I be engage elsewhere."
"engage! but what be that, when such friend be to be meet?"
"perhaps, Miss Marianne," cry Lucy, eager to take some revenge on
she, "you think young man never stand upon engagement, if they have no
mind to keep they, little as well as great."
Elinor be very angry, but Marianne seem entirely insensible of the
sting; for she calmly reply,
"not so, indeed; for, seriously speak, I be very sure that
conscience only keep Edward from Harley Street. and I really believe
he have the most delicate conscience in the world; the most scrupulous
in perform every engagement, however minute, and however it may make
against his interest or pleasure. he be the most fearful of give
pain, of wounding expectation, and the most incapable of be selfish,
of any body I ever see. Edward, it be so, and I will say it. what!
be you never to hear yourself praised!--then you must be no friend of
mine; for those who will accept of my love and esteem, must submit to
my open commendation."
the nature of her commendation, in the present case, however, happen
to be particularly ill-suited to the feeling of two third of her
auditor, and be so very unexhilarating to Edward, that he very soon
get up to go away.
"go so soon!" say Marianne; "my dear Edward, this must not be."
and draw he a little aside, she whisper her persuasion that Lucy
could not stay much long. but even this encouragement fail, for he
would go; and Lucy, who would have outstaid he, have his visit last
two hour, soon afterwards go away.
"what can bring she here so often?" say Marianne, on she leave they.
"could not she see that we want her gone!--how teaze to Edward!"
"why so?--we be all his friend, and Lucy have be the long know
to he of any. it be but natural that he should like to see she as
well as ourselves."
Marianne look at she steadily, and say, "you know, Elinor, that this
be a kind of talk which I cannot bear. if you only hope to have
your assertion contradict, as I must suppose to be the case, you
ought to recollect that I be the last person in the world to do it. I
cannot descend to be trick out of assurance, that be not really
want."
she then leave the room; and Elinor dare not follow she to say more,
for bound as she be by her promise of secrecy to Lucy, she could give
no information that would convince Marianne; and painful as the
consequence of she still continue in an error might be, she be
oblige to submit to it. all that she could hope, be that Edward
would not often expose she or himself to the distress of hear
Marianne's mistaken warmth, nor to the repetition of any other part of
the pain that have attend their recent meeting--and this she have every
reason to expect.
CHAPTER 36
within a few day after this meeting, the newspaper announce to the
world, that the lady of Thomas Palmer, Esq. be safely deliver of a
son and heir; a very interesting and satisfactory paragraph, at least
to all those intimate connection who know it before.
this event, highly important to Mrs. Jennings's happiness, produce a
temporary alteration in the disposal of her time, and influence, in a
like degree, the engagement of her young friend; for as she wish to
be as much as possible with Charlotte, she go thither every morning
as soon as she be dress, and do not return till late in the
evening; and the Miss Dashwoods, at the particular request of the
Middletons, spend the whole of every day, in every day in Conduit
Street. for their own comfort they would much rather have remain, at
least all the morning, in Mrs. Jennings's house; but it be not a thing
to be urge against the wish of everybody. their hour be
therefore make over to Lady Middleton and the two Miss Steeles, by whom
their company, in fact be as little value, as it be professedly
seek.
they have too much sense to be desirable companion to the former; and
by the latter they be consider with a jealous eye, as intrude on
their ground, and share the kindness which they want to monopolize.
though nothing could be more polite than Lady Middleton's behaviour to
Elinor and Marianne, she do not really like they at all. because they
neither flatter herself nor her child, she could not believe they
good-natured; and because they be fond of reading, she fancy they
satirical: perhaps without exactly know what it be to be satirical;
but that do not signify. it be censure in common use, and easily
give.
their presence be a restraint both on she and on Lucy. it check the
idleness of one, and the business of the other. Lady Middleton be
ashamed of do nothing before they, and the flattery which Lucy be
proud to think of and administer at other time, she fear they would
despise she for offering. Miss Steele be the least discompose of the
three, by their presence; and it be in their power to reconcile she to
it entirely. would either of they only have give she a full and
minute account of the whole affair between Marianne and Mr. Willoughby,
she would have think herself amply reward for the sacrifice of the
good place by the fire after dinner, which their arrival occasion.
but this conciliation be not grant; for though she often throw out
expression of pity for her sister to Elinor, and more than once dropt
a reflection on the inconstancy of beaux before Marianne, no effect be
produce, but a look of indifference from the former, or of disgust in
the latter. an effort even yet light might have make she their
friend. would they only have laugh at she about the Doctor! but so
little be they, anymore than the other, incline to oblige she, that
if Sir John din from home, she might spend a whole day without
hear any other raillery on the subject, than what she be kind
enough to bestow on herself.
all these jealousy and discontent, however, be so totally
unsuspected by Mrs. Jennings, that she think it a delightful thing
for the girl to be together; and generally congratulate her young
friend every night, on have escape the company of a stupid old
woman so long. she join they sometimes at Sir John's, sometimes at
her own house; but wherever it be, she always come in excellent
spirit, full of delight and importance, attribute Charlotte's well
do to her own care, and ready to give so exact, so minute a detail
of her situation, as only Miss Steele have curiosity enough to desire.
one thing do disturb she; and of that she make her daily complaint.
Mr. Palmer maintain the common, but unfatherly opinion among his sex,
of all infant be alike; and though she could plainly perceive, at
different time, the most striking resemblance between this baby and
every one of his relation on both side, there be no convincing his
father of it; no persuade he to believe that it be not exactly like
every other baby of the same age; nor could he even be bring to
acknowledge the simple proposition of its be the fine child in the
world.
I come now to the relation of a misfortune, which about this time
befell Mrs. John Dashwood. it so happen that while her two sister
with Mrs. Jennings be first call on she in Harley Street, another
of her acquaintance have dropt in--a circumstance in itself not
apparently likely to produce evil to she. but while the imagination
of other people will carry they away to form wrong judgment of our
conduct, and to decide on it by slight appearance, one's happiness
must in some measure be always at the mercy of chance. in the present
instance, this last-arrive lady allow her fancy to so far outrun
truth and probability, that on merely hear the name of the Miss
Dashwoods, and understand they to be Mr. Dashwood's sister, she
immediately conclude they to be stay in Harley Street; and this
misconstruction produce within a day or two afterwards, card of
invitation for they as well as for their brother and sister, to a small
musical party at her house. the consequence of which be, that Mrs.
John Dashwood be oblige to submit not only to the exceedingly great
inconvenience of send her carriage for the Miss Dashwoods, but, what
be still bad, must be subject to all the unpleasantness of appear
to treat they with attention: and who could tell that they might not
expect to go out with she a second time? the power of disappointing
they, it be true, must always be she's. but that be not enough; for
when people be determine on a mode of conduct which they know to be
wrong, they feel injure by the expectation of any thing well from
they.
Marianne have now be bring by degree, so much into the habit of
go out every day, that it be become a matter of indifference to
she, whether she go or not: and she prepare quietly and mechanically
for every evening's engagement, though without expect the small
amusement from any, and very often without know, till the last
moment, where it be to take she.
to her dress and appearance she be grow so perfectly indifferent, as
not to bestow half the consideration on it, during the whole of her
toilet, which it receive from Miss Steele in the first five minute of
their be together, when it be finish. nothing escape she minute
observation and general curiosity; she see every thing, and ask every
thing; be never easy till she know the price of every part of
Marianne's dress; could have guess the number of her gown altogether
with well judgment than Marianne herself, and be not without hope
of find out before they part, how much her washing cost per week,
and how much she have every year to spend upon herself. the
impertinence of these kind of scrutiny, moreover, be generally
conclude with a compliment, which though mean as its douceur, be
consider by Marianne as the great impertinence of all; for after
undergo an examination into the value and make of her gown, the
colour of her shoe, and the arrangement of her hair, she be almost
sure of be tell that upon "her word she look vastly smart, and she
dare to say she would make a great many conquest."
with such encouragement as this, be she dismiss on the present
occasion, to her brother's carriage; which they be ready to enter
five minute after it stop at the door, a punctuality not very
agreeable to their sister-in-law, who have precede they to the house of
her acquaintance, and be there hop for some delay on their part
that might inconvenience either herself or her coachman.
the event of this evening be not very remarkable. the party, like
other musical party, comprehend a great many people who have real
taste for the performance, and a great many more who have none at all;
and the performer themselves be, as usual, in their own estimation,
and that of their immediate friend, the first private performer in
England.
as Elinor be neither musical, nor affect to be so, she make no
scruple of turn her eye from the grand pianoforte, whenever it
suit she, and unrestraine even by the presence of a harp, and
violoncello, would fix they at pleasure on any other object in the
room. in one of these excursive glance she perceive among a group of
young man, the very he, who have give they a lecture on toothpick-case
at Gray's. she perceive he soon afterwards look at herself, and
speak familiarly to her brother; and have just determine to find out
his name from the latter, when they both come towards she, and Mr.
Dashwood introduce he to she as Mr. Robert Ferrars.
he address she with easy civility, and twist his head into a bow
which assure she as plainly as word could have do, that he be
exactly the coxcomb she have hear he describe to be by Lucy. Happy
have it be for she, if her regard for Edward have depend less on his
own merit, than on the merit of his near relation! for then his
brother's bow must have give the finishing stroke to what the
ill-humour of his mother and sister would have begin. but while she
wonder at the difference of the two young man, she do not find that
the emptiness of conceit of the one, put she out of all charity with
the modesty and worth of the other. why they be different, Robert
exclaim to her himself in the course of a quarter of an hour's
conversation; for, talk of his brother, and lament the extreme
GAUCHERIE which he really believe keep he from mix in proper
society, he candidly and generously attribute it much less to any
natural deficiency, than to the misfortune of a private education;
while he himself, though probably without any particular, any material
superiority by nature, merely from the advantage of a public school,
be as well fit to mix in the world as any other man.
"upon my soul," he add, "I believe it be nothing more; and so I often
tell my mother, when she be grieve about it. 'my dear Madam,' I
always say to she, 'you must make yourself easy. the evil be now
irremediable, and it have be entirely your own doing. why would you
be persuade by my uncle, Sir Robert, against your own judgment, to
place Edward under private tuition, at the most critical time of his
life? if you have only send he to Westminster as well as myself,
instead of send he to Mr. Pratt's, all this would have be
prevent.' this be the way in which I always consider the matter, and
my mother be perfectly convinced of her error."
Elinor would not oppose his opinion, because, whatever might be her
general estimation of the advantage of a public school, she could not
think of Edward's abode in Mr. Pratt's family, with any satisfaction.
"you reside in Devonshire, I think,"--wa his next observation, "in a
cottage near Dawlish."
Elinor set he right as to its situation; and it seem rather
surprising to he that anybody could live in Devonshire, without live
near Dawlish. he bestow his hearty approbation however on their
specie of house.
"for my own part," say he, "I be excessively fond of a cottage; there
be always so much comfort, so much elegance about they. and I protest,
if I have any money to spare, I should buy a little land and build one
myself, within a short distance of London, where I might drive myself
down at any time, and collect a few friend about I, and be happy. I
advise every body who be go to build, to build a cottage. my friend
Lord Courtland come to I the other day on purpose to ask my advice,
and lay before I three different plan of Bonomi's. I be to decide
on the good of they. 'my dear Courtland,' say I, immediately throw
they all into the fire, 'do not adopt either of they, but by all mean
build a cottage.' and that I fancy, will be the end of it.
"some people imagine that there can be no accommodation, no space in a
cottage; but this be all a mistake. I be last month at my friend
Elliott's, near Dartford. Lady Elliott wish to give a dance. 'but
how can it be do?' say she; 'my dear ferrar, do tell I how it be
to be manage. there be not a room in this cottage that will hold ten
couple, and where can the supper be?' I immediately see that there
could be no difficulty in it, so I say, 'my dear Lady Elliott, do not
be uneasy. the dining parlour will admit eighteen couple with ease;
card-table may be place in the drawing-room; the library may be open
for tea and other refreshment; and let the supper be set out in the
saloon.' Lady Elliott be delighted with the thought. we measure the
dining-room, and find it would hold exactly eighteen couple, and the
affair be arrange precisely after my plan. so that, in fact, you
see, if people do but know how to set about it, every comfort may be as
well enjoy in a cottage as in the most spacious dwelling."
Elinor agree to it all, for she do not think he deserve the
compliment of rational opposition.
as John Dashwood have no more pleasure in music than his eld sister,
his mind be equally at liberty to fix on any thing else; and a thought
strike he during the evening, which he communicate to his wife, for
her approbation, when they get home. the consideration of Mrs.
Dennison's mistake, in suppose his sister their guest, have
suggest the propriety of their be really invite to become such,
while Mrs. Jenning's engagement keep she from home. the expense would
be nothing, the inconvenience not more; and it be altogether an
attention which the delicacy of his conscience point out to be
requisite to its complete enfranchisement from his promise to his
father. Fanny be startle at the proposal.
"I do not see how it can be do," say she, "without affront Lady
Middleton, for they spend every day with she; otherwise I should be
exceedingly glad to do it. you know I be always ready to pay they any
attention in my power, as my take they out this evening shews. but
they be Lady Middleton's visitor. how can I ask they away from she?"
her husband, but with great humility, do not see the force of her
objection. "they have already spend a week in this manner in Conduit
Street, and Lady Middleton could not be displeased at their give the
same number of day to such near relation."
Fanny pause a moment, and then, with fresh vigor, say,
"my love I would ask they with all my heart, if it be in my power.
but I have just settle within myself to ask the Miss Steeles to spend a
few day with we. they be very well behave, good kind of girl; and
I think the attention be due to they, as their uncle do so very well
by Edward. we can ask your sister some other year, you know; but the
Miss Steeles may not be in town any more. I be sure you will like
they; indeed, you do like they, you know, very much already, and so
do my mother; and they be such favourite with Harry!"
Mr. Dashwood be convince. he see the necessity of invite the Miss
Steeles immediately, and his conscience be pacify by the resolution
of invite his sister another year; at the same time, however, slyly
suspecting that another year would make the invitation needless, by
bring Elinor to town as Colonel Brandon's wife, and Marianne as
their visitor.
Fanny, rejoice in her escape, and proud of the ready wit that have
procure it, write the next morning to Lucy, to request her company and
her sister's, for some day, in Harley Street, as soon as Lady
Middleton could spare they. this be enough to make Lucy really and
reasonably happy. Mrs. Dashwood seem actually work for she,
herself; cherish all her hope, and promote all her view! such
an opportunity of be with Edward and his family be, above all
thing, the most material to her interest, and such an invitation the
most gratifying to her feeling! it be an advantage that could not be
too gratefully acknowledge, nor too speedily make use of; and the
visit to Lady Middleton, which have not before have any precise limit,
be instantly discover to have be always mean to end in two day'
time.
when the note be show to Elinor, as it be within ten minute after
its arrival, it give she, for the first time, some share in the
expectation of Lucy; for such a mark of uncommon kindness, vouchsafe
on so short an acquaintance, seem to declare that the good-will
towards she arise from something more than merely malice against
herself; and might be bring, by time and address, to do every thing
that Lucy wish. her flattery have already subdue the pride of Lady
Middleton, and make an entry into the close heart of Mrs. John
Dashwood; and these be effect that lay open the probability of
great.
the Miss Steeles remove to Harley Street, and all that reach Elinor
of their influence there, strengthen her expectation of the event.
Sir John, who call on they more than once, bring home such account
of the favour they be in, as must be universally striking. Mrs.
Dashwood have never be so much pleased with any young woman in her
life, as she be with they; have give each of they a needle book make
by some emigrant; call Lucy by her christian name; and do not know
whether she should ever be able to part with they.
[at this point in the first and second edition, Volume II end.]
CHAPTER 37
Mrs. Palmer be so well at the end of a fortnight, that her mother feel
it no long necessary to give up the whole of her time to she; and,
content herself with visit she once or twice a day, return from
that period to her own home, and her own habit, in which she find the
Miss Dashwoods very ready to resume their former share.
about the third or fourth morning after their be thus resettle in
Berkeley Street, Mrs. Jennings, on return from her ordinary visit to
Mrs. Palmer, enter the drawing-room, where Elinor be sit by
herself, with an air of such hurrying importance as prepare she to
hear something wonderful; and give her time only to form that idea,
begin directly to justify it, by say,
"Lord! my dear Miss Dashwood! have you hear the news?"
"no, ma'am. what be it?"
"something so strange! but you shall hear it all.-- when I get to Mr.
Palmer's, I find Charlotte quite in a fuss about the child. she be
sure it be very ill--it cry, and fret, and be all over pimple.
so I look at it directly, and, 'Lord! my dear,' say I, 'it be
nothing in the world, but the red gum--' and nurse say just the same.
but Charlotte, she would not be satisfied, so Mr. Donavan be send for;
and luckily he happen to just come in from Harley Street, so he
step over directly, and as soon as ever he see the child, be say
just as we do, that it be nothing in the world but the red gum, and
then Charlotte be easy. and so, just as he be go away again, it
come into my head, I be sure I do not know how I happen to think of
it, but it come into my head to ask he if there be any news. so upon
that, he smirk, and simper, and look grave, and seem to know
something or other, and at last he say in a whisper, 'for fear any
unpleasant report should reach the young lady under your care as to
their sister's indisposition, I think it advisable to say, that I
believe there be no great reason for alarm; I hope Mrs. Dashwood will
do very well.'"
"what! be Fanny ill?"
"that be exactly what I say, my dear. 'Lord!' say I, 'be Mrs.
Dashwood ill?' so then it all come out; and the long and the short of
the matter, by all I can learn, seem to be this. Mr. Edward Ferrars,
the very young man I use to joke with you about (but however, as it
turn out, I be monstrous glad there be never any thing in it), Mr.
Edward Ferrars, it seem, have be engage above this twelvemonth to my
cousin Lucy!--There's for you, my dear!--and not a creature know a
syllable of the matter, except nancy!--could you have believe such a
thing possible?-- there be no great wonder in their like one another;
but that matter should be bring so forward between they, and nobody
suspect it!--that be strange!--i never happen to see they together,
or I be sure I should have find it out directly. well, and so this
be keep a great secret, for fear of Mrs. Ferrars, and neither she nor
your brother or sister suspect a word of the matter;--till this very
morning, poor Nancy, who, you know, be a well-mean creature, but no
conjurer, popt it all out. 'Lord!' think she to herself, 'they be
all so fond of Lucy, to be sure they will make no difficulty about it;'
and so, away she go to your sister, who be sit all alone at her
carpet-work, little suspecting what be to come--for she have just be
say to your brother, only five minute before, that she think to
make a match between Edward and some Lord's daughter or other, I forget
who. so you may think what a blow it be to all her vanity and pride.
she fall into violent hysteric immediately, with such scream as
reach your brother's ear, as he be sit in his own dressing-room
down stair, think about write a letter to his steward in the
country. so up he fly directly, and a terrible scene take place, for
Lucy be come to they by that time, little dream what be go on.
Poor soul! I pity she. and I must say, I think she be use very
hardly; for your sister scold like any fury, and soon drive she into
a fainting fit. Nancy, she fall upon her knee, and cry bitterly;
and your brother, he walk about the room, and say he do not know
what to do. Mrs. Dashwood declare they should not stay a minute
long in the house, and your brother be force to go down upon his
knee too, to persuade she to let they stay till they have pack up
their clothe. then she fall into hysteric again, and he be so
frightened that he would send for Mr. Donavan, and Mr. Donavan find
the house in all this uproar. the carriage be at the door ready to
take my poor cousin away, and they be just step in as he come
off; poor Lucy in such a condition, he say, she could hardly walk; and
Nancy, she be almost as bad. I declare, I have no patience with your
sister; and I hope, with all my heart, it will be a match in spite of
she. Lord! what a take poor Mr. Edward will be in when he hear of
it! to have his love use so scornfully! for they say he be monstrous
fond of she, as well he may. I should not wonder, if he be to be in
the great passion!--and Mr. Donavan think just the same. he and I
have a great deal of talk about it; and the good of all be, that he be
go back again to Harley Street, that he may be within call when Mrs.
Ferrars be tell of it, for she be send for as soon as ever my cousin
leave the house, for your sister be sure she would be in hysteric too;
and so she may, for what I care. I have no pity for either of they. I
have no notion of people's make such a to-do about money and
greatness. there be no reason on earth why Mr. Edward and Lucy should
not marry; for I be sure Mrs. Ferrars may afford to do very well by her
son, and though Lucy have next to nothing herself, she know well than
any body how to make the most of every thing; I dare say, if Mrs.
Ferrars would only allow he five hundred a-year, she would make as
good an appearance with it as any body else would with eight. Lord!
how snug they might live in such another cottage as your--or a little
big--with two maid, and two man; and I believe I could help they to
a housemaid, for my Betty have a sister out of place, that would fit
they exactly."
here Mrs. Jennings cease, and as Elinor have have time enough to collect
her thought, she be able to give such an answer, and make such
observation, as the subject might naturally be suppose to produce.
happy to find that she be not suspect of any extraordinary interest
in it; that Mrs. Jennings (as she have of late often hop might be the
case) have cease to imagine she at all attach to Edward; and happy
above all the rest, in the absence of Marianne, she feel very well able
to speak of the affair without embarrassment, and to give her judgment,
as she believe, with impartiality on the conduct of every one
concerned in it.
she could hardly determine what her own expectation of its event really
be; though she earnestly try to drive away the notion of its being
possible to end otherwise at last, than in the marriage of Edward and
Lucy. what Mrs. Ferrars would say and do, though there could not be a
doubt of its nature, she be anxious to hear; and still more anxious to
know how Edward would conduct himself. for HIM she feel much
compassion;--for Lucy very little--and it cost she some pain to
procure that little;--for the rest of the party none at all.
as Mrs. Jennings could talk on no other subject, Elinor soon see the
necessity of prepare Marianne for its discussion. no time be to be
lose in undeceive she, in make she acquainted with the real truth,
and in endeavour to bring she to hear it talk of by other,
without betray that she feel any uneasiness for her sister, or any
resentment against Edward.
Elinor's office be a painful one.--She be go to remove what she
really believe to be her sister's chief consolation,--to give such
particular of Edward as she fear would ruin he for ever in her good
opinion,-and to make Marianne, by a resemblance in their situation,
which to her fancy would seem strong, feel all her own disappointment
over again. but unwelcome as such a task must be, it be necessary to
be do, and Elinor therefore hasten to perform it.
she be very far from wish to dwell on her own feeling, or to
represent herself as suffer much, any otherwise than as the
self-command she have practise since her first knowledge of Edward's
engagement, might suggest a hint of what be practicable to Marianne.
her narration be clear and simple; and though it could not be give
without emotion, it be not accompany by violent agitation, nor
impetuous grief.--THAT belong rather to the hearer, for Marianne
listen with horror, and cry excessively. Elinor be to be the
comforter of other in her own distress, no less than in theirs; and
all the comfort that could be give by assurance of her own composure
of mind, and a very earnest vindication of Edward from every charge but
of imprudence, be readily offer.
but Marianne for some time would give credit to neither. Edward seem
a second Willoughby; and acknowledge as Elinor do, that she have
love he most sincerely, could she feel less than herself! as for
Lucy Steele, she consider she so totally unamiable, so absolutely
incapable of attach a sensible man, that she could not be persuade
at first to believe, and afterwards to pardon, any former affection of
Edward for she. she would not even admit it to have be natural; and
Elinor leave she to be convince that it be so, by that which only
could convince she, a well knowledge of mankind.
her first communication have reach no far than to state the fact
of the engagement, and the length of time it have existed.--Marianne's
feeling have then break in, and put an end to all regularity of
detail; and for some time all that could be do be to soothe her
distress, lessen her alarm, and combat her resentment. the first
question on her side, which lead to farth particular, be,
"how long have this be know to you, Elinor? have he write to you?"
"I have know it these four month. when Lucy first come to Barton
Park last November, she tell I in confidence of her engagement."
at these word, Marianne's eye express the astonishment which her
lip could not utter. after a pause of wonder, she exclaimed--
"four months!--have you know of this four month?"
Elinor confirm it.
"what!--while attend I in all my misery, have this be on your
heart?--and I have reproach you for be happy!"--
"it be not fit that you should then know how much I be the reverse!"
"Four months!"--crie Marianne again.--"So calm!--so cheerful!--how
have you be supported?"--
"by feeling that I be do my duty.--my promise to Lucy, oblige I
to be secret. I owe it to she, therefore, to avoid give any hint of
the truth; and I owe it to my family and friend, not to create in
they a solicitude about I, which it could not be in my power to
satisfy."
Marianne seem much strike.
"I have very often wish to undeceive yourself and my mother," add
Elinor; "and once or twice I have attempt it;--but without betray
my trust, I never could have convince you."
"four months!--and yet you love him!"--
"yes. but I do not love only him;--and while the comfort of other be
dear to I, I be glad to spare they from know how much I feel.
now, I can think and speak of it with little emotion. I would not have
you suffer on my account; for I assure you I no long suffer
materially myself. I have many thing to support I. I be not
conscious of have provoke the disappointment by any imprudence of my
own, I have bear it as much as possible without spread it far.
I acquit Edward of essential misconduct. I wish he very happy; and I
be so sure of his always do his duty, that though now he may harbour
some regret, in the end he must become so. Lucy do not want sense,
and that be the foundation on which every thing good may be built.--And
after all, Marianne, after all that be bewitch in the idea of a
single and constant attachment, and all that can be say of one's
happiness depend entirely on any particular person, it be not
mean--it be not fit--it be not possible that it should be so.-- Edward
will marry Lucy; he will marry a woman superior in person and
understanding to half her sex; and time and habit will teach he to
forget that he ever think another superior to her."--
"if such be your way of thinking," say Marianne, "if the loss of what
be most value be so easily to be make up by something else, your
resolution, your self-command, be, perhaps, a little less to be
wonder at.--They be bring more within my comprehension."
"I understand you.--You do not suppose that I have ever feel much.--For
four month, Marianne, I have have all this hang on my mind, without
be at liberty to speak of it to a single creature; know that it
would make you and my mother most unhappy whenever it be explain to
you, yet unable to prepare you for it in the least.-- it be tell
me,--it be in a manner force on I by the very person herself, whose
prior engagement ruin all my prospect; and tell I, as I think,
with triumph.-- this person's suspicion, therefore, I have have to
oppose, by endeavour to appear indifferent where I have be most
deeply interested;--and it have not be only once;--i have have she
hope and exultation to listen to again and again.-- I have know
myself to be divide from Edward for ever, without hear one
circumstance that could make I less desire the connection.--nothing
have prove he unworthy; nor have anything declare he indifferent to
me.-- I have have to contend against the unkindness of his sister, and
the insolence of his mother; and have suffer the punishment of an
attachment, without enjoy its advantages.-- and all this have be
go on at a time, when, as you know too well, it have not be my only
unhappiness.-- if you can think I capable of ever feel--surely you
may suppose that I have suffer now. the composure of mind with which
I have bring myself at present to consider the matter, the
consolation that I have be willing to admit, have be the effect of
constant and painful exertion;--they do not spring up of
themselves;--they do not occur to relieve my spirit at first.-- no,
Marianne.--THEN, if I have not be bind to silence, perhaps nothing
could have keep I entirely--not even what I owe to my dearest
friend--from openly shew that I be very unhappy."--
Marianne be quite subdued.--
"oh! elinor," she cry, "you have make I hate myself for ever.--How
barbarous have I be to you!--you, who have be my only comfort, who
have bear with I in all my misery, who have seem to be only
suffer for me!--Is this my gratitude?--is this the only return I can
make you?--because your merit cry out upon myself, I have be try
to do it away."
the tender caress follow this confession. in such a frame of
mind as she be now in, Elinor have no difficulty in obtain from she
whatever promise she require; and at her request, Marianne engage
never to speak of the affair to any one with the least appearance of
bitterness;--to meet Lucy without betray the small increase of
dislike to her;--and even to see Edward himself, if chance should bring
they together, without any diminution of her usual cordiality.-- these
be great concessions;--but where Marianne feel that she have injure,
no reparation could be too much for she to make.
she perform her promise of be discreet, to admiration.--She
attend to all that Mrs. Jennings have to say upon the subject, with an
unchanging complexion, dissent from she in nothing, and be hear
three time to say, "yes, ma'am."--she listen to her praise of Lucy
with only move from one chair to another, and when Mrs. Jennings
talk of Edward's affection, it cost she only a spasm in her
throat.--Such advance towards heroism in her sister, make Elinor feel
equal to any thing herself.
the next morning bring a farth trial of it, in a visit from their
brother, who come with a most serious aspect to talk over the dreadful
affair, and bring they news of his wife.
"you have hear, I suppose," say he with great solemnity, as soon as
he be seat, "of the very shocking discovery that take place under
our roof yesterday."
they all look their assent; it seem too awful a moment for speech.
"your sister," he continue, "have suffer dreadfully. Mrs. Ferrars
too--in short it have be a scene of such complicated distress--but I
will hope that the storm may be weather without our be any of we
quite overcome. poor Fanny! she be in hysteric all yesterday. but I
would not alarm you too much. Donavan say there be nothing materially
to be apprehend; her constitution be a good one, and her resolution
equal to any thing. she have bear it all, with the fortitude of an
angel! she say she never shall think well of anybody again; and one
cannot wonder at it, after be so deceived!--meeting with such
ingratitude, where so much kindness have be shewn, so much confidence
have be place! it be quite out of the benevolence of her heart,
that she have ask these young woman to her house; merely because she
think they deserve some attention, be harmless, well-behave
girl, and would be pleasant companion; for otherwise we both wish
very much to have invite you and Marianne to be with we, while your
kind friend there, be attend her daughter. and now to be so
reward! 'I wish, with all my heart,' say poor Fanny in her
affectionate way, 'that we have ask your sister instead of they.'"
here he stop to be thank; which be do, he go on.
"what poor Mrs. Ferrars suffer, when first Fanny break it to she, be
not to be describe. while she with the true affection have be
plan a most eligible connection for he, be it to be suppose that
he could be all the time secretly engage to another person!--such a
suspicion could never have enter her head! if she suspect any
prepossession elsewhere, it could not be in that quarter. 'there, to
be sure,' say she, 'I might have think myself safe.' she be quite
in an agony. we consult together, however, as to what should be
do, and at last she determine to send for Edward. he come. but I
be sorry to relate what ensue. all that Mrs. Ferrars could say to
make he put an end to the engagement, assist too as you may well
suppose by my argument, and Fanny's entreaty, be of no avail.
Duty, affection, every thing be disregarded. I never think Edward
so stubborn, so unfeele before. his mother explain to he her
liberal design, in case of his marry Miss Morton; tell he she
would settle on he the Norfolk estate, which, clear of land-tax,
bring in a good thousand a-year; offer even, when matter grow
desperate, to make it twelve hundred; and in opposition to this, if he
still persist in this low connection, represent to he the certain
penury that must attend the match. his own two thousand pound she
protest should be his all; she would never see he again; and so far
would she be from afford he the small assistance, that if he
be to enter into any profession with a view of well support, she
would do all in her power to prevent he advance in it."
here Marianne, in an ecstasy of indignation, clap her hand
together, and cry, "gracious God! can this be possible!"
"well may you wonder, Marianne," reply her brother, "at the obstinacy
which could resist such argument as these. your exclamation be very
natural."
Marianne be go to retort, but she remember her promise, and
forbore.
"all this, however," he continue, "be urge in vain. Edward say
very little; but what he do say, be in the most determined manner.
nothing should prevail on he to give up his engagement. he would
stand to it, cost he what it might."
"then," cry Mrs. Jennings with blunt sincerity, no long able to be
silent, "he have act like an honest man! I beg your pardon, Mr.
Dashwood, but if he have do otherwise, I should have think he a
rascal. I have some little concern in the business, as well as
yourself, for Lucy Steele be my cousin, and I believe there be not a
well kind of girl in the world, nor one who more deserve a good
husband."
John Dashwood be greatly astonish; but his nature be calm, not open
to provocation, and he never wish to offend anybody, especially
anybody of good fortune. he therefore reply, without any resentment,
"I would by no mean speak disrespectfully of any relation of your,
madam. Miss Lucy Steele be, I dare say, a very deserving young woman,
but in the present case you know, the connection must be impossible.
and to have enter into a secret engagement with a young man under her
uncle's care, the son of a woman especially of such very large fortune
as Mrs. Ferrars, be perhaps, altogether a little extraordinary. in
short, I do not mean to reflect upon the behaviour of any person whom
you have a regard for, Mrs. Jennings. we all wish she extremely happy;
and Mrs. Ferrars's conduct throughout the whole, have be such as every
conscientious, good mother, in like circumstance, would adopt. it have
be dignified and liberal. Edward have draw his own lot, and I fear
it will be a bad one."
Marianne sigh out her similar apprehension; and Elinor's heart wring
for the feeling of Edward, while brave his mother's threat, for a
woman who could not reward he.
"well, sir," say Mrs. Jennings, "and how do it end?"
"I be sorry to say, ma'am, in a most unhappy rupture:-- Edward be
dismiss for ever from his mother's notice. he leave her house
yesterday, but where he be go, or whether he be still in town, I do
not know; for we of course can make no inquiry."
"poor young man!--and what be to become of he?"
"what, indeed, ma'am! it be a melancholy consideration. bear to the
prospect of such affluence! I cannot conceive a situation more
deplorable. the interest of two thousand pound--how can a man live on
it?--and when to that be add the recollection, that he might, but for
his own folly, within three month have be in the receipt of two
thousand, five hundred a-year (for Miss Morton have thirty thousand
pound,) I cannot picture to myself a more wretched condition. we must
all feel for he; and the more so, because it be totally out of our
power to assist he."
"poor young man!" cry Mrs. Jennings, "I be sure he should be very
welcome to bed and board at my house; and so I would tell he if I
could see he. it be not fit that he should be live about at his own
charge now, at lodging and tavern."
Elinor's heart thank she for such kindness towards Edward, though she
could not forbear smile at the form of it.
"if he would only have do as well by himself," say John Dashwood,
"as all his friend be dispose to do by he, he might now have be
in his proper situation, and would have want for nothing. but as it
be, it must be out of anybody's power to assist he. and there be one
thing more prepare against he, which must be bad than all--his
mother have determine, with a very natural kind of spirit, to settle
that estate upon Robert immediately, which might have be Edward's, on
proper condition. I leave she this morning with her lawyer, talk
over the business."
"well!" say Mrs. Jennings, "that be her revenge. everybody have a way
of their own. but I donot think mine would be, to make one son
independent, because another have plague I."
Marianne get up and walk about the room.
"can anything be more galling to the spirit of a man," continue John,
"than to see his young brother in possession of an estate which might
have be his own? poor Edward! I feel for he sincerely."
a few minute more spend in the same kind of effusion, conclude his
visit; and with repeat assurance to his sister that he really
believe there be no material danger in Fanny's indisposition, and
that they need not therefore be very uneasy about it, he go away;
leave the three lady unanimous in their sentiment on the present
occasion, as far at least as it regard Mrs. Ferrars's conduct, the
dashwood', and Edward's.
Marianne's indignation burst forth as soon as he quit the room; and
as her vehemence make reserve impossible in Elinor, and unnecessary in
Mrs. Jennings, they all join in a very spirited critique upon the
party.
CHAPTER 38
Mrs. Jennings be very warm in her praise of Edward's conduct, but only
Elinor and Marianne understand its true merit. they only know how
little he have have to tempt he to be disobedient, and how small be the
consolation, beyond the consciousness of do right, that could remain
to he in the loss of friend and fortune. Elinor glory in his
integrity; and Marianne forgive all his offence in compassion for his
punishment. but though confidence between they be, by this public
discovery, restore to its proper state, it be not a subject on which
either of they be fond of dwelling when alone. Elinor avoid it
upon principle, as tend to fix still more upon her thought, by the
too warm, too positive assurance of Marianne, that belief of Edward's
continue affection for herself which she rather wish to do away; and
Marianne's courage soon fail she, in try to converse upon a topic
which always leave she more dissatisfied with herself than ever, by the
comparison it necessarily produce between Elinor's conduct and her own.
she feel all the force of that comparison; but not as her sister have
hop, to urge she to exertion now; she feel it with all the pain of
continual self-reproach, regret most bitterly that she have never
exert herself before; but it bring only the torture of penitence,
without the hope of amendment. her mind be so much weaken that she
still fancy present exertion impossible, and therefore it only
dispirit she more.
nothing new be hear by they, for a day or two afterwards, of affair
in Harley Street, or Bartlett's Buildings. but though so much of the
matter be know to they already, that Mrs. Jennings might have have
enough to do in spread that knowledge far, without seek after
more, she have resolve from the first to pay a visit of comfort and
inquiry to her cousin as soon as she could; and nothing but the
hindrance of more visitor than usual, have prevent she go to they
within that time.
the third day succeed their knowledge of the particular, be so
fine, so beautiful a Sunday as to draw many to Kensington Gardens,
though it be only the second week in March. Mrs. Jennings and Elinor
be of the number; but Marianne, who know that the Willoughbys be
again in town, and have a constant dread of meet they, choose rather
to stay at home, than venture into so public a place.
an intimate acquaintance of Mrs. Jennings join they soon after they
enter the Gardens, and Elinor be not sorry that by her continue
with they, and engage all Mrs. Jennings's conversation, she be
herself leave to quiet reflection. she see nothing of the Willoughbys,
nothing of Edward, and for some time nothing of anybody who could by
any chance whether grave or gay, be interesting to she. but at last
she find herself with some surprise, accost by Miss Steele, who,
though look rather shy, express great satisfaction in meeting
they, and on receive encouragement from the particular kindness of
Mrs. Jennings, leave her own party for a short time, to join their's.
Mrs. Jennings immediately whisper to Elinor,
"get it all out of she, my dear. she will tell you any thing if you
ask. you see I cannot leave Mrs. Clarke."
it be lucky, however, for Mrs. Jennings's curiosity and Elinor's too,
that she would tell any thing without be ask; for nothing would
otherwise have be learn.
"I be so glad to meet you;" say Miss Steele, take she familiarly by
the arm--"for I want to see you of all thing in the world." and
then lower her voice, "I suppose Mrs. Jennings have hear all about
it. be she angry?"
"not at all, I believe, with you."
"that be a good thing. and Lady Middleton, be SHE angry?"
"I cannot suppose it possible that she should."
"I be monstrous glad of it. good gracious! I have have such a time of
it! I never see Lucy in such a rage in my life. she vow at first
she would never trim I up a new bonnet, nor do any thing else for I
again, so long as she live; but now she be quite come to, and we be
as good friend as ever. look, she make I this bow to my hat, and put
in the feather last night. there now, you be go to laugh at I
too. but why should not I wear pink ribbon? I do not care if it be
the Doctor's favourite colour. I be sure, for my part, I should never
have know he do like it well than any other colour, if he have not
happen to say so. my cousin have be so plague I! I declare
sometimes I do not know which way to look before they."
she have wander away to a subject on which Elinor have nothing to say,
and therefore soon judge it expedient to find her way back again to
the first.
"well, but Miss Dashwood," speak triumphantly, "people may say what
they chuse about Mr. Ferrars's declare he would not have Lucy, for it
be no such thing I can tell you; and it be quite a shame for such
ill-natured report to be spread abroad. whatever Lucy might think
about it herself, you know, it be no business of other people to set
it down for certain."
"I never hear any thing of the kind hint at before, I assure you,"
say Elinor.
"oh, do not you? but it be say, I know, very well, and by more than
one; for Miss Godby tell Miss Sparks, that nobody in their sens could
expect Mr. Ferrars to give up a woman like Miss Morton, with thirty
thousand pound to her fortune, for Lucy Steele that have nothing at
all; and I have it from Miss Sparks myself. and besides that, my cousin
Richard say himself, that when it come to the point he be afraid Mr.
Ferrars would be off; and when Edward do not come near we for three
day, I could not tell what to think myself; and I believe in my heart
Lucy give it up all for lost; for we come away from your brother's
Wednesday, and we see nothing of he not all Thursday, Friday, and
Saturday, and do not know what be become of he. once Lucy think
to write to he, but then her spirit rise against that. however this
morning he come just as we come home from church; and then it all come
out, how he have be send for Wednesday to Harley Street, and be
talk to by his mother and all of they, and how he have declare before
they all that he love nobody but Lucy, and nobody but Lucy would he
have. and how he have be so worried by what pass, that as soon as
he have go away from his mother's house, he have get upon his horse,
and rid into the country, some where or other; and how he have stay
about at an inn all Thursday and Friday, on purpose to get the well
of it. and after think it all over and over again, he say, it
seem to he as if, now he have no fortune, and no nothing at all, it
would be quite unkind to keep she on to the engagement, because it must
be for her loss, for he have nothing but two thousand pound, and no
hope of any thing else; and if he be to go into order, as he have some
thought, he could get nothing but a curacy, and how be they to live
upon that?--He could not bear to think of she do no well, and so
he beg, if she have the least mind for it, to put an end to the
matter directly, and leave he shift for himself. I hear he say all
this as plain as could possibly be. and it be entirely for she sake,
and upon she account, that he say a word about be off, and not upon
his own. I will take my oath he never dropt a syllable of be tired
of she, or of wish to marry Miss Morton, or any thing like it. but,
to be sure, Lucy would not give ear to such kind of talk; so she
tell he directly (with a great deal about sweet and love, you know,
and all that--oh, la! one cannot repeat such kind of thing you
know)--she tell he directly, she have not the least mind in the world
to be off, for she could live with he upon a trifle, and how little so
ever he might have, she should be very glad to have it all, you know,
or something of the kind. so then he be monstrous happy, and talk
on some time about what they should do, and they agree he should take
order directly, and they must wait to be marry till he get a living.
and just then I could not hear any more, for my cousin call from
below to tell I Mrs. Richardson be come in her coach, and would take
one of we to Kensington Gardens; so I be force to go into the room
and interrupt they, to ask Lucy if she would like to go, but she do
not care to leave Edward; so I just run up stair and put on a pair of
silk stocking and come off with the Richardsons."
"I do not understand what you mean by interrupt they," say Elinor;
"you be all in the same room together, be not you?"
"no, indeed, not we. La! Miss Dashwood, do you think people make love
when any body else be by? oh, for shame!--to be sure you must know
well than that. (laugh affectedly.)--No, no; they be shut up in
the drawing-room together, and all I hear be only by listen at the
door."
"how!" cry Elinor; "have you be repeat to I what you only
learn yourself by listen at the door? I be sorry I do not know it
before; for I certainly would not have suffer you to give I
particular of a conversation which you ought not to have know
yourself. how could you behave so unfairly by your sister?"
"oh, la! there be nothing in that. I only stand at the door, and hear
what I could. and I be sure Lucy would have do just the same by I;
for a year or two back, when Martha Sharpe and I have so many secret
together, she never make any bone of hide in a closet, or behind a
chimney-board, on purpose to hear what we say."
Elinor try to talk of something else; but Miss Steele could not be
keep beyond a couple of minute, from what be uppermost in her mind.
"Edward talk of go to Oxford soon," say she; "but now he be
lodge at No. --, Pall Mall. what an ill-natured woman his mother be,
an't she? and your brother and sister be not very kind! however, I
shallnot say anything against they to you; and to be sure they do send
us home in their own chariot, which be more than I look for. and
for my part, I be all in a fright for fear your sister should ask we
for the huswife she have give we a day or two before; but, however,
nothing be say about they, and I take care to keep mine out of sight.
Edward have get some business at Oxford, he say; so he must go there
for a time; and after that, as soon as he can light upon a Bishop, he
will be ordain. I wonder what curacy he will get!--good gracious!
(giggle as she speak) Iwould lay my life I know what my cousin will
say, when they hear of it. they will tell I I should write to the
Doctor, to get Edward the curacy of his new living. I know they will;
but I be sure I would not do such a thing for all the world.-- 'La!' I
shall say directly, 'I wonder how you could think of such a thing? I
write to the Doctor, indeed!'"
"well," say Elinor, "it be a comfort to be prepare against the bad.
you have get your answer ready."
Miss Steele be go to reply on the same subject, but the approach of
her own party make another more necessary.
"oh, la! here come the Richardsons. I have a vast deal more to say to
you, but I must not stay away from they not any long. I assure you
they be very genteel people. he make a monstrous deal of money, and
they keep their own coach. I have not time to speak to Mrs. Jennings
about it myself, but pray tell she I be quite happy to hear she be not
in anger against we, and Lady Middleton the same; and if anything
should happen to take you and your sister away, and Mrs. Jennings
should want company, I be sure we should be very glad to come and stay
with she for as long a time as she like. I suppose Lady Middleton
willnot ask we any more this bout. good-by; I be sorry Miss Marianne be
not here. remember I kindly to she. La! if you have not get your
spot muslin on!--I wonder you be not afraid of its be tear."
such be her parting concern; for after this, she have time only to pay
her farewell compliment to Mrs. Jennings, before her company be
claim by Mrs. Richardson; and Elinor be leave in possession of
knowledge which might feed her power of reflection some time, though
she have learn very little more than what have be already foresee and
foreplanne in her own mind. Edward's marriage with Lucy be as firmly
determined on, and the time of its taking place remain as absolutely
uncertain, as she have conclude it would be;--every thing depend,
exactly after her expectation, on his get that preferment, of
which, at present, there seem not the small chance.
as soon as they return to the carriage, Mrs. Jennings be eager for
information; but as Elinor wish to spread as little as possible
intelligence that have in the first place be so unfairly obtain, she
confine herself to the brief repetition of such simple particular, as
she feel assure that Lucy, for the sake of her own consequence, would
choose to have know. the continuance of their engagement, and the
mean that be able to be take for promote its end, be all her
communication; and this produce from Mrs. Jennings the follow
natural remark.
"wait for his have a living!--ay, we all know how that will
end:--they will wait a twelvemonth, and find no good come of it,
will set down upon a curacy of fifty pound a-year, with the interest
of his two thousand pound, and what little matter Mr. Steele and Mr.
Pratt can give her.--then they will have a child every year! and Lord
help them! how poor they will be!--I must see what I can give they
towards furnish their house. two maid and two man, indeed!--as I
talk of t'other day.--No, no, they must get a stout girl of all
works.-- Betty's sister would never do for they now."
the next morning bring Elinor a letter by the two-penny post from
Lucy herself. it be as follow:
"Bartlett's Building, March.
"I hope my dear Miss Dashwood will excuse the
liberty I take of writing to she; but I know your
friendship for I will make you pleased to hear such
a good account of myself and my dear Edward, after
all the trouble we have go through lately,
therefore will make no more apology, but proceed
to say that, thank God! though we have suffer
dreadfully, we be both quite well now, and as happy
as we must always be in one another's love. we have
have great trial, and great persecution, but
however, at the same time, gratefully acknowledge
many friend, yourself not the least among they,
whose great kindness I shall always thankfully
remember, as will Edward too, who I have tell of
it. I be sure you will be glad to hear, as likewise
dear Mrs. Jennings, I spend two happy hour with
he yesterday afternoon, he would not hear of our
parting, though earnestly do I, as I think my
duty require, urge he to it for prudence sake,
and would have part for ever on the spot, would
he consent to it; but he say it should never be,
he do not regard his mother's anger, while he could
have my affection; our prospect be not very
bright, to be sure, but we must wait, and hope for
the good; he will be ordain shortly; and should
it ever be in your power to recommend he to any
body that have a living to bestow, be very sure you
will not forget we, and dear Mrs. Jennings too,
trust she will speak a good word for we to Sir John,
or Mr. Palmer, or any friend that may be able to
assist us.--Poor Anne be much to blame for what
she do, but she do it for the good, so I say
nothing; hope Mrs. Jennings willnot think it too much
trouble to give we a call, should she come this way
any morning, 'twould be a great kindness, and my
cousin would be proud to know her.--My paper remind
I to conclude; and beg to be most gratefully
and respectfully remember to she, and to Sir John,
and Lady Middleton, and the dear child, when you
chance to see they, and love to Miss Marianne,
"I be, &c."
as soon as Elinor have finish it, she perform what she conclude to
be its writer's real design, by place it in the hand of Mrs.
Jennings, who read it aloud with many comment of satisfaction and
praise.
"very well indeed!--how prettily she writes!--aye, that be quite
proper to let he be off if he would. that be just like Lucy.--Poor
soul! I wish I could get he a living, with all my heart.--She call I
dear Mrs. Jennings, you see. she be a good-hearted girl as ever
lived.--very well upon my word. that sentence be very prettily turn.
yes, yes, I will go and see she, sure enough. how attentive she be, to
think of every body!--thank you, my dear, for shew it I. it be as
pretty a letter as ever I see, and do Lucy's head and heart great
credit."
CHAPTER 39
the Miss Dashwoods have now be rather more than two month in town,
and Marianne's impatience to be go increase every day. she sigh
for the air, the liberty, the quiet of the country; and fancy that if
any place could give her ease, Barton must do it. Elinor be hardly
less anxious than herself for their removal, and only so much less bent
on its being effect immediately, as that she be conscious of the
difficulty of so long a journey, which Marianne could not be bring
to acknowledge. she begin, however, seriously to turn her thought
towards its accomplishment, and have already mention their wish to
their kind hostess, who resist they with all the eloquence of her
good-will, when a plan be suggest, which, though detain they from
home yet a few week long, appear to Elinor altogether much more
eligible than any other. the Palmers be to remove to Cleveland about
the end of March, for the Easter holiday; and Mrs. Jennings, with both
her friend, receive a very warm invitation from Charlotte to go with
they. this would not, in itself, have be sufficient for the delicacy
of Miss Dashwood;--but it be inforce with so much real politeness by
Mr. Palmer himself, as, join to the very great amendment of his
manner towards they since her sister have be know to be unhappy,
induce she to accept it with pleasure.
when she tell Marianne what she have do, however, her first reply be
not very auspicious.
"cleveland!"--she cry, with great agitation. "no, I cannot go to
Cleveland."--
"you forget," say Elinor gently, "that its situation be not...that it
be not in the neighbourhood of..."
"but it be in Somersetshire.--I cannot go into Somersetshire.--There,
where I look forward to go...no, Elinor, you cannot expect I to
go there."
Elinor would not argue upon the propriety of overcome such
feelings;--she only endeavour to counteract they by work on
others;--represented it, therefore, as a measure which would fix the
time of she return to that dear mother, whom she so much wish to
see, in a more eligible, more comfortable manner, than any other plan
could do, and perhaps without any great delay. from Cleveland, which
be within a few mile of Bristol, the distance to Barton be not
beyond one day, though a long day's journey; and their mother's servant
might easily come there to attend they down; and as there could be no
occasion of their stay above a week at Cleveland, they might now be
at home in little more than three week' time. as Marianne's affection
for her mother be sincere, it must triumph with little difficulty,
over the imaginary evil she have start.
Mrs. Jennings be so far from be weary of her guest, that she
press they very earnestly to return with she again from Cleveland.
Elinor be grateful for the attention, but it could not alter her
design; and their mother's concurrence be readily gain, every
thing relative to their return be arrange as far as it could be;--and
Marianne find some relief in draw up a statement of the hour that
be yet to divide she from Barton.
"ah! Colonel, I do not know what you and I shall do without the Miss
Dashwoods;"--was Mrs. Jennings's address to he when he first call on
she, after their leave she be settled--"for they be quite resolve
upon go home from the Palmers;--and how forlorn we shall be, when I
come back!--lord! we shall sit and gape at one another as dull as two
cat."
perhaps Mrs. Jennings be in hope, by this vigorous sketch of their
future ennui, to provoke he to make that offer, which might give
himself an escape from it;--and if so, she have soon afterwards good
reason to think her object gain; for, on Elinor's move to the
window to take more expeditiously the dimension of a print, which she
be go to copy for her friend, he follow she to it with a look of
particular meaning, and converse with she there for several minute.
the effect of his discourse on the lady too, could not escape she
observation, for though she be too honorable to listen, and have even
change her seat, on purpose that she might not hear, to one close by
the piano forte on which Marianne be play, she could not keep
herself from see that Elinor change colour, attend with
agitation, and be too intent on what he say to pursue she
employment.-- still far in confirmation of her hope, in the
interval of Marianne's turning from one lesson to another, some word
of the Colonel's inevitably reach her ear, in which he seem to be
apologise for the badness of his house. this set the matter beyond a
doubt. she wonder, indeed, at his think it necessary to do so;
but suppose it to be the proper etiquette. what Elinor say in reply
she could not distinguish, but judge from the motion of her lip, that
she do not think that any material objection;--and Mrs. Jennings
commend she in her heart for be so honest. they then talk on
for a few minute long without her catch a syllable, when another
lucky stop in Marianne's performance bring she these word in the
Colonel's calm voice,--
"I be afraid it cannot take place very soon."
Astonished and shock at so unlover-like a speech, she be almost
ready to cry out, "Lord! what should hinder it?"--but check she
desire, confine herself to this silent ejaculation.
"this be very strange!--sure he need not wait to be old."
this delay on the Colonel's side, however, do not seem to offend or
mortify his fair companion in the least, for on their break up the
conference soon afterwards, and move different way, Mrs. Jennings
very plainly hear Elinor say, and with a voice which shew she to
feel what she say,
"I shall always think myself very much oblige to you."
Mrs. Jennings be delighted with her gratitude, and only wonder that
after hear such a sentence, the Colonel should be able to take leave
of they, as he immediately do, with the utmost sang-froid, and go away
without make she any reply!--she have not think her old friend could
have make so indifferent a suitor.
what have really pass between they be to this effect.
"I have hear," say he, with great compassion, "of the injustice your
friend Mr. Ferrars have suffer from his family; for if I understand
the matter right, he have be entirely cast off by they for persevere
in his engagement with a very deserving young woman.-- have I be
rightly informed?--is it so?--"
Elinor tell he that it be.
"the cruelty, the impolitic cruelty,"--he reply, with great
feeling,--"of dividing, or attempt to divide, two young people long
attach to each other, be terrible.-- Mrs. Ferrars do not know what
she may be do--what she may drive her son to. I have see Mr.
ferrar two or three time in Harley Street, and be much pleased with
he. he be not a young man with whom one can be intimately acquaint
in a short time, but I have see enough of he to wish he well for his
own sake, and as a friend of your, I wish it still more. I understand
that he intend to take order. will you be so good as to tell he
that the living of Delaford, now just vacant, as I be inform by this
day's post, be his, if he think it worth his acceptance--but that,
perhaps, so unfortunately circumstance as he be now, it may be
nonsense to appear to doubt; I only wish it be more valuable.-- it
be a rectory, but a small one; the late incumbent, I believe, do not
make more than 200 L per annum, and though it be certainly capable of
improvement, I fear, not to such an amount as to afford he a very
comfortable income. such as it be, however, my pleasure in present
he to it, will be very great. pray assure he of it."
Elinor's astonishment at this commission could hardly have be
great, have the Colonel be really make she an offer of his hand.
the preferment, which only two day before she have consider as
hopeless for Edward, be already provide to enable he to marry;--and
SHE, of all people in the world, be fix on to bestow it!--Her
emotion be such as Mrs. Jennings have attribute to a very different
cause;--but whatever minor feeling less pure, less pleasing, might
have a share in that emotion, her esteem for the general benevolence,
and her gratitude for the particular friendship, which together
prompt Colonel Brandon to this act, be strongly feel, and warmly
express. she thank he for it with all her heart, speak of
Edward's principle and disposition with that praise which she know
they to deserve; and promise to undertake the commission with
pleasure, if it be really his wish to put off so agreeable an office
to another. but at the same time, she could not help think that no
one could so well perform it as himself. it be an office in short,
from which, unwilling to give Edward the pain of receive an
obligation from she, she would have be very glad to be spar
herself;-- but Colonel Brandon, on motif of equal delicacy, decline
it likewise, still seem so desirous of its be give through her
mean, that she would not on any account make farther opposition.
Edward, she believe, be still in town, and fortunately she have hear
his address from Miss Steele. she could undertake therefore to inform
he of it, in the course of the day. after this have be settle,
Colonel Brandon begin to talk of his own advantage in securing so
respectable and agreeable a neighbour, and then it be that he
mention with regret, that the house be small and indifferent;--an
evil which Elinor, as Mrs. Jennings have suppose she to do, make very
light of, at least as far as regard its size.
"the smallness of the house," say she, "I cannot imagine any
inconvenience to they, for it will be in proportion to their family and
income."
by which the Colonel be surprised to find that she be consider Mr.
Ferrars's marriage as the certain consequence of the presentation; for
he do not suppose it possible that Delaford living could supply such
an income, as anybody in his style of life would venture to settle
on--and he say so.
"this little rectory can do no more than make Mr. ferrar comfortable
as a bachelor; it cannot enable he to marry. I be sorry to say that
my patronage end with this; and my interest be hardly more extensive.
if, however, by an unforeseen chance it should be in my power to serve
he far, I must think very differently of he from what I now do,
if I be not as ready to be useful to he then as I sincerely wish I
could be at present. what I be now do indeed, seem nothing at all,
since it can advance he so little towards what must be his principal,
his only object of happiness. his marriage must still be a distant
good;--at least, I be afraid it cannot take place very soon.--"
such be the sentence which, when misunderstood, so justly offend the
delicate feeling of Mrs. Jennings; but after this narration of what
really pass between Colonel Brandon and Elinor, while they stand at
the window, the gratitude express by the latter on their parting, may
perhaps appear in general, not less reasonably excited, nor less
properly word than if it have arise from an offer of marriage.
CHAPTER 40
"well, Miss Dashwood," say Mrs. Jennings, sagaciously smile, as soon
as the gentleman have withdraw, "I do not ask you what the Colonel have
be say to you; for though, upon my honour, I try to keep out of
hearing, I could not help catch enough to understand his business.
and I assure you I never be well pleased in my life, and I wish you
joy of it with all my heart."
"thank you, ma'am," say Elinor. "it be a matter of great joy to I;
and I feel the goodness of Colonel Brandon most sensibly. there be
not many man who would act as he have do. few people who have so
compassionate a heart! I never be more astonished in my life."
"Lord! my dear, you be very modest. I an't the least astonish at it
in the world, for I have often think of late, there be nothing more
likely to happen."
"you judge from your knowledge of the Colonel's general benevolence;
but at least you could not foresee that the opportunity would so very
soon occur."
"opportunity!" repeat Mrs. Jennings--"Oh! as to that, when a man have
once make up his mind to such a thing, somehow or other he will soon
find an opportunity. well, my dear, I wish you joy of it again and
again; and if ever there be a happy couple in the world, I think I
shall soon know where to look for they."
"you mean to go to Delaford after they I suppose," say Elinor, with a
faint smile.
"Aye, my dear, that I do, indeed. and as to the house be a bad one,
I do not know what the Colonel would be at, for it be as good a one as
ever I see."
"he speak of its be out of repair."
"well, and whose fault be that? why donot he repair it?--who should do
it but himself?"
they be interrupt by the servant's come in to announce the
carriage be at the door; and Mrs. Jennings immediately prepare to
go, said,--
"well, my dear, I must be go before I have have half my talk out.
but, however, we may have it all over in the evening; for we shall be
quite alone. I do not ask you to go with I, for I dare say your mind
be too full of the matter to care for company; and besides, you must
long to tell your sister all about it."
Marianne have leave the room before the conversation begin.
"certainly, ma'am, I shall tell Marianne of it; but I shall not mention
it at present to any body else."
"oh! very well," say Mrs. Jennings rather disappoint. "then you
would not have I tell it to Lucy, for I think of go as far as
Holborn to-day."
"no, ma'am, not even Lucy if you please. one day's delay will not be
very material; and till I have write to Mr. Ferrars, I think it ought
not to be mention to any body else. I shall do that directly. it be
of importance that no time should be lose with he, for he will of
course have much to do relative to his ordination."
this speech at first puzzle Mrs. Jennings exceedingly. why Mr.
Ferrars be to have be write to about it in such a hurry, she could
not immediately comprehend. a few moment' reflection, however,
produce a very happy idea, and she exclaimed;--
"oh, ho!--I understand you. Mr. Ferrars be to be the man. well, so
much the well for he. ay, to be sure, he must be ordain in
readiness; and I be very glad to find thing be so forward between
you. but, my dear, be not this rather out of character? should not
the Colonel write himself?--sure, he be the proper person."
Elinor do not quite understand the beginning of Mrs. Jennings's
speech, neither do she think it worth inquire into; and therefore
only reply to its conclusion.
"Colonel Brandon be so delicate a man, that he rather wish any one to
announce his intention to Mr. Ferrars than himself."
"and so you be force to do it. well that be an odd kind of delicacy!
however, I will not disturb you (see she prepare to write.) you
know your own concern well. so goodby, my dear. I have not hear of
any thing to please I so well since Charlotte be bring to bed."
and away she go; but return again in a moment,
"I have just be think of Betty's sister, my dear. I should be
very glad to get she so good a mistress. but whether she would do for
a lady's maid, I be sure I cannot tell. she be an excellent housemaid,
and work very well at her needle. however, you will think of all that
at your leisure."
"certainly, ma'am," reply Elinor, not hear much of what she say,
and more anxious to be alone, than to be mistress of the subject.
how she should begin--how she should express herself in her note to
Edward, be now all her concern. the particular circumstance between
they make a difficulty of that which to any other person would have
be the easy thing in the world; but she equally fear to say too
much or too little, and sit deliberate over her paper, with the pen
in her hand, till break in on by the entrance of Edward himself.
he have meet Mrs. Jennings at the door in her way to the carriage, as he
come to leave his farewell card; and she, after apologise for not
return herself, have oblige he to enter, by say that Miss
Dashwood be above, and want to speak with he on very particular
business.
Elinor have just be congratulate herself, in the midst of her
perplexity, that however difficult it might be to express herself
properly by letter, it be at least preferable to give the
information by word of mouth, when her visitor enter, to force she
upon this great exertion of all. her astonishment and confusion
be very great on his so sudden appearance. she have not see he
before since his engagement become public, and therefore not since his
know she to be acquaint with it; which, with the consciousness of
what she have be think of, and what she have to tell he, make she
feel particularly uncomfortable for some minute. he too be much
distressed; and they sit down together in a most promising state of
embarrassment.--whether he have ask her pardon for his intrusion on
first come into the room, he could not recollect; but determine to
be on the safe side, he make his apology in form as soon as he could
say any thing, after take a chair.
"Mrs. Jennings tell I," say he, "that you wish to speak with I, at
least I understand she so--or I certainly should not have intrude on
you in such a manner; though at the same time, I should have be
extremely sorry to leave London without see you and your sister;
especially as it will most likely be some time--it be not probable that
I should soon have the pleasure of meet you again. I go to Oxford
tomorrow."
"you would not have go, however," say Elinor, recover herself,
and determine to get over what she so much dread as soon as
possible, "without receive our good wish, even if we have not be
able to give they in person. Mrs. Jennings be quite right in what she
say. I have something of consequence to inform you of, which I be on
the point of communicating by paper. I be charge with a most
agreeable office (breathe rather fast than usual as she speak.)
Colonel Brandon, who be here only ten minute ago, have desire I to
say, that understanding you mean to take order, he have great pleasure
in offer you the living of Delaford now just vacant, and only wish
it be more valuable. allow I to congratulate you on have so
respectable and well-judge a friend, and to join in his wish that the
living--it be about two hundred a-year--be much more considerable,
and such as might well enable you to--as might be more than a
temporary accommodation to yourself--such, in short, as might establish
all your view of happiness."
what Edward feel, as he could not say it himself, it cannot be expect
that any one else should say for he. he looked all the astonishment
which such unexpected, such unthought-of information could not fail of
exciting; but he say only these two word,
"Colonel Brandon!"
"yes," continue Elinor, gather more resolution, as some of the
bad be over, "Colonel Brandon mean it as a testimony of his concern
for what have lately pass--for the cruel situation in which the
unjustifiable conduct of your family have place you--a concern which I
be sure Marianne, myself, and all your friend, must share; and
likewise as a proof of his high esteem for your general character, and
his particular approbation of your behaviour on the present occasion."
"Colonel Brandon give I a living!--Can it be possible?"
"the unkindness of your own relation have make you astonish to find
friendship any where."
"no," reply be, with sudden consciousness, "not to find it in you;
for I cannot be ignorant that to you, to your goodness, I owe it
all.--i feel it--I would express it if I could--but, as you well know,
I be no orator."
"you be very much mistaken. I do assure you that you owe it entirely,
at least almost entirely, to your own merit, and Colonel Brandon's
discernment of it. I have have no hand in it. I do not even know,
till I understand his design, that the living be vacant; nor have it
ever occur to I that he might have have such a living in his gift.
as a friend of mine, of my family, he may, perhaps--indeed I know he
have, still great pleasure in bestow it; but, upon my word, you owe
nothing to my solicitation."
Truth oblige she to acknowledge some small share in the action, but
she be at the same time so unwilling to appear as the benefactress of
Edward, that she acknowledge it with hesitation; which probably
contribute to fix that suspicion in his mind which have recently
enter it. for a short time he sit deep in thought, after Elinor have
cease to speak;--at last, and as if it be rather an effort, he say,
"Colonel Brandon seem a man of great worth and respectability. I have
always hear he speak of as such, and your brother I know esteem he
highly. he be undoubtedly a sensible man, and in his manner perfectly
the gentleman."
"indeed," reply Elinor, "I believe that you will find he, on farther
acquaintance, all that you have hear he to be, and as you will be
such very near neighbour (for I understand the parsonage be almost
close to the mansion-house,) it be particularly important that he
should be all this."
Edward make no answer; but when she have turn away her head, give she
a look so serious, so earnest, so uncheerful, as seem to say, that he
might hereafter wish the distance between the parsonage and the
mansion-house much great.
"Colonel Brandon, I think, lodge in St. James Street," say he, soon
afterwards, rise from his chair.
Elinor tell he the number of the house.
"I must hurry away then, to give he those thank which you will not
allow I to give you; to assure he that he have make I a very--an
exceedingly happy man."
Elinor do not offer to detain he; and they part, with a very
earnest assurance on her side of her uncease good wish for his
happiness in every change of situation that might befall he; on HIS,
with rather an attempt to return the same good will, than the power of
express it.
"when I see he again," say Elinor to herself, as the door shut he
out, "I shall see he the husband of Lucy."
and with this pleasing anticipation, she sit down to reconsider the
past, recall the word and endeavour to comprehend all the feeling of
Edward; and, of course, to reflect on her own with discontent.
when Mrs. Jennings come home, though she return from see people
whom she have never see before, and of whom therefore she must have a
great deal to say, her mind be so much more occupy by the important
secret in her possession, than by anything else, that she revert to
it again as soon as Elinor appear.
"well, my dear," she cry, "I send you up to the young man. do not I
do right?--and I suppose you have no great difficulty--you do not find
he very unwilling to accept your proposal?"
"no, ma'am; that be not very likely."
"well, and how soon will he be ready?--For it seem all to depend upon
that."
"really," say Elinor, "I know so little of these kind of form, that I
can hardly even conjecture as to the time, or the preparation
necessary; but I suppose two or three month will complete his
ordination."
"two or three month!" cry Mrs. Jennings; "Lord! my dear, how calmly
you talk of it; and can the Colonel wait two or three month! Lord
bless me!--I be sure it would put I quite out of patience!--and though
one would be very glad to do a kindness by poor Mr. Ferrars, I do think
it be not worth while to wait two or three month for he. sure
somebody else might be find that would do as well; somebody that be in
order already."
"my dear ma'am," say Elinor, "what can you be think of?-- why,
Colonel Brandon's only object be to be of use to Mr. Ferrars."
"Lord bless you, my dear!--sure you do not mean to persuade I that the
Colonel only marry you for the sake of give ten guineas to Mr.
Ferrars!"
the deception could not continue after this; and an explanation
immediately take place, by which both gain considerable amusement for
the moment, without any material loss of happiness to either, for Mrs.
Jennings only exchange one form of delight for another, and still
without forfeit her expectation of the first.
"aye, aye, the parsonage be but a small one," say she, after the first
ebullition of surprise and satisfaction be over, "and very likely MAY
be out of repair; but to hear a man apologise, as I think, for a
house that to my knowledge have five sit room on the ground-floor,
and I think the housekeeper tell I could make up fifteen beds!--and to
you too, that have be use to live in Barton cottage!-- it seem quite
ridiculous. but, my dear, we must touch up the Colonel to do some
thing to the parsonage, and make it comfortable for they, before Lucy
go to it."
"but Colonel Brandon do not seem to have any idea of the living's
be enough to allow they to marry."
"the Colonel be a ninny, my dear; because he have two thousand a-year
himself, he think that nobody else can marry on less. take my word
for it, that, if I be alive, I shall be pay a visit at Delaford
Parsonage before Michaelmas; and I be sure I shallnot go if Lucy an't
there."
Elinor be quite of her opinion, as to the probability of their not
wait for any thing more.
CHAPTER 41
Edward, have carry his thank to Colonel Brandon, proceed with
his happiness to Lucy; and such be the excess of it by the time he
reach Bartlett's Buildings, that she be able to assure Mrs.
Jennings, who call on she again the next day with her
congratulation, that she have never see he in such spirit before in
her life.
her own happiness, and her own spirit, be at least very certain; and
she join Mrs. Jennings most heartily in her expectation of their
be all comfortably together in Delaford Parsonage before Michaelmas.
so far be she, at the same time, from any backwardness to give Elinor
that credit which Edward would give she, that she speak of her
friendship for they both with the most grateful warmth, be ready to
own all their obligation to she, and openly declare that no exertion
for their good on Miss Dashwood's part, either present or future, would
ever surprise she, for she believe she capable of do any thing in
the world for those she really value. as for Colonel Brandon, she be
not only ready to worship he as a saint, but be moreover truly
anxious that he should be treat as one in all worldly concern;
anxious that his tithe should be raise to the utmost; and scarcely
resolve to avail herself, at Delaford, as far as she possibly could,
of his servant, his carriage, his cow, and his poultry.
it be now above a week since John Dashwood have call in Berkeley
Street, and as since that time no notice have be take by they of his
wife's indisposition, beyond one verbal enquiry, Elinor begin to feel
it necessary to pay she a visit.--this be an obligation, however,
which not only oppose her own inclination, but which have not the
assistance of any encouragement from her companion. Marianne, not
content with absolutely refuse to go herself, be very urgent to
prevent her sister's go at all; and Mrs. Jennings, though her
carriage be always at Elinor's service, so very much dislike Mrs.
John Dashwood, that not even her curiosity to see how she look after
the late discovery, nor her strong desire to affront she by take
Edward's part, could overcome her unwillingness to be in her company
again. the consequence be, that Elinor set out by herself to pay a
visit, for which no one could really have less inclination, and to run
the risk of a tete-a-tete with a woman, whom neither of the other have
so much reason to dislike.
Mrs. Dashwood be deny; but before the carriage could turn from the
house, her husband accidentally come out. he express great pleasure
in meet Elinor, tell she that he have be just go to call in
Berkeley Street, and, assure she that Fanny would be very glad to see
she, invite she to come in.
they walk up stair in to the drawing-room.--nobody be there.
"Fanny be in her own room, I suppose," say he:--"I will go to she
presently, for I be sure she will not have the least objection in the
world to see you.-- very far from it, indeed. now especially there
cannot be--but however, you and Marianne be always great
favourites.--why would not Marianne come?"--
Elinor make what excuse she could for she.
"I be not sorry to see you alone," he reply, "for I have a good deal
to say to you. this living of Colonel Brandon's--can it be true?--has
he really give it to edward?--i hear it yesterday by chance, and be
come to you on purpose to enquire far about it."
"it be perfectly true.--Colonel Brandon have give the living of
Delaford to Edward."
"Really!--Well, this be very astonishing!--no relationship!--no
connection between them!--and now that living fetch such a
price!--what be the value of this?"
"about two hundred a year."
"very well--and for the next presentation to a living of that
value--suppose the late incumbent to have be old and sickly, and
likely to vacate it soon--he might have get I dare say--fourteen
hundred pound. and how come he not to have settle that matter before
this person's death?--now indeed it would be too late to sell it, but a
man of Colonel Brandon's sense!--I wonder he should be so improvident
in a point of such common, such natural, concern!--well, I be convince
that there be a vast deal of inconsistency in almost every human
character. I suppose, however--on recollection--that the case may
probably be this. Edward be only to hold the living till the person to
whom the Colonel have really sell the presentation, be old enough to
take it.--aye, aye, that be the fact, depend upon it."
Elinor contradict it, however, very positively; and by relate that
she have herself be employ in convey the offer from Colonel
Brandon to Edward, and, therefore, must understand the term on which
it be give, oblige he to submit to her authority.
"it be truly astonishing!"--he cry, after hear what she
said--"what could be the Colonel's motive?"
"a very simple one--to be of use to Mr. Ferrars."
"well, well; whatever Colonel Brandon may be, Edward be a very lucky
man.--you will not mention the matter to Fanny, however, for though I
have break it to she, and she bear it vastly well,--she will not like
to hear it much talk of."
Elinor have some difficulty here to refrain from observe, that she
think Fanny might have bear with composure, an acquisition of wealth
to her brother, by which neither she nor her child could be possibly
impoverish.
"Mrs. Ferrars," add he, lower his voice to the tone become so
important a subject, "know nothing about it at present, and I believe
it will be good to keep it entirely conceal from she as long as may
be.-- when the marriage take place, I fear she must hear of it all."
"but why should such precaution be used?--though it be not to be
suppose that Mrs. Ferrars can have the small satisfaction in
know that her son have money enough to live upon,--for that must be
quite out of the question; yet why, upon her late behaviour, be she
suppose to feel at all?--She have do with her son, she cast he off
for ever, and have make all those over whom she have any influence, cast
he off likewise. surely, after do so, she cannot be imagine
liable to any impression of sorrow or of joy on his account--she cannot
be interested in any thing that befall him.-- she would not be so weak
as to throw away the comfort of a child, and yet retain the anxiety of
a parent!"
"ah! Elinor," say John, "your reasoning be very good, but it be
found on ignorance of human nature. when Edward's unhappy match
take place, depend upon it his mother will feel as much as if she have
never discard he; and, therefore every circumstance that may
accelerate that dreadful event, must be conceal from she as much as
possible. Mrs. Ferrars can never forget that Edward be her son."
"you surprise I; I should think it must nearly have escape her memory
by this time."
"you wrong she exceedingly. Mrs. Ferrars be one of the most
affectionate mother in the world."
Elinor be silent.
"we think NOW,"--said Mr. Dashwood, after a short pause, "of ROBERT'S
marry Miss Morton."
Elinor, smile at the grave and decisive importance of her brother's
tone, calmly reply,
"the lady, I suppose, have no choice in the affair."
"choice!--how do you mean?"
"I only mean that I suppose, from your manner of speak, it must be
the same to Miss Morton whether she marry Edward or Robert."
"certainly, there can be no difference; for Robert will now to all
intent and purpose be consider as the eld son;--and as to any
thing else, they be both very agreeable young man: I do not know that
one be superior to the other."
Elinor say no more, and John be also for a short time silent.--hi
reflection end thus.
"of one thing, my dear sister," kindly take her hand, and speak in
an awful whisper,--"i may assure you;--and I will do it, because I know
it must gratify you. I have good reason to think--indeed I have it
from the good authority, or I should not repeat it, for otherwise it
would be very wrong to say any thing about it--but I have it from the
very good authority--not that I ever precisely hear Mrs. ferrar say
it herself--but her daughter DID, and I have it from she--that in
short, whatever objection there might be against a certain--a certain
connection--you understand I--it would have be far preferable to
she, it would not have give she half the vexation that this do. I
be exceedingly pleased to hear that Mrs. Ferrars consider it in that
light--a very gratifying circumstance you know to we all. 'it would
have be beyond comparison,' she say, 'the least evil of the two, and
she would be glad to compound now for nothing bad.' but however, all
that be quite out of the question--not to be think of or
mention--as to any attachment you know--it never could be--all that
be go by. but I think I would just tell you of this, because I
know how much it must please you. not that you have any reason to
regret, my dear Elinor. there be no doubt of your do exceedingly
well--quite as well, or well, perhaps, all thing consider. have
Colonel Brandon be with you lately?"
Elinor have hear enough, if not to gratify her vanity, and raise she
self-importance, to agitate her nerve and fill she mind;--and she be
therefore glad to be spar from the necessity of say much in reply
herself, and from the danger of hear any thing more from her
brother, by the entrance of Mr. Robert Ferrars. after a few moment'
chat, John Dashwood, recollect that Fanny be yet uninformed of her
sister's be there, quit the room in quest of she; and Elinor be
leave to improve her acquaintance with Robert, who, by the gay
unconcern, the happy self-complacency of his manner while enjoy so
unfair a division of his mother's love and liberality, to the prejudice
of his banish brother, earn only by his own dissipate course of
life, and that brother's integrity, be confirm her most
unfavourable opinion of his head and heart.
they have scarcely be two minute by themselves, before he begin to
speak of Edward; for he, too, have hear of the living, and be very
inquisitive on the subject. Elinor repeat the particular of it, as
she have give they to John; and their effect on Robert, though very
different, be not less striking than it have be on HIM. he laugh
most immoderately. the idea of Edward's be a clergyman, and live
in a small parsonage-house, divert he beyond measure;--and when to
that be add the fanciful imagery of Edward read prayer in a
white surplice, and publish the bann of marriage between John Smith
and Mary Brown, he could conceive nothing more ridiculous.
Elinor, while she wait in silence and immovable gravity, the
conclusion of such folly, could not restrain her eye from be fix
on he with a look that speak all the contempt it excite. it be a
look, however, very well bestow, for it relieve her own feeling,
and give no intelligence to he. he be recall from wit to wisdom,
not by any reproof of she's, but by his own sensibility.
"we may treat it as a joke," say he, at last, recover from the
affect laugh which have considerably lengthen out the genuine gaiety
of the moment--"but, upon my soul, it be a most serious business. poor
Edward! he be ruin for ever. I be extremely sorry for it--for I
know he to be a very good-hearted creature; as well-mean a fellow
perhaps, as any in the world. you must not judge of he, Miss
Dashwood, from your slight acquaintance.--poor edward!--his manner be
certainly not the happy in nature.--But we be not all bear, you
know, with the same powers,--the same address.-- poor fellow!--to see
he in a circle of strangers!--to be sure it be pitiable enough!--but
upon my soul, I believe he have as good a heart as any in the kingdom;
and I declare and protest to you I never be so shocked in my life, as
when it all burst forth. I could not believe it.-- my mother be the
first person who tell I of it; and I, feel myself call on to act
with resolution, immediately say to she, 'my dear madam, I do not know
what you may intend to do on the occasion, but as for myself, I must
say, that if Edward do marry this young woman, I never will see he
again.' that be what I say immediately.-- I be most uncommonly
shocked, indeed!--poor Edward!--he have do for himself
completely--shut himself out for ever from all decent society!--but, as
I directly say to my mother, I be not in the least surprised at it;
from his style of education, it be always to be expect. my poor
mother be half frantic."
"have you ever see the lady?"
"yes; once, while she be stay in this house, I happen to drop in
for ten minute; and I see quite enough of she. the mere awkward
country girl, without style, or elegance, and almost without beauty.--
I remember she perfectly. just the kind of girl I should suppose
likely to captivate poor Edward. I offer immediately, as soon as my
mother relate the affair to I, to talk to he myself, and dissuade
he from the match; but it be too late then, I find, to do any thing,
for unluckily, I be not in the way at first, and know nothing of it
till after the breach have take place, when it be not for I, you
know, to interfere. but have I be inform of it a few hour
early--I think it be most probable--that something might have be
hit on. I certainly should have represent it to Edward in a very
strong light. 'my dear fellow,' I should have say, 'consider what you
be do. you be make a most disgraceful connection, and such a
one as your family be unanimous in disapprove.' I cannot help
thinking, in short, that mean might have be find. but now it be
all too late. he must be starve, you know;--that be certain;
absolutely starve."
he have just settle this point with great composure, when the entrance
of Mrs. John Dashwood put an end to the subject. but though she never
speak of it out of her own family, Elinor could see its influence on
her mind, in the something like confusion of countenance with which she
enter, and an attempt at cordiality in her behaviour to herself. she
even proceed so far as to be concern to find that Elinor and her
sister be so soon to leave town, as she have hop to see more of
them;--an exertion in which her husband, who attend she into the
room, and hung enamour over her accent, seem to distinguish every
thing that be most affectionate and graceful.
CHAPTER 42
one other short call in Harley Street, in which Elinor receive she
brother's congratulation on their travel so far towards Barton
without any expense, and on Colonel Brandon's be to follow they to
Cleveland in a day or two, complete the intercourse of the brother and
sister in town;--and a faint invitation from Fanny, to come to Norland
whenever it should happen to be in their way, which of all thing be
the most unlikely to occur, with a more warm, though less public,
assurance, from John to Elinor, of the promptitude with which he should
come to see she at Delaford, be all that foretold any meeting in the
country.
it amuse she to observe that all her friend seem determined to send
she to delaford;--a place, in which, of all other, she would now least
chuse to visit, or wish to reside; for not only be it consider as
her future home by her brother and Mrs. Jennings, but even Lucy, when
they part, give she a press invitation to visit she there.
very early in April, and tolerably early in the day, the two party
from Hanover Square and Berkeley Street set out from their respective
home, to meet, by appointment, on the road. for the convenience of
Charlotte and her child, they be to be more than two day on their
journey, and Mr. Palmer, travel more expeditiously with Colonel
Brandon, be to join they at Cleveland soon after their arrival.
Marianne, few as have be her hour of comfort in London, and eager as
she have long be to quit it, could not, when it come to the point, bid
adieu to the house in which she have for the last time enjoy those
hope, and that confidence, in Willoughby, which be now extinguish
for ever, without great pain. nor could she leave the place in which
Willoughby remain, busy in new engagement, and new scheme, in which
she could have no share, without shed many tear.
Elinor's satisfaction, at the moment of removal, be more positive.
she have no such object for her linger thought to fix on, she leave
no creature behind, from whom it would give she a moment's regret to be
divide for ever, she be pleased to be free herself from the
persecution of Lucy's friendship, she be grateful for bring she
sister away unseen by Willoughby since his marriage, and she look
forward with hope to what a few month of tranquility at Barton might
do towards restore Marianne's peace of mind, and confirm her own.
their journey be safely perform. the second day bring they into
the cherished, or the prohibit, county of Somerset, for as such be
it dwelt on by turn in Marianne's imagination; and in the forenoon of
the third they drive up to Cleveland.
Cleveland be a spacious, modern-build house, situate on a sloping
lawn. it have no park, but the pleasure-ground be tolerably
extensive; and like every other place of the same degree of importance,
it have its open shrubbery, and close wood walk, a road of smooth
gravel winding round a plantation, lead to the front, the lawn be
dot over with timber, the house itself be under the guardianship of
the fir, the mountain-ash, and the acacia, and a thick screen of they
altogether, intersperse with tall lombardy poplar, shut out the
office.
Marianne enter the house with a heart swell with emotion from the
consciousness of be only eighty mile from Barton, and not thirty
from Combe Magna; and before she have be five minute within its
wall, while the other be busily help Charlotte to show her child
to the housekeeper, she quit it again, steal away through the
wind shrubbery, now just begin to be in beauty, to gain a
distant eminence; where, from its grecian temple, her eye, wander
over a wide tract of country to the south-east, could fondly rest on
the farth ridge of hill in the horizon, and fancy that from their
summit Combe Magna might be see.
in such moment of precious, invaluable misery, she rejoice in tear
of agony to be at Cleveland; and as she return by a different circuit
to the house, feel all the happy privilege of country liberty, of
wander from place to place in free and luxurious solitude, she
resolve to spend almost every hour of every day while she remain
with the Palmers, in the indulgence of such solitary ramble.
she return just in time to join the other as they quit the house,
on an excursion through its more immediate premise; and the rest of
the morning be easily while away, in lounge round the kitchen
garden, examine the bloom upon its wall, and listen to the
gardener's lamentation upon blight, in dawdle through the
green-house, where the loss of her favourite plant, unwarily expose,
and nip by the linger frost, raise the laughter of
Charlotte,--and in visit her poultry-yard, where, in the
disappointed hope of her dairy-maid, by hen forsake their nest, or
be steal by a fox, or in the rapid decrease of a promising young
brood, she find fresh source of merriment.
the morning be fine and dry, and Marianne, in her plan of employment
abroad, have not calculate for any change of weather during their stay
at Cleveland. with great surprise therefore, do she find herself
prevent by a settle rain from go out again after dinner. she have
depend on a twilight walk to the grecian temple, and perhaps all over
the ground, and an evening merely cold or damp would not have deter
she from it; but a heavy and settle rain even she could not fancy dry
or pleasant weather for walk.
their party be small, and the hour pass quietly away. Mrs. Palmer
have her child, and Mrs. Jennings her carpet-work; they talk of the
friend they have leave behind, arrange Lady Middleton's engagement,
and wonder whether Mr. Palmer and Colonel Brandon would get far
than read that night. Elinor, however little concerned in it,
join in their discourse; and Marianne, who have the knack of find
her way in every house to the library, however it might be avoid by
the family in general, soon procure herself a book.
nothing be want on Mrs. Palmer's side that constant and friendly
good humour could do, to make they feel themselves welcome. the
openness and heartiness of her manner more than atone for that want of
recollection and elegance which make she often deficient in the form
of politeness; her kindness, recommend by so pretty a face, be
engage; her folly, though evident be not disgusting, because it be
not conceited; and Elinor could have forgive every thing but her laugh.
the two gentleman arrive the next day to a very late dinner, afford
a pleasant enlargement of the party, and a very welcome variety to
their conversation, which a long morning of the same continued rain have
reduce very low.
Elinor have see so little of Mr. Palmer, and in that little have see so
much variety in his address to her sister and herself, that she know
not what to expect to find he in his own family. she find he,
however, perfectly the gentleman in his behaviour to all his visitor,
and only occasionally rude to his wife and her mother; she find he
very capable of be a pleasant companion, and only prevent from
be so always, by too great an aptitude to fancy himself as much
superior to people in general, as he must feel himself to be to Mrs.
Jennings and Charlotte. for the rest of his character and habit, they
be mark, as far as Elinor could perceive, with no trait at all
unusual in his sex and time of life. he be nice in his eating,
uncertain in his hour; fond of his child, though affect to slight
it; and idle away the morning at billiard, which ought to have be
devote to business. she like he, however, upon the whole, much
well than she have expect, and in her heart be not sorry that she
could like he no more;--not sorry to be drive by the observation of
his epicurism, his selfishness, and his conceit, to rest with
complacency on the remembrance of Edward's generous temper, simple
taste, and diffident feeling.
of Edward, or at least of some of his concern, she now receive
intelligence from Colonel Brandon, who have be into dorsetshire
lately; and who, treat she at once as the disinterested friend of
Mr. Ferrars, and the kind of confidant of himself, talk to she a
great deal of the parsonage at Delaford, describe its deficiency,
and tell she what he mean to do himself towards remove them.--his
behaviour to she in this, as well as in every other particular, his
open pleasure in meet she after an absence of only ten day, his
readiness to converse with she, and his deference for her opinion,
might very well justify Mrs. Jennings's persuasion of his attachment,
and would have be enough, perhaps, have not Elinor still, as from the
first, believe Marianne his real favourite, to make she suspect it
herself. but as it be, such a notion have scarcely ever enter she
head, except by Mrs. Jennings's suggestion; and she could not help
believe herself the nice observer of the two;--she watch his
eye, while Mrs. Jennings think only of his behaviour;--and while his
look of anxious solicitude on Marianne's feeling, in her head and
throat, the beginning of a heavy cold, because unexpresse by word,
entirely escape the latter lady's observation;--SHE could discover in
they the quick feeling, and needless alarm of a lover.
two delightful twilight walk on the third and fourth evening of she
be there, not merely on the dry gravel of the shrubbery, but all
over the ground, and especially in the most distant part of they,
where there be something more of wildness than in the rest, where the
tree be the old, and the grass be the long and wet,
have--assist by the still great imprudence of sit in her wet
shoe and stocking--give Marianne a cold so violent as, though for a
day or two trifle with or deny, would force itself by increase
ailment on the concern of every body, and the notice of herself.
prescription pour in from all quarter, and as usual, be all
decline. though heavy and feverish, with a pain in her limb, and a
cough, and a sore throat, a good night's rest be to cure she entirely;
and it be with difficulty that Elinor prevail on she, when she go
to bed, to try one or two of the simple of the remedy.
CHAPTER 43
Marianne get up the next morning at her usual time; to every inquiry
reply that she be well, and try to prove herself so, by engage
in her accustomary employment. but a day spend in sit shiver
over the fire with a book in her hand, which she be unable to read, or
in lie, weary and languid, on a sofa, do not speak much in favour of
her amendment; and when, at last, she go early to bed, more and more
indispose, Colonel Brandon be only astonish at her sister's
composure, who, though attend and nurse she the whole day, against
Marianne's inclination, and force proper medicine on she at night,
trust, like Marianne, to the certainty and efficacy of sleep, and
feel no real alarm.
a very restless and feverish night, however, disappoint the
expectation of both; and when Marianne, after persist in rise,
confess herself unable to sit up, and return voluntarily to her
bed, Elinor be very ready to adopt Mrs. Jennings's advice, of send
for the Palmers' apothecary.
he come, examine his patient, and though encourage Miss Dashwood to
expect that a very few day would restore her sister to health, yet, by
pronounce her disorder to have a putrid tendency, and allow the
word "infection" to pass his lip, give instant alarm to Mrs. Palmer,
on her baby's account. Mrs. Jennings, who have be incline from the
first to think Marianne's complaint more serious than Elinor, now
look very grave on Mr. Harris's report, and confirm Charlotte's
fear and caution, urge the necessity of her immediate removal with
her infant; and Mr. Palmer, though treat their apprehension as
idle, find the anxiety and importunity of his wife too great to be
withstood. her departure, therefore, be fix on; and within an hour
after Mr. Harris's arrival, she set off, with her little boy and his
nurse, for the house of a near relation of Mr. Palmer's, who live a
few mile on the other side of Bath; whither her husband promise, at
her earn entreaty, to join she in a day or two; and whither she be
almost equally urgent with her mother to accompany she. Mrs. Jennings,
however, with a kindness of heart which make Elinor really love she,
declare her resolution of not stir from Cleveland as long as
Marianne remain ill, and of endeavouring, by her own attentive care,
to supply to she the place of the mother she have take she from; and
Elinor find she on every occasion a most willing and active helpmate,
desirous to share in all her fatigue, and often by her well
experience in nursing, of material use.
Poor Marianne, languid and low from the nature of her malady, and
feel herself universally ill, could no long hope that tomorrow
would find she recover; and the idea of what tomorrow would have
produce, but for this unlucky illness, make every ailment severe; for
on that day they be to have begin their journey home; and, attend
the whole way by a servant of Mrs. Jennings, be to have take their
mother by surprise on the following forenoon. the little she say be
all in lamentation of this inevitable delay; though Elinor try to
raise her spirit, and make she believe, as she then really believe
herself, that it would be a very short one.
the next day produce little or no alteration in the state of the
patient; she certainly be not well, and, except that there be no
amendment, do not appear bad. their party be now far reduced;
for Mr. Palmer, though very unwilling to go as well from real humanity
and good-nature, as from a dislike of appear to be frighten away
by his wife, be persuade at last by Colonel Brandon to perform his
promise of follow she; and while he be prepare to go, Colonel
Brandon himself, with a much great exertion, begin to talk of go
likewise.--here, however, the kindness of Mrs. Jennings interpose most
acceptably; for to send the Colonel away while his love be in so much
uneasiness on her sister's account, would be to deprive they both, she
think, of every comfort; and therefore tell he at once that his
stay at Cleveland be necessary to herself, that she should want he to
play at piquet of an evening, while Miss Dashwood be above with her
sister, &c. she urge he so strongly to remain, that he, who be
gratify the first wish of his own heart by a compliance, could not
long even affect to demur; especially as Mrs. Jennings's entreaty be
warmly second by Mr. Palmer, who seem to feel a relief to himself,
in leave behind he a person so well able to assist or advise Miss
Dashwood in any emergence.
Marianne be, of course, keep in ignorance of all these arrangement.
she know not that she have be the mean of send the owner of
Cleveland away, in about seven day from the time of their arrival. it
give she no surprise that she see nothing of Mrs. Palmer; and as it
give she likewise no concern, she never mention her name.
two day pass away from the time of Mr. Palmer's departure, and her
situation continue, with little variation, the same. Mr. Harris, who
attend she every day, still talk boldly of a speedy recovery, and
Miss Dashwood be equally sanguine; but the expectation of the other
be by no mean so cheerful. Mrs. Jennings have determine very early
in the seizure that Marianne would never get over it, and Colonel
Brandon, who be chiefly of use in listen to Mrs. Jennings's
foreboding, be not in a state of mind to resist their influence. he
try to reason himself out of fear, which the different judgment of
the apothecary seem to render absurd; but the many hour of each day
in which he be leave entirely alone, be but too favourable for the
admission of every melancholy idea, and he could not expel from his
mind the persuasion that he should see Marianne no more.
on the morning of the third day however, the gloomy anticipation of
both be almost do away; for when Mr. Harris arrive, he declare
his patient materially well. her pulse be much strong, and every
symptom more favourable than on the precede visit. Elinor, confirm
in every pleasant hope, be all cheerfulness; rejoice that in her
letter to her mother, she have pursue her own judgment rather than her
friend's, in make very light of the indisposition which delay they
at Cleveland; and almost fix on the time when Marianne would be able
to travel.
but the day do not close so auspiciously as it began.-- towards the
evening Marianne become ill again, grow more heavy, restless, and
uncomfortable than before. her sister, however, still sanguine, be
willing to attribute the change to nothing more than the fatigue of
have sit up to have her bed make; and carefully administer the
cordial prescribe, see she, with satisfaction, sink at last into a
slumber, from which she expect the most beneficial effect. her
sleep, though not so quiet as Elinor wish to see it, last a
considerable time; and anxious to observe the result of it herself, she
resolve to sit with she during the whole of it. Mrs. Jennings,
know nothing of any change in the patient, go unusually early to
bed; she maid, who be one of the principal nurse, be recreate
herself in the housekeeper's room, and Elinor remain alone with
Marianne.
the repose of the latter become more and more disturbed; and her
sister, who watch, with unremitte attention her continual change of
posture, and hear the frequent but inarticulate sound of complaint
which pass her lip, be almost wish to rouse she from so painful
a slumber, when Marianne, suddenly awaken by some accidental noise in
the house, start hastily up, and, with feverish wildness, cry out,--
"be mama coming?--"
"not yet," cry the other, conceal her terror, and assist
Marianne to lie down again, "but she will be here, I hope, before it be
long. it be a great way, you know, from hence to Barton."
"but she must not go round by London," cry Marianne, in the same
hurry manner. "I shall never see she, if she go by London."
Elinor perceive with alarm that she be not quite herself, and, while
attempt to soothe she, eagerly feel her pulse. it be low and
quick than ever! and Marianne, still talk wildly of mama, her
alarm increase so rapidly, as to determine she on send instantly
for Mr. Harris, and despatch a messenger to Barton for her mother.
to consult with Colonel Brandon on the good mean of effect the
latter, be a thought which immediately follow the resolution of its
performance; and as soon she have ring up the maid to take her place by
her sister, she hasten down to the drawing-room, where she know he
be generally to be find at a much late hour than the present.
it be no time for hesitation. her fear and her difficulty be
immediately before he. her fear, he have no courage, no confidence to
attempt the removal of:--he listen to they in silent
despondence;--but her difficulty be instantly obviate, for with a
readiness that seem to speak the occasion, and the service
pre-arranged in his mind, he offer himself as the messenger who
should fetch Mrs. Dashwood. Elinor make no resistance that be not
easily overcome. she thank he with brief, though fervent gratitude,
and while he go to hurry off his servant with a message to Mr.
Harris, and an order for post-horse directly, she write a few line to
her mother.
the comfort of such a friend at that moment as Colonel Brandon--or such
a companion for her mother,--how gratefully be it felt!--a companion
whose judgment would guide, whose attendance must relieve, and whose
friendship might soothe her!--as far as the shock of such a summon
could be lessen to she, his presence, his manner, his assistance,
would lessen it.
he, meanwhile, whatever he might feel, act with all the firmness of a
collect mind, make every necessary arrangement with the utmost
despatch, and calculate with exactness the time in which she might
look for his return. not a moment be lose in delay of any kind. the
horse arrive, even before they be expect, and Colonel Brandon
only press her hand with a look of solemnity, and a few word speak
too low to reach her ear, hurry into the carriage. it be then about
twelve o'clock, and she return to her sister's apartment to wait for
the arrival of the apothecary, and to watch by she the rest of the
night. it be a night of almost equal suffering to both. hour after
hour pass away in sleepless pain and delirium on Marianne's side, and
in the most cruel anxiety on Elinor's, before Mr. Harris appear. her
apprehension once raise, pay by their excess for all her former
security; and the servant who sit up with she, for she would not allow
Mrs. Jennings to be call, only torture she more, by hint of what
her mistress have always think.
Marianne's idea be still, at interval, fix incoherently on her
mother, and whenever she mention her name, it give a pang to the
heart of poor Elinor, who, reproach herself for have trifle with
so many day of illness, and wretche for some immediate relief,
fancy that all relief might soon be in vain, that every thing have
be delay too long, and picture to herself her suffer mother
arrive too late to see this darling child, or to see her rational.
she be on the point of send again for Mr. Harris, or if he could
not come, for some other advice, when the former--but not till after
five o'clock--arrive. his opinion, however, make some little amend
for his delay, for though acknowledge a very unexpected and
unpleasant alteration in his patient, he would not allow the danger to
be material, and talk of the relief which a fresh mode of treatment
must procure, with a confidence which, in a less degree, be
communicate to Elinor. he promise to call again in the course of
three or four hour, and leave both the patient and her anxious
attendant more composed than he have find they.
with strong concern, and with many reproach for not be call to
their aid, do Mrs. Jennings hear in the morning of what have pass.
her former apprehension, now with great reason restore, leave she no
doubt of the event; and though try to speak comfort to Elinor, her
conviction of her sister's danger would not allow she to offer the
comfort of hope. her heart be really grieve. the rapid decay, the
early death of a girl so young, so lovely as Marianne, must have strike
a less interested person with concern. on Mrs. Jennings's compassion
she have other claim. she have be for three month her companion, be
still under her care, and she be know to have be greatly injure,
and long unhappy. the distress of her sister too, particularly a
favourite, be before her;--and as for their mother, when Mrs. Jennings
consider that Marianne might probably be to she what Charlotte be to
herself, her sympathy in her suffering be very sincere.
Mr. Harris be punctual in his second visit;--but he come to be
disappoint in his hope of what the last would produce. his
medicine have failed;--the fever be unabated; and Marianne only more
quiet--not more herself--remain in a heavy stupor. elinor, catch
all, and more than all, his fear in a moment, propose to call in
further advice. but he judge it unnecessary: he have still something
more to try, some more fresh application, of whose success he be as
confident as the last, and his visit conclude with encouraging
assurance which reach the ear, but could not enter the heart of Miss
Dashwood. she be calm, except when she think of her mother; but she
be almost hopeless; and in this state she continue till noon,
scarcely stir from her sister's bed, her thought wander from
one image of grief, one suffer friend to another, and her spirit
oppress to the utmost by the conversation of Mrs. Jennings, who
scruple not to attribute the severity and danger of this attack to the
many week of previous indisposition which Marianne's disappointment
have bring on. Elinor feel all the reasonableness of the idea, and it
give fresh misery to her reflection.
about noon, however, she begin--but with a caution--a dread of
disappointment which for some time keep she silent, even to her
friend--to fancy, to hope she could perceive a slight amendment in her
sister's pulse;--she wait, watch, and examine it again and
again;--and at last, with an agitation more difficult to bury under
exterior calmness, than all her forego distress, venture to
communicate her hope. Mrs. Jennings, though force, on examination,
to acknowledge a temporary revival, try to keep her young friend from
indulge a thought of its continuance;--and Elinor, con over every
injunction of distrust, tell herself likewise not to hope. but it be
too late. Hope have already enter; and feel all its anxious
flutter, she bent over her sister to watch--she hardly know for what.
half an hour pass away, and the favourable symptom yet bless she.
other even arise to confirm it. her breath, her skin, her lip, all
flatter Elinor with sign of amendment; and Marianne fix her eye
on she with a rational, though languid, gaze. anxiety and hope now
oppress she in equal degree, and leave she no moment of tranquillity
till the arrival of Mr. Harris at four o'clock;--when his assurance,
his felicitation on a recovery in her sister even surpass his
expectation, give her confidence, comfort, and tear of joy.
Marianne be in every respect materially well, and he declare she
entirely out of danger. Mrs. Jennings, perhaps satisfied with the
partial justification of her foreboding which have be find in their
late alarm, allow herself to trust in his judgment, and admit,
with unfeigned joy, and soon with unequivocal cheerfulness, the
probability of an entire recovery.
Elinor could not be cheerful. her joy be of a different kind, and lead
to any thing rather than to gaiety. Marianne restore to life, health,
friend, and to her doting mother, be an idea to fill her heart with
sensation of exquisite comfort, and expand it in fervent
gratitude;--but it lead to no outward demonstration of joy, no word,
no smile. all within Elinor's breast be satisfaction, silent and
strong.
she continue by the side of her sister, with little intermission the
whole afternoon, calm every fear, satisfy every inquiry of she
enfeeble spirit, supply every succour, and watch almost every
look and every breath. the possibility of a relapse would of course,
in some moment, occur to remind she of what anxiety be--but when she
see, on her frequent and minute examination, that every symptom of
recovery continue, and see Marianne at six o'clock sink into a quiet,
steady, and to all appearance comfortable, sleep, she silence every
doubt.
the time be now draw on, when Colonel Brandon might be expect
back. at ten o'clock, she trust, or at least not much later her
mother would be relieve from the dreadful suspense in which she must
now be travel towards they. the Colonel, too!--perhap scarcely
less an object of pity!--Oh!--how slow be the progress of time which
yet keep they in ignorance!
at seven o'clock, leave Marianne still sweetly asleep, she join
Mrs. Jennings in the drawing-room to tea. of breakfast she have be
keep by her fear, and of dinner by their sudden reverse, from eat
much;--and the present refreshment, therefore, with such feeling of
content as she bring to it, be particularly welcome. Mrs. Jennings
would have persuade she, at its conclusion, to take some rest before
her mother's arrival, and allow she to take her place by Marianne; but
Elinor have no sense of fatigue, no capability of sleep at that moment
about she, and she be not to be keep away from her sister an
unnecessary instant. Mrs. Jennings therefore attend she up stair
into the sick chamber, to satisfy herself that all continue right,
leave she there again to her charge and her thought, and retire to her
own room to write letter and sleep.
the night be cold and stormy. the wind roar round the house, and
the rain beat against the window; but Elinor, all happiness within,
regard it not. Marianne sleep through every blast; and the
traveller--they have a rich reward in store, for every present
inconvenience.
the clock strike eight. have it be ten, Elinor would have be
convince that at that moment she hear a carriage drive up to the
house; and so strong be the persuasion that she do, in spite of the
almost impossibility of their be already come, that she move into
the adjoining dressing-closet and open a window shutter, to be
satisfied of the truth. she instantly see that her ear have not
deceive she. the flare lamp of a carriage be immediately in
view. by their uncertain light she think she could discern it to be
draw by four horse; and this, while it tell the excess of her poor
mother's alarm, give some explanation to such unexpected rapidity.
never in her life have Elinor find it so difficult to be calm, as at
that moment. the knowledge of what her mother must be feel as the
carriage stopt at the door--of her doubt--her dread--perhaps she
despair!--and of what she have to tell!--with such knowledge it be
impossible to be calm. all that remain to be do be to be speedy;
and, therefore stay only till she could leave Mrs. Jennings's maid
with her sister, she hurry down stair.
the bustle in the vestibule, as she pass along an inner lobby,
assure she that they be already in the house. she rush to the
drawing-room,--she enter it,--and see only Willoughby.
CHAPTER 44
Elinor, start back with a look of horror at the sight of he, obey
the first impulse of her heart in turn instantly to quit the room,
and her hand be already on the lock, when its action be suspend by
his hastily advancing, and say, in a voice rather of command than
supplication,
"Miss Dashwood, for half an hour--for ten minute--I entreat you to
stay."
"no, sir," she reply with firmness, "I shall not stay. your business
cannot be with I. the servant, I suppose, forget to tell you that
Mr. Palmer be not in the house."
"have they tell I," he cry with vehemence, "that Mr. Palmer and all
his relation be at the devil, it would not have turn I from the
door. my business be with you, and only you."
"with me!"--in the utmost amazement--"well, sir,--be quick--and if you
can--less violent."
"sit down, and I will be both."
she hesitate; she know not what to do. the possibility of Colonel
Brandon's arrive and find she there, come across she. but she have
promise to hear he, and her curiosity no less than her honor be
engage. after a moment's recollection, therefore, conclude that
prudence require dispatch, and that her acquiescence would well
promote it, she walk silently towards the table, and sit down. he
take the opposite chair, and for half a minute not a word be say by
either.
"pray be quick, sir,"--said Elinor, impatiently;--"I have no time to
spare."
he be sit in an attitude of deep meditation, and seem not to
hear she.
"your sister," say he, with abruptness, a moment afterwards--"is out
of danger. I hear it from the servant. God be praised!--but be it
true? be it really true?"
Elinor would not speak. he repeat the inquiry with yet great
eagerness.
"for God's sake tell I, be she out of danger, or be she not?"
"we hope she be."
he rise up, and walk across the room.
"have I know as much half an hour ago--but since I be here,"--speaking
with a force vivacity as he return to his seat--"what do it
signify?--for once, Miss Dashwood--it will be the last time,
perhaps--let we be cheerful together.--i be in a fine mood for
gaiety.-- tell I honestly"--a deep glow overspread his
cheeks--"do you think I most a knave or a fool?"
Elinor look at he with great astonishment than ever. she begin to
think that he must be in liquor;--the strangeness of such a visit, and
of such manner, seem no otherwise intelligible; and with this
impression she immediately rise, say,
"Mr. Willoughby, I advise you at present to return to Combe--I be not
at leisure to remain with you longer.-- whatever your business may be
with I, will it be well recollect and explain to-morrow."
"I understand you," he reply, with an expressive smile, and a voice
perfectly calm; "yes, I be very drunk.-- a pint of porter with my cold
beef at Marlborough be enough to over-set I."
"at Marlborough!"--cried Elinor, more and more at a loss to understand
what he would be at.
"Yes,--I leave London this morning at eight o'clock, and the only ten
minute I have spend out of my chaise since that time procure I a
nuncheon at Marlborough."
the steadiness of his manner, and the intelligence of his eye as he
speak, convince Elinor, that whatever other unpardonable folly might
bring he to Cleveland, he be not bring there by intoxication, she
say, after a moment's recollection,
"Mr. Willoughby, you ought to feel, and I certainly do--that after what
have pass--your come here in this manner, and force yourself upon
my notice, require a very particular excuse.--what be it, that you
mean by it?"--
"I mean,"--said he, with serious energy--"if I can, to make you hate I
one degree less than you do now. I mean to offer some kind of
explanation, some kind of apology, for the past; to open my whole heart
to you, and by convince you, that though I have be always a
blockhead, I have not be always a rascal, to obtain something like
forgiveness from Ma--from your sister."
"be this the real reason of your coming?"
"upon my soul it is,"--wa his answer, with a warmth which bring all
the former Willoughby to her remembrance, and in spite of herself make
she think he sincere.
"if that be all, you may be satisfied already,-- for Marianne do--she
have long forgive you."
"have she?"--he cry, in the same eager tone.-- "then she have forgive
I before she ought to have do it. but she shall forgive I again,
and on more reasonable grounds.--NOW will you listen to I?"
Elinor bow her assent.
"I do not know," say he, after a pause of expectation on her side, and
thoughtfulness on his own,--"how you may have account for my
behaviour to your sister, or what diabolical motive you may have
impute to me.-- perhaps you will hardly think the well of me,--it be
worth the trial however, and you shall hear every thing. when I first
become intimate in your family, I have no other intention, no other view
in the acquaintance than to pass my time pleasantly while I be oblige
to remain in Devonshire, more pleasantly than I have ever do before.
your sister's lovely person and interesting manner could not but
please I; and her behaviour to I almost from the first, be of a
kind--it be astonishing, when I reflect on what it be, and what SHE
be, that my heart should have be so insensible! but at first I must
confess, my vanity only be elevate by it. careless of her happiness,
think only of my own amusement, give way to feeling which I have
always be too much in the habit of indulge, I endeavour, by every
mean in my power, to make myself pleasing to she, without any design
of return her affection."
Miss Dashwood, at this point, turn her eye on he with the most
angry contempt, stop he, by say,
"it be hardly worth while, Mr. Willoughby, for you to relate, or for I
to listen any long. such a beginning as this cannot be follow by
any thing.-- do not let I be pain by hear any thing more on the
subject."
"I insist on you hear the whole of it," he reply, "my fortune be
never large, and I have always be expensive, always in the habit of
associate with people of well income than myself. every year since
my coming of age, or even before, I believe, have add to my debt; and
though the death of my old cousin, Mrs. Smith, be to set I free; yet
that event be uncertain, and possibly far distant, it have be for
some time my intention to re-establish my circumstance by marry a
woman of fortune. to attach myself to your sister, therefore, be not
a thing to be think of;--and with a meanness, selfishness,
cruelty--which no indignant, no contemptuous look, even of your, Miss
Dashwood, can ever reprobate too much--I be act in this manner,
try to engage her regard, without a thought of return it.--but
one thing may be say for I: even in that horrid state of selfish
vanity, I do not know the extent of the injury I meditate, because I
do not then know what it be to love. but have I ever know it?--Well
may it be doubt; for, have I really love, could I have sacrifice my
feeling to vanity, to avarice?--or, what be more, could I have
sacrifice hers?-- but I have do it. to avoid a comparative poverty,
which her affection and her society would have deprive of all its
horror, I have, by raise myself to affluence, lose every thing that
could make it a blessing."
"you do then," say Elinor, a little soften, "believe yourself at
one time attach to she?"
"to have resist such attraction, to have withstand such
tenderness!--Is there a man on earth who could have do it?--Yes, I
find myself, by insensible degree, sincerely fond of she; and the
happy hour of my life be what I spend with she when I feel my
intention be strictly honourable, and my feeling blameless. even
then, however, when fully determined on pay my address to she, I
allow myself most improperly to put off, from day to day, the moment
of do it, from an unwillingness to enter into an engagement while my
circumstance be so greatly embarrassed. I will not reason here--nor
will I stop for you to expatiate on the absurdity, and the bad than
absurdity, of scruple to engage my faith where my honour be already
bind. the event have prove, that I be a cunning fool, provide with
great circumspection for a possible opportunity of make myself
contemptible and wretche for ever. at last, however, my resolution
be take, and I have determine, as soon as I could engage she alone,
to justify the attention I have so invariably pay she, and openly
assure she of an affection which I have already take such pain to
display. but in the interim--in the interim of the very few hour that
be to pass, before I could have an opportunity of speak with she
in private--a circumstance occur--an unlucky circumstance, to ruin
all my resolution, and with it all my comfort. a discovery take
place,"--here he hesitate and look down.--"Mrs. Smith have somehow or
other be inform, I imagine by some distant relation, whose interest
it be to deprive I of her favour, of an affair, a connection--but I
need not explain myself far," he add, look at she with an
heighten colour and an enquire eye--"your particular intimacy--you
have probably hear the whole story long ago."
"I have," return Elinor, colour likewise, and harden her heart
anew against any compassion for he, "I have hear it all. and how you
will explain away any part of your guilt in that dreadful business, I
confess be beyond my comprehension."
"remember," cry Willoughby, "from whom you receive the account.
could it be an impartial one? I acknowledge that her situation and her
character ought to have be respect by I. I do not mean to justify
myself, but at the same time cannot leave you to suppose that I have
nothing to urge--that because she be injure she be irreproachable,
and because I be a libertine, she must be a saint. if the violence of
her passion, the weakness of her understanding--I do not mean,
however, to defend myself. her affection for I deserve well
treatment, and I often, with great self-reproach, recall the tenderness
which, for a very short time, have the power of create any return. I
wish--I heartily wish it have never be. but I have injure more than
herself; and I have injure one, whose affection for me--(may I say
it?) be scarcely less warm than her; and whose mind--oh! how
infinitely superior!"--
"your indifference, however, towards that unfortunate girl--I must say
it, unpleasant to I as the discussion of such a subject may well
be--your indifference be no apology for your cruel neglect of she. do
not think yourself excuse by any weakness, any natural defect of
understanding on her side, in the wanton cruelty so evident on your.
you must have know, that while you be enjoy yourself in
Devonshire pursue fresh scheme, always gay, always happy, she be
reduce to the extreme indigence."
"but, upon my soul, I do not know it," he warmly reply; "I do not
recollect that I have omit to give she my direction; and common sense
might have tell she how to find it out."
"well, sir, and what say Mrs. Smith?"
"she tax I with the offence at once, and my confusion may be
guess. the purity of her life, the formality of her notion, her
ignorance of the world--every thing be against I. the matter itself
I could not deny, and vain be every endeavour to soften it. she be
previously dispose, I believe, to doubt the morality of my conduct in
general, and be moreover discontent with the very little attention,
the very little portion of my time that I have bestow on she, in my
present visit. in short, it end in a total breach. by one measure I
might have save myself. in the height of her morality, good woman!
she offer to forgive the past, if I would marry Eliza. that could
not be--and I be formally dismiss from her favour and her house.
the night follow this affair--I be to go the next morning--be
spend by I in deliberate on what my future conduct should be. the
struggle be great--but it end too soon. my affection for Marianne,
my thorough conviction of her attachment to I--it be all insufficient
to outweigh that dread of poverty, or get the well of those false
idea of the necessity of rich, which I be naturally incline to
feel, and expensive society have increase. I have reason to believe
myself secure of my present wife, if I choose to address she, and I
persuade myself to think that nothing else in common prudence remain
for I to do. a heavy scene however await I, before I could leave
Devonshire;--I be engage to dine with you on that very day; some
apology be therefore necessary for my break this engagement. but
whether I should write this apology, or deliver it in person, be a
point of long debate. to see Marianne, I feel, would be dreadful, and
I even doubt whether I could see she again, and keep to my
resolution. in that point, however, I undervalue my own magnanimity,
as the event declare; for I go, I see she, and see her miserable,
and leave her miserable--and leave she hop never to see she again."
"why do you call, Mr. Willoughby?" say Elinor, reproachfully; "a note
would have answer every purpose.-- why be it necessary to call?"
"it be necessary to my own pride. I could not bear to leave the
country in a manner that might lead you, or the rest of the
neighbourhood, to suspect any part of what have really pass between
Mrs. Smith and myself--and I resolve therefore on call at the
cottage, in my way to Honiton. the sight of your dear sister, however,
be really dreadful; and, to heighten the matter, I find she alone.
you be all go I do not know where. I have leave she only the evening
before, so fully, so firmly resolve within my self on do right! a
few hour be to have engage she to I for ever; and I remember how
happy, how gay be my spirit, as I walk from the cottage to
Allenham, satisfied with myself, delight with every body! but in
this, our last interview of friendship, I approach she with a sense
of guilt that almost take from I the power of dissembling. her
sorrow, her disappointment, her deep regret, when I tell she that I be
oblige to leave Devonshire so immediately--I never shall forget
it--unite too with such reliance, such confidence in me!--oh,
god!--what a hard-hearted rascal I be!"
they be both silent for a few moment. Elinor first speak.
"do you tell she that you should soon return?"
"I do not know what I tell she," he reply, impatiently; "less than
be due to the past, beyond a doubt, and in all likelihood much more
than be justify by the future. I cannot think of it.--It willnot
do.--Then come your dear mother to torture I far, with all her
kindness and confidence. thank Heaven! it do torture I. I be
miserable. Miss Dashwood, you cannot have an idea of the comfort it
give I to look back on my own misery. I owe such a grudge to myself
for the stupid, rascally folly of my own heart, that all my past
suffering under it be only triumph and exultation to I now. well, I
go, leave all that I love, and go to those to whom, at well, I be
only indifferent. my journey to town--travel with my own horse,
and therefore so tediously--no creature to speak to--my own reflection
so cheerful--when I look forward every thing so inviting!--when I
look back at Barton, the picture so soothing!--oh, it be a blessed
journey!"
he stop.
"well, sir," say Elinor, who, though pity he, grow impatient for
his departure, "and this be all?"
"Ah!--no,--have you forgot what pass in town?-- that infamous
letter--do she shew it you?"
"yes, I see every note that pass."
"when the first of hers reach I (as it immediately do, for I be in
town the whole time,) what I feel be--in the common phrase, not to be
express; in a more simple one--perhaps too simple to raise any
emotion--my feeling be very, very painful.--every line, every word
be--in the hackneyed metaphor which their dear writer, be she here,
would forbid--a dagger to my heart. to know that Marianne be in town
be--in the same language--a thunderbolt.--thunderbolts and
daggers!--what a reproof would she have give me!--h taste, her
opinion--I believe they be well know to I than my own,--and I be
sure they be dearer."
Elinor's heart, which have undergo many change in the course of this
extraordinary conversation, be now soften again;--yet she feel it
her duty to check such idea in her companion as the last.
"this be not right, Mr. Willoughby.--Remember that you be marry.
relate only what in your conscience you think necessary for I to hear."
"Marianne's note, by assure I that I be still as dear to she as in
former day, that in spite of the many, many week we have be
separate, she be as constant in her own feeling, and as full of
faith in the constancy of mine as ever, awaken all my remorse. I say
awaken, because time and London, business and dissipation, have in
some measure quiet it, and I have be grow a fine harden
villain, fancy myself indifferent to she, and chuse to fancy that
she too must have become indifferent to I; talk to myself of our
past attachment as a mere idle, trifle business, shrug up my
shoulder in proof of its being so, and silence every reproach,
overcome every scruple, by secretly say now and then, 'I shall be
heartily glad to hear she be well married.'-- but this note make I
know myself well. I feel that she be infinitely dearer to I than
any other woman in the world, and that I be use she infamously. but
every thing be then just settle between Miss Grey and I. to retreat
be impossible. all that I have to do, be to avoid you both. I send
no answer to Marianne, intend by that to preserve myself from she
far notice; and for some time I be even determined not to call in
Berkeley Street;--but at last, judge it wise to affect the air of a
cool, common acquaintance than anything else, I watch you all safely
out of the house one morning, and leave my name."
"watch we out of the house!"
"even so. you would be surprised to hear how often I watch you, how
often I be on the point of fall in with you. I have enter many a
shop to avoid your sight, as the carriage drive by. lodge as I do
in Bond Street, there be hardly a day in which I do not catch a
glimpse of one or other of you; and nothing but the most constant
watchfulness on my side, a most invariably prevail desire to keep
out of your sight, could have separate we so long. I avoid the
Middletons as much as possible, as well as everybody else who be
likely to prove an acquaintance in common. not aware of their be in
town, however, I blunder on Sir John, I believe, the first day of his
coming, and the day after I have call at Mrs. Jennings's. he ask I
to a party, a dance at his house in the evening.--Had he not tell I as
an inducement that you and your sister be to be there, I should have
feel it too certain a thing, to trust myself near he. the next
morning bring another short note from Marianne--still affectionate,
open, artless, confiding--everything that could make my conduct most
hateful. I could not answer it. I try--but could not frame a
sentence. but I think of she, I believe, every moment of the day.
if you can pity I, Miss Dashwood, pity my situation as it be then.
with my head and heart full of your sister, I be force to play the
happy lover to another woman!--those three or four week be bad
than all. well, at last, as I need not tell you, you be force on
I; and what a sweet figure I cut!--what an evening of agony it was!--
Marianne, beautiful as an angel on one side, call I Willoughby in
such a tone!--oh, god!--holde out her hand to I, ask I for an
explanation, with those bewitch eye fix in such speak
solicitude on my face!--and Sophia, jealous as the devil on the other
hand, look all that be--well, it do not signify; it be over
now.-- such an evening!--i run away from you all as soon as I could;
but not before I have see Marianne's sweet face as white as
death.--THAT be the last, last look I ever have of her;--the last
manner in which she appear to I. it be a horrid sight!--yet when I
think of she to-day as really die, it be a kind of comfort to I
to imagine that I know exactly how she would appear to those, who see
she last in this world. she be before I, constantly before I, as I
travel, in the same look and hue."
a short pause of mutual thoughtfulness succeed. Willoughby first
rouse himself, break it thus:
"well, let I make haste and be go. your sister be certainly well,
certainly out of danger?"
"we be assure of it."
"your poor mother, too!--dote on Marianne."
"but the letter, Mr. Willoughby, your own letter; have you any thing to
say about that?"
"yes, yes, that in particular. your sister write to I again, you
know, the very next morning. you see what she say. I be
breakfast at the Ellisons,--and her letter, with some other, be
bring to I there from my lodging. it happen to catch Sophia's
eye before it catch mine--and its size, the elegance of the paper, the
hand-writing altogether, immediately give she a suspicion. some vague
report have reach she before of my attachment to some young lady in
Devonshire, and what have pass within her observation the precede
evening have mark who the young lady be, and make she more jealous
than ever. affect that air of playfulness, therefore, which be
delightful in a woman one love, she open the letter directly, and
read its content. she be well pay for her impudence. she read what
make she wretched. her wretchedness I could have bear, but her
passion--her malice--at all event it must be appease. and, in
short--what do you think of my wife's style of
letter-writing?--delicate--tender--truly feminine--be it not?"
"your wife!--the letter be in your own hand-writing."
"yes, but I have only the credit of servilely copy such sentence as
I be ashamed to put my name to. the original be all her own--her own
happy thought and gentle diction. but what could I do!--we be
engage, every thing in preparation, the day almost fix--but I be
talk like a fool. preparation!--day!--in honest word, her money
be necessary to I, and in a situation like mine, any thing be to be
do to prevent a rupture. and after all, what do it signify to my
character in the opinion of Marianne and her friend, in what language
my answer be couched?--it must have be only to one end. my business
be to declare myself a scoundrel, and whether I do it with a bow or a
bluster be of little importance.-- 'I be ruin for ever in their
opinion--' say I to myself--'I be shut out for ever from their
society, they already think I an unprincipled fellow, this letter will
only make they think I a blackguard one.' such be my reasoning, as,
in a sort of desperate carelessness, I copy my wife's word, and
part with the last relic of Marianne. her three note--unluckily
they be all in my pocketbook, or I should have deny their
existence, and hoard they for ever--I be force to put they up, and
could not even kiss they. and the lock of hair--that too I have always
carry about I in the same pocket-book, which be now search by
Madam with the most ingratiating virulence,--the dear lock--all, every
memento be tear from I."
"you be very wrong, Mr. Willoughby, very blamable," say Elinor, while
her voice, in spite of herself, betray her compassionate emotion;
"you ought not to speak in this way, either of Mrs. Willoughby or my
sister. you have make your own choice. it be not force on you. your
wife have a claim to your politeness, to your respect, at least. she
must be attach to you, or she would not have marry you. to treat
she with unkindness, to speak of she slightingly be no atonement to
Marianne--nor can I suppose it a relief to your own conscience."
"do not talk to I of my wife," say he with a heavy sigh.-- "she do
not deserve your compassion.--She know I have no regard for she when we
married.--well, marry we be, and come down to Combe Magna to be
happy, and afterwards return to town to be gay.--and now do you pity
I, Miss dashwood?--or have I say all this to no purpose?-- be I--be
it only one degree--be I less guilty in your opinion than I be
before?--my intention be not always wrong. have I explain away
any part of my guilt?"
"yes, you have certainly remove something--a little.-- you have prove
yourself, on the whole, less faulty than I have believe you. you have
prove your heart less wicked, much less wicked. but I hardly
know--the misery that you have inflict--I hardly know what could have
make it bad."
"will you repeat to your sister when she be recover, what I have be
tell you?--Let I be a little lightened too in her opinion as well
as in your. you tell I that she have forgive I already. let I be
able to fancy that a well knowledge of my heart, and of my present
feeling, will draw from she a more spontaneous, more natural, more
gentle, less dignified, forgiveness. tell she of my misery and my
penitence--tell she that my heart be never inconstant to she, and if
you will, that at this moment she be dearer to I than ever."
"I will tell she all that be necessary to what may comparatively be
call, your justification. but you have not explain to I the
particular reason of your come now, nor how you hear of her illness."
"last night, in Drury Lane lobby, I run against Sir John Middleton, and
when he see who I be--for the first time these two month--he speak to
me.--that he have cut I ever since my marriage, I have see without
surprise or resentment. now, however, his good-nature, honest, stupid
soul, full of indignation against I, and concern for your sister,
could not resist the temptation of tell I what he know ought
to--though probably he do not think it would--vex I horridly. as
bluntly as he could speak it, therefore, he tell I that Marianne
Dashwood be die of a putrid fever at Cleveland--a letter that
morning receive from Mrs. Jennings declare her danger most
imminent--the Palmers be all go off in a fright, &c.--I be too much
shocked to be able to pass myself off as insensible even to the
undiscerne Sir John. his heart be soften in see mine suffer;
and so much of his ill-will be do away, that when we part, he
almost shake I by the hand while he remind I of an old promise
about a pointer puppy. what I feel on hear that your sister be
die--and die too, believe I the great villain upon earth,
scorning, hat I in her late moment--for how could I tell what
horrid project might not have be impute? one person I be sure
would represent I as capable of any thing-- what I feel be
dreadful!--my resolution be soon make, and at eight o'clock this
morning I be in my carriage. now you know all."
Elinor make no answer. her thought be silently fix on the
irreparable injury which too early an independence and its consequent
habit of idleness, dissipation, and luxury, have make in the mind, the
character, the happiness, of a man who, to every advantage of person
and talent, unite a disposition naturally open and honest, and a
feeling, affectionate temper. the world have make he extravagant and
vain--Extravagance and vanity have make he cold-hearted and selfish.
Vanity, while seek its own guilty triumph at the expense of another,
have involve he in a real attachment, which extravagance, or at least
its offspring, necessity, have require to be sacrifice. each faulty
propensity in lead he to evil, have lead he likewise to punishment.
the attachment, from which against honour, against feeling, against
every well interest he have outwardly tear himself, now, when no
long allowable, govern every thought; and the connection, for the
sake of which he have, with little scruple, leave her sister to misery,
be likely to prove a source of unhappiness to himself of a far more
incurable nature. from a reverie of this kind she be recall at the
end of some minute by Willoughby, who, rouse himself from a reverie
at least equally painful, start up in preparation for go, and
said--
"there be no use in stay here; I must be off."
"be you go back to town?"
"no--to Combe Magna. I have business there; from thence to town in a
day or two. good bye."
he hold out his hand. she could not refuse to give he hers's;--he
press it with affection.
"and you do think something well of I than you did?"--said he,
let it fall, and lean against the mantel-piece as if forget
he be to go.
Elinor assure he that she did;--that she forgave, pitied, wish he
well--be even interested in his happiness--and add some gentle
counsel as to the behaviour most likely to promote it. his answer be
not very encouraging.
"as to that," say he, "I must rub through the world as well as I can.
domestic happiness be out of the question. if, however, I be allow
to think that you and yours feel an interest in my fate and action, it
may be the mean--it may put I on my guard--at least, it may be
something to live for. Marianne to be sure be lose to I for ever.
be I even by any blessed chance at liberty again--"
Elinor stop he with a reproof.
"Well,"--he replied--"once more good bye. I shall now go away and live
in dread of one event."
"what do you mean?"
"your sister's marriage."
"you be very wrong. she can never be more lost to you than she be
now."
"but she will be gain by some one else. and if that some one should
be the very he whom, of all other, I could least bear--but I will not
stay to rob myself of all your compassionate goodwill, by shew that
where I have most injure I can least forgive. good bye,--God bless
you!"
and with these word, he almost run out of the room.
CHAPTER 45
Elinor, for some time after he leave she, for some time even after the
sound of his carriage have die away, remain too much oppress by a
crowd of idea, widely differ in themselves, but of which sadness
be the general result, to think even of her sister.
Willoughby, he, whom only half an hour ago she have abhor as the most
worthless of man, Willoughby, in spite of all his fault, excite a
degree of commiseration for the suffering produce by they, which make
her think of he as now separate for ever from her family, with a
tenderness, a regret, rather in proportion, as she soon acknowledge
within herself--to his wish than to his merit. she feel that his
influence over her mind be heighten by circumstance which ought not
in reason to have weight; by that person of uncommon attraction, that
open, affectionate, and lively manner which it be no merit to possess;
and by that still ardent love for Marianne, which it be not even
innocent to indulge. but she feel that it be so, long, long before
she could feel his influence less.
when at last she return to the unconscious Marianne, she find she
just awake, refresh by so long and sweet a sleep to the extent of
her hope. Elinor's heart be full. the past, the present, the
future, Willoughby's visit, Marianne's safety, and her mother's
expect arrival, throw she altogether into an agitation of spirit
which keep off every indication of fatigue, and make she only fearful
of betray herself to her sister. Short be the time, however, in
which that fear could affect she, for within half an hour after
Willoughby's leave the house, she be again call down stair by the
sound of another carriage.--eager to save her mother from every
unnecessary moment's horrible suspense, she run immediately into the
hall, and reach the outward door just in time to receive and support
she as she enter it.
Mrs. Dashwood, whose terror as they draw near the house have produce
almost the conviction of Marianne's be no more, have no voice to
inquire after she, no voice even for Elinor; but SHE, wait neither
for salutation nor inquiry, instantly give the joyful relief;--and her
mother, catch it with all her usual warmth, be in a moment as much
overcome by her happiness, as she have be before by her fear. she
be support into the drawing-room between her daughter and her
friend;--and there, shed tear of joy, though still unable to
speak, embrace Elinor again and again, turn from she at interval
to press Colonel Brandon's hand, with a look which speak at once her
gratitude, and her conviction of his sharing with herself in the bliss
of the moment. he share it, however, in a silence even great than
her own.
as soon as Mrs. Dashwood have recover herself, to see Marianne be her
first desire; and in two minute she be with her beloved child,
render dearer to she than ever by absence, unhappiness, and danger.
Elinor's delight, as she see what each feel in the meeting, be only
check by an apprehension of its rob Marianne of far
sleep;--but Mrs. Dashwood could be calm, could be even prudent, when
the life of a child be at stake, and Marianne, satisfied in know
her mother be near she, and conscious of be too weak for
conversation, submit readily to the silence and quiet prescribe by
every nurse around she. Mrs. Dashwood would sit up with she all night;
and Elinor, in compliance with her mother's entreaty, go to bed. but
the rest, which one night entirely sleepless, and many hour of the
most wear anxiety seem to make requisite, be keep off by
irritation of spirit. Willoughby, "poor Willoughby," as she now
allow herself to call he, be constantly in her thought; she would
not but have hear his vindication for the world, and now blame, now
acquit herself for have judge he so harshly before. but her
promise of relate it to her sister be invariably painful. she
dread the performance of it, dread what its effect on Marianne
might be; doubt whether after such an explanation she could ever be
happy with another; and for a moment wish Willoughby a widower.
then, remember Colonel Brandon, reprove herself, feel that to his
suffering and his constancy far more than to his rival's, the reward
of her sister be due, and wish any thing rather than Mrs.
Willoughby's death.
the shock of Colonel Brandon's errand at Barton have be much soften
to Mrs. Dashwood by her own previous alarm; for so great be her
uneasiness about Marianne, that she have already determine to set out
for Cleveland on that very day, without wait for any further
intelligence, and have so far settle her journey before his arrival,
that the carey be then expect every moment to fetch Margaret away,
as her mother be unwilling to take she where there might be infection.
Marianne continue to mend every day, and the brilliant cheerfulness of
Mrs. Dashwood's look and spirit prove she to be, as she repeatedly
declare herself, one of the happy woman in the world. Elinor could
not hear the declaration, nor witness its proof without sometimes
wonder whether her mother ever recollect Edward. but Mrs.
Dashwood, trust to the temperate account of her own disappointment
which Elinor have send she, be lead away by the exuberance of her joy to
think only of what would increase it. Marianne be restore to she
from a danger in which, as she now begin to feel, her own mistaken
judgment in encourage the unfortunate attachment to Willoughby, have
contribute to place her;--and in her recovery she have yet another
source of joy unthought of by Elinor. it be thus impart to she, as
soon as any opportunity of private conference between they occur.
"at last we be alone. my Elinor, you do not yet know all my
happiness. Colonel Brandon love Marianne. he have tell I so himself."
her daughter, feel by turn both pleased and pained, surprised and
not surprised, be all silent attention.
"you be never like I, dear Elinor, or I should wonder at your
composure now. have I sit down to wish for any possible good to my
family, I should have fix on Colonel Brandon's marry one of you as
the object most desirable. and I believe Marianne will be the most
happy with he of the two."
Elinor be half inclined to ask her reason for think so, because
satisfied that none found on an impartial consideration of their age,
character, or feeling, could be given;--but her mother must always be
carry away by her imagination on any interesting subject, and
therefore instead of an inquiry, she pass it off with a smile.
"he open his whole heart to I yesterday as we travel. it come
out quite unawares, quite undesignedly. I, you may well believe, could
talk of nothing but my child;--he could not conceal his distress; I see
that it equal my own, and he perhaps, think that mere friendship,
as the world now go, would not justify so warm a sympathy--or rather,
not think at all, I suppose--give way to irresistible feeling,
make I acquainted with his earnest, tender, constant, affection for
Marianne. he have love she, my Elinor, ever since the first moment of
see she."
here, however, Elinor perceived,--not the language, not the profession
of Colonel Brandon, but the natural embellishment of her mother's
active fancy, which fashion every thing delightful to she as it choose.
"his regard for she, infinitely surpass anything that Willoughby
ever feel or feign, as much more warm, as more sincere or
constant--which ever we be to call it--have subsist through all the
knowledge of dear Marianne's unhappy prepossession for that worthless
young man!--and without selfishness--without encourage a hope!--could
he have see she happy with another--such a noble mind!--such openness,
such sincerity!--no one can be deceive in HIM."
"Colonel Brandon's character," say Elinor, "as an excellent man, be
well establish."
"I know it is"--replie her mother seriously, "or after such a warning,
I should be the last to encourage such affection, or even to be please
by it. but his come for I as he do, with such active, such ready
friendship, be enough to prove he one of the worthy of man."
"his character, however," answer Elinor, "do not rest on one act of
kindness, to which his affection for Marianne, be humanity out of the
case, would have prompt he. to Mrs. Jennings, to the Middletons, he
have be long and intimately know; they equally love and respect he;
and even my own knowledge of he, though lately acquire, be very
considerable; and so highly do I value and esteem he, that if Marianne
can be happy with he, I shall be as ready as yourself to think our
connection the great blessing to we in the world. what answer do
you give him?--Did you allow he to hope?"
"oh! my love, I could not then talk of hope to he or to myself.
Marianne might at that moment be die. but he do not ask for hope or
encouragement. his be an involuntary confidence, an irrepressible
effusion to a soothe friend--not an application to a parent. yet
after a time I do say, for at first I be quite overcome--that if she
live, as I trust she might, my great happiness would lie in
promote their marriage; and since our arrival, since our delightful
security, I have repeat it to he more fully, have give he every
encouragement in my power. time, a very little time, I tell he, will
do everything;--Marianne's heart be not to be waste for ever on such a
man as willoughby.-- his own merit must soon secure it."
"to judge from the Colonel's spirit, however, you have not yet make
he equally sanguine."
"No.--He think Marianne's affection too deeply rooted for any change
in it under a great length of time, and even suppose her heart again
free, be too diffident of himself to believe, that with such a
difference of age and disposition he could ever attach she. there,
however, he be quite mistaken. his age be only so much beyond her as
to be an advantage, as to make his character and principle fixed;--and
his disposition, I be well convinced, be exactly the very one to make
your sister happy. and his person, his manner too, be all in his
favour. my partiality do not blind I; he certainly be not so
handsome as Willoughby--but at the same time, there be something much
more pleasing in his countenance.-- there be always a something,--if
you remember,--in Willoughby's eye at time, which I do not like."
Elinor could not remember it;--but her mother, without wait for her
assent, continue,
"and his manner, the Colonel's manner be not only more pleasing to
I than Willoughby's ever be, but they be of a kind I well know to
be more solidly attach to Marianne. their gentleness, their genuine
attention to other people, and their manly unstudied simplicity be much
more accordant with her real disposition, than the liveliness--often
artificial, and often ill-timed of the other. I be very sure myself,
that have Willoughby turn out as really amiable, as he have prove
himself the contrary, Marianne would yet never have be so happy with
HIM, as she will be with Colonel Brandon."
she paused.--her daughter could not quite agree with she, but her
dissent be not hear, and therefore give no offence.
"at Delaford, she will be within an easy distance of I," add Mrs.
Dashwood, "even if I remain at Barton; and in all probability,--for I
hear it be a large village,--indeed there certainly must be some small
house or cottage close by, that would suit we quite as well as our
present situation."
poor elinor!--here be a new scheme for get she to Delaford!--but
her spirit be stubborn.
"his fortune too!--for at my time of life you know, everybody care
about that;--and though I neither know nor desire to know, what it
really be, I be sure it must be a good one."
here they be interrupt by the entrance of a third person, and
Elinor withdraw to think it all over in private, to wish success to her
friend, and yet in wish it, to feel a pang for Willoughby.
CHAPTER 46
Marianne's illness, though weaken in its kind, have not be long
enough to make her recovery slow; and with youth, natural strength, and
her mother's presence in aid, it proceed so smoothly as to enable she
to remove, within four day after the arrival of the latter, into Mrs.
Palmer's dressing-room. when there, at her own particular request, for
she be impatient to pour forth her thank to he for fetch she
mother, Colonel Brandon be invite to visit she.
his emotion on enter the room, in see her altered look, and in
receive the pale hand which she immediately hold out to he, be
such, as, in Elinor's conjecture, must arise from something more than
his affection for Marianne, or the consciousness of its be know to
other; and she soon discover in his melancholy eye and vary
complexion as he look at her sister, the probable recurrence of many
past scene of misery to his mind, bring back by that resemblance
between Marianne and Eliza already acknowledge, and now strengthen
by the hollow eye, the sickly skin, the posture of recline weakness,
and the warm acknowledgment of peculiar obligation.
Mrs. Dashwood, not less watchful of what pass than her daughter, but
with a mind very differently influence, and therefore watch to very
different effect, see nothing in the Colonel's behaviour but what arise
from the most simple and self-evident sensation, while in the action
and word of Marianne she persuade herself to think that something
more than gratitude already dawn.
at the end of another day or two, Marianne grow visibly strong
every twelve hour, Mrs. Dashwood, urge equally by her own and her
daughter's wish, begin to talk of remove to Barton. on she
measure depend those of her two friend; Mrs. Jennings could not
quit Cleveland during the Dashwoods' stay; and Colonel Brandon be soon
bring, by their united request, to consider his own abode there as
equally determinate, if not equally indispensable. at his and Mrs.
Jennings's united request in return, Mrs. Dashwood be prevail on to
accept the use of his carriage on her journey back, for the well
accommodation of her sick child; and the Colonel, at the joint
invitation of Mrs. Dashwood and Mrs. Jennings, whose active good-nature
make her friendly and hospitable for other people as well as herself,
engage with pleasure to redeem it by a visit at the cottage, in the
course of a few week.
the day of separation and departure arrive; and Marianne, after take
so particular and lengthen a leave of Mrs. Jennings, one so earnestly
grateful, so full of respect and kind wish as seem due to her own
heart from a secret acknowledgment of past inattention, and bidding
Colonel Brandon farewell with a cordiality of a friend, be carefully
assist by he into the carriage, of which he seem anxious that she
should engross at least half. Mrs. Dashwood and Elinor then follow,
and the other be leave by themselves, to talk of the traveller, and
feel their own dullness, till Mrs. Jennings be summon to her chaise
to take comfort in the gossip of she maid for the loss of her two young
companion; and Colonel Brandon immediately afterwards take his
solitary way to Delaford.
the Dashwoods be two day on the road, and Marianne bear her journey
on both, without essential fatigue. every thing that the most zealous
affection, the most solicitous care could do to render she comfortable,
be the office of each watchful companion, and each find their reward
in her bodily ease, and her calmness of spirit. to Elinor, the
observation of the latter be particularly grateful. she, who have see
her week after week so constantly suffer, oppress by anguish of
heart which she have neither courage to speak of, nor fortitude to
conceal, now see with a joy, which no other could equally share, an
apparent composure of mind, which, in be the result as she trust
of serious reflection, must eventually lead she to contentment and
cheerfulness.
as they approach Barton, indeed, and enter on scene of which every
field and every tree bring some peculiar, some painful recollection,
she grow silent and thoughtful, and turn away her face from their
notice, sit earnestly gaze through the window. but here, Elinor
could neither wonder nor blame; and when she see, as she assist
Marianne from the carriage, that she have be cry, she see only an
emotion too natural in itself to raise any thing less tender than pity,
and in its unobtrusiveness entitle to praise. in the whole of her
subsequent manner, she trace the direction of a mind awaken to
reasonable exertion; for no soon have they enter their common
sitting-room, than Marianne turn her eye around it with a look of
resolute firmness, as if determined at once to accustom herself to the
sight of every object with which the remembrance of Willoughby could be
connected.--She say little, but every sentence aim at cheerfulness,
and though a sigh sometimes escape she, it never pass away without
the atonement of a smile. after dinner she would try her piano-forte.
she go to it; but the music on which her eye first rest be an
opera, procure for she by Willoughby, contain some of their
favourite duet, and bear on its outward leaf her own name in his
hand-writing.--that would not do.--she shake her head, put the music
aside, and after run over the key for a minute, complain of
feebleness in her finger, and close the instrument again; declare
however with firmness as she do so, that she should in future practice
much.
the next morning produce no abatement in these happy symptom. on the
contrary, with a mind and body alike strengthen by rest, she look
and speak with more genuine spirit, anticipate the pleasure of
Margaret's return, and talk of the dear family party which would
then be restore, of their mutual pursuit and cheerful society, as the
only happiness worth a wish.
"when the weather be settle, and I have recover my strength," say
she, "we will take long walk together every day. we will walk to the
farm at the edge of the down, and see how the child go on; we will
walk to Sir John's new plantation at Barton Cross, and the Abbeyland;
and we will often go the old ruin of the priory, and try to trace its
foundation as far as we be tell they once reach. I know we shall
be happy. I know the summer will pass happily away. I mean never to
be later in rise than six, and from that time till dinner I shall
divide every moment between music and reading. I have form my plan,
and be determined to enter on a course of serious study. our own
library be too well known to I, to be resort to for any thing beyond
mere amusement. but there be many work well worth read at the
Park; and there be other of more modern production which I know I can
borrow of Colonel Brandon. by read only six hour a-day, I shall
gain in the course of a twelve-month a great deal of instruction which
I now feel myself to want."
Elinor honour she for a plan which originate so nobly as this;
though smile to see the same eager fancy which have be lead she
to the extreme of languid indolence and selfish repining, now at work
in introduce excess into a scheme of such rational employment and
virtuous self-control. her smile however change to a sigh when she
remember that promise to Willoughby be yet unfulfilled, and fear
she have that to communicate which might again unsettle the mind of
Marianne, and ruin at least for a time this fair prospect of busy
tranquillity. willing therefore to delay the evil hour, she resolve
to wait till her sister's health be more secure, before she appoint
it. but the resolution be make only to be break.
Marianne have be two or three day at home, before the weather be
fine enough for an invalid like herself to venture out. but at last a
soft, genial morning appear; such as might tempt the daughter's
wish and the mother's confidence; and Marianne, lean on Elinor's
arm, be authorise to walk as long as she could without fatigue, in
the lane before the house.
the sister set out at a pace, slow as the feebleness of Marianne in an
exercise hitherto untried since her illness required;--and they have
advance only so far beyond the house as to admit a full view of the
hill, the important hill behind, when pause with her eye turn
towards it, Marianne calmly say,
"there, exactly there,"--pointe with one hand, "on that project
mound,--there I fall; and there I first see Willoughby."
her voice sink with the word, but presently revive she add,
"I be thankful to find that I can look with so little pain on the
spot!--shall we ever talk on that subject, elinor?"--hesitatingly it
be said.--"Or will it be wrong?--I can talk of it now, I hope, as I
ought to do."--
Elinor tenderly invite she to be open.
"as for regret," say Marianne, "I have do with that, as far as he be
concerned. I do not mean to talk to you of what my feeling have be
for he, but what they be NOW.--At present, if I could be satisfied on
one point, if I could be allow to think that he be not always act
a part, not always deceive me;--but above all, if I could be assure
that he never be so very wicked as my fear have sometimes fancy
he, since the story of that unfortunate girl"--
she stopt. Elinor joyfully treasure her word as she answer,
"if you could be assure of that, you think you should be easy."
"yes. my peace of mind be doubly involve in it;--for not only be it
horrible to suspect a person, who have be what he have be to I, of
such designs,--but what must it make I appear to myself?--what in a
situation like mine, but a most shamefully unguarded affection could
expose I to"--
"how then," ask her sister, "would you account for his behaviour?"
"I would suppose him,--oh, how gladly would I suppose he, only fickle,
very, very fickle."
Elinor say no more. she be debate within herself on the
eligibility of begin her story directly, or postpone it till
Marianne be in strong health;--and they creep on for a few minute
in silence.
"I be not wish he too much good," say Marianne at last with a
sigh, "when I wish his secret reflection may be no more unpleasant
than my own. he will suffer enough in they."
"do you compare your conduct with his?"
"no. I compare it with what it ought to have be; I compare it with
your."
"our situation have bear little resemblance."
"they have bear more than our conduct.--do not, my dear Elinor, let
your kindness defend what I know your judgment must censure. my
illness have make I think-- it have give I leisure and calmness for
serious recollection. long before I be enough recover to talk, I
be perfectly able to reflect. I consider the past: I see in my own
behaviour, since the beginning of our acquaintance with he last
autumn, nothing but a series of imprudence towards myself, and want of
kindness to other. I see that my own feeling have prepare my
suffering, and that my want of fortitude under they have almost lead I
to the grave. my illness, I well know, have be entirely bring on by
myself by such negligence of my own health, as I have feel even at the
time to be wrong. have I died,--it would have be self-destruction. I
do not know my danger till the danger be remove; but with such
feeling as these reflection give I, I wonder at my recovery,--wonder
that the very eagerness of my desire to live, to have time for
atonement to my God, and to you all, do not kill I at once. have I
died,-- in what peculiar misery should I have leave you, my nurse, my
friend, my sister!--you, who have see all the fretful selfishness of my
latter day; who have know all the murmuring of my heart!--How should
I have live in your remembrance!--my mother too! how could you have
console her!--I cannot express my own abhorrence of myself. whenever
I look towards the past, I see some duty neglect, or some fail
indulge. every body seem injure by I. the kindness, the
unceasing kindness of Mrs. Jennings, I have repay with ungrateful
contempt. to the Middletons, to the Palmers, the Steeles, to every
common acquaintance even, I have be insolent and unjust; with a heart
harden against their merit, and a temper irritate by their very
attention.--To John, to Fanny,--yes, even to they, little as they
deserve, I have give less than their due. but you,--you above all,
above my mother, have be wrong by I. I, and only I, know your
heart and its sorrow; yet to what do it influence me?--not to any
compassion that could benefit you or myself.--your example be before
I; but to what avail?--was I more considerate of you and your comfort?
do I imitate your forbearance, or lessen your restraint, by take
any part in those office of general complaisance or particular
gratitude which you have hitherto be leave to discharge
alone?--no;--not less when I know you to be unhappy, than when I have
believe you at ease, do I turn away from every exertion of duty or
friendship; scarcely allow sorrow to exist but with I, regret
only that heart which have desert and wrong I, and leave you, for
or I profess an unbounded affection, to be miserable for my sake."
here cease the rapid flow of her self-reprove spirit; and Elinor,
impatient to soothe, though too honest to flatter, give she instantly
that praise and support which her frankness and her contrition so well
deserve. Marianne press her hand and reply,
"you be very good.--the future must be my proof. I have lay down my
plan, and if I be capable of adhere to it--my feeling shall be
govern and my temper improve. they shall no long worry other,
nor torture myself. I shall now live solely for my family. you, my
mother, and Margaret, must henceforth be all the world to I; you will
share my affection entirely between you. from you, from my home, I
shall never again have the small incitement to move; and if I do mix
in other society, it will be only to shew that my spirit be humble, my
heart amend, and that I can practise the civility, the less
duty of life, with gentleness and forbearance. as for Willoughby--to
say that I shall soon or that I shall ever forget he, would be idle.
his remembrance can be overcome by no change of circumstance or
opinion. but it shall be regulate, it shall be check by religion,
by reason, by constant employment."
she pause--and add in a low voice, "if I could but know his heart,
everything would become easy."
Elinor, who have now be for some time reflect on the propriety or
impropriety of speedily hazard her narration, without feel at all
nearer decision than at first, hear this; and perceive that as
reflection do nothing, resolution must do all, soon find herself
lead to the fact.
she manage the recital, as she hop, with address; prepare she
anxious listener with caution; relate simply and honestly the chief
point on which Willoughby ground his apology; do justice to his
repentance, and soften only his protestation of present regard.
Marianne say not a word.--She tremble, her eye be fix on the
ground, and her lip become white than even sickness have leave they. a
thousand inquiry spring up from her heart, but she dare not urge
one. she catch every syllable with pant eagerness; her hand,
unknowingly to herself, closely press her sister's, and tear cover
her cheek.
Elinor, dread she be tired, lead she towards home; and till they
reach the door of the cottage, easily conjecture what her curiosity
must be though no question be suffer to speak it, talk of nothing
but Willoughby, and their conversation together; and be carefully
minute in every particular of speech and look, where minuteness could
be safely indulge. as soon as they enter the house, Marianne with a
kiss of gratitude and these two word just articulate through her
tear, "tell mama," withdraw from her sister and walk slowly up
stair. Elinor would not attempt to disturb a solitude so reasonable
as what she now seek; and with a mind anxiously pre-arrange its
result, and a resolution of revive the subject again, should Marianne
fail to do it, she turn into the parlour to fulfill her parting
injunction.
CHAPTER 47
Mrs. Dashwood do not hear unmove the vindication of her former
favourite. she rejoice in his being clear from some part of his
impute guilt;--she be sorry for him;--she wish he happy. but the
feeling of the past could not be recalled.--nothe could restore he
with a faith unbroken--a character unblemishe, to Marianne. nothing
could do away the knowledge of what the latter have suffer through his
mean, nor remove the guilt of his conduct towards Eliza. nothing
could replace he, therefore, in her former esteem, nor injure the
interest of Colonel Brandon.
have Mrs. Dashwood, like her daughter, hear Willoughby's story from
himself--have she witness his distress, and be under the influence
of his countenance and his manner, it be probable that her compassion
would have be great. but it be neither in Elinor's power, nor in
her wish, to rouse such feeling in another, by her retail
explanation, as have at first be call forth in herself. reflection
have give calmness to her judgment, and sober her own opinion of
Willoughby's deserts;--she wish, therefore, to declare only the
simple truth, and lie open such fact as be really due to his
character, without any embellishment of tenderness to lead the fancy
astray.
in the evening, when they be all three together, Marianne begin
voluntarily to speak of he again;--but that it be not without an
effort, the restless, unquiet thoughtfulness in which she have be for
some time previously sit--her rise colour, as she spoke,--and her
unsteady voice, plainly shewed.
"I wish to assure you both," say she, "that I see every thing--as you
can desire I to do."
Mrs. Dashwood would have interrupt she instantly with soothe
tenderness, have not Elinor, who really wish to hear her sister's
unbiased opinion, by an eager sign, engage her silence. Marianne
slowly continued--
"it be a great relief to I--what Elinor tell I this morning--I have
now hear exactly what I wish to hear."--for some moment her voice
be lose; but recover herself, she add, and with great calmness
than before--"i be now perfectly satisfied, I wish for no change. I
never could have be happy with he, after know, as soon or later
I must have know, all this.--I should have have no confidence, no
esteem. nothing could have do it away to my feeling."
"I know it--I know it," cry her mother. "happy with a man of
libertine practices!--With one who so injure the peace of the dearest
of our friend, and the good of men!--no--my Marianne have not a heart
to be make happy with such a man!--her conscience, her sensitive
conscience, would have feel all that the conscience of her husband
ought to have feel."
Marianne sigh, and repeat, "I wish for no change."
"you consider the matter," say Elinor, "exactly as a good mind and a
sound understanding must consider it; and I dare say you perceive, as
well as myself, not only in this, but in many other circumstance,
reason enough to be convince that your marriage must have involve you
in many certain trouble and disappointment, in which you would have
be poorly support by an affection, on his side, much less certain.
have you marry, you must have be always poor. his expensiveness be
acknowledge even by himself, and his whole conduct declare that
self-denial be a word hardly understand by he. his demand and your
inexperience together, on a small, very small income, must have bring
on distress which would not be the less grievous to you, from have
be entirely unknown and unthought of before. your sense of honour
and honesty would have lead you, I know, when aware of your situation,
to attempt all the economy that would appear to you possible: and,
perhaps, as long as your frugality retrench only on your own comfort,
you might have be suffer to practice it, but beyond that--and how
little could the utmost of your single management do to stop the ruin
which have begin before your marriage?-- beyond THAT, have you
endeavour, however reasonably, to abridge his enjoyment, be it not
to be fear, that instead of prevail on feeling so selfish to
consent to it, you would have lessen your own influence on his heart,
and make he regret the connection which have involve he in such
difficulty?"
Marianne's lip quiver, and she repeat the word "selfish?" in a
tone that implied--"do you really think he selfish?"
"the whole of his behaviour," reply Elinor, "from the beginning to
the end of the affair, have be ground on selfishness. it be
selfishness which first make he sport with your affection; which
afterwards, when his own be engage, make he delay the confession of
it, and which finally carry he from Barton. his own enjoyment, or
his own ease, be, in every particular, his rule principle."
"it be very true. my happiness never be his object."
"at present," continue Elinor, "he regret what he have do. and why
do he regret it?--because he find it have not answer towards
himself. it have not make he happy. his circumstance be now
unembarrassed--he suffer from no evil of that kind; and he think only
that he have marry a woman of a less amiable temper than yourself.
but do it follow that have he marry you, he would have be
happy?--the inconvenience would have be different. he would then
have suffer under the pecuniary distress which, because they be
remove, he now reckon as nothing. he would have have a wife of whose
temper he could make no complaint, but he would have be always
necessitous--always poor; and probably would soon have learn to rank
the innumerable comfort of a clear estate and good income as of far
more importance, even to domestic happiness, than the mere temper of a
wife."
"I have not a doubt of it," say Marianne; "and I have nothing to
regret--nothing but my own folly."
"rather say your mother's imprudence, my child," say Mrs. Dashwood;
"she must be answerable."
Marianne would not let she proceed;--and elinor, satisfy that each
feel their own error, wish to avoid any survey of the past that might
weaken her sister's spirit; she, therefore, pursue the first
subject, immediately continue,
"one observation may, I think, be fairly draw from the whole of the
story--that all Willoughby's difficulty have arise from the first
offence against virtue, in his behaviour to Eliza Williams. that crime
have be the origin of every less one, and of all his present
discontent."
Marianne assent most feelingly to the remark; and her mother be lead
by it to an enumeration of Colonel Brandon's injury and merit, warm
as friendship and design could unitedly dictate. her daughter do not
look, however, as if much of it be hear by she.
Elinor, accord to her expectation, see on the two or three follow
day, that Marianne do not continue to gain strength as she have do;
but while her resolution be unsubdue, and she still try to appear
cheerful and easy, her sister could safely trust to the effect of time
upon her health.
Margaret return, and the family be again all restore to each
other, again quietly settle at the cottage; and if not pursue their
usual study with quite so much vigour as when they first come to
Barton, at least plan a vigorous prosecution of they in future.
Elinor grow impatient for some tiding of Edward. she have hear
nothing of he since she leave London, nothing new of his plan,
nothing certain even of his present abode. some letter have pass
between she and her brother, in consequence of Marianne's illness; and
in the first of John's, there have be this sentence:-- "we know
nothing of our unfortunate Edward, and can make no enquiry on so
prohibit a subject, but conclude he to be still at Oxford;" which
be all the intelligence of Edward afford she by the correspondence,
for his name be not even mention in any of the succeed letter.
she be not doom, however, to be long in ignorance of his measure.
their man-servant have be send one morning to exeter on business; and
when, as he wait at table, he have satisfy the inquiry of his
mistress as to the event of his errand, this be his voluntary
communication--
"I suppose you know, ma'am, that Mr. Ferrars be marry."
Marianne give a violent start, fix her eye upon Elinor, see she
turn pale, and fall back in her chair in hysteric. Mrs. Dashwood,
whose eye, as she answer the servant's inquiry, have intuitively
take the same direction, be shock to perceive by Elinor's
countenance how much she really suffer, and a moment afterwards,
alike distress by Marianne's situation, know not on which child to
bestow her principal attention.
the servant, who see only that Miss Marianne be take ill, have sense
enough to call one of the maid, who, with Mrs. Dashwood's assistance,
support she into the other room. by that time, Marianne be rather
well, and her mother leave she to the care of Margaret and the
maid, return to Elinor, who, though still much disorder, have so far
recover the use of her reason and voice as to be just begin an
inquiry of Thomas, as to the source of his intelligence. Mrs. Dashwood
immediately take all that trouble on herself; and Elinor have the
benefit of the information without the exertion of seek it.
"who tell you that Mr. Ferrars be marry, Thomas?"
"I see Mr. Ferrars myself, ma'am, this morning in Exeter, and his lady
too, Miss Steele as be. they be stop in a chaise at the door of
the New London Inn, as I go there with a message from Sally at the
Park to her brother, who be one of the post-boy. I happen to look up
as I go by the chaise, and so I see directly it be the young Miss
Steele; so I take off my hat, and she know I and call to I, and
inquire after you, ma'am, and the young lady, especially Miss
Marianne, and bid I I should give her compliment and Mr. Ferrars's,
their good compliment and service, and how sorry they be they have not
time to come on and see you, but they be in a great hurry to go
forwards, for they be go far down for a little while, but
howsever, when they come back, theywould make sure to come and see you."
"but do she tell you she be marry, Thomas?"
"yes, ma'am. she smile, and say how she have change her name since
she be in these part. she be always a very affable and free-speak
young lady, and very civil behave. so, I make free to wish her joy."
"be Mr. Ferrars in the carriage with she?"
"yes, ma'am, I just see he lean back in it, but he do not look
up;--he never be a gentleman much for talk."
Elinor's heart could easily account for his not put himself
forward; and Mrs. Dashwood probably find the same explanation.
"be there no one else in the carriage?"
"no, ma'am, only they two."
"do you know where they come from?"
"they come straight from town, as Miss Lucy-- Mrs. Ferrars tell I."
"and be they go far westward?"
"yes, ma'am--but not to bide long. they will soon be back again, and
then theywould be sure and call here."
Mrs. Dashwood now look at her daughter; but Elinor know well than
to expect they. she recognise the whole of Lucy in the message, and
be very confident that Edward would never come near they. she
observe in a low voice, to her mother, that they be probably go
down to Mr. Pratt's, near Plymouth.
Thomas's intelligence seem over. Elinor look as if she wish to
hear more.
"do you see they off, before you come away?"
"no, ma'am--the horse be just come out, but I could not bide any
long; I be afraid of be late."
"do Mrs. Ferrars look well?"
"yes, ma'am, she say how she be very well; and to my mind she be
always a very handsome young lady--and she seem vastly content."
Mrs. Dashwood could think of no other question, and Thomas and the
tablecloth, now alike needless, be soon afterwards dismiss.
Marianne have already send to say, that she should eat nothing more.
Mrs. Dashwood's and Elinor's appetite be equally lose, and Margaret
might think herself very well off, that with so much uneasiness as both
her sister have lately experience, so much reason as they have often
have to be careless of their meal, she have never be oblige to go
without her dinner before.
when the dessert and the wine be arrange, and Mrs. Dashwood and
Elinor be leave by themselves, they remain long together in a
similarity of thoughtfulness and silence. Mrs. Dashwood fear to
hazard any remark, and venture not to offer consolation. she now
find that she have err in rely on Elinor's representation of
herself; and justly conclude that every thing have be expressly
soften at the time, to spare she from an increase of unhappiness,
suffering as she then have suffer for Marianne. she find that she
have be mislead by the careful, the considerate attention of her
daughter, to think the attachment, which once she have so well
understand, much slighter in reality, than she have be willnot to
believe, or than it be now prove to be. she fear that under this
persuasion she have be unjust, inattentive, nay, almost unkind, to she
Elinor;--that Marianne's affliction, because more acknowledge, more
immediately before she, have too much engross her tenderness, and lead
she away to forget that in Elinor she might have a daughter suffer
almost as much, certainly with less self-provocation, and great
fortitude.
CHAPTER 48
Elinor now find the difference between the expectation of an
unpleasant event, however certain the mind may be tell to consider it,
and certainty itself. she now find, that in spite of herself, she have
always admit a hope, while Edward remain single, that something
would occur to prevent his marrying Lucy; that some resolution of his
own, some mediation of friend, or some more eligible opportunity of
establishment for the lady, would arise to assist the happiness of all.
but he be now marry; and she condemn her heart for the lurking
flattery, which so much heighten the pain of the intelligence.
that he should be marry soon, before (as she imagine) he could be in
order, and consequently before he could be in possession of the
living, surprise she a little at first. but she soon see how likely
it be that Lucy, in her self-provident care, in her haste to secure
he, should overlook every thing but the risk of delay. they be
married, marry in town, and now hasten down to her uncle's. what
have Edward feel on be within four mile from Barton, on see she
mother's servant, on hear Lucy's message!
they would soon, she suppose, be settle at delaford.--delaford,--that
place in which so much conspire to give she an interest; which she
wish to be acquaint with, and yet desire to avoid. she see they
in an instant in their parsonage-house; see in Lucy, the active,
contrive manager, unite at once a desire of smart appearance with
the utmost frugality, and ashamed to be suspect of half her
economical practices;--pursuing her own interest in every thought,
court the favour of Colonel Brandon, of Mrs. Jennings, and of every
wealthy friend. in Edward--she know not what she see, nor what she
wish to see;--happy or unhappy,--nothing please she; she turn away
her head from every sketch of he.
Elinor flatter herself that some one of their connection in London
would write to they to announce the event, and give far
particulars,--but day after day pass off, and bring no letter, no
tiding. though uncertain that any one be to blame, she find fault
with every absent friend. they be all thoughtless or indolent.
"when do you write to Colonel Brandon, ma'am?" be an inquiry which
spring from the impatience of her mind to have something go on.
"I write to he, my love, last week, and rather expect to see, than to
hear from he again. I earnestly press his come to we, and should
not be surprised to see he walk in today or tomorrow, or any day."
this be gain something, something to look forward to. Colonel
Brandon must have some information to give.
Scarcely have she so determine it, when the figure of a man on
horseback draw her eye to the window. he stopt at their gate. it be
a gentleman, it be Colonel Brandon himself. now she could hear more;
and she tremble in expectation of it. but--it be not Colonel
Brandon--neither his air--nor his height. be it possible, she must
say it must be Edward. she look again. he have just dismounted;--she
could not be mistaken,--it WAS Edward. she move away and sit down.
"he come from Mr. Pratt's purposely to see we. I will be calm; I will
be mistress of myself."
in a moment she perceive that the other be likewise aware of the
mistake. she see her mother and Marianne change colour; see they look
at herself, and whisper a few sentence to each other. she would have
give the world to be able to speak--and to make they understand that
she hop no coolness, no slight, would appear in their behaviour to
him;--but she have no utterance, and be oblige to leave all to their
own discretion.
not a syllable pass aloud. they all wait in silence for the
appearance of their visitor. his footstep be hear along the gravel
path; in a moment he be in the passage, and in another he be before
they.
his countenance, as he enter the room, be not too happy, even for
Elinor. his complexion be white with agitation, and he look as if
fearful of his reception, and conscious that he merit no kind one.
Mrs. Dashwood, however, conform, as she trust, to the wish of
that daughter, by whom she then mean in the warmth of her heart to be
guide in every thing, meet with a look of force complacency, give he
her hand, and wish he joy.
he colour, and stammer out an unintelligible reply. Elinor's lip
have move with her mother's, and, when the moment of action be over,
she wish that she have shake hand with he too. but it be then too
late, and with a countenance meaning to be open, she sit down again and
talk of the weather.
Marianne have retreat as much as possible out of sight, to conceal her
distress; and Margaret, understand some part, but not the whole of
the case, think it incumbent on she to be dignify, and therefore
take a seat as far from he as she could, and maintain a strict
silence.
when Elinor have cease to rejoice in the dryness of the season, a very
awful pause take place. it be put an end to by Mrs. Dashwood, who
feel oblige to hope that he have leave Mrs. Ferrars very well. in a
hurry manner, he reply in the affirmative.
another pause.
Elinor resolve to exert herself, though fear the sound of her own
voice, now say,
"be Mrs. Ferrars at Longstaple?"
"at Longstaple!" he reply, with an air of surprise.-- "no, my mother
be in town."
"I mean," say Elinor, take up some work from the table, "to inquire
for Mrs. EDWARD Ferrars."
she dare not look up;--but her mother and Marianne both turn their
eye on he. he colour, seem perplexed, look doubtingly, and,
after some hesitation, said,--
"perhaps you mean--my brother--you mean Mrs.--Mrs. ROBERT Ferrars."
"Mrs. Robert Ferrars!"--was repeat by Marianne and her mother in an
accent of the utmost amazement;--and though Elinor could not speak,
even her eye be fix on he with the same impatient wonder. he
rise from his seat, and walk to the window, apparently from not
know what to do; take up a pair of scissor that lie there, and
while spoil both they and their sheath by cut the latter to
piece as he speak, say, in a hurried voice,
"perhaps you do not know--you may not have hear that my brother be
lately married to--to the young--to Miss Lucy Steele."
his word be echo with unspeakable astonishment by all but Elinor,
who sit with her head lean over her work, in a state of such
agitation as make she hardly know where she be.
"yes," say he, "they be marry last week, and be now at Dawlish."
Elinor could sit it no long. she almost run out of the room, and as
soon as the door be close, burst into tear of joy, which at first
she think would never cease. Edward, who have till then look any
where, rather than at she, see her hurry away, and perhaps see--or even
hear, her emotion; for immediately afterwards he fall into a reverie,
which no remark, no inquiry, no affectionate address of Mrs.
Dashwood could penetrate, and at last, without say a word, quit
the room, and walk out towards the village--leave the other in the
great astonishment and perplexity on a change in his situation, so
wonderful and so sudden;--a perplexity which they have no mean of
lessening but by their own conjecture.
CHAPTER 49
Unaccountable, however, as the circumstance of his release might
appear to the whole family, it be certain that Edward be free; and to
what purpose that freedom would be employ be easily pre-determined
by all;--for after experience the blessing of one imprudent
engagement, contract without his mother's consent, as he have already
do for more than four year, nothing less could be expect of he in
the failure of that, than the immediate contraction of another.
his errand at Barton, in fact, be a simple one. it be only to ask
Elinor to marry him;--and consider that he be not altogether
inexperienced in such a question, it might be strange that he should
feel so uncomfortable in the present case as he really do, so much in
need of encouragement and fresh air.
how soon he have walk himself into the proper resolution, however, how
soon an opportunity of exercise it occur, in what manner he
express himself, and how he be receive, need not be particularly
tell. this only need be said;--that when they all sit down to table at
four o'clock, about three hour after his arrival, he have secure his
lady, engage her mother's consent, and be not only in the rapturous
profession of the lover, but, in the reality of reason and truth, one
of the happy of man. his situation indeed be more than commonly
joyful. he have more than the ordinary triumph of accept love to
swell his heart, and raise his spirit. he be release without any
reproach to himself, from an entanglement which have long form his
misery, from a woman whom he have long cease to love;--and elevate at
once to that security with another, which he must have think of
almost with despair, as soon as he have learn to consider it with
desire. he be bring, not from doubt or suspense, but from misery to
happiness;--and the change be openly speak in such a genuine,
flow, grateful cheerfulness, as his friend have never witness in
he before.
his heart be now open to Elinor, all its weakness, all its error
confess, and his first boyish attachment to Lucy treat with all the
philosophic dignity of twenty-four.
"it be a foolish, idle inclination on my side," say he, "the
consequence of ignorance of the world--and want of employment. have my
brother give I some active profession when I be remove at eighteen
from the care of Mr. Pratt, I think--nay, I be sure, it would never
have happen; for though I leave Longstaple with what I think, at the
time, a most unconquerable preference for his niece, yet have I then have
any pursuit, any object to engage my time and keep I at a distance
from she for a few month, I should very soon have outgrow the fancied
attachment, especially by mix more with the world, as in such case I
must have do. but instead of have any thing to do, instead of
have any profession choose for I, or be allow to chuse any
myself, I return home to be completely idle; and for the first
twelvemonth afterwards I have not even the nominal employment, which
belong to the university would have give I; for I be not enter
at Oxford till I be nineteen. I have therefore nothing in the world to
do, but to fancy myself in love; and as my mother do not make my home
in every respect comfortable, as I have no friend, no companion in my
brother, and dislike new acquaintance, it be not unnatural for I to
be very often at Longstaple, where I always feel myself at home, and
be always sure of a welcome; and accordingly I spend the great part
of my time there from eighteen to nineteen: Lucy appear everything
that be amiable and obliging. she be pretty too--at least I think
so then; and I have see so little of other woman, that I could make no
comparison, and see no defect. consider everything, therefore, I
hope, foolish as our engagement be, foolish as it have since in every
way be prove, it be not at the time an unnatural or an inexcusable
piece of folly."
the change which a few hour have work in the mind and the happiness
of the Dashwoods, be such--so great--as promise they all, the
satisfaction of a sleepless night. Mrs. Dashwood, too happy to be
comfortable, know not how to love Edward, nor praise Elinor enough, how
to be enough thankful for his release without wound his delicacy,
nor how at once to give they leisure for unrestrained conversation
together, and yet enjoy, as she wish, the sight and society of both.
Marianne could speak her happiness only by tear. comparison would
occur--regret would arise;--and her joy, though sincere as her love
for her sister, be of a kind to give she neither spirit nor language.
but Elinor--how be her feeling to be described?--from the moment of
learn that Lucy be married to another, that Edward be free, to the
moment of his justify the hope which have so instantly follow, she
be every thing by turn but tranquil. but when the second moment have
pass, when she find every doubt, every solicitude remove, compare
her situation with what so lately it have been,--saw he honourably
release from his former engagement, see he instantly profit by the
release, to address herself and declare an affection as tender, as
constant as she have ever suppose it to be,--she be oppress, she be
overcome by her own felicity;--and happily dispose as be the human
mind to be easily familiarize with any change for the well, it
require several hour to give sedateness to her spirit, or any degree
of tranquillity to her heart.
Edward be now fix at the cottage at least for a week;--for whatever
other claim might be make on he, it be impossible that less than a
week should be give up to the enjoyment of Elinor's company, or
suffice to say half that be to be say of the past, the present, and
the future;--for though a very few hour spend in the hard labor of
incessant talking will despatch more subject than can really be in
common between any two rational creature, yet with lover it be
different. between they no subject be finish, no communication be
even make, till it have be make at least twenty time over.
Lucy's marriage, the unceasing and reasonable wonder among they all,
form of course one of the early discussion of the lovers;--and
Elinor's particular knowledge of each party make it appear to she in
every view, as one of the most extraordinary and unaccountable
circumstance she have ever hear. how they could be throw together,
and by what attraction Robert could be draw on to marry a girl, of
whose beauty she have herself hear he speak without any admiration,--a
girl too already engage to his brother, and on whose account that
brother have be throw off by his family--it be beyond her
comprehension to make out. to her own heart it be a delightful
affair, to her imagination it be even a ridiculous one, but to her
reason, her judgment, it be completely a puzzle.
Edward could only attempt an explanation by suppose, that, perhaps,
at first accidentally meeting, the vanity of the one have be so worked
on by the flattery of the other, as to lead by degree to all the rest.
Elinor remember what Robert have tell she in Harley Street, of his
opinion of what his own mediation in his brother's affair might have
do, if apply to in time. she repeat it to Edward.
"that be exactly like Robert,"--was his immediate observation.--"And
THAT," he presently add, "might perhaps be in his head when the
acquaintance between they first begin. and Lucy perhaps at first might
think only of procure his good office in my favour. other design
might afterward arise."
how long it have be carry on between they, however, he be equally
at a loss with herself to make out; for at Oxford, where he have
remain for choice ever since his quit London, he have have no mean
of hearing of she but from herself, and her letter to the very last
be neither less frequent, nor less affectionate than usual. not the
small suspicion, therefore, have ever occur to prepare he for
what followed;--and when at last it burst on he in a letter from Lucy
herself, he have be for some time, he believe, half stupifie between
the wonder, the horror, and the joy of such a deliverance. he put the
letter into Elinor's hand.
"DEAR SIR,
"be very sure I have long lose your affection,
I have think myself at liberty to bestow my own
on another, and have no doubt of be as happy with
he as I once use to think I might be with you;
but I scorn to accept a hand while the heart be
another's. sincerely wish you happy in your choice,
and it shall not be my fault if we be not always
good friend, as our near relationship now make
proper. I can safely say I owe you no ill-will,
and be sure you will be too generous to do we any
ill office. your brother have gain my affection
entirely, and as we could not live without one
another, we be just return from the altar, and
be now on our way to dawlish for a few week, which
place your dear brother have great curiosity to see,
but think I would first trouble you with these
few line, and shall always remain,
"your sincere well-wisher, friend, and sister,
"LUCY FERRARS.
"I have burn all your letter, and will return
your picture the first opportunity. please to destroy
my scrawls--but the ring with my hair you be very
welcome to keep."
Elinor read and return it without any comment.
"I will not ask your opinion of it as a composition," say
Edward.--"For world would not I have have a letter of hers see by you
in former days.--In a sister it be bad enough, but in a wife!--how I
have blush over the page of her writing!--and I believe I may say
that since the first half year of our foolish--business--this be the
only letter I ever receive from she, of which the substance make I
any amend for the defect of the style."
"however it may have come about," say Elinor, after a pause,--"they
be certainly married. and your mother have bring on herself a most
appropriate punishment. the independence she settle on Robert,
through resentment against you, have put it in his power to make his own
choice; and she have actually be bribe one son with a thousand
a-year, to do the very deed which she disinherit the other for
intend to do. she will hardly be less hurt, I suppose, by Robert's
marry Lucy, than she would have be by your marry she."
"she will be more hurt by it, for Robert always be her favourite.--She
will be more hurt by it, and on the same principle will forgive he
much soon."
in what state the affair stand at present between they, Edward know
not, for no communication with any of his family have yet be attempt
by he. he have quit Oxford within four and twenty hour after
Lucy's letter arrive, and with only one object before he, the near
road to Barton, have have no leisure to form any scheme of conduct, with
which that road do not hold the most intimate connection. he could do
nothing till he be assure of his fate with Miss Dashwood; and by his
rapidity in seek that fate, it be to be suppose, in spite of the
jealousy with which he have once thought of Colonel Brandon, in spite of
the modesty with which he rat his own desert, and the politeness
with which he talk of his doubt, he do not, upon the whole, expect
a very cruel reception. it be his business, however, to say that he
do, and he say it very prettily. what he might say on the subject a
twelvemonth after, must be refer to the imagination of husband and
wife.
that Lucy have certainly mean to deceive, to go off with a flourish of
malice against he in her message by Thomas, be perfectly clear to
Elinor; and Edward himself, now thoroughly enlighten on her
character, have no scruple in believe her capable of the utmost
meanness of wanton ill-nature. though his eye have be long open,
even before his acquaintance with Elinor begin, to her ignorance and a
want of liberality in some of her opinion--they have be equally
impute, by he, to her want of education; and till her last letter
reach he, he have always believe she to be a well-dispose,
good-hearted girl, and thoroughly attach to himself. nothing but
such a persuasion could have prevent his put an end to an
engagement, which, long before the discovery of it lay he open to his
mother's anger, have be a continual source of disquiet and regret to
he.
"I think it my duty," say he, "independent of my feeling, to give
she the option of continue the engagement or not, when I be
renounce by my mother, and stand to all appearance without a friend in
the world to assist I. in such a situation as that, where there
seem nothing to tempt the avarice or the vanity of any living
creature, how could I suppose, when she so earnestly, so warmly
insist on share my fate, whatever it might be, that any thing but
the most disinterested affection be her inducement? and even now, I
cannot comprehend on what motive she act, or what fancy advantage
it could be to she, to be fetter to a man for whom she have not the
small regard, and who have only two thousand pound in the world.
she could not foresee that Colonel Brandon would give I a living."
"no; but she might suppose that something would occur in your favour;
that your own family might in time relent. and at any rate, she lose
nothing by continue the engagement, for she have prove that it
fetter neither her inclination nor her action. the connection be
certainly a respectable one, and probably gain her consideration
among her friend; and, if nothing more advantageous occur, it would
be well for she to marry you than be single."
Edward be, of course, immediately convince that nothing could have
be more natural than Lucy's conduct, nor more self-evident than the
motive of it.
Elinor scold he, harshly as lady always scold the imprudence which
compliment themselves, for have spend so much time with they at
Norland, when he must have feel his own inconstancy.
"your behaviour be certainly very wrong," say she; "because--to say
nothing of my own conviction, our relation be all lead away by it to
fancy and expect what, as you be then situate, could never be."
he could only plead an ignorance of his own heart, and a mistaken
confidence in the force of his engagement.
"I be simple enough to think, that because my faith be plight to
another, there could be no danger in my be with you; and that the
consciousness of my engagement be to keep my heart as safe and sacred
as my honour. I feel that I admire you, but I tell myself it be only
friendship; and till I begin to make comparison between yourself and
Lucy, I do not know how far I be get. after that, I suppose, I be
wrong in remain so much in Sussex, and the argument with which I
reconcile myself to the expediency of it, be no well than
these:--The danger be my own; I be do no injury to anybody but
myself."
Elinor smile, and shake her head.
Edward hear with pleasure of Colonel Brandon's be expect at the
Cottage, as he really wish not only to be well acquaint with he,
but to have an opportunity of convince he that he no long resent
his give he the living of Delaford--"Which, at present," say he,
"after thank so ungraciously deliver as mine be on the occasion,
he must think I have never forgive he for offer."
now he feel astonish himself that he have never yet be to the place.
but so little interest have be take in the matter, that he owe all his
knowledge of the house, garden, and glebe, extent of the parish,
condition of the land, and rate of the tithe, to Elinor herself, who
have hear so much of it from Colonel Brandon, and hear it with so much
attention, as to be entirely mistress of the subject.
one question after this only remain undecided, between they, one
difficulty only be to be overcome. they be bring together by
mutual affection, with the warm approbation of their real friend;
their intimate knowledge of each other seem to make their happiness
certain--and they only want something to live upon. Edward have two
thousand pound, and Elinor one, which, with Delaford living, be all
that they could call their own; for it be impossible that Mrs.
Dashwood should advance anything; and they be neither of they quite
enough in love to think that three hundred and fifty pound a-year
would supply they with the comfort of life.
Edward be not entirely without hope of some favourable change in his
mother towards he; and on that he rest for the residue of their
income. but Elinor have no such dependence; for since Edward would
still be unable to marry Miss Morton, and his chusing herself have be
speak of in Mrs. Ferrars's flattering language as only a less evil
than his chuse Lucy Steele, she fear that Robert's offence would
serve no other purpose than to enrich Fanny.
about four day after Edward's arrival Colonel Brandon appear, to
complete Mrs. Dashwood's satisfaction, and to give she the dignity of
have, for the first time since her live at Barton, more company
with she than her house would hold. Edward be allow to retain the
privilege of first comer, and Colonel Brandon therefore walk every
night to his old quarter at the Park; from whence he usually return
in the morning, early enough to interrupt the lover' first tete-a-tete
before breakfast.
a three week' residence at Delaford, where, in his evening hour at
least, he have little to do but to calculate the disproportion between
thirty-six and seventeen, bring he to Barton in a temper of mind
which need all the improvement in Marianne's look, all the kindness
of her welcome, and all the encouragement of her mother's language, to
make it cheerful. among such friend, however, and such flattery, he
do revive. no rumour of Lucy's marriage have yet reach him:--he know
nothing of what have pass; and the first hour of his visit be
consequently spend in hearing and in wonder. every thing be
explain to he by Mrs. Dashwood, and he find fresh reason to rejoice
in what he have do for Mr. Ferrars, since eventually it promote the
interest of Elinor.
it would be needless to say, that the gentleman advance in the good
opinion of each other, as they advance in each other's acquaintance,
for it could not be otherwise. their resemblance in good principle
and good sense, in disposition and manner of thinking, would probably
have be sufficient to unite they in friendship, without any other
attraction; but their be in love with two sister, and two sister
fond of each other, make that mutual regard inevitable and immediate,
which might otherwise have wait the effect of time and judgment.
the letter from town, which a few day before would have make every
nerve in Elinor's body thrill with transport, now arrive to be read
with less emotion than mirth. Mrs. Jennings write to tell the
wonderful tale, to vent her honest indignation against the jilting
girl, and pour forth her compassion towards poor Mr. Edward, who, she
be sure, have quite dot upon the worthless hussy, and be now, by all
account, almost break-hearted, at oxford.-- "I do think," she
continue, "nothing be ever carry on so sly; for it be but two day
before Lucy call and sit a couple of hour with I. not a soul
suspect anything of the matter, not even Nancy, who, poor soul! come
cry to I the day after, in a great fright for fear of Mrs. Ferrars,
as well as not know how to get to Plymouth; for Lucy it seem
borrow all her money before she go off to be marry, on purpose we
suppose to make a show with, and poor Nancy have not seven shilling in
the world;--so I be very glad to give she five guineas to take she
down to Exeter, where she think of stay three or four week with
Mrs. Burgess, in hope, as I tell she, to fall in with the doctor
again. and I must say that Lucy's crossness not to take they along
with they in the chaise be bad than all. poor Mr. Edward! I cannot
get he out of my head, but you must send for he to Barton, and Miss
Marianne must try to comfort he."
Mr. Dashwood's strain be more solemn. Mrs. Ferrars be the most
unfortunate of woman--poor Fanny have suffer agony of
sensibility--and he consider the existence of each, under such a
blow, with grateful wonder. Robert's offence be unpardonable, but
Lucy's be infinitely bad. neither of they be ever again to be
mention to Mrs. Ferrars; and even, if she might hereafter be induce
to forgive her son, his wife should never be acknowledge as her
daughter, nor be permit to appear in her presence. the secrecy with
which everything have be carry on between they, be rationally
treat as enormously heighten the crime, because, have any suspicion
of it occur to the other, proper measure would have be take to
prevent the marriage; and he call on Elinor to join with he in
regret that Lucy's engagement with Edward have not rather be
fulfil, than that she should thus be the mean of spread misery
far in the family.-- he thus continue:
"Mrs. Ferrars have never yet mention Edward's name, which do not
surprise we; but, to our great astonishment, not a line have be
receive from he on the occasion. perhaps, however, he be keep silent
by his fear of offend, and I shall, therefore, give he a hint, by a
line to Oxford, that his sister and I both think a letter of proper
submission from he, address perhaps to Fanny, and by her shewn to
her mother, might not be take amiss; for we all know the tenderness of
Mrs. Ferrars's heart, and that she wish for nothing so much as to be
on good term with her child."
this paragraph be of some importance to the prospect and conduct of
Edward. it determine he to attempt a reconciliation, though not
exactly in the manner point out by their brother and sister.
"a letter of proper submission!" repeat he; "would they have I beg
my mother's pardon for Robert's ingratitude to she, and breach of
honour to me?--i can make no submission--I be grow neither humble nor
penitent by what have passed.--i be grow very happy; but that would not
interest.--i know of no submission that be proper for I to make."
"you may certainly ask to be forgive," say Elinor, "because you have
offended;--and I should think you might now venture so far as to
profess some concern for have ever form the engagement which draw
on you your mother's anger."
he agree that he might.
"and when she have forgive you, perhaps a little humility may be
convenient while acknowledge a second engagement, almost as imprudent
in her eye as the first."
he have nothing to urge against it, but still resist the idea of a
letter of proper submission; and therefore, to make it easy to he,
as he declare a much great willingness to make mean concession by
word of mouth than on paper, it be resolve that, instead of write
to Fanny, he should go to London, and personally intreat her good
office in his favour.-- "and if they really do interest themselves,"
say Marianne, in her new character of candour, "in bring about a
reconciliation, I shall think that even John and Fanny be not entirely
without merit."
after a visit on Colonel Brandon's side of only three or four day, the
two gentleman quit Barton together.-- they be to go immediately to
Delaford, that Edward might have some personal knowledge of his future
home, and assist his patron and friend in decide on what improvement
be need to it; and from thence, after stay there a couple of
night, he be to proceed on his journey to town.
CHAPTER 50
after a proper resistance on the part of Mrs. Ferrars, just so violent
and so steady as to preserve she from that reproach which she always
seem fearful of incur, the reproach of be too amiable, Edward
be admit to her presence, and pronounce to be again her son.
her family have of late be exceedingly fluctuating. for many year of
her life she have have two son; but the crime and annihilation of Edward
a few week ago, have rob she of one; the similar annihilation of
Robert have leave she for a fortnight without any; and now, by the
resuscitation of Edward, she have one again.
in spite of his be allow once more to live, however, he do not
feel the continuance of his existence secure, till he have reveal his
present engagement; for the publication of that circumstance, he
fear, might give a sudden turn to his constitution, and carry he off
as rapidly as before. with apprehensive caution therefore it be
reveal, and he be listen to with unexpected calmness. Mrs.
ferrar at first reasonably endeavoured to dissuade he from marry
Miss Dashwood, by every argument in her power;--told he, that in Miss
Morton he would have a woman of high rank and large fortune;--and
enforce the assertion, by observe that Miss Morton be the daughter
of a nobleman with thirty thousand pound, while Miss Dashwood be only
the daughter of a private gentleman with no more than three; but when
she find that, though perfectly admit the truth of her
representation, he be by no mean incline to be guide by it, she
judge it wisest, from the experience of the past, to submit--and
therefore, after such an ungracious delay as she owe to her own
dignity, and as serve to prevent every suspicion of good-will, she
issue her decree of consent to the marriage of Edward and Elinor.
what she would engage to do towards augment their income be next to
be consider; and here it plainly appear, that though Edward be now
her only son, he be by no mean she eld; for while Robert be
inevitably endow with a thousand pound a-year, not the small
objection be make against Edward's take order for the sake of two
hundred and fifty at the utmost; nor be anything promise either for
the present or in future, beyond the ten thousand pound, which have
be give with Fanny.
it be as much, however, as be desire, and more than be expect, by
Edward and Elinor; and Mrs. Ferrars herself, by her shuffle excuse,
seem the only person surprised at she not give more.
with an income quite sufficient to their want thus secure to they,
they have nothing to wait for after Edward be in possession of the
living, but the readiness of the house, to which Colonel Brandon, with
an eager desire for the accommodation of Elinor, be make
considerable improvement; and after wait some time for their
completion, after experience, as usual, a thousand disappointment
and delay from the unaccountable dilatoriness of the workman, Elinor,
as usual, break through the first positive resolution of not marry
till every thing be ready, and the ceremony take place in Barton
church early in the autumn.
the first month after their marriage be spend with their friend at the
Mansion-house; from whence they could superintend the progress of the
Parsonage, and direct every thing as they like on the spot;--could
chuse paper, project shrubbery, and invent a sweep. Mrs. Jennings's
prophecy, though rather jumble together, be chiefly fulfil; for
she be able to visit Edward and his wife in their Parsonage by
Michaelmas, and she find in Elinor and her husband, as she really
believe, one of the happy couple in the world. they have in fact
nothing to wish for, but the marriage of Colonel Brandon and Marianne,
and rather well pasturage for their cow.
they be visit on their first settling by almost all their relation
and friend. Mrs. Ferrars come to inspect the happiness which she be
almost ashamed of have authorise; and even the Dashwoods be at the
expense of a journey from Sussex to do they honour.
"I will not say that I be disappointed, my dear sister," say John, as
they be walk together one morning before the gate of Delaford
House, "that would be say too much, for certainly you have be one
of the most fortunate young woman in the world, as it be. but, I
confess, it would give I great pleasure to call Colonel Brandon
brother. his property here, his place, his house, every thing be in
such respectable and excellent condition!--and his woods!--i have not
see such timber any where in Dorsetshire, as there be now stand in
Delaford hanger!--and though, perhaps, Marianne may not seem exactly
the person to attract he--yet I think it would altogether be advisable
for you to have they now frequently stay with you, for as Colonel
Brandon seem a great deal at home, nobody can tell what may
happen--for, when people be much throw together, and see little of
anybody else--and it will always be in your power to set she off to
advantage, and so forth;--in short, you may as well give she a
chance--you understand I."--
but though Mrs. Ferrars do come to see they, and always treat they
with the make-believe of decent affection, they be never insult by
her real favour and preference. that be due to the folly of Robert,
and the cunning of his wife; and it be earn by they before many
month have pass away. the selfish sagacity of the latter, which have
at first draw Robert into the scrape, be the principal instrument of
his deliverance from it; for her respectful humility, assiduous
attention, and endless flattery, as soon as the small opening be
give for their exercise, reconcile Mrs. Ferrars to his choice, and
re-establish he completely in her favour.
the whole of Lucy's behaviour in the affair, and the prosperity which
crown it, therefore, may be hold forth as a most encouraging instance
of what an earnest, an uncease attention to self-interest, however
its progress may be apparently obstruct, will do in secure every
advantage of fortune, with no other sacrifice than that of time and
conscience. when Robert first seek her acquaintance, and privately
visit she in Bartlett's building, it be only with the view impute
to he by his brother. he merely mean to persuade she to give up the
engagement; and as there could be nothing to overcome but the affection
of both, he naturally expect that one or two interview would settle
the matter. in that point, however, and that only, he erred;--for
though Lucy soon give he hope that his eloquence would convince she
in TIME, another visit, another conversation, be always want to
produce this conviction. some doubt always linger in her mind when
they part, which could only be remove by another half hour's
discourse with himself. his attendance be by this mean secure, and
the rest follow in course. instead of talk of Edward, they come
gradually to talk only of Robert,--a subject on which he have always
more to say than on any other, and in which she soon betray an
interest even equal to his own; and in short, it become speedily
evident to both, that he have entirely supplant his brother. he be
proud of his conquest, proud of trick Edward, and very proud of
marry privately without his mother's consent. what immediately
follow be know. they pass some month in great happiness at
Dawlish; for she have many relation and old acquaintance to cut--and
he draw several plan for magnificent cottages;--and from thence
return to town, procure the forgiveness of Mrs. Ferrars, by the
simple expedient of ask it, which, at Lucy's instigation, be
adopt. the forgiveness, at first, indeed, as be reasonable,
comprehend only Robert; and Lucy, who have owe his mother no duty and
therefore could have transgress none, still remain some week
long unpardoned. but perseverance in humility of conduct and
message, in self-condemnation for Robert's offence, and gratitude for
the unkindness she be treat with, procure she in time the haughty
notice which overcome she by its graciousness, and lead soon afterwards,
by rapid degree, to the high state of affection and influence.
Lucy become as necessary to Mrs. Ferrars, as either Robert or Fanny;
and while Edward be never cordially forgive for have once intend
to marry she, and Elinor, though superior to she in fortune and birth,
be speak of as an intruder, SHE be in every thing consider, and
always openly acknowledge, to be a favourite child. they settle in
town, receive very liberal assistance from Mrs. Ferrars, be on the
good term imaginable with the Dashwoods; and set aside the
jealousy and ill-will continually subsist between Fanny and Lucy,
in which their husband of course take a part, as well as the frequent
domestic disagreement between Robert and Lucy themselves, nothing
could exceed the harmony in which they all live together.
what Edward have do to forfeit the right of eld son, might have
puzzle many people to find out; and what Robert have do to succeed to
it, might have puzzle they still more. it be an arrangement,
however, justify in its effect, if not in its cause; for nothing
ever appear in Robert's style of living or of talk to give a
suspicion of his regret the extent of his income, as either leave
his brother too little, or bring himself too much;--and if Edward
might be judge from the ready discharge of his duty in every
particular, from an increase attachment to his wife and his home, and
from the regular cheerfulness of his spirit, he might be suppose no
less contented with his lot, no less free from every wish of an
exchange.
Elinor's marriage divide she as little from her family as could well
be contrive, without render the cottage at Barton entirely useless,
for her mother and sister spend much more than half their time with
she. Mrs. Dashwood be act on motif of policy as well as pleasure
in the frequency of her visit at Delaford; for her wish of bring
Marianne and Colonel Brandon together be hardly less earnest, though
rather more liberal than what John have express. it be now her
darling object. precious as be the company of her daughter to she,
she desire nothing so much as to give up its constant enjoyment to she
value friend; and to see Marianne settle at the mansion-house be
equally the wish of Edward and Elinor. they each feel his sorrow, and
their own obligation, and Marianne, by general consent, be to be the
reward of all.
with such a confederacy against she--with a knowledge so intimate of
his goodness--with a conviction of his fond attachment to herself,
which at last, though long after it be observable to everybody
else--burst on she--what could she do?
Marianne Dashwood be bear to an extraordinary fate. she be bear to
discover the falsehood of her own opinion, and to counteract, by her
conduct, her most favourite maxim. she be bear to overcome an
affection form so late in life as at seventeen, and with no sentiment
superior to strong esteem and lively friendship, voluntarily to give
her hand to another!--and that other, a man who have suffer no less
than herself under the event of a former attachment, whom, two year
before, she have consider too old to be married,--and who still seek
the constitutional safeguard of a flannel waistcoat!
but so it be. instead of fall a sacrifice to an irresistible
passion, as once she have fondly flatter herself with
expecting,--instead of remain even for ever with her mother, and
find she only pleasure in retirement and study, as afterwards in
she more calm and sober judgment she have determine on,--she find
herself at nineteen, submit to new attachment, enter on new
duty, place in a new home, a wife, the mistress of a family, and the
patroness of a village.
Colonel Brandon be now as happy, as all those who well love he,
believe he deserve to be;--in Marianne he be console for every past
affliction;--her regard and her society restore his mind to animation,
and his spirit to cheerfulness; and that Marianne find her own
happiness in form his, be equally the persuasion and delight of
each observe friend. Marianne could never love by half; and her
whole heart become, in time, as much devoted to her husband, as it have
once be to Willoughby.
Willoughby could not hear of her marriage without a pang; and his
punishment be soon afterwards complete in the voluntary forgiveness of
Mrs. Smith, who, by state his marriage with a woman of character, as
the source of her clemency, give he reason for believe that have he
behave with honour towards Marianne, he might at once have be happy
and rich. that his repentance of misconduct, which thus bring its
own punishment, be sincere, need not be doubted;--nor that he long
thought of Colonel Brandon with envy, and of Marianne with regret. but
that he be for ever inconsolable, that he flee from society, or
contract an habitual gloom of temper, or die of a broken heart, must
not be depend on--for he do neither. he live to exert, and
frequently to enjoy himself. his wife be not always out of humour,
nor his home always uncomfortable; and in his breed of horse and dog,
and in sporting of every kind, he find no inconsiderable degree of
domestic felicity.
for Marianne, however--in spite of his incivility in survive her
loss--he always retain that decide regard which interest he in
every thing that befell she, and make she his secret standard of
perfection in woman;--and many a rise beauty would be slight by he
in after-day as bear no comparison with Mrs. Brandon.
Mrs. Dashwood be prudent enough to remain at the cottage, without
attempt a removal to Delaford; and fortunately for Sir John and Mrs.
Jennings, when Marianne be take from they, Margaret have reach an
age highly suitable for dancing, and not very ineligible for be
suppose to have a lover.
between Barton and Delaford, there be that constant communication
which strong family affection would naturally dictate;--and among the
merit and the happiness of Elinor and Marianne, let it not be rank
as the least considerable, that though sister, and live almost
within sight of each other, they could live without disagreement
between themselves, or produce coolness between their husband.
the END
