 Pride and Prejudice
by Jane Austen
Chapter 1
it be a truth universally acknowledge, that a single man in possession of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife.
however little know the feeling or view of such a man may be on his first enter a neighbourhood, this truth be so well fix in the mind of the surround family, that he be consider the rightful property of some one or other of their daughter.
"my dear Mr. Bennet," say his lady to he one day, "have you hear that Netherfield Park be let at last?"
Mr. Bennet reply that he have not.
"but it be," return she; "for Mrs. Long have just be here, and she tell I all about it."
Mr. Bennet make no answer.
"do you not want to know who have take it?" cry his wife impatiently.
"_you_ want to tell I, and I have no objection to hear it."
this be invitation enough.
"why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long say that Netherfield be take by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he come down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and be so much delighted with it, that he agree with Mr. Morris immediately; that he be to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servant be to be in the house by the end of next week."
"what be his name?"
"Bingley."
"be he married or single?"
"oh! single, my dear, to be sure! a single man of large fortune; four or five thousand a year. what a fine thing for our girl!"
"how so? how can it affect they?"
"my dear Mr. Bennet," reply his wife, "how can you be so tiresome! you must know that I be think of his marry one of they."
"be that his design in settle here?"
"Design! nonsense, how can you talk so! but it be very likely that he may fall in love with one of they, and therefore you must visit he as soon as he come."
"I see no occasion for that. you and the girl may go, or you may send they by themselves, which perhaps will be still well, for as you be as handsome as any of they, Mr. Bingley may like you the good of the party."
"my dear, you flatter I. I certainly have have my share of beauty, but I do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now. when a woman have five grow-up daughter, she ought to give over thinking of her own beauty."
"in such case, a woman have not often much beauty to think of."
"but, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when he come into the neighbourhood."
"it be more than I engage for, I assure you."
"but consider your daughter. only think what an establishment it would be for one of they. Sir William and Lady Lucas be determined to go, merely on that account, for in general, you know, they visit no newcomer. indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for we to visit he if you do not."
"you be over-scrupulous, surely. I dare say Mr. Bingley will be very glad to see you; and I will send a few line by you to assure he of my hearty consent to his marrying whichever he choose of the girl; though I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy."
"I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy be not a bit well than the other; and I be sure she be not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so good-humour as Lydia. but you be always give she the preference."
"they have none of they much to recommend they," reply he; "they be all silly and ignorant like other girl; but Lizzy have something more of quickness than her sister."
"Mr. Bennet, how can you abuse your own child in such a way? you take delight in vex I. you have no compassion for my poor nerve."
"you mistake I, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerve. they be my old friend. I have hear you mention they with consideration these last twenty year at least."
Mr. Bennet be so odd a mixture of quick part, sarcastic humour, reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty year have be insufficient to make his wife understand his character. her mind be less difficult to develop. she be a woman of mean understanding, little information, and uncertain temper. when she be discontent, she fancy herself nervous. the business of her life be to get her daughter marry; its solace be visit and news.
chapter 2
Mr. Bennet be among the early of those who wait on Mr. Bingley. he have always intend to visit he, though to the last always assure his wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit be pay she have no knowledge of it. it be then disclose in the follow manner. observe his second daughter employ in trim a hat, he suddenly address she with:
"I hope Mr. Bingley will like it, Lizzy."
"we be not in a way to know what Mr. Bingley like," say her mother resentfully, "since we be not to visit."
"but you forget, mamma," say Elizabeth, "that we shall meet he at the assembly, and that Mrs. Long promise to introduce he."
"I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing. she have two niece of her own. she be a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion of she."
"no more have I," say Mr. Bennet; "and I be glad to find that you do not depend on she serve you."
Mrs. Bennet deign not to make any reply, but, unable to contain herself, begin scold one of her daughter.
"donot keep cough so, Kitty, for Heaven's sake! have a little compassion on my nerve. you tear they to piece."
"Kitty have no discretion in her cough," say her father; "she time they ill."
"I do not cough for my own amusement," reply Kitty fretfully. "when be your next ball to be, Lizzy?"
"to-morrow fortnight."
"Aye, so it be," cry her mother, "and Mrs. Long do not come back till the day before; so it will be impossible for she to introduce he, for she will not know he herself."
"then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce Mr. Bingley to she."
"impossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I be not acquaint with he myself; how can you be so teasing?"
"I honour your circumspection. a fortnight's acquaintance be certainly very little. one cannot know what a man really be by the end of a fortnight. but if we do not venture somebody else
will; and after all, Mrs. Long and her daughter must stand their chance; and, therefore, as she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I will take it on myself."
the girl star at their father. Mrs. Bennet say only, "nonsense, nonsense!"
"what can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?" cry he. "do you consider the form of introduction, and the stress that be lay on they, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you there. what say you, Mary? for you be a young lady of deep reflection, I know, and read great book and make extract."
Mary wish to say something sensible, but know not how.
"while Mary be adjust her idea," he continue, "let we return to Mr. Bingley."
"I be sick of Mr. Bingley," cry his wife.
"I be sorry to hear that; but why do not you tell I that before? if I have know as much this morning I certainly would not have call on he. it be very unlucky; but as I have actually pay the visit, we cannot escape the acquaintance now."
the astonishment of the lady be just what he wish; that of Mrs. Bennet perhaps surpass the rest; though, when the first tumult of joy be over, she begin to declare that it be what she have expect all the while.
"how good it be in you, my dear Mr. Bennet! but I know I should persuade you at last. I be sure you love your girl too well to neglect such an acquaintance. well, how pleased I be! and it be such a good joke, too, that you should have go this morning and never say a word about it till now."
"now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose," say Mr. Bennet; and, as he speak, he leave the room, fatigue with the rapture of his wife.
"what an excellent father you have, girl!" say she, when the door be shut. "I do not know how you will ever make he amend for his kindness; or I, either, for that matter. at our time of life it be not so pleasant, I can tell you, to be make new acquaintance every day; but for your sake, we would do anything. Lydia, my love, though you be the young, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next ball."
"oh!" say Lydia stoutly, "I be not afraid; for though I be the young, Ibe the tall."
the rest of the evening be spend in conjecture how soon he would return Mr. Bennet's visit, and determine when they should ask he to dinner.
chapter 3
not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five daughter, could ask on the subject, be sufficient to draw from her husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. they attack he in various way---with bareface question, ingenious supposition, and distant surmise; but he elude the skill of they all, and they be at last oblige to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour, Lady Lucas. her report be highly favourable. Sir William have be delighted with he. he be quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he mean to be at the next assembly with a large party. nothing could be more delightful! to be fond of dancing be a certain step towards fall in love; and very lively hope of Mr. Bingley's heart be entertain.
"if I can but see one of my daughter happily settle at Netherfield," say Mrs. Bennet to her husband, "and all the other equally well married, I shall have nothing to wish for."
in a few day Mr. Bingley return Mr. Bennet's visit, and sit about ten minute with he in his library. he have entertain hope of be admit to a sight of the young lady, of whose beauty he have hear much; but he see only the father. the lady be somewhat more fortunate, for they have the advantage of ascertain from an upper window that he wear a blue coat, and ride a black horse.
an invitation to dinner be soon afterwards dispatch; and already have Mrs. Bennet plan the course that be to do credit to her housekeeping, when an answer arrive which defer it all. Mr. Bingley be oblige to be in town the follow day, and, consequently, unable to accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet be quite disconcert. she could not imagine what business he could have in town so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she begin to fear that he might be always fly about from one place to another, and never settle at Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quiet her fear a little by start the idea of his be go to London only to get a large party for the ball; and a report soon follow that Mr. Bingley be to bring twelve lady and seven gentleman with he to the assembly. the girl grieve over such a number of lady, but be comfort the day before the ball by hear, that instead of twelve he bring only six with he from London---his five 
sister and a cousin. and when the party enter the assembly room it consist of only five altogether---Mr. Bingley, his two sister, the husband of the eld, and another young man.
Mr. Bingley be good-look and gentlemanlike; he have a pleasant countenance, and easy, unaffected manner. his sister be fine woman, with an air of decide fashion. his brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merely look the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon draw the attention of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome feature, noble mien, and the report which be in general circulation within five minute after his entrance, of his have ten thousand a year. the gentleman pronounce he to be a fine figure of a man, the lady declare he be much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he be look at with great admiration for about half the evening, till his manner give a disgust which turn the tide of his popularity; for he be discover to be proud; to be above his company, and above be please; and not all his large estate in Derbyshire could then save he from have a most forbidding, disagreeable countenance, and be unworthy to be compare with his friend.
Mr. Bingley have soon make himself acquaint with all the principal people in the room; he be lively and unreserve, dance every dance, be angry that the ball close so early, and talk of give one himself at Netherfield. such amiable quality must speak for themselves. what a contrast between he and his friend! Mr. Darcy dance only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, decline be introduce to any other lady, and spend the rest of the evening in walk about the room, speak occasionally to one of his own party. his character be decide. he be the proud, most disagreeable man in the world, and everybody hop that he would never come there again. amongst the most violent against he be Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike of his general behaviour be sharpen into particular resentment by his have slight one of her daughter.
Elizabeth Bennet have be oblige, by the scarcity of gentleman, to sit down for two dance; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy have be stand near enough for she to hear a conversation between he and Mr. Bingley, who come from the dance for a few minute, to press his friend to join it.
"come, Darcy," say he, "I must have you dance. I hate to see you stand about by yourself in this stupid manner. you have much well dance."
"I certainly shall not. you know how I detest it, unless I be particularly acquaint with my partner. at such an assembly as this it would be insupportable. your sister be engage, and there be not another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to I to stand up with."
"I would not be so fastidious as you be," cry Mr. Bingley, "for a kingdom! upon my honour, I never meet with so many pleasant girl in my life as I have this evening; and there be several of they you see uncommonly pretty."
"_you_ be dance with the only handsome girl in the room," say Mr. Darcy, look at the eld Miss Bennet.
"oh! she be the most beautiful creature I ever behold! but there be one of her sister sit down just behind you, who be very pretty, and I dare say very agreeable. do let I ask my partner to introduce you."
"which do you mean?" and turn round he look for a moment at Elizabeth, till catch her eye, he withdraw his own
and coldly say: "she be tolerable, but not handsome enough to tempt I; I be in no humour at present to give consequence to young lady who be slight by other man. you have well return to your partner and enjoy her smile, for you be waste
your time with I."
Mr. Bingley follow his advice. Mr. Darcy walk off; and Elizabeth remain with no very cordial feeling toward he. she tell the story, however, with great spirit among her friend; for she have a lively, playful disposition, which delight in anything ridiculous.
the evening altogether pass off pleasantly to the whole family. Mrs. Bennet have see her eld daughter much admire by the Netherfield party. Mr. Bingley have dance with she twice, and she have be distinguish by his sister. Jane be as much gratify by this as her mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth feel Jane's pleasure. Mary have hear herself mention to Miss Bingley as the most accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia have be fortunate enough never to be without partner, which be all that they have yet learn to care for at a ball. they return, therefore, in good spirit to Longbourn, the village where they live, and of which they be the principal inhabitant. they find Mr. Bennet still up. with a book he be regardless of time; and on the present occasion he have a good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which have raise such splendid expectation. he have rather hop that his wife's view on the stranger would be disappoint; but he 
soon find out that he have a different story to hear.
"oh! my dear Mr. Bennet," as she enter the room, "we have have a most delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you have be there. Jane be so admired, nothing could be like it. everybody say how well she look; and Mr. Bingley think she quite beautiful, and dance with she twice! only think of that, my dear; he actually dance with she twice! and she be the only creature in the room that he ask a second time. first of all, he ask Miss Lucas. I be so vex to see he stand up with she! but, however, he do not admire she at all; indeed, nobody can, you know; and he seem quite strike with Jane as she be go down the dance. so he inquire who she be, and get introduce, and ask she for the two next. then the two third he dance with Miss King, and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane again, and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the _Boulanger_--"
"if he have have any compassion for I," cry her husband impatiently, "he would not have dance half so much! for God's sake, say no more of his partner. o that he have sprain his ankle in the first place!"
"oh! my dear, I be quite delighted with he. he be so excessively handsome! and his sister be charming woman. I never in my life see anything more elegant than their dress. I dare say the lace upon Mrs. Hurst's gown---"
here she be interrupt again. Mr. Bennet protest against any description of finery. she be therefore oblige to seek another branch of the subject, and relate, with much bitterness of spirit and some exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy.
"but I can assure you," she add, "that Lizzy do not lose much by not suit his fancy; for he be a most disagreeable, horrid man, not at all worth please. so high and so conceited that there be no endure he! he walk here, and he walk there, fancy himself so very great! not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you have be there, my dear, to have give he one of your set-down. I quite det the man."
chapter 4
when Jane and Elizabeth be alone, the former, who have be cautious in her praise of Mr. Bingley before, express to her sister just how very much she admire he.
"he be just what a young man ought to be," say she, "sensible, good-humour, lively; and I never see such happy manners!--so much ease, with such perfect good breeding!"
"he be also handsome," reply Elizabeth, "which a young man ought likewise to be, if he possibly can. his character be thereby complete."
"I be very much flatter by his ask I to dance a second time. I do not expect such a compliment."
"do not you? I do for you. but that be one great difference between we. compliment always take you by surprise, and I never. what could be more natural than his ask you again? he could not help see that you be about five time as pretty as every other woman in the room. no thank to his gallantry for that. well, he certainly be very agreeable, and I give you leave to like he. you have like many a stupider person."
"Dear Lizzy!"
"oh! you be a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general. you never see a fault in anybody. all the world be good and agreeable in your eye. I never hear you speak ill of a human being in your life."
"I would not wish to be hasty in censure anyone; but I always speak what I think."
"I know you do; and it be that which make the wonder. with your good sense, to be so honestly blind to the folly and nonsense of other! affectation of candour be common enough---one meet with it everywhere. but to be candid without ostentation or design---to take the good of everybody's character and make it still well, and say nothing of the bad---belong to you alone. and so you like this man's sister, too, do you? their manner be not equal to his."
"certainly not---at first. but they be very pleasing woman when you converse with they. Miss Bingley be to live with her brother, and keep his house; and I be much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming neighbour in she."
Elizabeth listen in silence, but be not convince; their behaviour at the assembly have not be calculate to please in general; and with more quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister, and with a judgement too unassailed by any attention to herself, she be very little disposed to approve they. they be in fact very fine lady; not deficient in good humour when they be pleased, nor in the power of make themselves agreeable when they choose it, but proud and conceited. they be rather handsome, have be educate in one of the first private seminary in town, have a fortune of twenty thousand pound, be in the habit of spend more than they ought, and of associate with people of rank, and be therefore in every respect entitle to think well of themselves, and meanly of other. they be of a respectable family in the north of England; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their memory than that their brother's fortune and their own have be acquire by trade.
Mr. Bingley inherit property to the amount of nearly a hundred thousand pound from his father, who have intend to purchase an estate, but do not live to do it. Mr. Bingley intend it likewise, and sometimes make choice of his county; but as he be now provide with a good house and the liberty of a manor, it be doubtful to many of those who well know the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the remainder of his day at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to purchase.
his sister be anxious for his have an estate of his own; but, though he be now only establish as a tenant, Miss Bingley be by no mean unwilling to preside at his table---nor be Mrs. Hurst, who have marry a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to consider his house as her home when it suit she. Mr. Bingley have not be of age two year, when he be tempt by an accidental recommendation to look at Netherfield House. he do look at it, and into it for half-an-hour---be pleased with the situation and the principal room, satisfied with what the owner say in its praise, and take it immediately.
between he and Darcy there be a very steady friendship, in spite of great opposition of character. Bingley be endear to
Darcy by the easiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition could offer a great contrast to his own, and though with his own he never appear dissatisfied. on the strength of Darcy's regard, Bingley have the firm reliance, and of his judgement the high opinion. in understanding, Darcy be the superior. Bingley be by no mean deficient, but Darcy be clever. he be at the same time haughty, reserve, and fastidious, and his manner, though well-breed, be not invite. in that respect his friend have greatly the advantage. Bingley be sure of be like wherever he appear, Darcy be continually give offense.
the manner in which they speak of the Meryton assembly be sufficiently characteristic. Bingley have never meet with more pleasant people or pretty girl in his life; everybody have be most kind and attentive to he; there have be no formality, no stiffness; he have soon feel acquainted with all the room; and, as to Miss Bennet, he could not conceive an angel more beautiful. Darcy, on the contrary, have see a collection of people in whom there be little beauty and no fashion, for none of whom he have feel the small interest, and from none receive either attention or pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledge to be pretty, but she smile too much.
Mrs. Hurst and her sister allow it to be so---but still they admire she and like she, and pronounce she to be a sweet girl, and one whom they would not object to know more of. Miss Bennet be therefore establish as a sweet girl, and their brother feel authorize by such commendation to think of she as he choose.
chapter 5
within a short walk of Longbourn live a family with whom the Bennets be particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas have be formerly in trade in Meryton, where he have make a tolerable fortune, and rise to the honour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty. the distinction have perhaps be feel too strongly. it have give he a disgust to his business, and to his residence in a small market town; and, in quit they both, he have remove with his family to a house about a mile from Meryton, denominate from that period Lucas Lodge, where he could think with pleasure of his own importance, and, unshackle by business, occupy himself solely in be civil to all the world. for, though elated by his rank, it do not render he supercilious; on the contrary, he be all attention to everybody. by nature inoffensive, friendly, and obliging, his presentation at St. James's have make he courteous.
Lady Lucas be a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a valuable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet. they have several child. the eld of they, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, be Elizabeth's intimate friend.
that the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over a ball be absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly bring the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate.
"_you_ begin the evening well, Charlotte," say Mrs. Bennet with civil self-command to Miss Lucas. "_you_ be Mr. Bingley's first choice."
"yes; but he seem to like his second well."
"oh! you mean Jane, I suppose, because he dance with she twice. to be sure that do seem as if he admire she---indeed I rather believe he _did_--I hear something about it---but I hardly know what---something about Mr. Robinson."
"perhaps you mean what I overheard between he and Mr. Robinson; do not I mention it to you? Mr. Robinson's ask he how he like our Meryton assembly, and whether he do not think there be a great many pretty woman in the room, and which he think the prettiest? and his answer immediately to the last question: 'oh! the eld Miss Bennet, beyond a doubt; there cannot be two opinion on that point.'"
"upon my word! well, that be very decide indeed---that do seem as if---but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know."
"_my_ overhearing be more to the purpose than your, Eliza," say Charlotte. "Mr. Darcy be not so well worth listen to as his friend, be he?--poor Eliza!--to be only just tolerable."
"I beg you would not put it into Lizzy's head to be vex by his ill-treatment, for he be such a disagreeable man, that it would be quite a misfortune to be like by he. Mrs. Long tell I last night that he sit close to she for half-an-hour without once open his lip."
"be you quite sure, ma'am?--is not there a little mistake?" say Jane. "I certainly see Mr. Darcy speak to she."
"aye---because she ask he at last how he like Netherfield, and he could not help answer she; but she say he seem quite angry at be speak to."
"Miss Bingley tell I," say Jane, "that he never speak much, unless among his intimate acquaintance. with they he be remarkably agreeable."
"I do not believe a word of it, my dear. if he have be so very agreeable, he would have talk to Mrs. Long. but I can guess how it be; everybody say that he be eat up with pride, and I dare say he have hear somehow that Mrs. Long do not keep a carriage, and have come to the ball in a hack chaise."
"I do not mind his not talk to Mrs. Long," say Miss Lucas, "but I wish he have dance with Eliza."
"another time, Lizzy," say her mother, "I would not dance with he, if I be you."
"I believe, ma'am, I may safely promise you never to dance with he."
"his pride," say Miss Lucas, "do not offend I so much as pride often do, because there be an excuse for it. one cannot wonder that so very fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour, should think highly of himself. if I may so express it, he have a right to be proud."
"that be very true," reply Elizabeth, "and I could easily forgive his pride, if he have not mortify mine."
"Pride," observe Mary, who pique herself upon the solidity of her reflection, "be a very common failing, I believe. by all that I have ever read, I be convinced that it be very common indeed; that human nature be particularly prone to it, and that there be very few of we who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some quality or other, real or imaginary. vanity and pride be different thing, though the word be often use synonymously. a person may be proud without be vain. pride relate more to our opinion of ourselves, vanity to what we would have other think of we."
"if I be as rich as Mr. Darcy," cry a young Lucas, who come with his sister, "I should not care how proud I be. I would keep a pack of foxhound, and drink a bottle of wine a day."
"then you would drink a great deal more than you ought," say Mrs. Bennet; "and if I be to see you at it, I should take away your bottle directly."
the boy protest that she should not; she continue to declare that she would, and the argument end only with the visit.
chapter 6
the lady of Longbourn soon wait on those of Netherfield. the visit be soon return in due form. Miss Bennet's pleasing manner grow on the goodwill of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother be find to be intolerable, and the young sister not worth speak to, a wish of be well acquaint with they be express towards the two eld. by Jane, this attention be receive with the great pleasure, but Elizabeth still see superciliousness in their treatment of everybody, hardly except even her sister, and could not like they; though their kindness to Jane, such as it be, have a value as arise in all probability from the influence of their brother's admiration. it be generally evident whenever they meet, that he do admire she and to she it be equally evident that Jane be yield to the preference which she have begin to entertain for he from the first, and be in a way to be very much in love; but she consider with pleasure that it be not likely to be discover by the 
world in general, since Jane unite, with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and a uniform cheerfulness of manner which would guard she from the suspicion of the impertinent. she mention this to her friend Miss Lucas.
"it may perhaps be pleasant," reply Charlotte, "to be able to impose on the public in such a case; but it be sometimes a disadvantage to be so very guard. if a woman conceal her affection with the same skill from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fix he; and it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in the dark. there be so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every attachment, that it be not safe to leave any to itself. we can all begin freely---a slight preference be natural enough; but there be very few of we who have heart enough to be really in love without encouragement. in nine case out of ten a woman have well show more affection than she feel. Bingley like your sister undoubtedly; but he may never do more than like she, if she do not help he on."
"but she do help he on, as much as her nature will allow. if I can perceive her regard for he, he must be a simpleton, indeed, not to discover it too."
"remember, Eliza, that he do not know Jane's disposition as you do."
"but if a woman be partial to a man, and do not endeavour to conceal it, he must find it out."
"perhaps he must, if he see enough of she. but, though Bingley and Jane meet tolerably often, it be never for many hour together; and, as they always see each other in large mixed party, it be impossible that every moment should be employ in converse together. Jane should therefore make the most of every half-hour in which she can command his attention. when she be secure of he, there will be more leisure for fall in love as much as she choose."
"your plan be a good one," reply Elizabeth, "where nothing be in question but the desire of be well married, and if I be determined to get a rich husband, or any husband, I dare say I should adopt it. but these be not Jane's feeling; she be not act by design. as yet, she cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard nor of its reasonableness. she have know he only a fortnight. she dance four dance with he at Meryton; she see he one morning at his own house, and have since din with he in company four time. this be not quite enough to make she understand his character."
"not as you represent it. have she merely din with he, she might only have discover whether he have a good appetite; but you must remember that four evening have also be spend together---and four evening may do a great deal."
"yes; these four evening have enable they to ascertain that they both like Vingt-un well than Commerce; but with respect to any other lead characteristic, I do not imagine that much have be unfold."
"well," say Charlotte, "I wish Jane success with all my heart; and if she be married to he to-morrow, I should think she have as good a chance of happiness as if she be to be study his character for a twelvemonth. happiness in marriage be entirely a matter of chance. if the disposition of the party be ever so well known to each other or ever so similar beforehand, it do not advance their felicity in the least. they always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to have their share of vexation; and it be well to know as little as possible of the defect of the person with whom you be to pass your life."
"you make I laugh, Charlotte; but it be not sound. you know it be not sound, and that you would never act in this way yourself."
occupy in observe Mr. Bingley's attention to her sister, Elizabeth be far from suspect that she be herself become an object of some interest in the eye of his friend. Mr. Darcy have at first scarcely allow she to be pretty; he have look at she without admiration at the ball; and when they next meet, he look at she only to criticise. but no soon have he make it clear to himself and his friend that she hardly have a good feature in her face, than he begin to find it be render uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eye. to this discovery succeed some other equally mortifying. though he have detect with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry in her form, he be force to acknowledge her figure to be light and pleasing; and in spite of his assert that her manner be not those of the fashionable world, he be catch by their easy playfulness. of this she be perfectly unaware; to she he be only the man who make himself agreeable nowhere, and 
who have not think she handsome enough to dance with.
he begin to wish to know more of she, and as a step towards converse with she himself, attend to her conversation with other. his do so draw her notice. it be at Sir William Lucas's, where a large party be assemble.
"what do Mr. Darcy mean," say she to Charlotte, "by listen to my conversation with Colonel Forster?"
"that be a question which Mr. Darcy only can answer."
"but if he do it any more I shall certainly let he know that I see what he be about. he have a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin by be impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of he."
on his approach they soon afterwards, though without seem to have any intention of speak, Miss Lucas defy her friend to mention such a subject to he; which immediately provoke Elizabeth to do it, she turn to he and say:
"do you not think, Mr. Darcy, that I express myself uncommonly well just now, when I be tease Colonel Forster to give we a ball at Meryton?"
"with great energy; but it be always a subject which make a lady energetic."
"you be severe on we."
"it will be her turn soon to be tease," say Miss Lucas. "I be go to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follow."
"you be a very strange creature by way of a friend!--always want I to play and sing before anybody and everybody! if my vanity have take a musical turn, you would have be invaluable; but as it be, I would really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of hear the very good performer." on Miss Lucas's persevering, however, she add, "very well, if it must be so, it must." and gravely glance at Mr. Darcy, "there be a fine old saying, which everybody here be of course familiar with: 'keep your breath to cool your porridge'; and I shall keep mine to swell my song."
her performance be pleasing, though by no means capital. after a song or two, and before she could reply to the entreaty of several that she would sing again, she be eagerly succeed at the instrument by her sister Mary, who have, in consequence of be the only plain one in the family, work hard for knowledge and accomplishment, be always impatient for display.
Mary have neither genius nor taste; and though vanity have give her application, it have give she likewise a pedantic air and conceited manner, which would have injure a high degree of excellence than she have reach. Elizabeth, easy and unaffected, have be listen to with much more pleasure, though not play half so well; and Mary, at the end of a long concerto, be glad to purchase praise and gratitude by Scotch and irish air, at the request of her young sister, who, with some of the Lucases, and two or three officer, join eagerly in dancing at one end of the room.
Mr. Darcy stand near they in silent indignation at such a mode of pass the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and be too much engross by his thought to perceive that Sir William Lucas be his neighbour, till Sir William thus begin:
"what a charming amusement for young people this be, Mr. Darcy! there be nothing like dance after all. I consider it as one of the first refinement of polished society."
"certainly, sir; and it have the advantage also of be in vogue amongst the less polished society of the world. every savage can dance."
Sir William only smile. "your friend perform delightfully," he continue after a pause, on see Bingley join the group; "and I doubt not that you be an adept in the science yourself, Mr. Darcy."
"you see I dance at Meryton, I believe, sir."
"yes, indeed, and receive no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight. do you often dance at St. James's?"
"never, sir."
"do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?"
"it be a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it."
"you have a house in town, I conclude?"
Mr. Darcy bow.
"I have once have some thought of fix in town myself---for I be fond of superior society; but I do not feel quite certain that the air of London would agree with Lady Lucas."
he pause in hope of an answer; but his companion be not disposed to make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards they, he be strike with the action of do a very gallant thing, and call out to she:
"my dear Miss Eliza, why be you not dance? Mr. Darcy, you must allow I to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner. you cannot refuse to dance, I be sure when so much beauty be before you." and, take her hand, he would have give it to Mr. Darcy who, though extremely surprised, be not unwilling to receive it, when she instantly draw back, and say with some discomposure to Sir William:
"indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. I entreat you not to suppose that I move this way in order to beg for a partner."
Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, request to be allow the honour of her hand, but in vain. Elizabeth be determine; nor do Sir William at all shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion.
"you excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it be cruel to deny I the happiness of see you; and though this gentleman dislike the amusement in general, he can have no objection, I be sure, to oblige we for one half-hour."
"Mr. Darcy be all politeness," say Elizabeth, smile.
"he be, indeed; but, consider the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza, we cannot wonder at his complaisance---for who would object to such a partner?"
Elizabeth look archly, and turn away. her resistance have not injure she with the gentleman, and he be think of she with some complacency, when thus accost by Miss Bingley:
"I can guess the subject of your reverie."
"I should imagine not."
"you be consider how insupportable it would be to pass many evening in this manner---in such society; and indeed I be quite of your opinion. I be never more annoyed! the insipidity, and yet the noise---the nothingness, and yet the self-importance of all those people! what would I give to hear your stricture on they!"
"you conjecture be totally wrong, I assure you. my mind be more agreeably engaged. I have be meditate on the very great pleasure which a pair of fine eye in the face of a pretty woman can bestow."
Miss Bingley immediately fix her eye on his face, and desire he would tell she what lady have the credit of inspire such reflection. Mr. Darcy reply with great intrepidity:
"Miss Elizabeth Bennet."
"Miss Elizabeth Bennet!" repeat Miss Bingley. "I be all astonishment. how long have she be such a favourite?--and pray, when be I to wish you joy?"
"that be exactly the question which I expect you to ask. a lady's imagination be very rapid; it jump from admiration to love, from love to matrimony, in a moment. I know you would be wish I joy."
"Nay, if you be serious about it, I shall consider the matter be absolutely settle. you will be have a charming mother-in-law, indeed; and, of course, she will always be at Pemberley with you."
he listen to she with perfect indifference while she choose to entertain herself in this manner; and as his composure convince she that all be safe, her wit flow long.
chapter 7
Mr. Bennet's property consist almost entirely in an estate of two thousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughter, be entail, in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother's fortune, though ample for her situation in life, could but ill supply the deficiency of his. her father have be an attorney in Meryton, and have leave she four thousand pound.
she have a sister marry to a Mr. Phillips, who have be a clerk to their father and succeed he in the business, and a brother settle in London in a respectable line of trade.
the village of Longbourn be only one mile from Meryton; a most convenient distance for the young lady, who be usually tempt thither three or four time a week, to pay their duty to their aunt and to a milliner's shop just over the way. the two young of the family, Catherine and Lydia, be particularly frequent in these attention; their mind be more vacant than their sister', and when nothing well offer, a walk to Meryton be necessary to amuse their morning hour and furnish conversation for the evening; and however bare of news the country in general might be, they always contrive to learn some from their aunt. at present, indeed, they be well supply both with news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in the neighbourhood; it be to remain the whole winter, and Meryton be the headquarters.
their visit to Mrs. Phillips be now productive of the most interesting intelligence. every day add something to their knowledge of the officer' name and connection. their lodging be not long a secret, and at length they begin to know the officer themselves. Mr. Phillips visit they all, and this open to his niece a store of felicity unknown before. they could talk of nothing but officer; and Mr. Bingley's large fortune, the mention of which give animation to their mother, be worthless in their eye when oppose to the regimental of an ensign.
after listen one morning to their effusion on this subject, Mr. Bennet coolly observe:
"from all that I can collect by your manner of talk, you must be two of the silly girl in the country. I have suspect it some time, but I be now convince."
Catherine be disconcert, and make no answer; but Lydia, with perfect indifference, continue to express her admiration of Captain Carter, and her hope of see he in the course of the day, as he be go the next morning to London.
"I be astonish, my dear," say Mrs. Bennet, "that you should be so ready to think your own child silly. if I wish to think slightingly of anybody's child, it should not be of my own, however."
"if my child be silly, I must hope to be always sensible of it."
"yes---but as it happen, they be all of they very clever."
"this be the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. I have hop that our sentiment coincide in every particular, but I must so far differ from you as to think our two young daughter uncommonly foolish."
"my dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girl to have the sense of their father and mother. when they get to our age, I dare say they will not think about officer any more than we do. I remember the time when I like a red coat myself very well---and, indeed, so I do still at my heart; and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year, should want one of my girl I shall not say nay to he; and I think Colonel Forster look very become the other night at Sir William's in his regimental."
"Mamma," cry Lydia, "my aunt say that Colonel Forster and Captain Carter do not go so often to Miss Watson's as they do when they first come; she see they now very often stand in
Clarke's library."
Mrs. Bennet be prevent reply by the entrance of the footman with a note for Miss Bennet; it come from Netherfield, and the servant wait for an answer. Mrs. Bennet's eye sparkle with pleasure, and she be eagerly call out, while her daughter read,
"well, Jane, who be it from? what be it about? what do he say? well, Jane, make haste and tell we; make haste, my love."
"it be from Miss Bingley," say Jane, and then read it aloud.
"MY DEAR friend,--
"if you be not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa and I, we shall be in danger of hat each other for the rest of our life, for a whole day's tete-a-tete between two woman can never end without a quarrel. come as soon as you can on receipt of this. my brother and the gentleman be to dine with the officers.---yours ever,
"CAROLINE BINGLEY"
"with the officer!" cry Lydia. "I wonder my aunt do not tell we of that."
"din out," say Mrs. Bennet, "that be very unlucky."
"can I have the carriage?" say Jane.
"no, my dear, you have well go on horseback, because it seem likely to rain; and then you must stay all night."
"that would be a good scheme," say Elizabeth, "if you be sure that they would not offer to send her home."
"oh! but the gentleman will have Mr. Bingley's chaise to go to Meryton, and the Hursts have no horse to theirs."
"I have much rather go in the coach."
"but, my dear, your father cannot spare the horse, I be sure. they be want in the farm, Mr. Bennet, be they not?"
"they be want in the farm much oftener than I can get they."
"but if you have get they to-day," say Elizabeth, "my mother's purpose will be answer."
she do at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horse be engage. Jane be therefore oblige to go on horseback, and her mother attend she to the door with many cheerful prognostic of a bad day. her hope be answer; Jane have not be go long before it rain hard. her sister be uneasy for she, but her mother be delighted. the rain continue the whole evening without intermission; Jane certainly could not come back.
"this be a lucky idea of mine, indeed!" say Mrs. Bennet more than once, as if the credit of make it rain be all her own. till the next morning, however, she be not aware of all the felicity of her contrivance. Breakfast be scarcely over when a servant from Netherfield bring the follow note for Elizabeth:
"I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, be to be impute to my get wet through yesterday. my kind friend will not hear of my returning till I be well. they insist also on my see Mr. Jones---therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear of his have be to I---and, except a sore throat and headache, there be not much the matter with me.---yours, etc."
"well, my dear," say Mr. Bennet, when Elizabeth have read the note aloud, "if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness---if she should die, it would be a comfort to know that it be all in pursuit of Mr. Bingley, and under your order."
"oh! I be not afraid of her die. People do not die of little trifling cold. she will be take good care of. as long as she stay there, it be all very well. I would go and see she if I could have the carriage."
Elizabeth, feel really anxious, be determined to go to she, though the carriage be not to be have; and as she be no horsewoman, walk be her only alternative. she declare her resolution.
"how can you be so silly," cry her mother, "as to think of such a thing, in all this dirt! you will not be fit to be see when you get there."
"I shall be very fit to see Jane---which be all I want."
"be this a hint to I, Lizzy," say her father, "to send for the horse?"
"no, indeed, I do not wish to avoid the walk. the distance be nothing when one have a motive; only three mile. I shall be back by dinner."
"I admire the activity of your benevolence," observe Mary, "but every impulse of feeling should be guide by reason; and, in my opinion, exertion should always be in proportion to what be require."
"we will go as far as Meryton with you," say Catherine and Lydia. Elizabeth accept their company, and the three young lady set off together.
"if we make haste," say Lydia, as they walk along, "perhaps we may see something of Captain Carter before he go."
in Meryton they part; the two youngest repair to the lodging of one of the officer' wife, and Elizabeth continue her walk alone, cross field after field at a quick pace, jump over stile and spring over puddle with impatient activity, and find herself at last within view of the house, with weary ankle, dirty stocking, and a face glow with the warmth of exercise.
she be show into the breakfast-parlour, where all but Jane be assemble, and where her appearance create a great deal of surprise. that she should have walk three mile so early in the day, in such dirty weather, and by herself, be almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth be convince that they hold she in contempt for it. she be receive, however, very politely by they; and in their brother's manner there be something well than politeness; there be good humour and kindness. Mr. Darcy say very little, and Mr. Hurst nothing at all. the former be divide between admiration of the brilliancy which exercise have give to her complexion, and doubt as to the occasion's justify she come so far alone. the latter be think only of his breakfast.
her inquiry after her sister be not very favourably answer. Miss Bennet have sleep ill, and though up, be very feverish, and not well enough to leave her room. Elizabeth be glad to be take to she immediately; and Jane, who have only be withhold by the fear of give alarm or inconvenience from express in her note how much she long for such a visit, be delighted at her entrance. she be not equal, however, to much conversation, and when Miss Bingley leave they together, could attempt little besides expression of gratitude for the extraordinary kindness she be treat with. Elizabeth silently attend she.
when breakfast be over they be join by the sister; and Elizabeth begin to like they herself, when she see how much affection and solicitude they show for Jane. the apothecary come, and have examine his patient, say, as might be suppose, that she have catch a violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the well of it; advise she to return to bed, and promise she some draught. the advice be follow readily, for the feverish symptom increase, and her head ache acutely. Elizabeth do not quit her room for a moment; nor be the other lady often absent; the gentleman be out, they have, in fact, nothing to do elsewhere.
when the clock strike three, Elizabeth feel that she must go, and very unwillingly say so. Miss Bingley offer she the carriage, and she only want a little press to accept it, when Jane testify such concern in part with she, that Miss Bingley be oblige to convert the offer of the chaise to an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the present. Elizabeth most thankfully consent, and a servant be dispatch to Longbourn to acquaint the family with her stay and bring back a supply of clothe.
chapter 8
at five o'clock the two lady retire to dress, and at half-past six Elizabeth be summon to dinner. to the civil inquiry which then pour in, and amongst which she have the pleasure of distinguish the much superior solicitude of Mr. Bingley's, she could not make a very favourable answer. Jane be by no mean well. the sister, on hear this, repeat three or four time how much they be grieve, how shocking it be to have a bad cold, and how excessively they dislike be ill themselves; and then think no more of the matter: and their indifference towards Jane when not immediately before they restore Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her former dislike.
their brother, indeed, be the only one of the party whom she could regard with any complacency. his anxiety for Jane be evident, and his attention to herself most pleasing, and they prevent she feeling herself so much an intruder as she believe she be consider by the other. she have very little notice from any but he. Miss Bingley be engross by Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr. Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sit, he be an indolent man, who live only to eat, drink, and play at card; who, when he find she to prefer a plain dish to a ragout, have nothing to say to she.
when dinner be over, she return directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley begin abuse she as soon as she be out of the room. her manner be pronounce to be very bad indeed, a mixture of pride and impertinence; she have no conversation, no style, no beauty. Mrs. Hurst think the same, and add:
"she have nothing, in short, to recommend she, but be an excellent walker. I shall never forget her appearance this morning. she really look almost wild."
"she do, indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance. very nonsensical to come at all! why must she be scamper about the country, because her sister have a cold? her hair, so untidy, so blowsy!"
"yes, and her petticoat; I hope you see her petticoat, six inch deep in mud, I be absolutely certain; and the gown which have be let down to hide it not do its office."
"your picture may be very exact, Louisa," say Bingley; "but this be all lose upon I. I think Miss Elizabeth Bennet look remarkably well when she come into the room this morning. her dirty petticoat quite escape my notice."
"_you_ observe it, Mr. Darcy, I be sure," say Miss Bingley; "and I be inclined to think that you would not wish to see your sister make such an exhibition."
"certainly not."
"to walk three mile, or four mile, or five mile, or whatever it be, above her ankle in dirt, and alone, quite alone! what could she mean by it? it seem to I to show an abominable sort of conceited independence, a most country-town indifference to decorum."
"it show an affection for her sister that be very pleasing," say Bingley.
"I be afraid, Mr. Darcy," observe Miss Bingley in a half whisper, "that this adventure have rather affect your admiration of her fine eye."
"not at all," he reply; "they be brighten by the exercise." a short pause follow this speech, and Mrs. Hurst begin again:
"I have a excessive regard for Miss Jane Bennet, she be really a very sweet girl, and I wish with all my heart she be well settle. but with such a father and mother, and such low connection, I be afraid there be no chance of it."
"I think I have hear you say that their uncle be an attorney on Meryton."
"yes; and they have another, who live somewhere near Cheapside."
"that be capital," add her sister, and they both laugh heartily.
"if they have uncle enough to fill all Cheapside," cry Bingley, "it would not make they one jot less agreeable."
"but it must very materially lessen their chance of marry man of any consideration in the world," reply Darcy.
to this speech Bingley make no answer; but his sister give it their hearty assent, and indulge their mirth for some time at the expense of their dear friend's vulgar relation.
with a renewal of tenderness, however, they return to her room on leave the dining-parlour, and sit with she till summon to coffee. she be still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit she at all, till late in the evening, when she have the comfort of see her sleep, and when it seem to she rather right than pleasant that she should go downstairs herself. on enter the drawing-room she find the whole party at loo, and be immediately invite to join they; but suspect they to be play high she decline it, and make her sister the excuse, say she would amuse herself for the short time she could stay below, with a book. Mr. Hurst look at she with astonishment.
"do you prefer read to card?" say he; "that be rather singular."
"Miss Eliza Bennet," say Miss Bingley, "despise card. she be a great reader, and have no pleasure in anything else."
"I deserve neither such praise nor such censure," cry Elizabeth; "I be not a great reader, and I have pleasure in many thing."
"in nursing your sister I be sure you have pleasure," say Bingley; "and I hope it will be soon increase by see she quite well."
Elizabeth thank he from her heart, and then walk towards the table where a few book be lie. he immediately offer to fetch her other---all that his library afford.
"and I wish my collection be large for your benefit and my own credit; but I be an idle fellow, and though I have not many, I have more than I ever look into."
Elizabeth assure he that she could suit herself perfectly with those in the room.
"I be astonish," say Miss Bingley, "that my father should have leave so small a collection of book. what a delightful library you have at Pemberley, Mr. Darcy!"
"it ought to be good," he reply, "it have be the work of many generation."
"and then you have add so much to it yourself, you be always buy book."
"I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such day as these."
"neglect! I be sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauty of that noble place. Charles, when you build your house, I wish it may be half as delightful as Pemberley."
"I wish it may."
"but I would really advise you to make your purchase in that neighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model. there be not a fine county in England than Derbyshire."
"with all my heart; I will buy Pemberley itself if Darcy will sell it."
"I be talk of possibility, Charles."
"upon my word, Caroline, I should think it more possible to get Pemberley by purchase than by imitation."
Elizabeth be so much catch with what pass, as to leave she very little attention for her book; and soon lay it wholly aside, she draw near the card-table, and station herself between Mr. Bingley and his eld sister, to observe the game.
"be Miss Darcy much grow since the spring?" say Miss Bingley; "will she be as tall as I be?"
"I think she will. she be now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet's height, or rather tall." 
"how I long to see she again! I never meet with anybody who delight I so much. such a countenance, such manner! and so extremely accomplish for her age! her performance on the pianoforte be exquisite."
"it be amazing to I," say Bingley, "how young lady can have patience to be so very accomplished as they all be."
"all young lady accomplish! my dear Charles, what do you mean?"
"yes, all of they, I think. they all paint table, cover screen, and net purse. I scarcely know anyone who cannot do all this, and I be sure I never hear a young lady speak of for the first time, without be inform that she be very accomplished."
"your list of the common extent of accomplishment," say Darcy, "have too much truth. the word be apply to many a woman who deserve it no otherwise than by net a purse or cover a screen. but I be very far from agree with you in your estimation of lady in general. I cannot boast of know more than half-a-dozen, in the whole range of my acquaintance, that be really accomplish."
"nor I, I be sure," say Miss Bingley.
"then," observe Elizabeth, "you must comprehend a great deal in your idea of an accomplished woman."
"yes, I do comprehend a great deal in it." 
"oh! certainly," cry his faithful assistant, "no one can be really esteem accomplish who do not greatly surpass what be usually meet with. a woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, drawing, dancing, and the modern language, to
deserve the word; and besides all this, she must possess a certain something in her air and manner of walking, the tone of her voice, her address and expression, or the word will be but half-deserved."
"all this she must possess," add Darcy, "and to all this she must yet add something more substantial, in the improvement of her mind by extensive reading."
"I be no long surprised at your know only six accomplished woman. I rather wonder now at your know any."
"be you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of all this?"
"I never see such a woman. I never see such capacity, and taste, and application, and elegance, as you describe unite."
Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cry out against the injustice of her imply doubt, and be both protest that they know many woman who answer this description, when Mr. Hurst call they to order, with bitter complaint of their inattention to what be go forward. as all conversation be thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards leave the room.
"Elizabeth Bennet," say Miss Bingley, when the door be close on she, "be one of those young lady who seek to recommend themselves to the other sex by undervalue their own; and with many man, I dare say, it succeed. but, in my opinion, it be a paltry device, a very mean art."
"undoubtedly," reply Darcy, to whom this remark be chiefly address, "there be a meanness in all the art which lady sometimes condescend to employ for captivation. whatever bear affinity to cunning be despicable."
Miss Bingley be not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to continue the subject.
Elizabeth join they again only to say that her sister be bad, and that she could not leave she. Bingley urge Mr. Jones be send for immediately; while his sister, convince that no country advice could be of any service, recommend an express to town for one of the most eminent physician. this she would not hear of; but she be not so unwilling to comply with their brother's proposal; and it be settle that Mr. Jones should be send for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet be not decidedly well. Bingley be quite uncomfortable; his sister declare that they be miserable. they solace their wretchedness, however, by duet after supper, while he could find no well relief to his feeling than by give his housekeeper direction that every attention might be pay to the sick lady and her sister.
chapter 9
Elizabeth pass the chief of the night in her sister's room, and in the morning have the pleasure of be able to send a tolerable answer to the inquiry which she very early receive from Mr. Bingley by a housemaid, and some time afterwards from the two elegant lady who wait on his sister. in spite of this amendment, however, she request to have a note send to Longbourn, desire her mother to visit Jane, and form her own judgement of her situation. the note be immediately dispatch, and its content as quickly comply with. Mrs. Bennet, accompany by her two young girl, reach Netherfield soon after the family breakfast.
have she find Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have be very miserable; but be satisfied on see she that her illness be not alarming, she have no wish of she recover immediately, as her restoration to health would probably remove she from Netherfield. she would not listen, therefore, to her daughter's proposal of be carry home; neither do the apothecary, who arrive about the same time, think it at all advisable. after sit a little while with Jane, on Miss Bingley's appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughter all attend she into the breakfast parlour. Bingley meet they with hope that Mrs. Bennet have not find Miss Bennet bad than she expect.
"indeed I have, sir," be her answer. "she be a great deal too ill to be move. Mr. Jones say we must not think of move she. we must trespass a little long on your kindness."
"remove!" cry Bingley. "it must not be think of. my sister, I be sure, will not hear of her removal."
"you may depend upon it, Madam," say Miss Bingley, with cold civility, "that Miss Bennet will receive every possible attention while she remain with we."
Mrs. Bennet be profuse in her acknowledgment.
"I be sure," she add, "if it be not for such good friend I do not know what would become of she, for she be very ill indeed, and suffer a vast deal, though with the great patience in the world, which be always the way with she, for she have, without exception, the sweetest temper I have ever meet with. I often tell my other girl they be nothing to she. you have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and a charming prospect over the gravel walk. I do not know a place in the country that be equal to Netherfield. you will not think of quit it in a hurry, I hope, though you have but a short lease."
"whatever I do be do in a hurry," reply he; "and therefore if I should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five minute. at present, however, I consider myself as quite fix here."
"that be exactly what I should have suppose of you," say Elizabeth.
"you begin to comprehend I, do you?" cry he, turn towards she.
"oh! yes---I understand you perfectly."
"I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily see through I be afraid be pitiful."
"that be as it happen. it do not follow that a deep, intricate character be more or less estimable than such a one as your."
"Lizzy," cry her mother, "remember where you be, and do not run on in the wild manner that you be suffer to do at home."
"I do not know before," continue Bingley immediately, "that you be a studier of character. it must be an amusing study."
"yes, but intricate character be the most amusing. they have at least that advantage."
"the country," say Darcy, "can in general supply but a few subject for such a study. in a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and unvarying society."
"but people themselves alter so much, that there be something new to be observe in they for ever."
"yes, indeed," cry Mrs. Bennet, offend by his manner of mention a country neighbourhood. "I assure you there be quite as much of that go on in the country as in town."
everybody be surprised, and Darcy, after look at she for a moment, turn silently away. Mrs. Bennet, who fancy she have gain a complete victory over he, continue her triumph.
"I cannot see that London have any great advantage over the country, for my part, except the shop and public place. the country be a vast deal pleasanter, be it not, Mr. Bingley?"
"when I be in the country," he reply, "I never wish to leave it; and when I be in town it be pretty much the same. they have each their advantage, and I can be equally happy in either."
"aye---that be because you have the right disposition. but that
gentleman," look at Darcy, "seem to think the country be nothing at all."
"indeed, Mamma, you be mistaken," say Elizabeth, blush for her mother. "you quite mistook Mr. Darcy. he only mean that there be not such a variety of people to be meet with in the country as in the town, which you must acknowledge to be true."
"certainly, my dear, nobody say there be; but as to not meet with many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there be few neighbourhood large. I know we dine with four-and-twenty family."
nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his countenance. his sister be less delicate, and direct her eye towards Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake of say something that might turn her mother's thought, now ask she if Charlotte Lucas have be at Longbourn since she come away.
"yes, she call yesterday with her father. what an agreeable man Sir William be, Mr. Bingley, be not he? so much the man of fashion! so genteel and easy! he have always something to say to everybody. that be my idea of good breeding; and those person who fancy themselves very important, and never open their mouth, quite mistake the matter."
"do Charlotte dine with you?"
"no, she would go home. I fancy she be want about the mince-pie. for my part, Mr. Bingley, I always keep servant that can do their own work; my daughter be bring up very differently. but everybody be to judge for themselves, and the Lucases be a very good sort of girl, I assure you. it be a pity they be not handsome! not that I think Charlotte so very plain---but then she be our particular friend."
"she seem a very pleasant young woman."
"oh! dear, yes; but you must own she be very plain. Lady Lucas herself have often say so, and envy I Jane's beauty. I do not like to boast of my own child, but to be sure, Jane---one do not often see anybody well look. it be what everybody say. I do not trust my own partiality. when she be only fifteen, there be a man at my brother Gardiner's in town so much in love with she that my sister-in-law be sure he would make she an offer before we come away. but, however, he do not. perhaps he think she too young. however, he write some verse on she, and very pretty they be."
"and so end his affection," say Elizabeth impatiently. "there have be many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder who first discover the efficacy of poetry in drive away love!"
"I have be use to consider poetry as the food of love," say Darcy.
"of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. everything nourish what be strong already. but if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I be convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away."
Darcy only smile; and the general pause which ensue make Elizabeth tremble lest her mother should be expose herself again. she long to speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs. Bennet begin repeat she thank to Mr. Bingley for his kindness to Jane, with an apology for trouble he also with Lizzy. Mr. Bingley be unaffectedly civil in his answer, and force his young sister to be civil also, and say what the occasion require. she perform her part indeed without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet be satisfied, and soon afterwards order her carriage. upon this signal, the young of her daughter put herself forward. the two girl have be whisper to each other during the whole visit, and the result of it be, that the young should tax Mr. Bingley with have promise on his first come into the country to give a ball at Netherfield.
Lydia be a stout, well-grow girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion and good-humour countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose affection have bring she into public at an early age. she have high animal spirit, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the attention of the officer, to whom her uncle's good dinner, and her own easy manner recommend she, have increase into assurance. she be very equal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball, and abruptly remind he of his promise; add, that it would be the most shameful thing in the world if he do not keep it. his answer to this sudden attack be delightful to their mother's ear:
"I be perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and when your sister be recover, you shall, if you please, name the very day of the ball. but you would not wish to be dance when she be ill."
Lydia declare herself satisfied. "oh! yes---it would be much well to wait till Jane be well, and by that time most likely Captain Carter would be at Meryton again. and when you have give your ball," she add, "I shall insist on their give one also. I shall tell Colonel Forster it will be quite a shame if he do not."
Mrs. Bennet and her daughter then depart, and Elizabeth return instantly to Jane, leave her own and her relation' behaviour to the remark of the two lady and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however, could not be prevail on to join in their censure of she, in spite of all Miss Bingley's witticism on fine eye.
chapter 10
the day pass much as the day before have do. Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley have spend some hour of the morning with the invalid, who continue, though slowly, to mend; and in the evening Elizabeth join their party in the drawing-room. the loo-table, however, do not appear. Mr. Darcy be write, and Miss Bingley, seat near he, be watch the progress of his letter and repeatedly call off his attention by message to his sister. Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingley be at piquet, and Mrs. Hurst be observe their game.
Elizabeth take up some needlework, and be sufficiently amuse in attend to what pass between Darcy and his companion. the perpetual commendation of the lady, either on his handwriting, or on the evenness of his line, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcern with which her praise be receive, form a curious dialogue, and be exactly in union with her opinion of each.
"how delight Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!"
he make no answer.
"you write uncommonly fast."
"you be mistaken. I write rather slowly."
"how many letter you must have occasion to write in the course of a year! letter of business, too! how odious I should think they!"
"it be fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of your."
"pray tell your sister that I long to see she."
"I have already tell she so once, by your desire."
"I be afraid you do not like your pen. let I mend it for you. I mend pen remarkably well."
"thank you---but I always mend my own."
"how can you contrive to write so even?"
he be silent.
"tell your sister I be delighted to hear of her improvement on the harp; and pray let she know that I be quite in rapture with her beautiful little design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to Miss Grantley's."
"will you give I leave to defer your rapture till I write again? at present I have not room to do they justice."
"oh! it be of no consequence. I shall see she in January. but do you always write such charming long letter to she, Mr. Darcy?"
"they be generally long; but whether always charming it be not for I to determine."
"it be a rule with I, that a person who can write a long letter with ease, cannot write ill."
"that will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline," cry her brother, "because he do not write with ease. he study too much for word of four syllable. do not you, Darcy?"
"my style of writing be very different from your."
"oh!" cry Miss Bingley, "Charles write in the most careless way imaginable. he leave out half his word, and blot the rest."
"my idea flow so rapidly that I have not time to express they---by which mean my letter sometimes convey no idea at all to my correspondent."
"your humility, Mr. Bingley," say Elizabeth, "must disarm reproof."
"nothing be more deceitful," say Darcy, "than the appearance of humility. it be often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an indirect boast."
"and which of the two do you call my little recent piece of modesty?"
"the indirect boast; for you be really proud of your defect in writing, because you consider they as proceed from a rapidity of thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you think at least highly interesting. the power of do anything with quickness be always prize much by the possessor, and often without any attention to the imperfection of the performance. when you tell Mrs. Bennet this morning that if you ever resolve upon quit Netherfield you should be go in five minute, you mean it to be a sort of panegyric, of compliment to yourself---and yet what be there so very laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business undo, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?"
"Nay," cry Bingley, "this be too much, to remember at night all the foolish thing that be say in the morning. and yet, upon my honour, I believe what I say of myself to be true, and I believe it at this moment. at least, therefore, I do not assume the character of needless precipitance merely to show off before the lady."
"I dare say you believe it; but I be by no mean convince that you would be go with such celerity. your conduct would be quite as dependent on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as you be mount your horse, a friend be to say, 'Bingley, you have well stay till next week,' you would probably do it, you would probably not go---and at another word, might stay a month."
"you have only prove by this," cry Elizabeth, "that Mr. Bingley do not do justice to his own disposition. you have show he off now much more than he do himself."
"I be exceedingly gratify," say Bingley, "by your convert what my friend say into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper. but I be afraid you be give it a turn which that gentleman do by no mean intend; for he would certainly think well of I, if under such a circumstance I be to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as I could."
"would Mr. Darcy then consider the rashness of your original intention as atone for by your obstinacy in adhere to it?"
"upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter; Darcy must speak for himself."
"you expect I to account for opinion which you choose to call mine, but which I have never acknowledge. allow the case, however, to stand accord to your representation, you must remember, Miss Bennet, that the friend who be suppose to desire his return to the house, and the delay of his plan, have merely desire it, ask it without offer one argument in favour of its propriety."
"to yield readily---easily---to the persuasion of a friend be no merit with you."
"to yield without conviction be no compliment to the understanding of either."
"you appear to I, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence of friendship and affection. a regard for the requester would often make one readily yield to a request, without wait for argument to reason one into it. I be not particularly speak of such a case as you have suppose about Mr. Bingley. we may as well wait, perhaps, till the circumstance occur before we discuss the discretion of his behaviour thereupon. but in general and ordinary case between friend and friend, where one of they be desire by the other to change a resolution of no very great moment, should you think ill of that person for comply with the desire, without wait to be argue into it?"
"will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, to arrange with rather more precision the degree of importance which be to appertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsist between the party?"
"by all mean," cry Bingley; "let we hear all the particular, not forget their comparative height and size; for that will have more weight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. I assure you, that if Darcy be not such a great tall fellow, in comparison with myself, I should not pay he half so much deference. I declare I do not know a more awful object than Darcy, on particular occasion, and in particular place; at his own house especially, and of a Sunday evening, when he have nothing to do."
Mr. Darcy smile; but Elizabeth think she could perceive that he be rather offended, and therefore check her laugh. Miss Bingley warmly resent the indignity he have receive, in an expostulation with her brother for talk such nonsense.
"I see your design, Bingley," say his friend. "you dislike an argument, and want to silence this."
"perhaps I do. argument be too much like dispute. if you and Miss Bennet will defer yours till I be out of the room, I shall be very thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of I."
"what you ask," say Elizabeth, "be no sacrifice on my side; and Mr. Darcy have much well finish his letter."
Mr. Darcy take her advice, and do finish his letter.
when that business be over, he apply to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth for an indulgence of some music. Miss Bingley move with some alacrity to the pianoforte; and, after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead the way which the other as politely and more earnestly negative, she seat herself.
Mrs. Hurst sing with her sister, and while they be thus employ, Elizabeth could not help observe, as she turn over some music-book that lie on the instrument, how frequently Mr. Darcy's eye be fix on she. she hardly know how to suppose that she could be an object of admiration to so great a man; and yet that he should look at she because he dislike she, be still more strange. she could only imagine, however, at last that she draw his notice because there be something more wrong and reprehensible, accord to his idea of right, than in any other person present. the supposition do not pain she. she like he too little to care for his approbation.
after play some italian song, Miss Bingley vary the charm by a lively Scotch air; and soon afterwards Mr. Darcy, draw near Elizabeth, say to she:
"do not you feel a great inclination, Miss Bennet, to seize such an opportunity of dance a reel?"
she smile, but make no answer. he repeat the question, with some surprise at her silence.
"oh!" say she, "I hear you before, but I could not immediately determine what to say in reply. you want I, I know, to say 'yes,' that you might have the pleasure of despise my taste; but I always delight in overthrow those kind of scheme, and cheat a person of their premeditated contempt. I have, therefore, make up my mind to tell you, that I do not want to dance a reel at all---and now despise I if you dare."
"indeed I do not dare."
Elizabeth, have rather expect to affront he, be amazed at his gallantry; but there be a mixture of sweetness and archness in her manner which make it difficult for she to affront anybody; and Darcy have never be so bewitch by any woman as he be by she. he really believe, that be it not for the inferiority of her connection, he should be in some danger.
Miss Bingley see, or suspect enough to be jealous; and her great anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane receive some assistance from her desire of get rid of Elizabeth.
she often try to provoke Darcy into dislike her guest, by talk of their suppose marriage, and plan his happiness in such an alliance.
"I hope," say she, as they be walk together in the shrubbery the next day, "you will give your mother-in-law a few hint, when this desirable event take place, as to the advantage of hold her tongue; and if you can compass it, do sure the young girl of run after officer. and, if I may mention so delicate a subject, endeavour to check that little something, border on conceit and impertinence, which your lady possess."
"have you anything else to propose for my domestic felicity?"
"oh! yes. do let the portrait of your uncle and aunt Phillips be place in the gallery at Pemberley. put they next to your great-uncle the judge. they be in the same profession, you know, only in different line. as for your Elizabeth's picture, you must not have it take, for what painter could do justice to those beautiful eye?"
"it would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression, but their colour and shape, and the eyelash, so remarkably fine, might be copy."
at that moment they be meet from another walk by Mrs. Hurst and Elizabeth herself.
"I do not know that you intend to walk," say Miss Bingley, in some confusion, lest they have be overhear.
"you use we abominably ill," answer Mrs. Hurst, "run away without tell we that you be come out."
then take the disengaged arm of Mr. Darcy, she leave Elizabeth to walk by herself. the path just admit three. Mr. Darcy feel their rudeness, and immediately say:
"this walk be not wide enough for our party. we have well go into the avenue."
but Elizabeth, who have not the least inclination to remain with they, laughingly answer:
"no, no; stay where you be. you be charmingly group, and appear to uncommon advantage. the picturesque would be spoil by admit a fourth. good-bye."
she then run gaily off, rejoice as she ramble about, in the hope of be at home again in a day or two. Jane be already so much recover as to intend leave her room for a couple of hour that evening.
chapter 11
when the lady remove after dinner, Elizabeth run up to her sister, and see she well guard from cold, attend she into the drawing-room, where she be welcome by her two friend with many profession of pleasure; and Elizabeth have never see they so agreeable as they be during the hour which pass before the gentleman appear. their power of conversation be considerable. they could describe an entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh at their acquaintance with spirit.
but when the gentleman enter, Jane be no long the first object; Miss Bingley's eye be instantly turn toward Darcy, and she have something to say to he before he have advance many step. he address himself to Miss Bennet, with a polite congratulation; Mr. Hurst also make she a slight bow, and say he be "very glad;" but diffuseness and warmth remain for Bingley's salutation. he be full of joy and attention. the first half-hour be spend in pile up the fire, lest she should suffer from the change of room; and she remove at his desire to the other side of the fireplace, that she might be far from the door. he then sit down by she, and talk scarcely to anyone else. Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, see it all with great delight.
when tea be over, Mr. Hurst remind his sister-in-law of the card-table---but in vain. she have obtain private intelligence that Mr. Darcy do not wish for card; and Mr. Hurst soon find even his open petition reject. she assure he that no one intend to play, and the silence of the whole party on the subject seem to justify she. Mr. Hurst have therefore nothing to do, but to stretch himself on one of the sofas and go to sleep. Darcy take up a book; Miss Bingley do the same; and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupy in play with her bracelet and ring, join now and then in her brother's conversation with Miss Bennet. 
Miss Bingley's attention be quite as much engage in watch Mr. Darcy's progress through his book, as in read her own; and she be perpetually either make some inquiry, or look at his page. she could not win he, however, to any conversation; he merely answer her question, and read on. at length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be amuse with her own book, which she have only choose because it be the second volume of his, she give a great yawn and say, "how pleasant it be to spend an evening in this way! I declare after all there be no enjoyment like reading! how much soon one tire of anything than of a book! when I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have not an excellent library."
no one make any reply. she then yawn again, throw aside her book, and cast her eye round the room in quest for some amusement; when hear her brother mention a ball to Miss Bennet, she turn suddenly towards he and say:
"by the bye, Charles, be you really serious in meditate a dance at Netherfield? I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult the wish of the present party; I be much mistaken if there be not some among we to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a pleasure."
"if you mean Darcy," cry her brother, "he may go to bed, if he choose, before it begin---but as for the ball, it be quite a settle thing; and as soon as Nicholls have make white soup enough, I shall send round my card."
"I should like ball infinitely well," she reply, "if they be carry on in a different manner; but there be something insufferably tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. it would surely be much more rational if conversation instead of dancing be make the order of the day."
"much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say, but it would not be near so much like a ball."
Miss Bingley make no answer, and soon afterwards she get up and walk about the room. her figure be elegant, and she walk well; but Darcy, at whom it be all aim, be still inflexibly studious. in the desperation of her feeling, she resolve on one effort more, and, turn to Elizabeth, say:
"Miss Eliza Bennet, let I persuade you to follow my example, and take a turn about the room. I assure you it be very refreshing after sit so long in one attitude."
Elizabeth be surprised, but agree to it immediately. Miss Bingley succeed no less in the real object of her civility; Mr. Darcy look up. he be as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously close his book. he be directly invite to join their party, but he decline it, observe that he could imagine but two motif for their choosing to walk up and down the room together, with either of which motive his join they would interfere. "what could he mean? she be die to know what could be his meaning?"---and ask Elizabeth whether she could at all understand he?
"not at all," be her answer; "but depend upon it, he mean to be severe on we, and our sure way of disappoint he will be to ask nothing about it."
Miss Bingley, however, be incapable of disappoint Mr. Darcy in anything, and persevere therefore in require an explanation of his two motif.
"I have not the small objection to explain they," say he, as soon as she allow he to speak. "you either choose this method of pass the evening because you be in each other's confidence, and have secret affair to discuss, or because you be conscious that your figure appear to the great advantage in walk; if the first, I would be completely in your way, and if the second, I can admire you much well as I sit by the fire."
"oh! shocking!" cry Miss Bingley. "I never hear anything so abominable. how shall we punish he for such a speech?"
"nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination," say Elizabeth. "we can all plague and punish one another. tease he---laugh at he. intimate as you be, you must know how it be to be do."
"but upon my honour, I do not. I do assure you that my intimacy have not yet teach I that. tease calmness of manner and presence of mind! no, no---feel he may defy we there. and as to laughter, we will not expose ourselves, if you please, by attempt to laugh without a subject. Mr. Darcy may hug himself."
"Mr. Darcy be not to be laugh at!" cry Elizabeth. "that be an uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it would be a great loss to I to have many such acquaintance. I dearly love a laugh."
"Miss Bingley," say he, "have give I more credit than can be. the wise and the good of man---nay, the wise and good of their action---may be render ridiculous by a person whose first object in life be a joke."
"certainly," reply elizabeth---"there be such people, but I hope I be not one of they. I hope I never ridicule what be wise and good. folly and nonsense, whim and inconsistency, do divert I, I own, and I laugh at they whenever I can. but these, I suppose, be precisely what you be without."
"perhaps that be not possible for anyone. but it have be the study of my life to avoid those weakness which often expose a strong understanding to ridicule."
"such as vanity and pride."
"yes, vanity be a weakness indeed. but pride---where there be a real superiority of mind, pride will be always under good regulation."
Elizabeth turn away to hide a smile.
"your examination of Mr. Darcy be over, I presume," say Miss Bingley; "and pray what be the result?"
"I be perfectly convince by it that Mr. Darcy have no defect. he own it himself without disguise."
"no," say Darcy, "I have make no such pretension. I have fault enough, but they be not, I hope, of understanding. my temper I dare not vouch for. it be, I believe, too little yield---certainly too little for the convenience of the world. I cannot forget the folly and vice of other so soon as I ought, nor their offense against myself. my feeling be not puff about with every attempt to move they. my temper would perhaps be call resentful. my good opinion once lose, be lose forever."
"_that_ be a failing indeed!" cry Elizabeth. "implacable resentment be a shade in a character. but you have choose your fault well. I really cannot laugh at it. you be safe from I."
"there be, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some particular evil---a natural defect, which not even the good education can overcome."
"and your defect be to hate everybody."
"and your," he reply with a smile, "be willfully to misunderstand they."
"do let we have a little music," cry Miss Bingley, tired of a conversation in which she have no share. "Louisa, you will not mind my wake Mr. Hurst?"
her sister have not the small objection, and the pianoforte be open; and Darcy, after a few moment' recollection, be not sorry for it. he begin to feel the danger of pay Elizabeth too much attention.
chapter 12
in consequence of an agreement between the sister, Elizabeth write the next morning to their mother, to beg that the carriage might be send for they in the course of the day. but Mrs. Bennet, who have calculate on her daughter remain at Netherfield till the follow Tuesday, which would exactly finish Jane's week, could not bring herself to receive they with pleasure before. her answer, therefore, be not propitious, at least not to Elizabeth's wish, for she be impatient to get home. Mrs. Bennet send they word that they could not possibly have the carriage before Tuesday; and in her postscript it be add, that if Mr. Bingley and his sister press they to stay long, she could spare they very well. against stay long, however, Elizabeth be positively resolve---nor do she much expect it would be ask; and fearful, on the contrary, as be consider as intrude themselves needlessly long, she urge Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley's carriage immediately, and at length it be settle that their 
original design of leave Netherfield that morning should be mention, and the request make.
the communication excite many profession of concern; and enough be say of wish they to stay at least till the following day to work on Jane; and till the morrow their going be defer. Miss Bingley be then sorry that she have propose the delay, for her jealousy and dislike of one sister much exceed her affection for the other.
the master of the house hear with real sorrow that they be to go so soon, and repeatedly try to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be safe for she---that she be not enough recover; but Jane be firm where she feel herself to be right.
to Mr. Darcy it be welcome intelligence---Elizabeth have be at Netherfield long enough. she attract he more than he like---and Miss Bingley be uncivil to she, and more teasing than usual to himself. he wisely resolve to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration should now escape he, nothing that could elevate she with the hope of influence his felicity; sensible that if such an idea have be suggest, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight in confirm or crush it. steady to his purpose, he scarcely speak ten word to she through the whole of Saturday, and though they be at one time leave by themselves for half-an-hour, he adhere most conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at she.
on Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost all, take place. Miss Bingley's civility to Elizabeth increase at last very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they part, after assure the latter of the pleasure it would always give she to see she either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embrace she most tenderly, she even shake hand with the former. Elizabeth take leave of the whole party in the lively of spirit.
they be not welcome home very cordially by their mother. Mrs. Bennet wonder at their coming, and think they very wrong to give so much trouble, and be sure Jane would have catch cold again. but their father, though very laconic in his expression of pleasure, be really glad to see they; he have feel their importance in the family circle. the evening conversation, when they be all assemble, have lose much of its animation, and almost all its sense by the absence of Jane and Elizabeth.
they find Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough-bass and human nature; and have some extract to admire, and some new observation of threadbare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia have information for they of a different sort. much have be do and much have be say in the regiment since the precede Wednesday; several of the officer have din lately with their uncle, a private have be flog, and it have actually be hint that Colonel Forster be go to be marry.
chapter 13
"I hope, my dear," say Mr. Bennet to his wife, as they be at breakfast the next morning, "that you have order a good dinner to-day, because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party."
"who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that be come, I be sure, unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in---and I hope my dinner be good enough for she. I do not believe she often see such at home."
"the person of whom I speak be a gentleman, and a stranger."
Mrs. Bennet's eye sparkle. "a gentleman and a stranger! it be Mr. Bingley, I be sure! well, I be sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr. Bingley. but---good Lord! how unlucky! there be not a bit of fish to be get to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell---I must speak to Hill this moment."
"it be not Mr. Bingley," say her husband; "it be a person whom I never see in the whole course of my life."
this rouse a general astonishment; and he have the pleasure of be eagerly question by his wife and his five daughter at once.
after amuse himself some time with their curiosity, he thus explain:
"about a month ago I receive this letter; and about a fortnight ago I answer it, for I think it a case of some delicacy, and require early attention. it be from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who, when I be dead, may turn you all out of this house as soon as he please."
"oh! my dear," cry his wife, "I cannot bear to hear that mention. pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it be the hard thing in the world, that your estate should be entail away from your own child; and I be sure, if I have be you, I should have try long ago to do something or other about it."
Jane and Elizabeth try to explain to she the nature of an entail. they have often attempt to do it before, but it be a subject on which Mrs. Bennet be beyond the reach of reason, and she continue to rail bitterly against the cruelty of settle an estate away from a family of five daughter, in favour of a man whom nobody care anything about.
"it certainly be a most iniquitous affair," say Mr. Bennet, "and nothing can clear Mr. Collins from the guilt of inherit longbourn. but if you will listen to his letter, you may perhaps be a little soften by his manner of express himself."
"no, that I be sure I shall not; and I think it be very impertinent of he to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I hate such false friend. why could he not keep on quarrel with you, as his father do before he?"
"why, indeed; he do seem to have have some filial scruple on that head, as you will hear."
"Hunsford, near Westerham, Kent, 15th October.
"dear sir,--
"the disagreement subsist between yourself and my late honoured father always give I much uneasiness, and since I have have the misfortune to lose he, I have frequently wish to heal the breach; but for some time I be keep back by my own doubt, fear lest it might seem disrespectful to his memory for I to be on good term with anyone with whom it have always please he to be at variance.---'there, Mrs. Bennet.'---My mind, however, be now make up on the subject, for have receive ordination at Easter, I have be so fortunate as to be distinguish by the patronage of the Right Honourable Lady Catherine de Bourgh, widow of Sir Lewis de Bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence have prefer I to the valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be my earnest endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rite and ceremony which be institute by the Church of England. as a clergyman, moreover, I feel it my duty to promote and establish the 
blessing of peace in all family within in the reach of my influence; and on these ground I flatter myself that my present overture be highly commendable, and that the circumstance of my being next in the entail of Longbourn estate will be kindly overlook on your side, and not lead you to reject the offer olive-branch. I cannot be otherwise than concerned at be the mean of injure your amiable daughter, and beg leave to apologise for it, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make they every possible amend---but of this hereafter. if you should have no objection to receive I into your house, I propose myself the satisfaction of wait on you and your family, Monday, November 18th, by four o'clock, and shall probably trespass on your hospitality till the Saturday se'ennight following, which I can do without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine be far from object to my occasional absence on a Sunday, provide that some other clergyman be engage to do the duty of the day.---I remain, dear 
sir, with respectful compliment to your lady and daughter, your well-wisher and friend,
"at four o'clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-make gentleman," say Mr. Bennet, as he fold up the letter. "he seem to be a most conscientious and polite young man, upon my word, and I doubt not will prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so indulgent as to let he come to we again."
"there be some sense in what he say about the girl, however, and if he be disposed to make they any amend, I shall not be the person to discourage he."
"though it be difficult," say Jane, "to guess in what way he can mean to make we the atonement he think our due, the wish be certainly to his credit."
Elizabeth be chiefly strike by his extraordinary deference for Lady Catherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and bury his parishioner whenever it be require.
"he must be an oddity, I think," say she. "I cannot make he out.---there be something very pompous in his style.---and what can he mean by apologise for be next in the entail?--we cannot suppose he would help it if he could.---Could he be a sensible man, sir?"
"no, my dear, I think not. I have great hope of find he quite the reverse. there be a mixture of servility and self-importance in his letter, which promise well. I be impatient to see he."
"in point of composition," say Mary, "the letter do not seem defective. the idea of the olive-branch perhaps be not wholly new, yet I think it be well express."
to Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its writer be in any degree interesting. it be next to impossible that their cousin should come in a scarlet coat, and it be now some week since they have receive pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour. as for their mother, Mr. Collins's letter have do away much of her ill-will, and she be prepare to see he with a degree of composure which astonish her husband and daughter.
Mr. Collins be punctual to his time, and be receive with great politeness by the whole family. Mr. Bennet indeed say little; but the lady be ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seem neither in need of encouragement, nor incline to be silent himself. he be a tall, heavy-look young man of five-and-twenty. his air be grave and stately, and his manner be very formal. he have not be long seat before he compliment Mrs. Bennet on have so fine a family of daughter; say he have hear much of their beauty, but that in this instance fame have fall short of the truth; and add, that he do not doubt she see they all in due time dispose of in marriage. this gallantry be not much to the taste of some of his hearer; but Mrs. Bennet, who quarrel with no compliment, answer most readily.
"you be very kind, I be sure; and I wish with all my heart it may prove so, for else they will be destitute enough. thing be settle so oddly."
"you allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate."
"ah! sir, I do indeed. it be a grievous affair to my poor girl, you must confess. not that I mean to find fault with you, for such thing I know be all chance in this world. there be no knowing how estate will go when once they come to be entail."
"I be very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousin, and could say much on the subject, but that I be cautious of appear forward and precipitate. but I can assure the young lady that I come prepared to admire they. at present I will not say more; but, perhaps, when we be well acquainted---"
he be interrupt by a summon to dinner; and the girl smile on each other. they be not the only object of Mr. Collins's admiration. the hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, be examine and praise; and his commendation of everything would have touch Mrs. Bennet's heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his view it all as his own future property. the dinner too in its turn be highly admire; and he beg to know to which of his fair cousin the excellency of its cooking be owe. but he be set right there by Mrs. Bennet, who assure he with some asperity that they be very well able to keep a good cook, and that her daughter have nothing to do in the kitchen. he beg pardon for have displease she. in a softened tone she declare herself not at all offend; but he continue to apologise for about a quarter of an hour.
chapter 14
during dinner, Mr. Bennet scarcely speak at all; but when the servant be withdraw, he think it time to have some conversation with his guest, and therefore start a subject in which he expect he to shine, by observe that he seem very fortunate in his patroness. Lady Catherine de Bourgh's attention to his wish, and consideration for his comfort, appear very remarkable. Mr. Bennet could not have choose well. Mr. Collins be eloquent in her praise. the subject elevate he to more than usual solemnity of manner, and with a most important aspect he protest that "he have never in his life witness such behaviour in a person of rank---such affability and condescension, as he have himself experience from Lady Catherine. she have be graciously pleased to approve of both of the discourse which he have already have the honour of preach before she. she have also ask he twice to dine at Rosings, and have send for he only the Saturday before, to make up her pool of quadrille in the evening. Lady 
Catherine be reckon proud by many people he know, but he have never see anything but affability in she. she have always speak to he as she would to any other gentleman; she make not the small objection to his join in the society of the neighbourhood nor to his leave the parish occasionally for a week or two, to visit his relation. she have even condescend to advise he to marry as soon as he could, provide he choose with discretion; and have once pay he a visit in his humble parsonage, where she have perfectly approve all the alteration he have be make, and have even vouchsafe to suggest some herself---some shelf in the closet upstairs."
"that be all very proper and civil, I be sure," say Mrs. Bennet, "and I dare say she be a very agreeable woman. it be a pity that great lady in general be not more like she. do she live near you, sir?"
"the garden in which stand my humble abode be separate only by a lane from Rosings Park, her ladyship's residence."
"I think you say she be a widow, sir? have she any family?"
"she have only one daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of very extensive property."
"ah!" say Mrs. Bennet, shake her head, "then she be well off than many girl. and what sort of young lady be she? be she handsome?"
"she be a most charming young lady indeed. Lady Catherine herself say that, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh be far superior to the handsome of her sex, because there be that in her feature which mark the young lady of distinguished birth. she be unfortunately of a sickly constitution, which have prevent she from make that progress in many accomplishment which she could not have otherwise fail of, as I be inform by the lady who superintend her education, and who still reside with they. but she be perfectly amiable, and often condescend to drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and pony."
"have she be present? I do not remember her name among the lady at court."
"her indifferent state of health unhappily prevent she be in town; and by that mean, as I tell Lady Catherine one day, have deprive the british court of its bright ornament. her ladyship seem pleased with the idea; and you may imagine that I be happy on every occasion to offer those little delicate compliment which be always acceptable to lady. I have more than once observe to Lady Catherine, that her charming daughter seem bear to be a duchess, and that the most elevated rank, instead of give her consequence, would be adorn by she. these be the kind of little thing which please her ladyship, and it be a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bind to pay."
"you judge very properly," say Mr. Bennet, "and it be happy for you that you possess the talent of flatter with delicacy. may I ask whether these pleasing attention proceed from the impulse of the moment, or be the result of previous study?"
"they arise chiefly from what be pass at the time, and though I sometimes amuse myself with suggest and arrange such little elegant compliment as may be adapt to ordinary occasion, I always wish to give they as unstudied an air as possible."
Mr. Bennet's expectation be fully answer. his cousin be as absurd as he have hop, and he listen to he with the keenest enjoyment, maintain at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance, and, except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, require no partner in his pleasure.
by tea-time, however, the dose have be enough, and Mr. Bennet be glad to take his guest into the drawing-room again, and, when tea be over, glad to invite he to read aloud to the lady. Mr. Collins readily assent, and a book be produce; but, on behold it (for everything announce it to be from a circulate library), he start back, and beg pardon, protest that he never read novel. Kitty star at he, and Lydia exclaim. other book be produce, and after some
deliberation he choose Fordyce's sermon. Lydia gap as he open the volume, and before he have, with very monotonous solemnity, read three page, she interrupt he with:
"do you know, mamma, that my uncle Phillips talk of turn away Richard; and if he do, Colonel Forster will hire he. my aunt tell I so herself on Saturday. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear more about it, and to ask when Mr. Denny come back from town."
Lydia be bid by her two eld sister to hold her tongue; but Mr. Collins, much offend, lay aside his book, and say:
"I have often observe how little young lady be interested by book of a serious stamp, though write solely for their benefit. it amaze I, I confess; for, certainly, there can be nothing so advantageous to they as instruction. but I will no long importune my young cousin."
then turn to Mr. Bennet, he offer himself as his antagonist at backgammon. Mr. Bennet accept the challenge, observe that he act very wisely in leave the girl to their own trifling amusement. Mrs. Bennet and her daughter apologise most civilly for Lydia's interruption, and promise that it should not occur again, if he would resume his book; but Mr. Collins, after assure they that he bear his young cousin no ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as any affront, seat himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and prepare for backgammon.
chapter 15
Mr. Collins be not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature have be but little assist by education or society; the great part of his life have be spend under the guidance of an illiterate and miserly father; and though he belong to one of the university, he have merely keep the necessary term, without form at it any useful acquaintance. the subjection in which his father have bring he up have give he originally great humility of manner; but it be now a good deal counteract by the self-conceit of a weak head, live in retirement, and the consequential feeling of early and unexpected prosperity. a fortunate chance have recommend he to Lady Catherine de Bourgh when the living of Hunsford be vacant; and the respect which he feel for her high rank, and his veneration for she as his patroness, mingle with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a clergyman, and his right as a rector, make he altogether a mixture of pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and 
humility.
have now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intend to marry; and in seek a reconciliation with the Longbourn family he have a wife in view, as he mean to choose one of the daughter, if he find they as handsome and amiable as they be represent by common report. this be his plan of amend---of atonement---for inherit their father's estate; and he think it an excellent one, full of eligibility and suitableness, and excessively generous and disintereste on his own part.
his plan do not vary on see they. Miss Bennet's lovely face confirm his view, and establish all his strict notion of what be due to seniority; and for the first evening she be his settle choice. the next morning, however, make an alteration; for in a quarter of an hour's tete-a-tete with Mrs. Bennet before breakfast, a conversation begin with his parsonage-house, and lead naturally to the avowal of his hope, that a mistress might be find for it at Longbourn, produce from she, amid very complaisant smile and general encouragement, a caution against the very Jane he have fix on. "as to her young daughter, she could not take upon she to say---she could not positively answer---but she do not know of any prepossession; her eld daughter, she must just mention---she feel it incumbent on she to hint, be likely to be very soon engage."
Mr. Collins have only to change from Jane to Elizabeth---and it be soon do---do while Mrs. Bennet be stir the fire. Elizabeth, equally next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeed she of course.
Mrs. Bennet treasure up the hint, and trust that she might soon have two daughter marry; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of the day before be now high in her good grace.
Lydia's intention of walk to Meryton be not forget; every sister except Mary agree to go with she; and Mr. Collins be to attend they, at the request of Mr. Bennet, who be most anxious to get rid of he, and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins have follow he after breakfast; and there he would continue, nominally engage with one of the large folio in the collection, but really talk to Mr. Bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hunsford. such doing discompose Mr. Bennet exceedingly. in his library he have be always sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though prepare, as he tell Elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room of the house, he be use to be free from they there; his
civility, therefore, be most prompt in invite Mr. Collins to join his daughter in their walk; and Mr. Collins, be in fact much well fit for a walker than a reader, be extremely pleased to close his large book, and go.
in pompous nothing on his side, and civil assent on that of his cousin, their time pass till they enter Meryton. the attention of the young one be then no long to be gain by he. their eye be immediately wander up in the street in quest of the officer, and nothing less than a very smart bonnet indeed, or a really new muslin in a shop window, could recall they.
but the attention of every lady be soon catch by a young man, whom they have never see before, of most gentlemanlike appearance, walk with another officer on the other side of the way. the officer be the very Mr. Denny concern whose return from London Lydia come to inquire, and he bow as they pass. all be strike with the stranger's air, all wonder who he could be; and Kitty and Lydia, determine if possible to find out, lead the way across the street, under pretense of want something in an opposite shop, and fortunately have just gain the pavement when the two gentleman, turn back, have reach the same spot. Mr. Denny address they directly, and entreat permission to introduce his friend, Mr. Wickham, who have return with he the day before from town, and he be happy to say have accept a commission in their corps. this be exactly as it should be; for the young man want only regimental to make he completely charming. his appearance be greatly in his favour; he have all the 
good part of beauty, a fine countenance, a good figure, and very pleasing address. the introduction be follow up on his side by a happy readiness of conversation---a readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming; and the whole party be still stand and talk together very agreeably, when the sound of horse draw their notice, and Darcy and Bingley be see rid down the street. on distinguish the lady of the group, the two gentleman come directly towards they, and begin the usual civility. Bingley be the principal spokesman, and Miss Bennet the principal object. he be then, he say, on his way to longbourn on purpose to inquire after she. Mr. Darcy corroborate it with a bow, and be begin to determine not to fix his eye on Elizabeth, when they be suddenly arrest by the sight of the stranger, and Elizabeth happen to see the countenance of both as they look at each other, be all astonishment at the effect of the meeting. both change colour, one look white, 
the other red. Mr. Wickham, after a few moment, touch his hat---a salutation which Mr. Darcy just deign to return. what could be the meaning of it? it be impossible to imagine; it be impossible not to long to know.
in another minute, Mr. Bingley, but without seem to have notice what pass, take leave and ride on with his friend. 
Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walk with the young lady to the door of Mr. Phillip's house, and then make their bow, in spite of Miss Lydia's press entreaty that they should come in, and even in spite of Mrs. Phillips's throw up the parlour window and loudly second the invitation.
Mrs. Phillips be always glad to see her niece; and the two eld, from their recent absence, be particularly welcome, and she be eagerly express her surprise at their sudden return home, which, as their own carriage have not fetch they, she should have know nothing about, if she have not happen to see Mr. Jones's shop-boy in the street, who have tell she that they be not to send any more draught to Netherfield because the Miss Bennets be come away, when her civility be claim towards Mr. Collins by Jane's introduction of he. she receive he with her very good politeness, which he return with as much more, apologise for his intrusion, without any previous acquaintance with she, which he could not help flatter himself, however, might be justify by his relationship to the young lady who introduce he to her notice. Mrs. Phillips be quite awed by such an excess of good breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger be soon put to an end by exclamation and inquiry about the 
other; of whom, however, she could only tell her niece what they already know, that Mr. Denny have bring he from London, and that he be to have a lieutenant's commission in the ----shire. she have be watch he the last hour, she say, as he walk up and down the street, and have Mr. Wickham appear, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continue the occupation, but unluckily no one pass window now except a few of the officer, who, in comparison with the stranger, be become "stupid, disagreeable fellow." some of they be to dine with the Phillipses the next day, and their aunt promise to make her husband call on Mr. Wickham, and give he an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn would come in the evening. this be agree to, and Mrs. Phillips protest that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery ticket, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. the prospect of such delight be very cheering, and they part in mutual good spirit. Mr. Collins repeat his 
apology in quit the room, and be assure with unwearye civility that they be perfectly needless.
as they walk home, Elizabeth relate to Jane what she have see pass between the two gentleman; but though Jane would have defend either or both, have they appear to be in the wrong, she could no more explain such behaviour than her sister.
Mr. Collins on his return highly gratified Mrs. Bennet by admire Mrs. Phillips's manner and politeness. he protest that, except Lady Catherine and her daughter, he have never see a more elegant woman; for she have not only receive he with the utmost civility, but even pointedly include he in her invitation for the next evening, although utterly unknown to she before. something, he suppose, might be attribute to his connection with they, but yet he have never meet with so much attention in the whole course of his life.
chapter 16
as no objection be make to the young people's engagement with their aunt, and all Mr. Collins's scruple of leave Mr. and Mrs. Bennet for a single evening during his visit be most steadily resist, the coach convey he and his five cousin at a suitable hour to Meryton; and the girl have the pleasure of hearing, as they enter the drawing-room, that Mr. Wickham have accept their uncle's invitation, and be then in the house.
when this information be give, and they have all take their seat, Mr. Collins be at leisure to look around he and admire, and he be so much strike with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declare he might almost have suppose himself in the small summer breakfast parlour at Rosings; a comparison that do not at first convey much gratification; but when Mrs. Phillips understand from he what Rosings be, and who be its proprietor---when she have listen to the description of only one of Lady Catherine's drawing-room, and find that the chimney-piece alone have cost eight hundred pound, she feel all the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resent a comparison with the housekeeper's room.
in describe to she all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her mansion, with occasional digression in praise of his own humble abode, and the improvement it be receive, he be happily employ until the gentleman join they; and he find in Mrs. Phillips a very attentive listener, whose opinion of his consequence increase with what she hear, and who be
resolve to retail it all among her neighbour as soon as she could. to the girl, who could not listen to their cousin, and who have nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and examine their own indifferent imitation of china on the mantelpiece, the interval of wait appear very long. it be over at last, however. the gentleman do approach, and when Mr. Wickham walk into the room, Elizabeth feel that she have neither be see he before, nor think of he since, with the small degree of unreasonable admiration. the officer of the ----shire be in general a very creditable, gentlemanlike set, and the good of they be of the present party; but Mr. Wickham be as far beyond they all in person, countenance, air, and walk, as they be superior to the broad-faced, stuffy uncle Phillips, breathe port wine, who follow they into the room.
Mr. Wickham be the happy man towards whom almost every female eye be turn, and Elizabeth be the happy woman by whom he finally seat himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fall into conversation, though it be only on its be a wet night, make she feel that the commonest, dull, most threadbare topic might be render interesting by the skill of the speaker.
with such rival for the notice of the fair as Mr. Wickham and the officer, Mr. Collins seem to sink into insignificance; to the young lady he certainly be nothing; but he have still at interval a kind listener in Mrs. Phillips, and be by her watchfulness, most abundantly supply with coffee and muffin. when the card-table be place, he have the opportunity of oblige she in turn, by sit down to whist.
"I know little of the game at present," say he, "but I shall be glad to improve myself, for in my situation in life---" Mrs. Phillips be very glad for his compliance, but could not wait for his reason.
Mr. Wickham do not play at whist, and with ready delight be he receive at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. at first there seem danger of Lydia's engross he entirely, for she be a most determined talker; but be likewise extremely fond of lottery ticket, she soon grow too much interested in the game, too eager in make bet and exclaim after prize to have attention for anyone in particular. allow for the common demand of the game, Mr. Wickham be therefore at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she be very willing to hear he, though what she chiefly wish to hear she could not hope to be tell---the history of his acquaintance with Mr. Darcy. she dare not even mention that gentleman. her curiosity, however, be unexpectedly relieve. Mr. Wickham begin the subject himself. he inquire how far Netherfield be from Meryton; and, after receive her answer, ask in a hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy have be stay there.
"about a month," say Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject drop, add, "he be a man of very large property in Derbyshire, I understand."
"yes," reply Mr. Wickham; "his estate there be a noble one. a clear ten thousand per annum. you could not have meet with a person more capable of give you certain information on that head than myself, for I have be connect with his family in a particular manner from my infancy."
Elizabeth could not but look surprised.
"you may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, after see, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meeting yesterday. be you much acquainted with Mr. Darcy?"
"as much as I ever wish to be," cry Elizabeth very warmly. "I have spend four day in the same house with he, and I think he very disagreeable."
"I have no right to give my opinion," say Wickham, "as to his be agreeable or otherwise. I be not qualified to form one. I have know he too long and too well to be a fair judge. it be impossible for I to be impartial. but I believe your opinion of he would in general astonish---and perhaps you would not express it quite so strongly anywhere else. here you be in your own family."
"upon my word, I say no more here than I might say in any house in the neighbourhood, except Netherfield. he be not at all like in Hertfordshire. everybody be disgusted with his pride. you will not find he more favourably speak of by anyone."
"I cannot pretend to be sorry," say Wickham, after a short interruption, "that he or that any man should not be estimate beyond their desert; but with he I believe it do not often happen. the world be blind by his fortune and consequence, or frighten by his high and impose manner, and see he only as he choose to be see."
"I should take he, even on my slight acquaintance, to be an ill-temper man." Wickham only shake his head.
"I wonder," say he, at the next opportunity of speak, "whether he be likely to be in this country much long."
"I do not at all know; but I hear nothing of his go away when I be at Netherfield. I hope your plan in favour of the ----shire will not be affect by his be in the neighbourhood."
"oh! no---it be not for I to be drive away by Mr. Darcy. if he wish to avoid see I, he must go. we be not on friendly term, and it always give I pain to meet he, but I have no reason for avoid he but what I might proclaim before all the world, a sense of very great ill-usage, and most painful regret at his be what he be. his father, Miss Bennet, the late Mr. Darcy, be one of the good man that ever breathe, and the true friend I ever have; and I can never be in company with this Mr. Darcy without be grieve to the soul by a thousand tender recollection. his behaviour to myself have be scandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive he anything and everything, rather than his disappoint the hope and disgrace the memory of his father."
Elizabeth find the interest of the subject increase, and listen with all her heart; but the delicacy of it prevent further inquiry.
Mr. Wickham begin to speak on more general topic, Meryton, the neighbourhood, the society, appear highly pleased with all that he have yet see, and speak of the latter with gentle but very intelligible gallantry.
"it be the prospect of constant society, and good society," he add, "which be my chief inducement to enter the ----shire. I know it to be a most respectable, agreeable corps, and my friend Denny tempt I far by his account of their present quarter, and the very great attention and excellent acquaintance Meryton have procure they. society, I own, be necessary to I. I have be a disappointed man, and my spirit will not bear solitude. I must have employment and society. a military life be not what I be intend for, but circumstance have now make it eligible. the church ought to have be my profession---I be bring up for the church, and I should at this time have be in possession of a most valuable living, have it please the gentleman we be speak of just now."
"indeed!"
"yes---the late Mr. Darcy bequeath I the next presentation of the good living in his gift. he be my godfather, and excessively attach to I. I cannot do justice to his kindness. he mean to provide for I amply, and think he have do it; but when the living fall, it be give elsewhere."
"good heaven!" cry Elizabeth; "but how could that be? how could his will be disregard? why do you not seek legal redress?"
"there be just such an informality in the term of the bequest as to give I no hope from law. a man of honour could not have doubt the intention, but Mr. Darcy choose to doubt it---or to treat it as a merely conditional recommendation, and to assert that I have forfeit all claim to it by extravagance, imprudence---in short anything or nothing. certain it be, that the living become vacant two year ago, exactly as I be of an age to hold it, and that it be give to another man; and no less certain be it, that I cannot accuse myself of have really do anything to deserve to lose it. I have a warm, unguarded temper, and I may have speak my opinion of he, and to he, too freely. I can recall nothing bad. but the fact be, that we be very different sort of man, and that he hat I."
"this be quite shocking! he deserve to be publicly disgrace."
"some time or other he will be---but it shall not be by I. till I can forget his father, I can never defy or expose he."
Elizabeth honour he for such feeling, and think he handsomer than ever as he express they.
"but what," say she, after a pause, "can have be his motive? what can have induce he to behave so cruelly?"
"a thorough, determined dislike of I---a dislike which I cannot but attribute in some measure to jealousy. have the late Mr. Darcy like I less, his son might have bear with I well; but his father's uncommon attachment to I irritate he, I believe, very early in life. he have not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stand---the sort of preference which be often give I."
"I have not think Mr. Darcy so bad as this---though I have never like he. I have not think so very ill of he. I have suppose he to be despise his fellow-creature in general, but do not suspect he of descend to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity as this."
after a few minute' reflection, however, she continue, "I do remember his boasting one day, at Netherfield, of the implacability of his resentment, of his have an unforgive temper. his disposition must be dreadful."
"I will not trust myself on the subject," reply Wickham; "I can hardly be just to he."
Elizabeth be again deep in thought, and after a time exclaim, "to treat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of his father!" she could have add, "a young man, too, like you, whose very countenance may vouch for your be amiable"---but she content herself with, "and one, too, who have probably be his companion from childhood, connect together, as I think you say, in the close manner!"
"we be bear in the same parish, within the same park; the great part of our youth be pass together; inmate of the
same house, share the same amusement, object of the same parental care. my father begin life in the profession which your uncle, Mr. Phillips, appear to do so much credit to---but he give up everything to be of use to the late Mr. Darcy and devote all his time to the care of the Pemberley property. he be most highly esteemed by Mr. Darcy, a most intimate, confidential friend. Mr. Darcy often acknowledge himself to be under the great obligation to my father's active superintendence, and when, immediately before my father's death, Mr. Darcy give he a voluntary promise of provide for I, I be convinced that he feel it to be as much a debt of gratitude to he, as of his affection to myself."
"how strange!" cry Elizabeth. "how abominable! I wonder that the very pride of this Mr. Darcy have not make he just to you! if from no well motive, that he should not have be too proud to be dishonest---for dishonesty I must call it."
"it be wonderful," reply Wickham, "for almost all his action may be trace to pride; and pride have often be his good friend. it have connect he near with virtue than with any other feeling. but we be none of we consistent, and in his behaviour to I there be strong impulse even than pride."
"can such abominable pride as his have ever do he good?"
"yes. it have often lead he to be liberal and generous, to give his money freely, to display hospitality, to assist his tenant, and relieve the poor. family pride, and filial pride---for he be very proud of what his father be---have do this. not to appear to disgrace his family, to degenerate from the popular quality, or lose the influence of the Pemberley House, be a powerful motive. he have also brotherly pride, which, with some brotherly affection, make he a very kind and careful guardian of his sister, and you will hear he generally cry up as the most attentive and good of brother."
"what sort of girl be Miss Darcy?"
he shake his head. "I wish I could call she amiable. it give I pain to speak ill of a Darcy. but she be too much like her brother---very, very proud. as a child, she be affectionate and pleasing, and extremely fond of I; and I have devote hour and hour to her amusement. but she be nothing to I now. she be a handsome girl, about fifteen or sixteen, and, I understand, highly accomplished. since her father's death, her home have be London, where a lady live with she, and superintend her education."
after many pause and many trial of other subject, Elizabeth could not help revert once more to the first, and say:
"I be astonish at his intimacy with Mr. Bingley! how can Mr. Bingley, who seem good humour itself, and be, I really believe, truly amiable, be in friendship with such a man? how can they suit each other? do you know Mr. Bingley?"
"not at all."
"he be a sweet-temper, amiable, charming man. he cannot know what Mr. Darcy be."
"probably not; but Mr. Darcy can please where he choose. he do not want ability. he can be a conversible companion if he think it worth his while. among those who be at all his equal in consequence, he be a very different man from what he be to the less prosperous. his pride never desert he; but with the rich he be liberal-minded, just, sincere, rational, honourable, and perhaps agreeable---allow something for fortune and figure."
the whist party soon afterwards break up, the player gather round the other table and Mr. Collins take his station between his cousin Elizabeth and Mrs. Phillips. the usual inquiry as to his success be make by the latter. it have not be very great; he have lose every point; but when Mrs. Phillips begin to express her concern thereupon, he assure she with much earnest gravity that it be not of the least importance, that he consider the money as a mere trifle, and beg that she would not make herself uneasy.
"I know very well, madam," say he, "that when person sit down to a card-table, they must take their chance of these thing, and happily I be not in such circumstance as to make five shilling any object. there be undoubtedly many who could not say the same, but thank to Lady Catherine de Bourgh, I be remove far beyond the necessity of regard little matter."
Mr. Wickham's attention be catch; and after observe Mr. Collins for a few moment, he ask Elizabeth in a low voice whether her relation be very intimately acquaint with the family of de Bourgh.
"Lady Catherine de Bourgh," she reply, "have very lately give he a living. I hardly know how Mr. Collins be first introduce to her notice, but he certainly have not know she long."
"you know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy be sister; consequently that she be aunt to the present Mr. Darcy."
"no, indeed, I do not. I know nothing at all of Lady Catherine's connection. I never hear of her existence till the day before yesterday."
"her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune, and it be believe that she and her cousin will unite the two estate."
this information make Elizabeth smile, as she think of poor Miss Bingley. Vain indeed must be all her attention, vain and useless her affection for his sister and her praise of himself, if he be already self-destine for another.
"Mr. Collins," say she, "speak highly both of Lady Catherine and her daughter; but from some particular that he have relate of her ladyship, I suspect his gratitude mislead he, and that in spite of she be his patroness, she be an arrogant, conceited woman."
"I believe she to be both in a great degree," reply Wickham; "I have not see she for many year, but I very well remember that
I never like she, and that her manner be dictatorial and insolent. she have the reputation of be remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believe she derive part of her ability from her rank and fortune, part from her authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride for her nephew, who choose that everyone connect with he should have an understanding of the first class."
Elizabeth allow that he have give a very rational account of it, and they continue talk together, with mutual satisfaction till supper put an end to card, and give the rest of the lady their share of Mr. Wickham's attention. there could be no conversation in the noise of Mrs. Phillips's supper party, but his manner recommend he to everybody. whatever he say, be say well; and whatever he do, do gracefully. Elizabeth go away with her head full of he. she could think of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what he have tell she, all the way home; but there be not time for she even to mention his name as they go, for neither Lydia nor Mr. Collins be once silent. Lydia talk incessantly of lottery ticket, of the fish she have lose and the fish she have win; and Mr. Collins in describe the civility of Mr. and Mrs. Phillips, protest that he do not in the least regard his loss at whist, enumerate all the dish at supper, and repeatedly fear that he crowd his cousin, have more 
to say than he could well manage before the carriage stop at Longbourn House.
chapter 17
Elizabeth relate to Jane the next day what have pass between Mr. Wickham and herself. Jane listen with astonishment and concern; she know not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr. Bingley's regard; and yet, it be not in her nature to question the veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. the possibility of his have endure such unkindness, be enough to interest all her tender feeling; and nothing remain therefore to be do, but to think well of they both, to defend the conduct of each, and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be otherwise explain.
"they have both," say she, "be deceive, I dare say, in some way or other, of which we can form no idea. interested people have perhaps misrepresent each to the other. it be, in short, impossible for we to conjecture the cause or circumstance which may have alienate they, without actual blame on either side."
"very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you get to say on behalf of the interested people who have probably be concern in the business? do clear they too, or we shall be oblige to think ill of somebody."
"laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh I out of my opinion. my dear Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful light it place Mr. Darcy, to be treat his father's favourite in such a manner, one whom his father have promise to provide for. it be impossible. no man of common humanity, no man who have any value for his character, could be capable of it. can his most intimate friend be so excessively deceive in he? oh! no."
"I can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley's be impose on, than that Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he give I last night; name, fact, everything mention without ceremony. if it be not so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it. besides, there be truth in his look."
"it be difficult indeed---it be distress. one do not know what to think."
"I beg your pardon; one know exactly what to think."
but Jane could think with certainty on only one point---that Mr. Bingley, if he have be impose on, would have much to suffer when the affair become public.
the two young lady be summon from the shrubbery, where this conversation pass, by the arrival of the very person of whom they have be speak; Mr. Bingley and his sister come to give their personal invitation for the long-expect ball at Netherfield, which be fix for the following Tuesday. the two lady be delighted to see their dear friend again, call it an age since they have meet, and repeatedly ask what she have be do with herself since their separation. to the rest of the family they pay little attention; avoid Mrs. Bennet as much as possible, say not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all to the other. they be soon go again, rise from their seat with an activity which take their brother by surprise, and hurry off as if eager to escape from Mrs. Bennet's civility.
the prospect of the Netherfield ball be extremely agreeable to every female of the family. Mrs. Bennet choose to consider it as give in compliment to her eld daughter, and be particularly flatter by receive the invitation from Mr. Bingley himself, instead of a ceremonious card. Jane picture to herself a happy evening in the society of her two friend, and the attention of her brother; and Elizabeth think with pleasure of dance a great deal with Mr. Wickham, and of see a confirmation of everything in Mr. Darcy's look and behavior. the happiness anticipate by Catherine and Lydia depend less on any single event, or any particular person, for though they each, like Elizabeth, mean to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham, he be by no mean the only partner who could satisfy they, and a ball be, at any rate, a ball. and even Mary could assure her family that she have no disinclination for it.
"while I can have my morning to myself," say she, "it be enough---I think it be no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagement. Society have claim on we all; and I profess myself one of those who consider interval of recreation and amusement as desirable for everybody."
Elizabeth's spirit be so high on this occasion, that though she do not often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, she could not help ask he whether he intend to accept Mr. Bingley's invitation, and if he do, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening's amusement; and she be rather surprised to find that he entertain no scruple whatever on that head, and be very far from dread a rebuke either from the Archbishop, or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venture to dance.
"I be by no mean of the opinion, I assure you," say he, "that a ball of this kind, give by a young man of character, to respectable people, can have any evil tendency; and I be so far from object to dance myself, that I shall hope to be honour with the hand of all my fair cousin in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity of solicit your, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dance especially, a preference which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right cause, and not to any disrespect for she."
Elizabeth feel herself completely take in. she have fully propose be engage by Mr. Wickham for those very dance; and to have Mr. Collins instead! her liveliness have never be worse time. there be no help for it, however. Mr. Wickham's happiness and her own be perforce delay a little long, and Mr. Collins's proposal accept with as good a grace as she could. she be not the well pleased with his gallantry from the idea it suggest of something more. it now first strike she, that she be select from among her sister as worthy of be mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assist to form a quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitor. the idea soon reach to conviction, as she observe his increase civility toward herself, and hear his frequent attempt at a compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than gratify herself by this effect of her charm, it be not long before her mother give she to understand that the probability of their 
marriage be extremely agreeable to she. Elizabeth, however, do not choose to take the hint, be well aware that a serious dispute must be the consequence of any reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer, and till he do, it be useless to quarrel about he.
if there have not be a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the young Miss Bennets would have be in a very pitiable state at this time, for from the day of the invitation, to the day of the ball, there be such a succession of rain as prevent their walking to Meryton once. no aunt, no officer, no news could be seek after---the very shoe-rose for Netherfield be get by proxy. even Elizabeth might have find some trial of her patience in weather which totally suspend the improvement of her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less than a dance on Tuesday, could have make such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday endurable to Kitty and Lydia.
chapter 18
Till Elizabeth enter the drawing-room at Netherfield, and look in vain for Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coat there assemble, a doubt of his being present have never occur to she. the certainty of meet he have not be check by any of those recollection that might not unreasonably have alarm she. she have dress with more than usual care, and prepare in the high spirit for the conquest of all that remain unsubdued of his heart, trust that it be not more than might be win in the course of the evening. but in an instant arise the dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omit for Mr. Darcy's pleasure in the Bingleys' invitation to the officer; and though this be not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence be pronounce by his friend Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly apply, and who tell they that Wickham have be oblige to go to town on business the day before, and be not yet return; add, with a significant smile, "I do not imagine his business would have 
call he away just now, if he have not want to avoid a certain gentleman here."
this part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, be catch by Elizabeth, and, as it assure she that Darcy be not less answerable for Wickham's absence than if her first surmise have be just, every feeling of displeasure against the former be so sharpen by immediate disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite inquiry which he directly afterwards approach to make. attendance, forbearance, patience with Darcy, be injury to Wickham. she be resolve against any sort of conversation with he, and turn away with a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even in speak to Mr. Bingley, whose blind partiality provoke she.
but Elizabeth be not form for ill-humour; and though every prospect of her own be destroy for the evening, it could not dwell long on her spirit; and have tell all her grief to Charlotte Lucas, whom she have not see for a week, she be soon able to make a voluntary transition to the oddity of her cousin, and to point he out to her particular notice. the first two dance, however, bring a return of distress; they be dance of mortification. Mr. Collins, awkward and solemn, apologise instead of attend, and often move wrong without be aware of it, give she all the shame and misery which a disagreeable partner for a couple of dance can give. the moment of her release from he be ecstasy.
she dance next with an officer, and have the refreshment of talking of Wickham, and of hear that he be universally like. when those dance be over, she return to Charlotte Lucas,
and be in conversation with she, when she find herself suddenly address by Mr. Darcy who take she so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that, without know what she do, she accept he. he walk away again immediately, and she be leave to fret over her own want of presence of mind; Charlotte try to console she:
"I dare say you will find he very agreeable."
"heaven forbid! that would be the great misfortune of all! to find a man agreeable whom one be determined to hate! do not wish I such an evil."
when the dancing recommence, however, and Darcy approach to claim her hand, Charlotte could not help caution she in a whisper, not to be a simpleton, and allow her fancy for Wickham to make she appear unpleasant in the eye of a man ten time his consequence. Elizabeth make no answer, and take her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which she be arrive in be allow to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy, and read in her neighbour' look, their equal amazement in behold it. they stand for some time without speak a word; and she begin to imagine that their silence be to last through the two dance, and at first be resolve not to break it; till suddenly fancy that it would be the great punishment to her partner to oblige he to talk, she make some slight observation on the dance. he reply, and be again silent. after a pause of some minute, she address he a second time with:--"it be your turn to say something now, Mr. Darcy. I talk about the dance, and you ought to make some 
sort of remark on the size of the room, or the number of couple."
he smile, and assure she that whatever she wish he to say should be say.
"very well. that reply will do for the present. perhaps by and by I may observe that private ball be much pleasanter than public one. but now we may be silent."
"do you talk by rule, then, while you be dance?"
"sometimes. one must speak a little, you know. it would look odd to be entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet for the advantage of some, conversation ought to be so arrange, as that they may have the trouble of say as little as possible."
"be you consult your own feeling in the present case, or do you imagine that you be gratify mine?"
"both," reply Elizabeth archly; "for I have always see a great similarity in the turn of our mind. we be each of an unsocial, taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say something that will amaze the whole room, and be hand down to posterity with all the eclat of a proverb."
"this be no very striking resemblance of your own character, I be sure," say he. "how near it may be to mine, I cannot pretend to say. you think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly."
"I must not decide on my own performance."
he make no answer, and they be again silent till they have go down the dance, when he ask she if she and her sister do not very often walk to Meryton. she answer in the affirmative, and, unable to resist the temptation, add, "when you meet we there the other day, we have just be form a new acquaintance."
the effect be immediate. a deep shade of hauteur overspread his feature, but he say not a word, and Elizabeth, though blame herself for her own weakness, could not go on. at length Darcy speak, and in a constrain manner say, "Mr. Wickham be bless with such happy manner as may ensure his make friend---whether he may be equally capable of retain they, be less certain."
"he have be so unlucky as to lose your friendship," reply Elizabeth with emphasis, "and in a manner which he be likely to suffer from all his life."
Darcy make no answer, and seem desirous of change the subject. at that moment, Sir William Lucas appear close to they, mean to pass through the set to the other side of the room; but on perceive Mr. Darcy, he stop with a bow of superior courtesy to compliment he on his dancing and his partner.
"I have be most highly gratified indeed, my dear sir. such very superior dancing be not often see. it be evident that you belong to the first circle. allow I to say, however, that your fair partner do not disgrace you, and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeat, especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Eliza (glance at her sister and Bingley) shall take place. what congratulation will then flow in! I appeal to Mr. Darcy:--but let I not interrupt you, sir. you will not thank I for detain you from the bewitching converse of that young lady, whose bright eye be also upbraid I."
the latter part of this address be scarcely hear by Darcy; but Sir William's allusion to his friend seem to strike he forcibly, and his eye be direct with a very serious expression towards Bingley and Jane, who be dance together. recover himself, however, shortly, he turn to his partner, and say, "Sir William's interruption have make I forget what we be talk of."
"I do not think we be speak at all. Sir William could not have interrupt two people in the room who have less to say for themselves. we have try two or three subject already without success, and what we be to talk of next I cannot imagine."
"what think you of book?" say he, smile.
"book---oh! no. I be sure we never read the same, or not with the same feeling."
"I be sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be no want of subject. we may compare our different opinion."
"no---I cannot talk of book in a ball-room; my head be always full of something else."
"the present always occupy you in such scene---do it?" say he, with a look of doubt.
"yes, always," she reply, without know what she say, for her thought have wander far from the subject, as soon afterwards appear by she suddenly exclaim, "I remember hear you once say, Mr. Darcy, that you hardly ever forgave, that your resentment once create be unappeasable. you be very cautious, I suppose, as to its be create."
"I be," say he, with a firm voice.
"and never allow yourself to be blind by prejudice?"
"I hope not."
"it be particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion, to be secure of judge properly at first."
"may I ask to what these question tend?"
"merely to the illustration of your character," say she, endeavour to shake off her gravity. "I be try to make it out."
"and what be your success?"
she shake her head. "I do not get on at all. I hear such different account of you as puzzle I exceedingly."
"I can readily believe," answer he gravely, "that report may vary greatly with respect to I; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you be not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there be reason to fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either."
"but if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another opportunity."
"I would by no mean suspend any pleasure of your," he coldly reply. she say no more, and they go down the other dance and part in silence; and on each side dissatisfy, though not to an equal degree, for in Darcy's breast there be a tolerable powerful feeling towards she, which soon procure her pardon, and direct all his anger against another.
they have not long separate, when Miss Bingley come towards she, and with an expression of civil disdain accost she:
"so, Miss Eliza, I hear you be quite delighted with George Wickham! your sister have be talk to I about he, and ask I a thousand question; and I find that the young man quite forget to tell you, among his other communication, that he be the son of old Wickham, the late Mr. Darcy's steward. let I recommend you, however, as a friend, not to give implicit confidence to all his assertion; for as to Mr. Darcy's use he ill, it be perfectly false; for, on the contrary, he have always be remarkably kind to he, though George Wickham have treat Mr. Darcy in a most infamous manner. I do not know the particular, but I know very well that Mr. Darcy be not in the least to blame, that he cannot bear to hear George Wickham mention, and that though my brother think that he could not well avoid include he in his invitation to the officer, he be excessively glad to find that he have take himself out of the way. his come into the country at all be a most insolent thing, indeed, and I wonder how 
he could presume to do it. I pity you, Miss Eliza, for this discovery of your favourite's guilt; but really, consider his descent, one could not expect much well."
"his guilt and his descent appear by your account to be the same," say Elizabeth angrily; "for I have hear you accuse he of nothing bad than of be the son of Mr. Darcy's steward, and of that, I can assure you, he inform I himself."
"I beg your pardon," reply Miss Bingley, turn away with a sneer. "excuse my interference---it be kindly mean."
"insolent girl!" say Elizabeth to herself. "you be much mistaken if you expect to influence I by such a paltry attack as this. I see nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr. Darcy." she then seek her eld sister, who have undertake to make inquiry on the same subject of Bingley. Jane meet she with a smile of such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently mark how well she be satisfied with the occurrence of the evening. Elizabeth instantly read her feeling, and at that moment solicitude for Wickham, resentment against his enemy, and everything else, give way before the hope of Jane's be in the fairest way for happiness.
"I want to know," say she, with a countenance no less smile than her sister's, "what you have learn about Mr. Wickham. but perhaps you have be too pleasantly engage to think of any third person; in which case you may be sure of my pardon."
"no," reply Jane, "I have not forget he; but I have nothing satisfactory to tell you. Mr. Bingley do not know the whole of his history, and be quite ignorant of the circumstance which have principally offend Mr. Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct, the probity, and honour of his friend, and be perfectly convinced that Mr. Wickham have deserve much less attention from Mr. Darcy than he have receive; and I be sorry to say by his account as well as his sister's, Mr. Wickham be by no mean a respectable young man. I be afraid he have be very imprudent, and have deserve to lose Mr. Darcy's regard."
"Mr. Bingley do not know Mr. Wickham himself?"
"no; he never see he till the other morning at Meryton."
"this account then be what he have receive from Mr. Darcy. I be satisfied. but what do he say of the living?"
"he do not exactly recollect the circumstance, though he have hear they from Mr. Darcy more than once, but he believe that it be leave to he conditionally only."
"I have not a doubt of Mr. Bingley's sincerity," say Elizabeth warmly; "but you must excuse my not be convince by assurance only. Mr. Bingley's defense of his friend be a very able one, I dare say; but since he be unacquainted with several part of the story, and have learn the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture to still think of both gentleman as I do before."
she then change the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on which there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth listen with delight to the happy, though modest hope which Jane entertain of Mr. Bingley's regard, and say all in her power to heighten her confidence in it. on their being join by Mr. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdraw to Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her last partner she have scarcely reply, before Mr. Collins come up to they, and tell she with great exultation that he have just be so fortunate as to make a most important discovery.
"I have find out," say he, "by a singular accident, that there be now in the room a near relation of my patroness. I happen to overhear the gentleman himself mention to the young lady who do the honour of the house the name of his cousin Miss de Bourgh, and of her mother Lady Catherine. how wonderfully these sort of thing occur! who would have think of my meeting with, perhaps, a nephew of Lady Catherine de Bourgh in this assembly! I be most thankful that the discovery be make in time for I to pay my respect to he, which I be now go to do, and trust he will excuse my not have do it before. my total ignorance of the connection must plead my apology."
"you be not go to introduce yourself to Mr. Darcy!"
"indeed I be. I shall entreat his pardon for not have do it early. I believe he to be Lady Catherine's nephew. it will be in my power to assure he that her ladyship be quite well yesterday se'nnight."
Elizabeth try hard to dissuade he from such a scheme, assure he that Mr. Darcy would consider his address he without introduction as an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; that it be not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either side; and that if it be, it must belong to Mr. Darcy, the superior in consequence, to begin the acquaintance. Mr. Collins listen to she with the determined air of follow his own inclination, and, when she cease speak, reply thus:
"my dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the high opinion in the world in your excellent judgement in all matter within the scope of your understanding; but permit I to say, that there must be a wide difference between the establish form of ceremony amongst the laity, and those which regulate the clergy; for, give I leave to observe that I consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with the high rank in the kingdom---provide that a proper humility of behaviour be at the same time maintain. you must therefore allow I to follow the dictate of my conscience on this occasion, which lead I to perform what I look on as a point of duty. pardon I for neglect to profit by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant guide, though in the case before we I consider myself more fit by education and habitual study to decide on what be right than a young lady like yourself." and with a low bow he leave she to attack Mr. Darcy, whose reception of his advance she eagerly 
watch, and whose astonishment at be so address be very evident. her cousin preface his speech with a solemn bow and though she could not hear a word of it, she feel as if hear it all, and see in the motion of his lip the word "apology," "Hunsford," and "Lady Catherine de Bourgh." it vex she to see he expose himself to such a man. Mr. Darcy be eye he with unrestrained wonder, and when at last Mr. Collins allow he time to speak, reply with an air of distant civility. Mr. Collins, however, be not discourage from speak again, and Mr. Darcy's contempt seem abundantly increase with the length of his second speech, and at the end of it he only make he a slight bow, and move another way. Mr. Collins then return to Elizabeth.
"I have no reason, I assure you," say he, "to be dissatisfied with my reception. Mr. Darcy seem much pleased with the attention. he answer I with the utmost civility, and even pay I the compliment of say that he be so well convinced of Lady Catherine's discernment as to be certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily. it be really a very handsome thought. upon the whole, I be much pleased with he."
as Elizabeth have no long any interest of her own to pursue, she turn her attention almost entirely on her sister and Mr. Bingley; and the train of agreeable reflection which her observation give birth to, make she perhaps almost as happy as Jane. she see she in idea settle in that very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection could bestow; and she feel capable, under such circumstance, of endeavour even to like Bingley's two sister. her mother's thought she plainly see be bent the same way, and she determine not to venture near she, lest she might hear too much. when they sit down to supper, therefore, she consider it a most unlucky perverseness which place they within one of each other; and deeply be she vex to find that her mother be talk to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely, openly, and of nothing else but her expectation that Jane would soon be married to Mr. Bingley. it be an animate subject, and Mrs. Bennet seem incapable of fatigue while 
enumerate the advantage of the match. his be such a charming young man, and so rich, and living but three mile from they, be the first point of self-gratulation; and then it be such a comfort to think how fond the two sister be of Jane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as she could do. it be, moreover, such a promising thing for her young daughter, as Jane's marrying so greatly must throw they in the way of other rich man; and lastly, it be so pleasant at her time of life to be able to consign her single daughter to the care of their sister, that she might not be oblige to go into company more than she like. it be necessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on such occasion it be the etiquette; but no one be less likely than Mrs. Bennet to find comfort in stay home at any period of her life. she conclude with many good wish that Lady Lucas might soon be equally fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believe there be 
no chance of it.
in vain do Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother's word, or persuade she to describe her felicity in a less audible whisper; for, to her inexpressible vexation, she could perceive that the chief of it be overhear by Mr. Darcy, who sit opposite to they. her mother only scold she for be nonsensical.
"what be Mr. Darcy to I, pray, that I should be afraid of he? I be sure we owe he no such particular civility as to be oblige to say nothing he may not like to hear."
"for heaven's sake, madam, speak lower. what advantage can it be for you to offend Mr. Darcy? you will never recommend yourself to his friend by so do!"
nothing that she could say, however, have any influence. her mother would talk of her view in the same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blush and blush again with shame and vexation. she could not help frequently glance her eye at Mr. Darcy, though every glance convince she of what she dread; for though he be not always look at her mother, she be convince that his attention be invariably fix by she. the expression of his face change gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and steady gravity.
at length, however, Mrs. Bennet have no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who have be long yawn at the repetition of delight which she see no likelihood of sharing, be leave to the comfort of cold ham and chicken. Elizabeth now begin to revive. but not long be the interval of tranquillity; for, when supper be over, singing be talk of, and she have the mortification of see Mary, after very little entreaty, prepare to oblige the company. by many significant look and silent entreaty, do she endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance, but in vain; Mary would not understand they; such an opportunity of exhibit be delightful to she, and she begin her song. Elizabeth's eye be fix on she with most painful sensation, and she watch her progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which be very ill reward at their close; for Mary, on receive, amongst the thank of the table, the hint of a hope that she might be prevail on to favour they again, after the pause of half a 
minute begin another. Mary's power be by no mean fit for such a display; her voice be weak, and her manner affect. Elizabeth be in agony. she look at Jane, to see how she bear it; but Jane be very composedly talk to Bingley. she look at his two sister, and see they make sign of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continue, however, imperturbably grave. she look at her father to entreat his interference, lest Mary should be sing all night. he take the hint, and when Mary have finish her second song, say aloud, "that will do extremely well, child. you have delight we long enough. let the other young lady have time to exhibit."
Mary, though pretend not to hear, be somewhat disconcert; and Elizabeth, sorry for she, and sorry for her father's speech, be afraid her anxiety have do no good. other of the party be now apply to.
"if I," say Mr. Collins, "be so fortunate as to be able to sing, I should have great pleasure, I be sure, in oblige the company with an air; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly compatible with the profession of a clergyman. I do not mean, however, to assert that we can be justify in devote too much of our time to music, for there be certainly other thing to be attend to. the rector of a parish have much to do. in the first place, he must make such an agreement for tithe as may be beneficial to himself and not offensive to his patron. he must write his own sermon; and the time that remain will not be too much for his parish duty, and the care and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excuse from make as comfortable as possible. and I do not think it of light importance that he should have attentive and conciliatory manner towards everybody, especially towards those to whom he owe his preferment. I cannot acquit he of that duty; nor could I think 
well of the man who should omit an occasion of testify his respect towards anybody connect with the family." and with a bow to Mr. Darcy, he conclude his speech, which have be speak so loud as to be hear by half the room. many star---many smile; but no one look more amused than Mr. Bennet himself, while his wife seriously commend Mr. Collins for have speak so sensibly, and observe in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that he be a remarkably clever, good kind of young man.
to Elizabeth it appear that, have her family make an agreement to expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would have be impossible for they to play their part with more spirit or fine success; and happy do she think it for Bingley and her sister that some of the exhibition have escape his notice, and that his feeling be not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he must have witness. that his two sister and Mr. Darcy, however, should have such an opportunity of ridicule her relation, be bad enough, and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman, or the insolent smile of the lady, be more intolerable.
the rest of the evening bring she little amusement. she be tease by Mr. Collins, who continue most perseveringly by her side, and though he could not prevail on she to dance with he again, put it out of her power to dance with other. in vain do she entreat he to stand up with somebody else, and offer to introduce he to any young lady in the room. he assure she, that as to dancing, he be perfectly indifferent to it; that his chief object be by delicate attention to recommend himself to she and that he should therefore make a point of remain close to she the whole evening. there be no arguing upon such a project. she owe her great relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often join they, and good-naturedly engage Mr. Collins's conversation to herself.
she be at least free from the offense of Mr. Darcy's further notice; though often stand within a very short distance of she, quite disengaged, he never come near enough to speak. she feel it to be the probable consequence of her allusion to Mr. Wickham, and rejoice in it.
the Longbourn party be the last of all the company to depart, and, by a manoeuvre of Mrs. Bennet, have to wait for their carriage a quarter of an hour after everybody else be go, which give they time to see how heartily they be wish away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and her sister scarcely open their mouth, except to complain of fatigue, and be evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. they repulse every attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation, and by so do throw a languor over the whole party, which be very little relieve by the long speech of Mr. Collins, who be compliment Mr. Bingley and his sister on the elegance of
their entertainment, and the hospitality and politeness which have mark their behaviour to their guest. Darcy say nothing at all. Mr. Bennet, in equal silence, be enjoy the scene. Mr. Bingley and Jane be stand together, a little detach from the rest, and talk only to each other. Elizabeth preserve as steady a silence as either Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia be too much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of "Lord, how tired I be!" accompany by a
violent yawn.
when at length they arise to take leave, Mrs. Bennet be most pressingly civil in her hope of see the whole family soon at Longbourn, and address herself especially to Mr. Bingley, to assure he how happy he would make they by eat a family dinner with they at any time, without the ceremony of a formal invitation. Bingley be all grateful pleasure, and he readily engage for take the early opportunity of wait on she, after his return from London, whither he be oblige to go the next day for a short time.
Mrs. Bennet be perfectly satisfied, and quit the house under the delightful persuasion that, allow for the necessary preparation of settlement, new carriage, and wedding clothe, she should undoubtedly see her daughter settle at Netherfield in the course of three or four month. of have another daughter marry to Mr. Collins, she think with equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure. Elizabeth be the least dear to she of all her child; and though the man and the match be quite good enough for she, the worth of each be eclipse by Mr. Bingley and Netherfield.
chapter 19
the next day open a new scene at Longbourn. Mr. Collins make his declaration in form. have resolve to do it without loss of time, as his leave of absence extend only to the following Saturday, and have no feeling of diffidence to make it distress to himself even at the moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the observance, which he suppose a regular part of the business. on find Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the young girl together, soon after breakfast, he address the mother in these word:
"may I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth, when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with she in the course of this morning?"
before Elizabeth have time for anything but a blush of surprise, Mrs. Bennet answer instantly, "oh dear!--yes---certainly. I be sure Lizzy will be very happy---I be sure she can have no objection. come, Kitty, I want you upstairs." and, gather her work together, she be hasten away, when Elizabeth call out:
"dear madam, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr. Collins must excuse I. he can have nothing to say to I that anybody need not hear. I be go away myself."
"no, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you to stay where you be." and upon Elizabeth's seem really, with vex and embarrassed
look, about to escape, she add: "Lizzy, I insist upon your staying and hear Mr. Collins."
Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction---and a moment's consideration make she also sensible that it would be wisest to get it over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sit down again and try to conceal, by incessant employment the feeling which be divide between distress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walk off, and as soon as they be go, Mr. Collins begin.
"believe I, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far from do you any disservice, rather add to your other perfection. you would have be less amiable in my eye have there not be this little unwillingness; but allow I to assure you, that I have your respected mother's permission for this address. you can hardly doubt the purport of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to dissemble; my attention have be too marked to be mistake. almost as soon as I enter the house, I single you out as the companion of my future life. but before I be run away with by my feeling on this subject, perhaps it would be advisable for I to state my reason for marrying---and, moreover, for come into Hertfordshire with the design of select a wife, as I certainly do."
the idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn composure, be run away with by his feeling, make Elizabeth so near laughing, that she could not use the short pause he allow in any attempt to stop he far, and he continue:
"my reason for marry be, first, that I think it a right thing for every clergyman in easy circumstance (like myself) to set the example of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I be convinced that it will add very greatly to my happiness; and thirdly---which perhaps I ought to have mention early, that it be the particular advice and recommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of call patroness. twice have she condescend to give I her opinion (unaske too!) on this subject; and it be but the very Saturday night before I leave Hunsford---between our pool at quadrille, while Mrs. Jenkinson be arrange Miss de Bourgh's footstool, that she say, 'Mr. Collins, you must marry. a clergyman like you must marry. choose properly, choose a gentlewoman for my sake; and for your own, let she be an active, useful sort of person, not bring up high, but able to make a small income go a good way. this be my advice. find such a woman as soon as you can, bring she to Hunsford, and I will visit 
she.' allow I, by the way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon the notice and kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the advantage in my power to offer. you will find her manner beyond anything I can describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must be acceptable to she, especially when temper with the silence and respect which her rank will inevitably excite. thus much for my general intention in favour of matrimony; it remain to be tell why my view be direct towards Longbourn instead of my own neighbourhood, where I can assure you there be many amiable young woman. but the fact be, that be, as I be, to inherit this estate after the death of your honoured father (who, however, may live many year long), I could not satisfy myself without resolve to choose a wife from among his daughter, that the loss to they might be as little as possible, when the melancholy event take place---which, however, as I have already say, may not be for several year. this have 
be my motive, my fair cousin, and I flatter myself it will not sink I in your esteem. and now nothing remain but for I but to assure you in the most animate language of the violence of my affection. to fortune I be perfectly indifferent, and shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I be well aware that it could not be comply with; and that one thousand pound in the four per cent, which will not be yours till after your mother's decease, be all that you may ever be entitle to. on that head, therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may assure yourself that no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lip when we be marry."
it be absolutely necessary to interrupt he now.
"you be too hasty, sir," she cry. "you forget that I have make no answer. let I do it without further loss of time. accept my thank for the compliment you be pay I. I be very sensible of the honour of your proposal, but it be impossible for I to do otherwise than to decline they."
"I be not now to learn," reply Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of the hand, "that it be usual with young lady to reject the address of the man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first apply for their favour; and that sometimes the refusal be repeat a second, or even a third time. I be therefore by no mean discourage by what you have just say, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long."
"upon my word, sir," cry Elizabeth, "your hope be a rather extraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I be not one of those young lady (if such young lady there be) who be so daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of
be ask a second time. I be perfectly serious in my refusal. you could not make I happy, and I be convinced that I be the last woman in the world who could make you so. Nay, be your friend Lady Catherine to know I, I be persuade she would find I in every respect ill qualified for the situation."
"be it certain that Lady Catherine would think so," say Mr. Collins very gravely---"but I cannot imagine that her ladyship would at all disapprove of you. and you may be certain when I have the honour of see she again, I shall speak in the very high term of your modesty, economy, and other amiable qualification."
"indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of I will be unnecessary. you must give I leave to judge for myself, and pay I the compliment of believe what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and by refuse your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise. in make I the offer, you must have satisfy the delicacy of your feeling with regard to my family, and may take possession of Longbourn estate whenever it fall, without any self-reproach. this matter may be consider, therefore, as finally settle." and rise as she thus speak, she would have quit the room, have Mr. Collins not thus address she:
"when I do myself the honour of speak to you next on the subject, I shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now give I; though I be far from accuse you of cruelty at present, because I know it to be the establish custom of your sex to reject a man on the first application, and perhaps you have even now say as much to encourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the female character."
"really, Mr. Collins," cry Elizabeth with some warmth, "you puzzle I exceedingly. if what I have hitherto say can appear to you in the form of encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way as to convince you of its be one."
"you must give I leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that your refusal of my address be merely word of course. my reason for believe it be briefly these: it do not appear to I that my hand be unworthy your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer would be any other than highly desirable. my situation in life, my connection with the family of de Bourgh, and my relationship to your own, be circumstance highly in my favour; and you should take it into further consideration, that in spite of your manifold attraction, it be by no mean certain that another offer of marriage may ever be make you. your portion be unhappily so small that it will in all likelihood undo the effect of your loveliness and amiable qualification. as I must therefore conclude that you be not serious in your rejection of I, I shall choose to attribute it to your wish of increase my love by suspense, accord to the usual practice of elegant female."
"I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretension whatever to that kind of elegance which consist in torment a respectable man. I would rather be pay the compliment of be believe sincere. I thank you again and again for the honour you have do I in your proposal, but to accept they be absolutely impossible. my feeling in every respect forbid it. can I speak plainer? do not consider I now as an elegant female, intend to plague you, but as a rational creature, speak the truth from her heart."
"you be uniformly charming!" cry he, with an air of awkward gallantry; "and I be persuade that when sanction by the express authority of both your excellent parent, my proposal will not fail of be acceptable."
to such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would make no reply, and immediately and in silence withdraw; determine, if he persist in consider her repeat refusal as flattering encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be utter in such a manner as to be decisive, and whose behavior at least could not be mistake for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.
chapter 20
Mr. Collins be not leave long to the silent contemplation of his successful love; for Mrs. Bennet, have dawdle about in the vestibule to watch for the end of the conference, no soon see Elizabeth open the door and with quick step pass she towards the staircase, than she enter the breakfast-room, and congratulate both he and herself in warm term on the happy prospect or their nearer connection. Mr. Collins receive and return these felicitation with equal pleasure, and then proceed to relate the particular of their interview, with the result of which he trust he have every reason to be satisfied, since the refusal which his cousin have steadfastly give he would naturally flow from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character.
this information, however, startle Mrs. Bennet; she would have be glad to be equally satisfied that her daughter have mean to encourage he by protest against his proposal, but she dare not believe it, and could not help say so.
"but, depend upon it, Mr. Collins," she add, "that Lizzy shall be bring to reason. I will speak to she about it directly. she be a very headstrong, foolish girl, and do not know her own interest but I will make she know it."
"pardon I for interrupt you, madam," cry Mr. Collins; "but if she be really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she would altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who naturally look for happiness in the marriage state. if therefore she actually persist in reject my suit, perhaps it be well not to force she into accept I, because if liable to such defect of temper, she could not contribute much to my felicity."
"Sir, you quite misunderstand I," say Mrs. Bennet, alarmed. "Lizzy be only headstrong in such matter as these. in everything else she be as good-natured a girl as ever live. I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, and we shall very soon settle it with she, I be sure."
she would not give he time to reply, but hurry instantly to her husband, call out as she enter the library, "oh! Mr. Bennet, you be want immediately; we be all in an uproar. you must come and make Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vow she will not have he, and if you do not make haste he will change his mind and not have she."
Mr. Bennet raise his eye from his book as she enter, and fix they on her face with a calm unconcern which be not in the least altered by her communication.
"I have not the pleasure of understand you," say he, when she have finish her speech. "of what be you talk?"
"of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declare she will not have Mr. Collins, and Mr. Collins begin to say that he will not have Lizzy."
"and what be I to do on the occasion? it seem an hopeless business."
"speak to Lizzy about it yourself. tell she that you insist upon her marry he."
"let she be call down. she shall hear my opinion."
Mrs. Bennet ring the bell, and Miss Elizabeth be summon to the library.
"come here, child," cry her father as she appear. "I have send for you on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr. Collins have make you an offer of marriage. be it true?" Elizabeth reply that it be. "very well---and this offer of marriage you have refuse?"
"I have, sir."
"very well. we now come to the point. your mother insist upon your accept it. be it not so, Mrs. Bennet?"
"yes, or I will never see she again."
"an unhappy alternative be before you, Elizabeth. from this day you must be a stranger to one of your parent. your mother will never see you again if you do not marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you again if you do."
Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning, but Mrs. Bennet, who have persuade herself that her husband regard the affair as she wish, be excessively disappointed.
"what do you mean, Mr. Bennet, in talk this way? you promise I to insist upon her marry he."
"my dear," reply her husband, "I have two small favour to request. first, that you will allow I the free use of my understanding on the present occasion; and secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have the library to myself as soon as may be."
not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, do Mrs. Bennet give up the point. she talk to Elizabeth again and again; coax and threaten she by turn. she endeavour to secure Jane in her interest; but Jane, with all possible mildness, decline interfere; and Elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, and sometimes with playful gaiety, reply to her attack. though her manner vary, however, her determination never do.
Mr. Collins, meanwhile, be meditate in solitude on what have pass. he think too well of himself to comprehend on what motive his cousin could refuse he; and though his pride be hurt, he suffer in no other way. his regard for she be quite imaginary; and the possibility of she deserve her mother's reproach prevent his feeling any regret.
while the family be in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas come to spend the day with they. she be meet in the vestibule by Lydia, who, fly to she, cry in a half whisper, "I be glad you be come, for there be such fun here! what do you think have happen this morning? Mr. Collins have make an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have he."
Charlotte hardly have time to answer, before they be join by Kitty, who come to tell the same news; and no soon have they enter the breakfast-room, where Mrs. Bennet be alone, than she likewise begin on the subject, call on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreat she to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wish of all her family. "pray do, my dear Miss Lucas," she add in a melancholy tone, "for nobody be on my side, nobody take part with I. I be cruelly use, nobody feel for my poor nerve."
Charlotte's reply be spar by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth.
"Aye, there she come," continue Mrs. Bennet, "look as unconcerned as may be, and care no more for we than if we be at York, provide she can have her own way. but I tell you, Miss Lizzy---if you take it into your head to go on refuse every offer of marriage in this way, you will never get a husband at all---and I be sure I do not know who be to maintain you when your father be dead. I shall not be able to keep you---and so I warn you. I have do with you from this very day. I tell you in the library, you know, that I should never speak to you again, and you will find I as good as my word. I have no pleasure in talk to undutiful child. not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talk to anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaint can have no great inclination for talk. nobody can tell what I suffer! but it be always so. those who do not complain be never pity."
her daughter listen in silence to this effusion, sensible that any attempt to reason with she or soothe she would only increase the irritation. she talk on, therefore, without interruption from any of they, till they be join by Mr. Collins, who enter the room with an air more stately than usual, and on perceive whom, she say to the girl, "now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold your tongue, and let I and Mr. Collins have a little conversation together."
Elizabeth pass quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty follow, but Lydia stand her ground, determine to hear all she could; and Charlotte, detain first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiry after herself and all her family be very minute, and then by a little curiosity, satisfy herself with walk to the window and pretend not to hear. in a doleful voice Mrs. Bennet begin the project conversation: "oh! Mr. Collins!"
"my dear madam," reply he, "let we be for ever silent on this point. far be it from I," he presently continue, in a voice that mark his displeasure, "to resent the behaviour of your daughter. resignation to inevitable evil be the evil duty of we all; the peculiar duty of a young man who have be so fortunate as I have be in early preferment; and I trust I be resign. perhaps not the less so from feel a doubt of my positive happiness have my fair cousin honour I with her hand; for I have often observe that resignation be never so perfect as when the blessing deny begin to lose somewhat of its value in our estimation. you will not, I hope, consider I as show any disrespect to your family, my dear madam, by thus withdraw my pretension to your daughter's favour, without have pay yourself and Mr. Bennet the compliment of request you to interpose your authority in my behalf. my conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in have accept my dismission from your daughter's lip instead 
of your own. but we be all liable to error. I have certainly mean well through the whole affair. my object have be to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due consideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my manner have be at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologise."
chapter 21
the discussion of Mr. Collins's offer be now nearly at an end, and Elizabeth have only to suffer from the uncomfortable feeling necessarily attend it, and occasionally from some peevish allusion of her mother. as for the gentleman himself, his feeling be chiefly express, not by embarrassment or dejection, or by try to avoid she, but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence. he scarcely ever speak to she, and the assiduous attention which he have be so sensible of himself be transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose civility in listen to he be a seasonable relief to they all, and especially to her friend.
the morrow produce no abatement of Mrs. Bennet's ill-humour or ill health. Mr. Collins be also in the same state of angry pride. Elizabeth have hop that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan do not appear in the least affected by it. he be always to have go on Saturday, and to Saturday he mean to stay.
after breakfast, the girl walk to Meryton to inquire if Mr. Wickham be return, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball. he join they on their enter the town, and attend they to their aunt's where his regret and vexation, and the concern of everybody, be well talk over. to Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledge that the necessity of his absence have be self-impose.
"I find," say he, "as the time draw near that I have well not meet Mr. Darcy; that to be in the same room, the same party with he for so many hour together, might be more than I could bear, and that scene might arise unpleasant to more than myself."
she highly approve his forbearance, and they have leisure for a full discussion of it, and for all the commendation which they civilly bestow on each other, as Wickham and another officer walk back with they to longbourn, and during the walk he particularly attend to she. his accompany they be a double advantage; she feel all the compliment it offer to herself, and it be most acceptable as an occasion of introduce he to her father and mother.
soon after their return, a letter be deliver to Miss Bennet; it come from Netherfield. the envelope contain a sheet of elegant, little, hot-press paper, well cover with a lady's fair, flow hand; and Elizabeth see her sister's countenance change as she read it, and see her dwelling intently on some particular passage. Jane recollect herself soon, and put the letter away, try to join with her usual cheerfulness in the general conversation; but Elizabeth feel an anxiety on the subject which draw off her attention even from Wickham; and no soon have he and he companion take leave, than a glance from Jane invite she to follow she upstairs. when they have gain their own room, Jane, take out the letter, say:
"this be from Caroline Bingley; what it contain have surprise I a good deal. the whole party have leave Netherfield by this time, and be on their way to town---and without any intention of come back again. you shall hear what she say."
she then read the first sentence aloud, which comprise the information of their have just resolve to follow their brother to town directly, and of their meaning to dine in Grosvenor Street, where Mr. Hurst have a house. the next be in these word: "I do not pretend to regret anything I shall leave in Hertfordshire, except your society, my dear friend; but we will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many return of that delightful intercourse we have know, and in the meanwhile may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved correspondence. I depend on you for that." to these highflown expression Elizabeth listen with all the insensibility of distrust; and though the suddenness of their removal surprise she, she see nothing in it really to lament; it be not to be suppose that their absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley's be there; and as to the loss of their society, she be persuade that Jane must cease to regard it, in the enjoyment of his.
"it be unlucky," say she, after a short pause, "that you should not be able to see your friend before they leave the country. but may we not hope that the period of future happiness to which Miss Bingley look forward may arrive early than she be aware, and that the delightful intercourse you have know as friend will be renew with yet great satisfaction as sister? Mr. Bingley will not be detain in London by they."
"caroline decidedly say that none of the party will return into Hertfordshire this winter. I will read it to you:"
"when my brother leave we yesterday, he imagine that the business which take he to London might be conclude in three or four day; but as we be certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convince that when Charles get to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have determine on follow he thither, that he may not be oblige to spend his vacant hour in a comfortless hotel. many of my acquaintance be already there for the winter; I wish that I could hear that you, my dear friend, have any intention of make one of the crowd---but of that I despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in the gaiety which that season generally bring, and that your beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the three of whom we shall deprive you."
"it be evident by this," add Jane, "that he come back no more this winter."
"it be only evident that Miss Bingley do not mean that he should."
"why will you think so? it must be his own doing. he be his own master. but you do not know all. I will read you the passage which particularly hurt I. I will have no reserve from you."
"Mr. Darcy be impatient to see his sister; and, to confess the truth, we be scarcely less eager to meet she again. I really do not think Georgiana Darcy have she equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishment; and the affection she inspire in Louisa and myself be heighten into something still more interesting, from the hope we dare entertain of her be hereafter our sister. I do not know whether I ever before mention to you my feeling on this subject; but I will not leave the country without confide they, and I trust you will not esteem they unreasonable. my brother admire she greatly already; he will
have frequent opportunity now of see she on the most intimate footing; her relation all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sister's partiality be not mislead I, I think, when I call Charles most capable of engage any woman's heart. with all these circumstance to favour an attachment, and nothing to prevent it, be I wrong, my dear Jane, in indulge the hope of an event which will secure the happiness of so many?"
"what do you think of this sentence, my dear Lizzy?" say Jane as she finish it. "be it not clear enough? do it not expressly declare that Caroline neither expect nor wish I to be her sister; that she be perfectly convinced of her brother's indifference; and that if she suspect the nature of my feeling for he, she mean (most kindly!) to put I on my guard? can there be any other opinion on the subject?"
"yes, there can; for mine be totally different. will you hear it?"
"most willingly."
"you shall have it in a few word. Miss Bingley see that her brother be in love with you, and want he to marry Miss Darcy. she follow he to town in hope of keep he there, and try to persuade you that he do not care about you."
Jane shake her head.
"indeed, Jane, you ought to believe I. no one who have ever see you together can doubt his affection. Miss Bingley, I be sure, cannot. she be not such a simpleton. could she have see half as much love in Mr. Darcy for herself, she would have order her wedding clothe. but the case be this: we be not rich enough or grand enough for they; and she be the more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from the notion that when there have be one intermarriage, she may have less trouble in achieve a second; in which there be certainly some ingenuity, and I dare say it would succeed, if Miss de Bourgh be out of the way. but, my dear Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that because Miss Bingley tell you her brother greatly admire Miss Darcy, he be in the small degree less sensible of your merit than when he take leave of you on Tuesday, or that it will be in her power to persuade he that, instead of be in love with you, he be very much in love with her friend."
"if we think alike of Miss Bingley," reply Jane, "your representation of all this might make I quite easy. but I know the foundation be unjust. Caroline be incapable of wilfully deceive anyone; and all that I can hope in this case be that she be deceive herself."
"that be right. you could not have start a more happy idea, since you will not take comfort in mine. believe she to be deceive, by all mean. you have now do your duty by she, and must fret no long."
"but, my dear sister, can I be happy, even suppose the good, in accept a man whose sister and friend be all wish he to marry elsewhere?"
"you must decide for yourself," say Elizabeth; "and if, upon mature deliberation, you find that the misery of disoblige his two sister be more than equivalent to the happiness of be his wife, I advise you by all mean to refuse he."
"how can you talk so?" say Jane, faintly smile. "you must know that though I should be exceedingly grieve at their disapprobation, I could not hesitate."
"I do not think you would; and that be the case, I cannot consider your situation with much compassion."
"but if he return no more this winter, my choice will never be require. a thousand thing may arise in six month!"
the idea of his return no more Elizabeth treat with the utmost contempt. it appear to she merely the suggestion of Caroline's interested wish, and she could not for a moment suppose that those wish, however openly or artfully speak, could influence a young man so totally independent of everyone.
she represent to her sister as forcibly as possible what she feel on the subject, and have soon the pleasure of see its happy effect. Jane's temper be not despond, and she be gradually lead to hope, though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcome the hope, that Bingley would return to Netherfield and answer every wish of her heart.
they agree that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the family, without be alarmed on the score of the gentleman's conduct; but even this partial communication give she a great deal of concern, and she bewail it as exceedingly unlucky that the lady should happen to go away just as they be all get so intimate together. after lament it, however, at some length, she have the consolation that Mr. Bingley would be soon down again and soon din at Longbourn, and the conclusion of all be the comfortable declaration, that though he have be invite only to a family dinner, she would take care to have two full course.
chapter 22
the Bennets be engage to dine with the Lucases and again during the chief of the day be Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr. Collins. Elizabeth take an opportunity of thank she. "it keep he in good humour," say she, "and I be more obliged to you than I can express." Charlotte assure her friend of her satisfaction in be useful, and that it amply repay she for the little sacrifice of her time. this be very amiable, but Charlotte's kindness extend far than Elizabeth have any conception of; its object be nothing else than to secure she from any return of Mr. Collins's address, by engage they towards herself. such be Miss Lucas's scheme; and appearance be so favourable, that when they part at night, she would have feel almost secure of success if he have not be to leave Hertfordshire so very soon. but here she do injustice to the fire and independence of his character, for it lead he to escape out of Longbourn House the next morning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas 
Lodge to throw himself at her foot. he be anxious to avoid the notice of his cousin, from a conviction that if they see he depart, they could not fail to conjecture his design, and he be not willing to have the attempt know till its success might be know likewise; for though feel almost secure, and with reason, for Charlotte have be tolerably encouraging, he be comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday. his reception, however, be of the most flattering kind. Miss Lucas perceive he from an upper window as he walk towards the house, and instantly set out to meet he accidentally in the lane. but little have she dare to hope that so much love and eloquence await she there.
in as short a time as Mr. Collins's long speech would allow, everything be settle between they to the satisfaction of both; and as they enter the house he earnestly entreat she to name the day that be to make he the happy of man; and though such a solicitation must be waive for the present, the lady feel no inclination to trifle with his happiness. the stupidity with which he be favour by nature must guard his courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its continuance; and Miss Lucas, who accept he solely from the pure and disinterested desire of an establishment, care not how soon that establishment be gain.
Sir William and Lady Lucas be speedily apply to for their consent; and it be bestow with a most joyful alacrity. Mr. Collins's present circumstance make it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whom they could give little fortune; and his prospect of future wealth be exceedingly fair. Lady Lucas begin directly to calculate, with more interest than the matter have ever excite before, how many year long Mr. Bennet be likely to live; and Sir William give it as his decide opinion, that whenever Mr. Collins should be in possession of the Longbourn estate, it would be highly expedient that both he and his wife should make their appearance at St. James's. the whole family, in short, be properly overjoyed on the occasion. the young girl form hope of come out a year or two soon than they might otherwise have do; and the boy be relieve from their apprehension of Charlotte's die an old maid. Charlotte herself be tolerably compose. she have gain her point, and have time to 
consider of it. her reflection be in general satisfactory. Mr. Collins, to be sure, be neither sensible nor agreeable; his society be irksome, and his attachment to she must be imaginary. but still he would be her husband. without think highly either of man or matrimony, marriage have always be her object; it be the only provision for well-educate young woman of small fortune, and however uncertain of give happiness, must be their pleasantest preservative from want. this preservative she have now obtain; and at the age of twenty-seven, without have ever be handsome, she feel all the good luck of it. the least agreeable circumstance in the business be the surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship she value beyond that of any other person. Elizabeth would wonder, and probably would blame she; and though her resolution be not to be shake, her feeling must be hurt by such a disapprobation. she resolve to give she the information herself, and therefore charge Mr. 
Collins, when he return to Longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what have pass before any of the family. a promise of secrecy be of course very dutifully give, but it could not be keep without difficulty; for the curiosity excite by his long absence burst forth in such very direct question on his return as require some ingenuity to evade, and he be at the same time exercise great self-denial, for he be long to publish his prosperous love.
as he be to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of the family, the ceremony of leave-taking be perform when the lady move for the night; and Mrs. Bennet, with great politeness and cordiality, say how happy they should be to see he at Longbourn again, whenever his engagement might
allow he to visit they.
"my dear madam," he reply, "this invitation be particularly gratifying, because it be what I have be hop to receive; and you may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon as possible."
they be all astonish; and Mr. Bennet, who could by no mean wish for so speedy a return, immediately say:
"but be there not danger of Lady Catherine's disapprobation here, my good sir? you have well neglect your relation than run the risk of offend your patroness."
"my dear sir," reply Mr. Collins, "I be particularly oblige to you for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not take so material a step without her ladyship's concurrence."
"you cannot be too much upon your guard. risk anything rather than her displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raise by your come to we again, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home, and be satisfied that we shall take no offence."
"believe I, my dear sir, my gratitude be warmly excite by such affectionate attention; and depend upon it, you will speedily receive from I a letter of thank for this, and for every other mark of your regard during my stay in Hertfordshire. as for my fair cousin, though my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall now take the liberty of wish they health and happiness, not except my cousin Elizabeth."
with proper civility the lady then withdraw; all of they equally surprised that he meditate a quick return. Mrs. Bennet wish to understand by it that he think of pay his address to one of her young girl, and Mary might have be prevail on to accept he. she rat his ability much high than any of the other; there be a solidity in his reflection which often strike she, and though by no mean so clever as herself, she think that if encourage to read and improve himself by such an example as her, he might become a very agreeable companion. but on the follow morning, every hope of this kind be do away. Miss Lucas call soon after breakfast, and in a private conference with Elizabeth relate the event of the day before.
the possibility of Mr. Collins's fancy herself in love with her friend have once occur to Elizabeth within the last day or two; but that Charlotte could encourage he seem almost as far from possibility as she could encourage he herself, and her astonishment be consequently so great as to overcome at first the bound of decorum, and she could not help cry out:
"engage to Mr. Collins! my dear Charlotte---impossible!"
the steady countenance which Miss Lucas have command in tell her story, give way to a momentary confusion here on receive so direct a reproach; though, as it be no more than she expect, she soon regain her composure, and calmly reply:
"why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? do you think it incredible that Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman's good opinion, because he be not so happy as to succeed with you?"
but Elizabeth have now recollect herself, and make a strong effort for it, be able to assure with tolerable firmness that the prospect of their relationship be highly grateful to she, and that she wish she all imaginable happiness.
"I see what you be feel," reply Charlotte. "you must be surprised, very much surprised---so lately as Mr. Collins be wish to marry you. but when you have have time to think it over, I hope you will be satisfied with what I have do. I be not romantic, you know; I never be. I ask only a comfortable home; and consider Mr. Collins's character, connection, and situation in life, I be convinced that my chance of happiness with he be as fair as most people can boast on enter the marriage state."
Elizabeth quietly answer "undoubtedly;" and after an awkward pause, they return to the rest of the family. Charlotte do not stay much long, and Elizabeth be then leave to reflect on what she have hear. it be a long time before she become at all reconcile to the idea of so unsuitable a match. the strangeness of Mr. Collins's make two offer of marriage within three day be nothing in comparison of his be now accept. she have always feel that Charlotte's opinion of matrimony be not exactly like her own, but she have not suppose it to be possible that, when call into action, she would have sacrifice every well feeling to worldly advantage. Charlotte the wife of Mr. Collins be a most humiliating picture! and to the pang of a friend disgrace herself and sink in her esteem, be add the distressing conviction that it be impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the lot she have choose.
chapter 23
Elizabeth be sit with her mother and sister, reflect on what she have hear, and doubt whether she be authorise to mention it, when Sir William Lucas himself appear, send by his daughter, to announce her engagement to the family. with many compliment to they, and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the house, he unfold the matter---to an audience not merely wonder, but incredulous; for Mrs. Bennet, with more perseverance than politeness, protest he must be entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always unguarde and often uncivil, boisterously exclaim:
"Good Lord! Sir William, how can you tell such a story? do not you know that Mr. Collins want to marry Lizzy?"
nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have bear without anger such treatment; but Sir William's good breeding carry he through it all; and though he beg leave to be positive as to the truth of his information, he listen to all their impertinence with the most forbearing courtesy.
Elizabeth, feel it incumbent on she to relieve he from so unpleasant a situation, now put herself forward to confirm his account, by mention she prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; and endeavour to put a stop to the exclamation of her mother and sister by the earnestness of her congratulation to Sir William, in which she be readily join by Jane, and by make a variety of remark on the happiness that might be expect from the match, the excellent character of Mr. Collins, and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London.
Mrs. Bennet be in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal while Sir William remain; but no soon have he leave they than her feeling find a rapid vent. in the first place, she persist in disbelieve the whole of the matter; secondly, she be very sure that Mr. Collins have be take in; thirdly, she trust that they would never be happy together; and fourthly, that the match might be break off. two inference, however, be plainly deduce from the whole: one, that Elizabeth be the real cause of the mischief; and the other that she herself have be barbarously misuse by they all; and on these two point she principally dwelt during the rest of the day. nothing could console and nothing could appease she. nor do that day wear out her resentment. a week elapse before she could see Elizabeth without scold she, a month pass away before she could speak to Sir William or Lady Lucas without be rude, and many month be go before she could at all forgive their daughter.
Mr. Bennet's emotion be much more tranquil on the occasion, and such as he do experience he pronounce to be of a most agreeable sort; for it gratify he, he say, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom he have be use to think tolerably sensible, be as foolish as his wife, and more foolish than his daughter!
Jane confess herself a little surprised at the match; but she say less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness; nor could Elizabeth persuade she to consider it as improbable. Kitty and Lydia be far from envy Miss Lucas, for Mr. Collins be only a clergyman; and it affect they in no other way than as a piece of news to spread at Meryton.
Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on be able to retort on Mrs. Bennet the comfort of have a daughter well marry; and she call at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she be, though Mrs. Bennet's sour look and ill-natured remark might have be enough to drive happiness away.
between Elizabeth and Charlotte there be a restraint which keep they mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth feel persuade that no real confidence could ever subsist between they again. her disappointment in Charlotte make her turn with fonder regard to her sister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she be sure her opinion could never be shake, and for whose happiness she grow daily more anxious, as Bingley have now be go a week and nothing more be hear of his return.
Jane have send Caroline an early answer to her letter, and be count the day till she might reasonably hope to hear again. the promise letter of thank from Mr. Collins arrive on Tuesday, address to their father, and write with all the solemnity of gratitude which a twelvemonth's abode in the family might have prompt. after discharge his conscience on that head, he proceed to inform they, with many rapturous expression, of his happiness in have obtain the affection of their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explain that it be merely with the view of enjoy her society that he have be so ready to close with their kind wish of see he again at Longbourn, whither he hop to be able to return on Monday fortnight; for Lady Catherine, he add, so heartily approve his marriage, that she wish it to take place as soon as possible, which he trust would be an unanswerable argument with his amiable Charlotte to name an early day for make he the happy of man.
Mr. Collins's return into Hertfordshire be no long a matter of pleasure to Mrs. Bennet. on the contrary, she be as much disposed to complain of it as her husband. it be very strange that he should come to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it be also very inconvenient and exceedingly troublesome. she hat have visitor in the house while her health be so indifferent, and lover be of all people the most disagreeable. such be the gentle murmur of Mrs. Bennet, and they give way only to the great distress of Mr. Bingley's continued absence.
neither Jane nor Elizabeth be comfortable on this subject. day after day pass away without bring any other tiding of he than the report which shortly prevail in Meryton of his come no more to Netherfield the whole winter; a report which highly incense Mrs. Bennet, and which she never fail to contradict as a most scandalous falsehood. 
even Elizabeth begin to fear---not that Bingley be indifferent---but that his sister would be successful in keep he away. unwilling as she be to admit an idea so destructive of Jane's happiness, and so dishonorable to the stability of her lover, she could not prevent its frequently occur. the united effort of his two unfeele sister and of his overpowering friend, assist by the attraction of Miss Darcy and the amusement of London might be too much, she fear, for the strength of his attachment.
as for Jane, her anxiety under this suspense be, of course, more painful than Elizabeth's, but whatever she feel she be desirous of conceal, and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject be never allude to. but as no such delicacy restrain her mother, an hour seldom pass in which she do not talk of Bingley, express her impatience for his arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if he do not come back she would think herself very ill use. it need all Jane's steady mildness to bear these attack with tolerable tranquillity.
Mr. Collins return most punctually on Monday fortnight, but his reception at Longbourn be not quite so gracious as it have be on his first introduction. he be too happy, however, to need much attention; and luckily for the other, the business of love-making relieve they from a great deal of his company. the chief of every day be spend by he at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimes return to Longbourn only in time to make an apology for his absence before the family go to bed.
Mrs. Bennet be really in a most pitiable state. the very mention of anything concern the match throw she into an agony of ill-humour, and wherever she go she be sure of hear it talk of. the sight of Miss Lucas be odious to she. as her successor in that house, she regard she with jealous abhorrence. whenever Charlotte come to see they, she conclude she to be anticipate the hour of possession; and whenever she speak in a low voice to Mr. Collins, be convince that they be talk of the Longbourn estate, and resolve to turn herself and her daughter out of the house, as soon as Mr. Bennet be dead. she complain bitterly of all this to her husband.
"indeed, Mr. Bennet," say she, "it be very hard to think that Charlotte Lucas should ever be mistress of this house, that I should be force to make way for she, and live to see she take her place in it!"
"my dear, do not give way to such gloomy thought. let we hope for well thing. let we flatter ourselves that I may be the survivor."
this be not very consoling to Mrs. Bennet, and therefore, instead of make any answer, she go on as before.
"I cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate. if it be not for the entail, I should not mind it."
"what should not you mind?"
"I should not mind anything at all."
"let we be thankful that you be preserve from a state of such insensibility."
"I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything about the entail. how anyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one's own daughter, I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr. Collins too! why should he have it more than anybody else?"
"I leave it to yourself to determine," say Mr. Bennet.
chapter 24
Miss Bingley's letter arrive, and put an end to doubt. the very first sentence convey the assurance of their be all settle in London for the winter, and conclude with her brother's regret at not have have time to pay his respect to his friend in Hertfordshire before he leave the country.
Hope be over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest of the letter, she find little, except the profess affection of the writer, that could give she any comfort. Miss Darcy's praise occupy the chief of it. her many attraction be again dwelt on, and Caroline boast joyfully of their increase intimacy, and venture to predict the accomplishment of the wish which have be unfold in her former letter. she write also with great pleasure of her brother's be an inmate of Mr. Darcy's house, and mention with rapture some plan of the latter with regard to new furniture.
Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicate the chief of all this, hear it in silent indignation. her heart be divide between concern for her sister, and resentment against all other. to Caroline's assertion of her brother's be partial to Miss Darcy she pay no credit. that he be really fond of Jane, she doubt no more than she have ever do; and much as she have always be dispose to like he, she could not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness of temper, that want of proper resolution, which now make he the slave of his design friend, and lead he to sacrifice of his own happiness to the caprice of their inclination. have his own happiness, however, be the only sacrifice, he might have be allow to sport with it in whatever manner he think well, but her sister's be involve in it, as she think he must be sensible himself. it be a subject, in short, on which reflection would be long indulge, and must be unavaile. she could think of nothing else; and yet 
whether Bingley's regard have really die away, or be suppress by his friend' interference; whether he have be aware of Jane's attachment, or whether it have escape his observation; whatever be the case, though her opinion of he must be materially affect by the difference, her sister's situation remain the same, her peace equally wound.
a day or two pass before Jane have courage to speak of her feeling to Elizabeth; but at last, on Mrs. Bennet's leave they together, after a long irritation than usual about Netherfield and its master, she could not help say:
"oh, that my dear mother have more command over herself! she can have no idea of the pain she give I by her continual reflection on he. but I will not repine. it cannot last long. he will be forget, and we shall all be as we be before."
Elizabeth look at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but say nothing.
"you doubt I," cry Jane, slightly colouring; "indeed, you have no reason. he may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my acquaintance, but that be all. I have nothing either to hope or fear, and nothing to reproach he with. thank God! I have not that pain. a little time, therefore---I shall certainly try to get the well."
with a strong voice she soon add, "I have this comfort immediately, that it have not be more than an error of fancy on my side, and that it have do no harm to anyone but myself."
"my dear jane!" exclaim Elizabeth, "you be too good. your sweetness and disinterestedness be really angelic; I do not know what to say to you. I feel as if I have never do you justice, or love you as you deserve."
Miss Bennet eagerly disclaim all extraordinary merit, and throw back the praise on her sister's warm affection.
"Nay," say Elizabeth, "this be not fair. you wish to think all the world respectable, and be hurt if I speak ill of anybody. I only want to think you perfect, and you set yourself against it. do not be afraid of my run into any excess, of my encroaching on your privilege of universal good-will. you need not. there be few people whom I really love, and still few of whom I think well. the more I see of the world, the more be I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirm my belief of the inconsistency of all human character, and of the little dependence that can be place on the appearance of merit or sense. I have meet with two instance lately, one I will not mention; the other be Charlotte's marriage. it be unaccountable! in every view it be unaccountable!"
"my dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feeling as these. they will ruin your happiness. you do not make allowance enough for difference of situation and temper. consider Mr. Collins's
respectability, and Charlotte's steady, prudent character. remember that she be one of a large family; that as to fortune, it be a most eligible match; and be ready to believe, for everybody's sake, that she may feel something like regard and esteem for our cousin."
"to oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no one else could be benefit by such a belief as this; for be I persuade that Charlotte have any regard for he, I should only think bad of her understanding than I now do of her heart. my dear Jane, Mr. Collins be a conceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man; you know he be, as well as I do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who marry he cannot have a proper way of thinking. you shall not defend she, though it be Charlotte Lucas. you shall not, for the sake of one individual, change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuade yourself or I, that selfishness be prudence, and insensibility of danger security for happiness."
"I must think your language too strong in speak of both," reply Jane; "and I hope you will be convince of it by see they happy together. but enough of this. you allude to something else. you mention two instance. I cannot misunderstand you, but I entreat you, dear Lizzy, not to pain I by think that person to blame, and say your opinion of he be sink. we must not be so ready to fancy ourselves intentionally injure. we must not expect a lively young man to be always so guarded and circumspect. it be very often nothing but our own vanity that deceive we. woman fancy admiration mean more than it do."
"and man take care that they should."
"if it be designedly do, they cannot be justify; but I have no idea of there be so much design in the world as some person imagine."
"I be far from attribute any part of Mr. Bingley's conduct to design," say Elizabeth; "but without scheme to do wrong, or to make other unhappy, there may be error, and there may be misery. thoughtlessness, want of attention to other people's feeling, and want of resolution, will do the business."
"and do you impute it to either of those?"
"yes; to the last. but if I go on, I shall displease you by say what I think of person you esteem. stop I whilst you can."
"you persist, then, in suppose his sister influence he?"
"yes, in conjunction with his friend."
"I cannot believe it. why should they try to influence he? they can only wish his happiness; and if he be attach to I, no other woman can secure it."
"your first position be false. they may wish many thing besides his happiness; they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they may wish he to marry a girl who have all the importance of money, great connection, and pride."
"beyond a doubt, they do wish he to choose Miss Darcy," reply Jane; "but this may be from well feeling than you be suppose. they have know she much long than they have know I; no wonder if they love she well. but, whatever may be their own wish, it be very unlikely they should have oppose their brother's. what sister would think herself at liberty to do it, unless there be something very objectionable? if they believe he attach to I, they would not try to part we; if he be so, they could not succeed. by suppose such an affection, you make everybody act unnaturally and wrong, and I most unhappy. do not distress I by the idea. I be not ashamed of have be mistake---or, at least, it be light, it be nothing in comparison of what I should feel in think ill of he or his sister. let I take it in the good light, in the light in which it may be understand."
Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Mr. Bingley's name be scarcely ever mention between they.
Mrs. Bennet still continue to wonder and repine at his return no more, and though a day seldom pass in which Elizabeth do not account for it clearly, there be little chance of she ever consider it with less perplexity. her daughter endeavour to convince she of what she do not believe herself, that his attention to Jane have be merely the effect of a common and transient liking, which cease when he see she no more; but though the probability of the statement be admit at the time, she have the same story to repeat every day. Mrs. Bennet's good comfort be that Mr. Bingley must be down again in the summer.
Mr. Bennet treat the matter differently. "so, Lizzy," say he one day, "your sister be cross in love, I find. I congratulate she. next to be marry, a girl like to be cross a little in love now and then. it be something to think of, and it give she a sort of distinction among her companion. when be your turn to come? you will hardly bear to be long outdo by Jane. now be your time. here be officer enough in Meryton to disappoint all the young lady in the country. let Wickham be your man. he be a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably."
"thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy I. we must not all expect Jane's good fortune."
"true," say Mr. Bennet, "but it be a comfort to think that whatever of that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will make the most of it."
Mr. Wickham's society be of material service in dispel the gloom which the late perverse occurrence have throw on many of the Longbourn family. they see he often, and to his other recommendation be now add that of general unreserve. the whole of what Elizabeth have already hear, his claim on Mr. Darcy, and all that he have suffer from he, be now openly acknowledge and publicly canvass; and everybody be pleased to know how much they have always dislike Mr. Darcy before they have know anything of the matter.
Miss Bennet be the only creature who could suppose there might be any extenuating circumstance in the case, unknown to the society of Hertfordshire; her mild and steady candour always plead for allowance, and urge the possibility of mistake---but by everybody else Mr. Darcy be condemn as the bad of man.
chapter 25
after a week spend in profession of love and scheme of felicity, Mr. Collins be call from his amiable Charlotte by the arrival of Saturday. the pain of separation, however, might be alleviate on his side, by preparation for the reception of his bride; as he have reason to hope, that shortly after his return into Hertfordshire, the day would be fix that be to make he the happy of man. he take leave of his relation at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before; wish his fair cousin health and happiness again, and promise their father another letter of thank.
on the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet have the pleasure of receive her brother and his wife, who come as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn. Mr. Gardiner be a sensible, gentlemanlike man, greatly superior to his sister, as well by nature as education. the Netherfield lady would have have difficulty in believe that a man who live by trade, and within view of his own warehouse, could have be so well-bred and agreeable. Mrs. Gardiner, who be several year young than
Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Phillips, be an amiable, intelligent, elegant woman, and a great favourite with all her Longbourn niece. between the two eld and herself especially, there subsist a particular regard. they have frequently be stay with she in town.
the first part of Mrs. Gardiner's business on her arrival be to distribute her present and describe the new fashion. when this be do she have a less active part to play. it become her turn to listen. Mrs. Bennet have many grievance to relate, and much to complain of. they have all be very ill-used since she last see her sister. two of her girl have be upon the point of marriage, and after all there be nothing in it.
"I do not blame Jane," she continue, "for Jane would have get Mr. Bingley if she could. but Lizzy! oh, sister! it be very hard to think that she might have be Mr. Collins's wife by this time, have it not be for her own perverseness. he make she an offer in this very room, and she refuse he. the consequence of it be, that Lady Lucas will have a daughter marry before I have, and that the Longbourn estate be just as much entail as ever. the Lucases be very artful people indeed, sister. they be all for what they can get. I be sorry to say it of they, but so it be. it make I very nervous and poorly, to be thwart so in my own family, and to have neighbour who think of themselves before anybody else. however, your come just at this time be the great of comfort, and I be very glad to hear what you tell we, of long sleeve."
Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news have be give before, in the course of Jane and Elizabeth's correspondence with she, make her sister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her niece, turn the conversation.
when alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she speak more on the subject. "it seem likely to have be a desirable match for Jane," say she. "I be sorry it go off. but these thing happen so often! a young man, such as you describe Mr. Bingley, so easily fall in love with a pretty girl for a few week, and when accident separate they, so easily forget she, that these sort of inconsistency be very frequent."
"an excellent consolation in its way," say Elizabeth, "but it will not do for we. we do not suffer by accident. it do not often happen that the interference of friend will persuade a young man of independent fortune to think no more of a girl whom he be violently in love with only a few day before."
"but that expression of 'violently in love' be so hackneyed, so doubtful, so indefinite, that it give I very little idea. it be as often apply to feeling which arise from a half-hour's acquaintance, as to a real, strong attachment. pray, how violent be Mr. Bingley's love?"
"I never see a more promising inclination; he be grow quite inattentive to other people, and wholly engross by she. every time they meet, it be more decide and remarkable. at his own ball he offend two or three young lady, by not ask they to dance; and I speak to he twice myself, without receive an answer. could there be fine symptom? be not general incivility the very essence of love?"
"oh, yes!--of that kind of love which I suppose he to have feel. poor Jane! I be sorry for she, because, with her disposition, she may not get over it immediately. it have well have happen to you, Lizzy; you would have laugh yourself out of it soon. but do you think she would be prevail upon to go back with we? change of scene might be of service---and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as anything."
Elizabeth be exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and feel persuade of her sister's ready acquiescence. 
"I hope," add Mrs. Gardiner, "that no consideration with regard to this young man will influence she. we live in so different a part of town, all our connection be so different, and, as you well know, we go out so little, that it be very improbable that they should meet at all, unless he really come to see she."
"and that be quite impossible; for he be now in the custody of his friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer he to call on Jane in such a part of London! my dear aunt, how could you think of it? Mr. Darcy may perhaps have hear of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but he would hardly think a month's ablution enough to cleanse he from its impurity, be he once to enter it; and depend upon it, Mr. Bingley never stir without he."
"so much the well. I hope they will not meet at all. but do not Jane correspond with his sister? she will not be able to help call."
"she will drop the acquaintance entirely."
but in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affect to place this point, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley's be withhold from see Jane, she feel a solicitude on the subject which convince she, on examination, that she do not consider it entirely hopeless. it be possible, and sometimes she think it probable, that his affection might be reanimate, and the influence of his friend successfully combat by the more natural influence of Jane's attraction.
Miss Bennet accept her aunt's invitation with pleasure; and the Bingleys be no otherwise in her thought at the same time, than as she hop by Caroline's not live in the same house with her brother, she might occasionally spend a morning with she, without any danger of see he.
the Gardiners stay a week at Longbourn; and what with the Phillipses, the Lucases, and the officer, there be not a day without its engagement. Mrs. Bennet have so carefully provide for the entertainment of her brother and sister, that they do not once sit down to a family dinner. when the engagement be for home, some of the officer always make part of it---of which officer Mr. Wickham be sure to be one; and on these occasion, Mrs. Gardiner, render suspicious by Elizabeth's warm commendation, narrowly observe they both. without suppose they, from what she see, to be very seriously in love, their preference of each other be plain enough to make she a little uneasy; and she resolve to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before she leave Hertfordshire, and represent to she the imprudence of encourage such an attachment.
to Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham have one mean of afford pleasure, unconnected with his general power. about ten or a dozen year ago, before her marriage, she have spend a considerable time in that very part of Derbyshire to which he belong. they have, therefore, many acquaintance in common; and though Wickham have be little there since the death of Darcy's father, it be yet in his power to give her fresher intelligence of her former friend than she have be in the way of procure.
Mrs. Gardiner have see Pemberley, and know the late Mr. Darcy by character perfectly well. here consequently be an inexhaustible subject of discourse. in compare her recollection of Pemberley with the minute description which Wickham could give, and in bestow her tribute of praise on the character of its late possessor, she be delight both he and herself. on be make acquainted with the present Mr. Darcy's treatment of he, she try to remember some of that gentleman's reputed disposition when quite a lad which might agree with it, and be confident at last that she recollect have hear Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly speak of as a very proud, ill-natured
boy.
chapter 26
Mrs. Gardiner's caution to Elizabeth be punctually and kindly give on the first favourable opportunity of speak to she alone; after honestly tell she what she think, she thus go on:
"you be too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely because you be warn against it; and, therefore, I be not afraid of speak openly. seriously, I would have you be on your guard. do not involve yourself or endeavour to involve he in an affection which the want of fortune would make so very imprudent. I have nothing to say against he; he be a most interesting young man; and if he have the fortune he ought to have, I should think you could not do well. but as it be, you must not let your fancy run away with you. you have sense, and we all expect you to use it. your father would depend on your resolution and good conduct, I be sure. you must not disappoint your father."
"my dear aunt, this be be serious indeed."
"yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise."
"well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I will take care of myself, and of Mr. Wickham too. he shall not be in love with I, if I can prevent it."
"Elizabeth, you be not serious now."
"I beg your pardon, I will try again. at present I be not in love with Mr. Wickham; no, I certainly be not. but he be, beyond all comparison, the most agreeable man I ever see---and if he become really attach to I---I believe it will be well that he should not. I see the imprudence of it. oh! that abominable Mr. Darcy! my father's opinion of I do I the great honour, and I should be miserable to forfeit it. my father, however, be partial to Mr. Wickham. in short, my dear aunt, I should be very sorry to be the mean of make any of you unhappy; but since we see every day that where there be affection, young people be seldom withhold by immediate want of fortune from enter into engagement with each other, how can I promise to be wise than so many of my fellow-creature if I be tempt, or how be I even to know that it would be wisdom to resist? all that I can promise you, therefore, be not to be in a hurry. I will not be in a hurry to believe myself his first object. when I be in company with 
he, I will not be wish. in short, I will do my good."
"perhaps it will be as well if you discourage his come here so very often. at least, you should not remind you mother of invite he."
"as I do the other day," say Elizabeth with a conscious smile: "very true, it will be wise in I to refrain from that. but do not imagine that he be always here so often. it be on your account that he have be so frequently invite this week. you know my mother's idea as to the necessity of constant company for her friend. but really, and upon my honour, I will try to do what I think to be the wise; and now I hope you be satisfied."
her aunt assure she that she be, and Elizabeth have thank she for the kindness of her hint, they part; a wonderful instance of advice be give on such a point, without be resent.
Mr. Collins return into Hertfordshire soon after it have be quit by the Gardiners and Jane; but as he take up his abode with the Lucases, his arrival be no great inconvenience to Mrs. Bennet. his marriage be now fast approach, and she be at length so far resign as to think it inevitable, and even repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured tone, that she "_wish_ they might be happy." Thursday be to be the wedding day, and on Wednesday Miss Lucas pay her farewell visit; and when she rise to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother's ungracious and reluctant good wish, and sincerely affect herself, accompany she out of the room. as they go downstairs together, Charlotte say:
"I shall depend on hear from you very often, Eliza."
"_that_ you certainly shall."
"and I have another favour to ask you. will you come and see I?"
"we shall often meet, I hope, in Hertfordshire."
"I be not likely to leave Kent for some time. promise I, therefore, to come to Hunsford."
Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the visit.
"my father and Maria be come to I in March," add Charlotte, "and I hope you will consent to be of the party. indeed, Eliza, you will be as welcome as either of they."
the wedding take place; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from the church door, and everybody have as much to say, or to hear, on the subject as usual. Elizabeth soon hear from her friend; and their correspondence be as regular and frequent as it have ever be; that it should be equally unreserved be impossible. Elizabeth could never address she without feel that all the comfort of intimacy be over, and though determine not to slacken as a correspondent, it be for the sake of what have be, rather than what be. Charlotte's first letter be receive with a good deal of eagerness; there could not but be curiosity to know how she would speak of her new home, how she would like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to be; though, when the letter be read, Elizabeth feel that Charlotte express herself on every point exactly as she might have foresee. she write cheerfully, seem surround with comfort, and mention nothing which she could not praise. the house, 
furniture, neighbourhood, and road, be all to her taste, and Lady Catherine's behaviour be most friendly and obliging. it be Mr. Collins's picture of Hunsford and Rosings rationally soften; and Elizabeth perceive that she must wait for her own visit there to know the rest.
Jane have already write a few line to her sister to announce their safe arrival in London; and when she write again, Elizabeth hop it would be in her power to say something of the Bingleys.
her impatience for this second letter be as well reward as impatience generally be. Jane have be a week in town without either seeing or hearing from Caroline. she account for it, however, by suppose that her last letter to her friend from Longbourn have by some accident be lose.
"my aunt," she continue, "be go to-morrow into that part of the town, and I shall take the opportunity of call in Grosvenor Street."
she write again when the visit be pay, and she have see Miss Bingley. "I do not think Caroline in spirit," be her word, "but she be very glad to see I, and reproach I for give she no notice of my come to London. I be right, therefore, my last letter have never reach she. I inquire after their brother, of course. he be well, but so much engage with Mr. Darcy that they scarcely ever see he. I find that Miss Darcy be expect to dinner. I wish I could see she. my visit be not long, as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst be go out. I dare say I shall see they soon here."
Elizabeth shake her head over this letter. it convince she that accident only could discover to Mr. Bingley her sister's be in town.
four week pass away, and Jane see nothing of he. she endeavour to persuade herself that she do not regret it; but she could no long be blind to Miss Bingley's inattention. after wait at home every morning for a fortnight, and invent every evening a fresh excuse for she, the visitor do at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and yet more, the alteration of her manner would allow Jane to deceive herself no long. the letter which she write on this occasion to her sister will prove what she feel.
"my dearest Lizzy will, I be sure, be incapable of triumph in her well judgement, at my expense, when I confess myself to have be entirely deceive in Miss Bingley's regard for I. but, my dear sister, though the event have prove you right, do not think I obstinate if I still assert that, consider what her behaviour be, my confidence be as natural as your suspicion. I do not at all comprehend her reason for wish to be intimate with I; but if the same circumstance be to happen again, I be sure I should be deceive again. Caroline do not return my visit till yesterday; and not a note, not a line, do I receive in the meantime. when she do come, it be very evident that she have no pleasure in it; she make a slight, formal apology, for not call before, say not a word of wish to see I again, and be in every respect so alter a creature, that when she go away I be perfectly resolve to continue the acquaintance no long. I pity, though I cannot help blame she. she be very 
wrong in single I out as she do; I can safely say that every advance to intimacy begin on her side. but I pity she, because she must feel that she have be act wrong, and because I be very sure that anxiety for her brother be the cause of it. I need not explain myself far; and though we know this anxiety to be quite needless, yet if she feel it, it will easily account for her behaviour to I; and so deservedly dear as he be to his sister, whatever anxiety she must feel on his behalf be natural and amiable. I cannot but wonder, however, at she have any such fear now, because, if he have at all care about I, we must have meet, long ago. he know of my being in town, I be certain, from something she say herself; and yet it would seem, by her manner of talk, as if she want to persuade herself that he be really partial to Miss Darcy. I cannot understand it. if I be not afraid of judge harshly, I should be almost tempt to say that there be a strong appearance of duplicity in all this. 
but I will endeavour to banish every painful thought, and think only of what will make I happy---your affection, and the invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. let I hear from you very soon. Miss Bingley say something of his never return to Netherfield again, of give up the house, but not with any certainty. we have well not mention it. I be extremely glad that you have such pleasant account from our friend at Hunsford. pray go to see they, with Sir William and Maria. I be sure you will be very comfortable there.---your, etc."
this letter give Elizabeth some pain; but her spirit return as she consider that Jane would no long be dupe, by the sister at least. all expectation from the brother be now absolutely over. she would not even wish for a renewal of his attention. his character sink on every review of it; and as a punishment for he, as well as a possible advantage to Jane, she seriously hop he might really soon marry Mr. Darcy's sister, as by Wickham's account, she would make he abundantly regret what he have throw away.
Mrs. Gardiner about this time remind Elizabeth of her promise concern that gentleman, and require information; and Elizabeth have such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than to herself. his apparent partiality have subside, his attention be over, he be the admirer of some one else. Elizabeth be watchful enough to see it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain. her heart have be but slightly touch, and her vanity be satisfied with believe that she would have be his only choice, have fortune permit it. the sudden acquisition of ten thousand pound be the most remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he be now render himself agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than in Charlotte's, do not quarrel with he for his wish of independence. nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and while able to suppose that it cost he a few struggle to relinquish she, she be ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure 
for both, and could very sincerely wish he happy.
all this be acknowledge to Mrs. Gardiner; and after relate the circumstance, she thus go on: "I be now convince, my dear aunt, that I have never be much in love; for have I really experience that pure and elevating passion, I should at present det his very name, and wish he all manner of evil. but my feeling be not only cordial towards he; they be even impartial towards Miss King. I cannot find out that I hate she at all, or that I be in the least unwilling to think she a very good sort of girl. there can be no love in all this. my watchfulness have be effectual; and though I certainly should be a more interesting object to all my acquaintance be I distractedly in love with he, I cannot say that I regret my comparative insignificance. Importance may sometimes be purchase too dearly. Kitty and Lydia take his defection much more to heart than I do. they be young in the way of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that handsome young man must have something to live 
on as well as the plain."
chapter 27
with no great event than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwise diversify by little beyond the walk to Meryton, sometimes dirty and sometimes cold, do January and February pass away. March be to take Elizabeth to Hunsford. she have not at first think very seriously of go thither; but Charlotte, she soon find, be depend on the plan and she gradually learn to consider it herself with great pleasure as well as great certainty. Absence have increase her desire of see Charlotte again, and weaken her disgust of Mr. Collins. there be novelty in the scheme, and as, with such a mother and such uncompanionable sister, home could not be faultless, a little change be not unwelcome for its own sake. the journey would moreover give she a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time draw near, she would have be very sorry for any delay. everything, however, go on smoothly, and be finally settle accord to Charlotte's first sketch. she be to accompany Sir William and his second 
daughter. the improvement of spend a night in London be add in time, and the plan become perfect as plan could be.
the only pain be in leave her father, who would certainly miss she, and who, when it come to the point, so little like she go, that he tell she to write to he, and almost promise to answer her letter.
the farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham be perfectly friendly; on his side even more. his present pursuit could not make he forget that Elizabeth have be the first to excite and to deserve his attention, the first to listen and to pity, the first to be admire; and in his manner of bid she adieu, wish she every enjoyment, remind she of what she be to expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trust their opinion of she---their opinion of everybody---would always coincide, there be a solicitude, an interest which she feel must ever attach she to he with a most sincere regard; and she part from he convince that, whether married or single, he must always be her model of the amiable and pleasing.
her fellow-traveller the next day be not of a kind to make she think he less agreeable. Sir William Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a good-humour girl, but as empty-headed as himself, have nothing to say that could be worth hearing, and be listen to with about as much delight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth love absurdity, but she have know Sir William's too long. he could tell she nothing new of the wonder of his presentation and knighthood; and his civility be wear out, like his information.
it be a journey of only twenty-four mile, and they begin it so early as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. as they drive to Mr. Gardiner's door, Jane be at a drawing-room window watch their arrival; when they enter the passage she be there to welcome they, and Elizabeth, look earnestly in her face, be pleased to see it healthful and lovely as ever. on the stair be a troop of little boy and girl, whose eagerness for their cousin's appearance would not allow they to wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they have not see she for a twelvemonth, prevent their come lower. all be joy and kindness. the day pass most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and shopping, and the evening at one of the theatre.
Elizabeth then contrive to sit by her aunt. their first object be her sister; and she be more grieve than astonish to hear, in reply to her minute inquiry, that though Jane always struggle to support her spirit, there be period of dejection. it be reasonable, however, to hope that they would not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner give she the particular also of Miss Bingley's visit in Gracechurch Street, and repeat conversation occur at different time between Jane and herself, which prove that the former have, from her heart, give up the acquaintance.
Mrs. Gardiner then rally her niece on Wickham's desertion, and compliment she on bear it so well.
"but my dear Elizabeth," she add, "what sort of girl be Miss King? I should be sorry to think our friend mercenary."
"pray, my dear aunt, what be the difference in matrimonial affair, between the mercenary and the prudent motive? where do discretion end, and avarice begin? last Christmas you be afraid of his marry I, because it would be imprudent; and now, because he be try to get a girl with only ten thousand pound, you want to find out that he be mercenary."
"if you will only tell I what sort of girl Miss King be, I shall know what to think."
"she be a very good kind of girl, I believe. I know no harm of she."
"but he pay she not the small attention till her grandfather's death make her mistress of this fortune."
"no---what should he? if it be not allowable for he to gain my affection because I have no money, what occasion could there be for make love to a girl whom he do not care about, and who be equally poor?"
"but there seem an indelicacy in direct his attention towards she so soon after this event."
"a man in distressed circumstance have not time for all those elegant decorum which other people may observe. if she do not object to it, why should we?"
"_her_ not object do not justify he. it only show she be deficient in something herself---sense or feeling."
"well," cry Elizabeth, "have it as you choose. he shall be mercenary, and she shall be foolish."
"no, Lizzy, that be what I do not choose. I should be sorry, you know, to think ill of a young man who have live so long in Derbyshire."
"oh! if that be all, I have a very poor opinion of young man who live in Derbyshire; and their intimate friend who live in Hertfordshire be not much well. I be sick of they all. thank Heaven! I be go to-morrow where I shall find a man who have not one agreeable quality, who have neither manner nor sense to recommend he. stupid man be the only one worth know, after all."
"take care, Lizzy; that speech savour strongly of disappointment."
before they be separate by the conclusion of the play, she have the unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in a tour of pleasure which they propose take in the summer.
"we have not determine how far it shall carry we," say Mrs. Gardiner, "but, perhaps, to the Lakes."
no scheme could have be more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her acceptance of the invitation be most ready and grateful. "oh, my dear, dear aunt," she rapturously cry, "what delight! what felicity! you give I fresh life and vigour. adieu to disappointment and spleen. what be young man to rock and mountain? oh! what hour of transport we shall spend! and when we do return, it shall not be like other traveller, without be able to give one accurate idea of anything. we will know where we have go---we will recollect what we have see. lake, mountain, and river shall not be jumble together in our imagination; nor when we attempt to describe any particular scene, will we begin quarrel about its relative situation. let our first effusion be less insupportable than those of the generality of traveller."
chapter 28
every object in the next day's journey be new and interesting to Elizabeth; and her spirit be in a state of enjoyment; for she have see her sister look so well as to banish all fear for her health, and the prospect of her northern tour be a constant source of delight.
when they leave the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye be in search of the Parsonage, and every turning expect to bring it in view. the paling of Rosings Park be their boundary on one side. Elizabeth smile at the recollection of all that she have hear of its inhabitant.
at length the Parsonage be discernible. the garden slop to the road, the house stand in it, the green pale, and the laurel hedge, everything declare they be arrive. Mr. Collins and Charlotte appear at the door, and the carriage stop at the small gate which lead by a short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nod and smile of the whole party. in a moment they be all out of the chaise, rejoice at the sight of each other. Mrs. Collins welcome her friend with the lively pleasure, and Elizabeth be more and more satisfied with come when she find herself so affectionately receive. she see instantly that her cousin's manner be not alter by his marriage; his formal civility be just what it have be, and he detain she some minute at the gate to hear and satisfy his inquiry after all her family. they be then, with no other delay than his point out the neatness of the entrance, take into the house; and as soon as they be in the parlour, he welcome they a second time, 
with ostentatious formality to his humble abode, and punctually repeat all his wife's offer of refreshment.
Elizabeth be prepared to see he in his glory; and she could not help in fancy that in display the good proportion of the room, its aspect and its furniture, he address himself particularly to she, as if wish to make she feel what she have lose in refuse he. but though everything seem neat and comfortable, she be not able to gratify he by any sigh of repentance, and rather look with wonder at her friend that she could have so cheerful an air with such a companion. when Mr. Collins say anything of which his wife might reasonably be ashamed, which certainly be not unseldom, she involuntarily turn her eye on Charlotte. once or twice she could discern a faint blush; but in general Charlotte wisely do not hear. after sit long enough to admire every article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard to the fender, to give an account of their journey, and of all that have happen in London, Mr. Collins invite they to take a stroll in the garden, which be large and well lay out, and 
to the cultivation of which he attend himself. to work in this garden be one of his most respectable pleasure; and Elizabeth admire the command of countenance with which Charlotte talk of the healthfulness of the exercise, and own she encourage it as much as possible. here, lead the way through every walk and cross walk, and scarcely allow they an interval to utter the praise he ask for, every view be point out with a minuteness which leave beauty entirely behind. he could number the field in every direction, and could tell how many tress there be in the most distant clump. but of all the view which his garden, or which the country or kingdom could boast, none be to be compare with the prospect of Rosings, afford by an opening in the tree that border the park nearly opposite the front of his house. it be a handsome modern building, well situated on rise ground.
from his garden, Mr. Collins would have lead they round his two meadow; but the lady, not have shoe to encounter the remain of a white frost, turn back; and while Sir William accompany he, Charlotte take her sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased, probably, to have the opportunity of show it without her husband's help. it be rather small, but well build and convenient; and everything be fit up and arrange with a neatness and consistency of which Elizabeth give Charlotte all the credit. when Mr. Collins could be forget, there be really an air of great comfort throughout, and by Charlotte's evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth suppose he must be often forget.
she have already learn that Lady Catherine be still in the country. it be speak of again while they be at dinner, when Mr. Collins join in, observe:
"yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of see Lady Catherine de Bourgh on the ensue Sunday at church, and I need not say you will be delighted with she. she be all affability and condescension, and I doubt not but you will be honour with some portion of her notice when service be over. I have scarcely any hesitation in say she will include you and my sister Maria in every invitation with which she honour we during your stay here. her behaviour to my dear Charlotte be charming. we dine at Rosings twice every week, and be never allow to walk home. her ladyship's carriage be regularly order for we. I should say, one of her ladyship's carriage, for she have several."
"Lady Catherine be a very respectable, sensible woman indeed," add Charlotte, "and a most attentive neighbour."
"very true, my dear, that be exactly what I say. she be the sort of woman whom one cannot regard with too much deference."
the evening be spend chiefly in talk over Hertfordshire news, and tell again what have already be write; and when it close, Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, have to meditate upon Charlotte's degree of contentment, to understand her address in guiding, and composure in bear with, her husband, and to acknowledge that it be all do very well. she have also to anticipate how her visit would pass, the quiet tenor of their usual employment, the vexatious interruption of Mr. Collins, and the gaiety of their intercourse with rosing. a lively imagination soon settle it all.
about the middle of the next day, as she be in her room get ready for a walk, a sudden noise below seem to speak the whole house in confusion; and, after listen a moment, she hear somebody run upstairs in a violent hurry, and call loudly after she. she open the door and meet Maria in the landing place, who, breathless with agitation, cry out---
"oh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come into the dining-room, for there be such a sight to be see! I will not tell you what it be. make haste, and come down this moment."
Elizabeth ask question in vain; Maria would tell she nothing more, and down they run into the dining-room, which front the lane, in quest of this wonder; it be two lady stop in a low phaeton at the garden gate.
"and be this all?" cry Elizabeth. "I expect at least that the pig be get into the garden, and here be nothing but Lady Catherine and her daughter."
"La! my dear," say Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, "it be not Lady Catherine. the old lady be Mrs. Jenkinson, who live with they; the other be Miss de Bourgh. only look at she. she be quite a little creature. who would have think that she could be so thin and small?"
"she be abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of door in all this wind. why do she not come in?"
"oh, Charlotte say she hardly ever do. it be the great of favour when Miss de Bourgh come in."
"I like her appearance," say Elizabeth, strike with other idea. "she look sickly and cross. yes, she will do for he very well. she will make he a very proper wife."
Mr. Collins and Charlotte be both stand at the gate in conversation with the lady; and Sir William, to Elizabeth's high diversion, be station in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the greatness before he, and constantly bow whenever Miss de Bourgh look that way.
at length there be nothing more to be say; the lady drive on, and the other return into the house. Mr. Collins no soon see the two girl than he begin to congratulate they on their good fortune, which Charlotte explain by let they know that the whole party be ask to dine at Rosings the next day.
chapter 29
Mr. Collins's triumph, in consequence of this invitation, be complete. the power of display the grandeur of his patroness to his wonder visitor, and of let they see her civility towards himself and his wife, be exactly what he have wish for; and that an opportunity of do it should be give so soon, be such an instance of Lady Catherine's condescension, as he know not how to admire enough.
"I confess," say he, "that I should not have be at all surprised by her ladyshipbe ask we on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at Rosings. I rather expect, from my knowledge of her affability, that it would happen. but who could have foresee such an attention as this? who could have imagine that we should receive an invitation to dine there (an invitation, moreover, include the whole party) so immediately after your arrival!"
"I be the less surprised at what have happen," reply Sir William, "from that knowledge of what the manner of the great really be, which my situation in life have allow I to acquire. about the court, such instance of elegant breeding be not uncommon."
Scarcely anything be talk of the whole day or next morning but their visit to Rosings. Mr. Collins be carefully instruct they in what they be to expect, that the sight of such room, so many servant, and so splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower they.
when the lady be separate for the toilette, he say to elizabeth---
"do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel. Lady Catherine be far from require that elegance of dress in we which become herself and her daughter. I would advise you merely to put on whatever of your clothe be superior to the rest---there be no occasion for anything more. Lady Catherine will not think the bad of you for be simply dressed. she like to have the distinction of rank preserve."
while they be dress, he come two or three time to their different door, to recommend their be quick, as Lady Catherine very much object to be keep wait for her dinner. such formidable account of her ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frighten Maria Lucas who have be little use to company, and she look forward to her introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as her father have do to his presentation at St. James's.
as the weather be fine, they have a pleasant walk of about half a mile across the park. every park have its beauty and its prospect; and Elizabeth see much to be pleased with, though she could not be in such rapture as Mr. Collins expect the scene to inspire, and be but slightly affect by his enumeration of the window in front of the house, and his relation of what the glazing altogether have originally cost Sir Lewis de Bourgh.
when they ascend the step to the hall, Maria's alarm be every moment increase, and even Sir William do not look perfectly calm. Elizabeth's courage do not fail she. she have hear nothing of Lady Catherine that speak she awful from any extraordinary talent or miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money or rank she think she could witness without trepidation.
from the entrance-hall, of which Mr. Collins point out, with a rapturous air, the fine proportion and the finished ornament, they follow the servant through an ante-chamber, to the room where Lady Catherine, her daughter, and Mrs. Jenkinson be sit. her ladyship, with great condescension, arise to receive they; and as Mrs. Collins have settle it with her husband that the office of introduction should be her, it be perform in a proper manner, without any of those apology and thank which he would have think necessary.
in spite of have be at St. James's Sir William be so completely awe by the grandeur surround he, that he have but just courage enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without say a word; and his daughter, frighten almost out of her sens, sit on the edge of her chair, not know which way to look. Elizabeth find herself quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three lady before her composedly. Lady Catherine be a tall, large woman, with strongly-mark feature, which might once have be handsome. her air be not conciliate, nor be her manner of receive they such as to make her visitor forget their inferior rank. she be not render formidable by silence; but whatever she say be speak in so authoritative a tone, as mark her self-importance, and bring Mr. Wickham immediately to Elizabeth's mind; and from the observation of the day altogether, she believe Lady Catherine to be exactly what he represent.
when, after examine the mother, in whose countenance and deportment she soon find some resemblance of Mr. Darcy, she turn her eye on the daughter, she could almost have join in Maria's astonishment at she be so thin and so small. there be neither in figure nor face any likeness between the lady. Miss de Bourgh be pale and sickly; her feature, though not plain, be insignificant; and she speak very little, except in a low voice, to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appearance there be nothing remarkable, and who be entirely engage in listen to what she say, and place a screen in the proper direction before her eye.
after sit a few minute, they be all send to one of the window to admire the view, Mr. Collins attend they to point out its beauty, and Lady Catherine kindly inform they that it be much well worth look at in the summer.
the dinner be exceedingly handsome, and there be all the servant and all the article of plate which Mr. Collins have promise; and, as he have likewise foretell, he take his seat at the bottom of the table, by her ladyship's desire, and look as if he feel that life could furnish nothing great. he carve, and eat, and praise with delighted alacrity; and every dish be commend, first by he and then by Sir William, who be now enough recover to echo whatever his son-in-law say, in a manner which Elizabeth wonder Lady Catherine could bear. but Lady Catherine seem gratified by their excessive admiration, and give most gracious smile, especially when any dish on the table prove a novelty to they. the party do not supply much conversation. Elizabeth be ready to speak whenever there be an opening, but she be seat between Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh---the former of whom be engage in listen to Lady Catherine, and the latter say not a word to she all dinner-time. Mrs. Jenkinson be 
chiefly employ in watch how little Miss de Bourgh eat, press she to try some other dish, and fear she be indispose. Maria think speak out of the question, and the gentleman do nothing but eat and admire.
when the lady return to the drawing-room, there be little to be do but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which she do without any intermission till coffee come in, deliver her opinion on every subject in so decisive a manner, as prove that she be not use to have her judgement controvert. she inquire into Charlotte's domestic concern familiarly and minutely, give she a great deal of advice as to the management of they all; tell she how everything ought to be regulate in so small a family as her, and instruct she as to the care of her cow and her poultry. Elizabeth find that nothing be beneath this great lady's attention, which could furnish she with an occasion of dictate to other. in the interval of her discourse with Mrs. Collins, she address a variety of question to Maria and Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connection she know the least, and who she observe to Mrs. Collins be a very genteel, pretty kind of girl. she ask she, at different time, how many 
sister she have, whether they be old or young than herself, whether any of they be likely to be marry, whether they be handsome, where they have be educate, what carriage her father kept, and what have be her mother's maiden name? Elizabeth feel all the impertinence of her question but answer they very composedly. Lady Catherine then observe,
"your father's estate be entail on Mr. Collins, I think. for your sake," turn to Charlotte, "I be glad of it; but otherwise I see no occasion for entail estate from the female line. it be not think necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh's family. do you
play and sing, Miss Bennet?"
"a little."
"oh! then---some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. our instrument be a capital one, probably superior to----you shall try it some day. do your sister play and sing?"
"one of they do."
"why do not you all learn? you ought all to have learn. the Miss Webbs all play, and their father have not so good an income as your. do you draw?"
"no, not at all."
"what, none of you?"
"not one."
"that be very strange. but I suppose you have no opportunity. your mother should have take you to town every spring for the benefit of master."
"my mother would have have no objection, but my father hat London."
"have your governess leave you?"
"we never have any governess."
"no governess! how be that possible? five daughter bring up at home without a governess! I never hear of such a thing. your mother must have be quite a slave to your education."
Elizabeth could hardly help smile as she assure she that have not be the case.
"then, who teach you? who attend to you? without a governess, you must have be neglect."
"compare with some family, I believe we be; but such of we as wish to learn never want the mean. we be always encourage to read, and have all the master that be necessary. those who choose to be idle, certainly might."
"Aye, no doubt; but that be what a governess will prevent, and if I have know your mother, I should have advise she most strenuously to engage one. I always say that nothing be to be do in education without steady and regular instruction, and nobody but a governess can give it. it be wonderful how many family I have be the mean of supply in that way. I be always glad to get a young person well place out. four niece of Mrs. Jenkinson be most delightfully situated through my mean; and it be but the other day that I recommend another young person, who be merely accidentally mention to I, and the family be quite delighted with she. Mrs. Collins, do I tell you of Lady Metcalf's calling yesterday to thank I? she find Miss Pope a treasure. 'Lady Catherine,' say she, 'you have give I a treasure.' be any of your young sister out, Miss Bennet?"
"yes, ma'am, all."
"All! what, all five out at once? very odd! and you only the second. the young one out before the eld one be marry! your young sister must be very young?"
"yes, my young be not sixteen. perhaps she be full young to be much in company. but really, ma'am, I think it would be very hard upon young sister, that they should not have their share of society and amusement, because the elder may not have the mean or inclination to marry early. the last-bear have as good a right to the pleasure of youth at the first. and to be keep back on such a motive! I think it would not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind."
"upon my word," say her ladyship, "you give your opinion very decidedly for so young a person. pray, what be your age?"
"with three young sister grow up," reply Elizabeth, smile, "your ladyship can hardly expect I to own it."
Lady Catherine seem quite astonished at not receive a direct answer; and Elizabeth suspect herself to be the first creature who have ever dare to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.
"you cannot be more than twenty, I be sure, therefore you need not conceal your age."
"I be not one-and-twenty."
when the gentleman have join they, and tea be over, the card-table be place. Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sit down to quadrille; and as Miss de Bourgh choose to play at cassino, the two girl have the honour of assist Mrs. Jenkinson to make up her party. their table be superlatively stupid. scarcely a syllable be utter that do not relate to the game, except when Mrs. Jenkinson express her fear of Miss de Bourgh's be too hot or too cold, or have too much or too little light. a great deal more pass at the other table. Lady Catherine be generally speak---state the mistake of the three other, or relate some anecdote of herself. Mr. Collins be employ in agree to everything her ladyship say, thank she for every fish he win, and apologise if he think he win too many. Sir William do not say much. he be store his memory with anecdote and noble name.
when Lady Catherine and her daughter have play as long as they choose, the table be break up, the carriage be offer to Mrs. Collins, gratefully accept and immediately order. the party then gather round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they be to have on the morrow. from these instruction they be summon by the arrival of the coach; and with many speech of thankfulness on Mr. Collins's side and as many bow on Sir William's they depart. as soon as they have drive from the door, Elizabeth be call on by her cousin to give her opinion of all that she have see at Rosings, which, for Charlotte's sake, she make more favourable than it really be. but her commendation, though cost she some trouble, could by no mean satisfy Mr. Collins, and he be very soon oblige to take her ladyship's praise into his own hand.
chapter 30
Sir William stay only a week at Hunsford, but his visit be long enough to convince he of his daughter's be most comfortably settle, and of her possess such a husband and such a neighbour as be not often meet with. while Sir William be with they, Mr. Collins devote his morning to drive he out in his gig, and show he the country; but when he go away, the whole family return to their usual employment, and Elizabeth be thankful to find that they do not see more of her cousin by the alteration, for the chief of the time between breakfast and dinner be now pass by he either at work in the garden or in reading and writing, and look out of the window in his own book-room, which front the road. the room in which the lady sit be backwards. Elizabeth have at first rather wonder that Charlotte should not prefer the dining-parlour for common use; it be a well sized room, and have a more pleasant aspect; but she soon see that her friend have an excellent reason for what she do, 
for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have be much less in his own apartment, have they sit in one equally lively; and she give Charlotte credit for the arrangement.
from the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and be indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriage go along, and how often especially Miss de Bourgh drive by in her phaeton, which he never fail come to inform they of, though it happen almost every day. she not unfrequently stop at the Parsonage, and have a few minute' conversation with Charlotte, but be scarcely ever prevail upon to get out.
very few day pass in which Mr. Collins do not walk to Rosings, and not many in which his wife do not think it necessary to go likewise; and till Elizabeth recollect that there might be other family living to be dispose of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so many hour. now and then they be honour with a call from her ladyship, and nothing escape her observation that be pass in the room during these visit. she examine into their employment, look at their work, and advise they to do it differently; find fault with the arrangement of the furniture; or detect the housemaid in negligence; and if she accept any refreshment, seem to do it only for the sake of find out that Mrs. Collins's joint of meat be too large for her family.
Elizabeth soon perceive, that though this great lady be not in commission of the peace of the county, she be a most active magistrate in her own parish, the minute concern of which be carry to she by Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottager be dispose to be quarrelsome, discontent, or too poor, she sally forth into the village to settle their difference, silence their complaint, and scold they into harmony and plenty.
the entertainment of dining at Rosings be repeat about twice a week; and, allow for the loss of Sir William, and there be only one card-table in the evening, every such entertainment be the counterpart of the first. their other engagement be few, as the style of live in the neighbourhood in general be beyond Mr. Collins's reach. this, however, be no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spend her time comfortably enough; there be half-hour of pleasant conversation with Charlotte, and the weather be so fine for the time of year that she have often great enjoyment out of door. her favourite walk, and where she frequently go while the other be call on Lady Catherine, be along the open grove which edge that side of the park, where there be a nice sheltered path, which no one seem to value but herself, and where she feel beyond the reach of Lady Catherine's curiosity.
in this quiet way, the first fortnight of her visit soon pass away. Easter be approach, and the week precede it be to bring an addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be important. Elizabeth have hear soon after her arrival that Mr. Darcy be expect there in the course of a few week, and though there be not many of her acquaintance whom she do not prefer, his come would furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings party, and she might be amuse in see how hopeless Miss Bingley's design on he be, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he be evidently destine by Lady Catherine, who talk of his come with the great satisfaction, speak of he in term of the high admiration, and seem almost angry to find that he have already be frequently see by Miss Lucas and herself.
his arrival be soon know at the Parsonage; for Mr. Collins be walk the whole morning within view of the lodge open into Hunsford Lane, in order to have the early assurance of it, and after make his bow as the carriage turn into the Park, hurry home with the great intelligence. on the follow morning he hasten to Rosings to pay his respect. there be two nephew of Lady Catherine to require they, for Mr. Darcy have bring with he a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the young son of his uncle Lord ----, and, to the great surprise of all the party, when Mr. Collins return, the gentleman accompany he. Charlotte have see they from her husband's room, cross the road, and immediately run into the other, tell the girl what an honour they might expect, add:
"I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Mr. Darcy would never have come so soon to wait upon I."
Elizabeth have scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment, before their approach be announce by the door-bell, and shortly afterwards the three gentleman enter the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam, who lead the way, be about thirty, not handsome, but in person and address most truly the gentleman. Mr. Darcy look just as he have be use to look in Hertfordshire---pay his compliment, with his usual reserve, to Mrs. Collins, and whatever might be his feeling toward her friend, meet she with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth merely curtsey to he without say a word.
Colonel Fitzwilliam enter into conversation directly with the readiness and ease of a well-breed man, and talk very pleasantly; but his cousin, after have address a slight observation on the house and garden to Mrs. Collins, sit for some time without speak to anybody. at length, however, his civility be so far awaken as to inquire of Elizabeth after the health of her family. she answer he in the usual way, and after a moment's pause, add:
"my eld sister have be in town these three month. have you never happen to see she there?"
she be perfectly sensible that he never have; but she wish to see whether he would betray any consciousness of what have pass between the Bingleys and Jane, and she think he look a little confused as he answer that he have never be so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet. the subject be pursue no far, and the gentleman soon afterwards go away.
chapter 31
Colonel Fitzwilliam's manner be very much admire at the Parsonage, and the lady all feel that he must add considerably to the pleasure of their engagement at Rosings. it be some day, however, before they receive any invitation thither---for while there be visitor in the house, they could not be necessary; and it be not till Easter-day, almost a week after the gentleman's arrival, that they be honour by such an attention, and then they be merely ask on leave church to come there in the evening. for the last week they have see very little of Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam have call at the Parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy they have see only at church.
the invitation be accept of course, and at a proper hour they join the party in Lady Catherine's drawing-room. her ladyship receive they civilly, but it be plain that their company be by no mean so acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she be, in fact, almost engross by her nephew, speak to they, especially to Darcy, much more than to any other person in the room.
Colonel Fitzwilliam seem really glad to see they; anything be a welcome relief to he at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins's pretty friend have moreover catch his fancy very much. he now seat himself by she, and talk so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travel and stay at home, of new book and music, that Elizabeth have never be half so well entertain in that room before; and they converse with so much spirit and flow, as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself, as well as of Mr. Darcy. his eye have be soon and repeatedly turn towards they with a look of curiosity; and that her ladyship, after a while, share the feeling, be more openly acknowledge, for she do not scruple to call out:
"what be that you be say, Fitzwilliam? what be it you be talk of? what be you tell Miss Bennet? let I hear what it be."
"we be speak of music, madam," say he, when no long able to avoid a reply.
"of music! then pray speak aloud. it be of all subject my delight. I must have my share in the conversation if you be speak of music. there be few people in England, I suppose, who have more true enjoyment of music than myself, or a well natural taste. if I have ever learn, I should have be a great proficient. and so would Anne, if her health have allow she to apply. I be confident that she would have perform delightfully. how do Georgiana get on, Darcy?"
Mr. Darcy speak with affectionate praise of his sister's proficiency.
"I be very glad to hear such a good account of she," say Lady Catherine; "and pray tell she from I, that she cannot expect to excel if she do not practice a good deal."
"I assure you, madam," he reply, "that she do not need such advice. she practise very constantly."
"so much the well. it cannot be do too much; and when I next write to she, I shall charge she not to neglect it on any account. I often tell young lady that no excellence in music be to be acquire without constant practice. I have tell Miss Bennet several time, that she will never play really well unless she practise more; and though Mrs. Collins have no instrument, she be very welcome, as I have often tell she, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the pianoforte in Mrs. Jenkinson's room. she would be in nobody's way, you know, in that part of the house."
Mr. Darcy look a little ashamed of his aunt's ill-breeding, and make no answer.
when coffee be over, Colonel Fitzwilliam remind Elizabeth of have promise to play to he; and she sit down directly to the instrument. he draw a chair near she. Lady Catherine listen to half a song, and then talk, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walk away from she, and make with his usual deliberation towards the pianoforte station himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer's countenance. Elizabeth see what he be do, and at the first convenient pause, turn to he with an arch smile, and say:
"you mean to frighten I, Mr. Darcy, by come in all this state to hear I? I will not be alarmed though your sister do play so well. there be a stubbornness about I that never can bear to be frighten at the will of other. my courage always rise at every attempt to intimidate I."
"I shall not say you be mistaken," he reply, "because you could not really believe I to entertain any design of alarm you; and I have have the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know that you find great enjoyment in occasionally profess opinion which in fact be not your own."
Elizabeth laugh heartily at this picture of herself, and say to Colonel Fitzwilliam, "your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of I, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I be particularly unlucky in meeting with a person so able to expose my real character, in a part of the world where I have hop to pass myself off with some degree of credit. indeed, Mr. Darcy, it be very ungenerous in you to mention all that you know to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire---and, give I leave to say, very impolitic too---for it be provoke I to retaliate, and such thing may come out as will shock your relation to hear."
"I be not afraid of you," say he, smilingly.
"pray let I hear what you have to accuse he of," cry Colonel Fitzwilliam. "I should like to know how he behave among stranger."
"you shall hear then---but prepare yourself for something very dreadful. the first time of my ever see he in Hertfordshire, you must know, be at a ball---and at this ball, what do you think he do? he dance only four dance, though gentleman be scarce; and, to my certain knowledge, more than one young lady be sit down in want of a partner. Mr. Darcy, you cannot deny the fact."
"I have not at that time the honour of know any lady in the assembly beyond my own party."
"true; and nobody can ever be introduce in a ball-room. well, Colonel Fitzwilliam, what do I play next? my finger wait your order."
"perhaps," say Darcy, "I should have judge well, have I seek an introduction; but I be ill-qualified to recommend myself to stranger."
"shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?" say Elizabeth, still address Colonel Fitzwilliam. "shall we ask he why a man of sense and education, and who have live in the world, be ill qualified to recommend himself to stranger?"
"I can answer your question," say Fitzwilliam, "without apply to he. it be because he will not give himself the
trouble."
"I certainly have not the talent which some people possess," say Darcy, "of converse easily with those I have never see before. I cannot catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their concern, as I often see do." 
"my finger," say Elizabeth, "do not move over this instrument in the masterly manner which I see so many woman's do. they have not the same force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. but then I have always suppose it to be my own fault---because I will not take the trouble of practise. it be not that I do not believe my finger as capable as any other woman's of superior execution."
Darcy smile and say, "you be perfectly right. you have employ your time much well. no one admit to the privilege of hear you can think anything want. we neither of we perform to stranger."
here they be interrupt by Lady Catherine, who call out to know what they be talk of. Elizabeth immediately begin play again. Lady Catherine approach, and, after listen for a few minute, say to Darcy:
"Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she practise more, and could have the advantage of a London master. she have a very good notion of fingering, though her taste be not equal to Anne's. Anne would have be a delightful performer, have her health allow she to learn."
Elizabeth look at Darcy to see how cordially he assent to his cousin's praise; but neither at that moment nor at any other could she discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Miss de Bourgh she derive this comfort for Miss Bingley, that he might have be just as likely to marry she, have she be his relation.
Lady Catherine continue her remark on Elizabeth's performance, mix with they many instruction on execution and taste. Elizabeth receive they with all the forbearance of civility, and, at the request of the gentleman, remain at the instrument till her ladyship's carriage be ready to take they all home.
chapter 32
Elizabeth be sit by herself the next morning, and write to Jane while Mrs. Collins and Maria be go on business into the village, when she be startle by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a visitor. as she have hear no carriage, she think it not unlikely to be Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension be put away her half-finished letter that she might escape all impertinent question, when the door open, and, to her very great surprise, Mr. Darcy, and Mr. Darcy only, enter the room.
he seem astonish too on find she alone, and apologise for his intrusion by let she know that he have understand all the lady be to be within.
they then sit down, and when her inquiry after Rosings be make, seem in danger of sink into total silence. it be absolutely necessary, therefore, to think of something, and in this emergence recollect when she have see he last in Hertfordshire, and feel curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty departure, she observe:
"how very suddenly you all quit Netherfield last November, Mr. Darcy! it must have be a most agreeable surprise to Mr. Bingley to see you all after he so soon; for, if I recollect right, he go but the day before. he and his sister be well, I hope, when you leave London?"
"perfectly so, I thank you."
she find that she be to receive no other answer, and, after a short pause add:
"I think I have understand that Mr. Bingley have not much idea of ever return to Netherfield again?"
"I have never hear he say so; but it be probable that he may spend very little of his time there in the future. he have many friend, and be at a time of life when friend and engagement be continually increase."
"if he mean to be but little at Netherfield, it would be well for the neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then we might possibly get a settle family there. but, perhaps, Mr. Bingley do not take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as for his own, and we must expect he to keep it or quit it on the same principle."
"I should not be surprised," say Darcy, "if he be to give it up
as soon as any eligible purchase offer."
Elizabeth make no answer. she be afraid of talk long of his friend; and, have nothing else to say, be now determined to leave the trouble of find a subject to he.
he take the hint, and soon begin with, "this seem a very comfortable house. Lady Catherine, I believe, do a great deal to it when Mr. Collins first come to Hunsford."
"I believe she do---and I be sure she could not have bestow her kindness on a more grateful object."
"Mr. Collins appear to be very fortunate in his choice of a wife."
"yes, indeed, his friend may well rejoice in his have meet with one of the very few sensible woman who would have accept he, or have make he happy if they have. my friend have an excellent understanding---though I be not certain that I consider she marry Mr. Collins as the wise thing she ever do. she seem perfectly happy, however, and in a prudential light it be certainly a very good match for she."
"it must be very agreeable for she to be settle within so easy a distance of her own family and friend."
"an easy distance, do you call it? it be nearly fifty mile."
"and what be fifty mile of good road? little more than half a day's journey. yes, I call it a very easy distance."
"I should never have consider the distance as one of the advantage of the match," cry Elizabeth. "I should never have say Mrs. Collins be settle near her family."
"it be a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. anything beyond the very neighbourhood of longbourn, I suppose, would appear far."
as he speak there be a sort of smile which Elizabeth fancy she understand; he must be suppose she to be think of Jane and Netherfield, and she blush as she answer:
"I do not mean to say that a woman may not be settle too near her family. the far and the near must be relative, and depend on many varying circumstance. where there be fortune to make the expense of travel unimportant, distance become no evil. but that be not the case here. Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a comfortable income, but not such a one as will allow of frequent journey---and I be persuade my friend would not call herself near her family under less than half the present distance."
Mr. Darcy draw his chair a little towards she, and say, "_you_ cannot have a right to such very strong local attachment. you cannot have be always at Longbourn."
Elizabeth look surprised. the gentleman experience some change of feeling; he draw back his chair, take a newspaper from the table, and glance over it, say, in a colder voice:
"be you pleased with Kent?"
a short dialogue on the subject of the country ensue, on either side calm and concise---and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte and her sister, just return from her walk. the tete-a-tete surprise they. Mr. Darcy relate the mistake which have occasion his intruding on Miss Bennet, and after sit a few minute long without say much to anybody, go away.
"what can be the meaning of this?" say Charlotte, as soon as he be go. "my dear, Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he would never have call we in this familiar way."
but when Elizabeth tell of his silence; it do not seem very likely, even to Charlotte's wish, to be the case; and after various conjecture, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from the difficulty of find anything to do, which be the more probable from the time of year. all field sport be over. within door there be Lady Catherine, book, and a billiard-table, but gentleman cannot always be within door; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who live in it, the two cousin find a temptation from this period of walk thither almost every day. they call at various time of the morning, sometimes separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompany by their aunt. it be plain to they all that Colonel Fitzwilliam come because he have pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommend he still more; and Elizabeth be remind by her own satisfaction in be with he, as well as by his evident 
admiration of she, of her former favourite George Wickham; and though, in compare they, she see there be less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam's manner, she believe he might have the well informed mind.
but why Mr. Darcy come so often to the Parsonage, it be more difficult to understand. it could not be for society, as he frequently sit there ten minute together without open his lip; and when he do speak, it seem the effect of necessity rather than of choice---a sacrifice to propriety, not a pleasure to himself. he seldom appear really animate. Mrs. Collins know not what to make of he. Colonel Fitzwilliam's occasionally laugh at his stupidity, prove that he be generally different, which her own knowledge of he could not have tell she; and as she would like to have believe this change the effect of love, and the object of that love her friend Eliza, she set herself seriously to work to find it out. she watch he whenever they be at Rosings, and whenever he come to Hunsford; but without much success. he certainly look at her friend a great deal, but the expression of that look be disputable. it be an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often doubt whether there be much admiration 
in it, and sometimes it seem nothing but absence of mind.
she have once or twice suggest to Elizabeth the possibility of his be partial to she, but Elizabeth always laugh at the idea; and Mrs. Collins do not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of raise expectation which might only end in disappointment; for in her opinion it admit not of a doubt, that all her friend's dislike would vanish, if she could suppose he to be in her power.
in her kind scheme for Elizabeth, she sometimes plan she marry Colonel Fitzwilliam. he be beyond comparison the most pleasant man; he certainly admire she, and his situation in life be most eligible; but, to counterbalance these advantage, Mr. Darcy have considerable patronage in the church, and his cousin could have none at all.
chapter 33
More than once do Elizabeth, in her ramble within the park, unexpectedly meet Mr. Darcy. she feel all the perverseness of the mischance that should bring he where no one else be bring, and, to prevent its ever happen again, take care to inform he at first that it be a favourite haunt of her. how it could occur a second time, therefore, be very odd! yet it do, and even a third. it seem like wilful ill-nature, or a voluntary penance, for on these occasion it be not merely a few formal inquiry and an awkward pause and then away, but he actually think it necessary to turn back and walk with she. he never say a great deal, nor do she give herself the trouble of talk or of listen much; but it strike she in the course of their third rencontre that he be ask some odd unconnected question---about her pleasure in be at Hunsford, her love of solitary walk, and her opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins's happiness; and that in speaking of Rosings and she not perfectly understand the 
house, he seem to expect that whenever she come into Kent again she would be stay there too. his word seem to imply it. could he have Colonel Fitzwilliam in his thought? she suppose, if he mean anything, he must mean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter. it distress she a little, and she be quite glad to find herself at the gate in the pale opposite the Parsonage.
she be engage one day as she walk, in peruse Jane's last letter, and dwell on some passage which prove that Jane have not write in spirit, when, instead of be again surprise by Mr. Darcy, she see on look up that Colonel Fitzwilliam be meet she. put away the letter immediately and force a smile, she say:
"I do not know before that you ever walk this way."
"I have be make the tour of the park," he reply, "as I generally do every year, and intend to close it with a call at the Parsonage. be you go much far?"
"no, I should have turn in a moment."
and accordingly she do turn, and they walk towards the Parsonage together.
"do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday?" say she.
"yes---if Darcy do not put it off again. but I be at his disposal. he arrange the business just as he please."
"and if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he have at least pleasure in the great power of choice. I do not know anybody who seem more to enjoy the power of do what he like than Mr. Darcy."
"he like to have his own way very well," reply Colonel Fitzwilliam. "but so we all do. it be only that he have well mean of have it than many other, because he be rich, and many other be poor. I speak feelingly. a young son, you know, must be inure to self-denial and dependence."
"in my opinion, the young son of an earl can know very little of either. now seriously, what have you ever know of self-denial and dependence? when have you be prevent by want of money from go wherever you choose, or procure anything you have a fancy for?"
"these be home question---and perhaps I cannot say that I have experience many hardship of that nature. but in matter of great weight, I may suffer from want of money. young son cannot marry where they like."
"unless where they like woman of fortune, which I think they very often do."
"our habit of expense make we too dependent, and there be too many in my rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention to money."
"be this," think Elizabeth, "mean for I?" and she colour at the idea; but, recover herself, say in a lively tone, "and pray, what be the usual price of an earl's young son? unless the eld brother be very sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pound."
he answer she in the same style, and the subject drop. to interrupt a silence which might make he fancy she affect with what have pass, she soon afterwards say:
"I imagine your cousin bring you down with he chiefly for the sake of have someone at his disposal. I wonder he do not marry, to secure a last convenience of that kind. but, perhaps, his sister do as well for the present, and, as she be under his sole care, he may do what he like with she."
"no," say Colonel Fitzwilliam, "that be an advantage which he must divide with I. I be join with he in the guardianship of Miss Darcy."
"be you indeed? and pray what sort of guardian do you make? do your charge give you much trouble? young lady of her age be sometimes a little difficult to manage, and if she have the true Darcy spirit, she may like to have her own way."
as she speak she observe he look at she earnestly; and the manner in which he immediately ask she why she suppose Miss Darcy likely to give they any uneasiness, convince she that she have somehow or other get pretty near the truth. she directly reply:
"you need not be frightened. I never hear any harm of she; and I dare say she be one of the most tractable creature in the world. she be a very great favourite with some lady of my acquaintance, Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley. I think I have hear you say that you know they."
"I know they a little. their brother be a pleasant gentlemanlike man---he be a great friend of Darcy's."
"oh! yes," say Elizabeth drily; "Mr. Darcy be uncommonly kind to Mr. Bingley, and take a prodigious deal of care of he."
"care of he! yes, I really believe Darcy do take care of he in those point where he most want care. from something that he tell I in our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted to he. but I ought to beg his pardon, for I have no right to suppose that Bingley be the person mean. it be all conjecture."
"what be it you mean?"
"it be a circumstance which Darcy could not wish to be generally know, because if it be to get round to the lady's family, it would be an unpleasant thing."
"you may depend upon my not mention it."
"and remember that I have not much reason for suppose it to be Bingley. what he tell I be merely this: that he congratulate himself on have lately save a friend from the inconvenience of a most imprudent marriage, but without mention name or any other particular, and I only suspect it to be Bingley from believe he the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort, and from know they to have be together the whole of last summer."
"do Mr. Darcy give you reason for this interference?"
"I understand that there be some very strong objection against the lady."
"and what art do he use to separate they?"
"he do not talk to I of his own art," say Fitzwilliam, smile. "he only tell I what I have now tell you."
Elizabeth make no answer, and walk on, her heart swell with indignation. after watch she a little, Fitzwilliam ask she why she be so thoughtful.
"I be think of what you have be tell I," say she. "your cousin's conduct do not suit my feeling. why be he to be the judge?"
"you be rather disposed to call his interference officious?"
"I do not see what right Mr. Darcy have to decide on the propriety of his friend's inclination, or why, upon his own judgement alone, he be to determine and direct in what manner his friend be to be happy. but," she continue, recollect herself, "as we know none of the particular, it be not fair to condemn he. it be not to be suppose that there be much affection in the case."
"that be not an unnatural surmise," say Fitzwilliam, "but it be a lessening of the honour of my cousin's triumph very sadly."
this be speak jestingly; but it appear to she so just a picture of Mr. Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer, and therefore, abruptly change the conversation talk on indifferent matter until they reach the Parsonage. there, shut into her own room, as soon as their visitor leave they, she could think without interruption of all that she have hear. it be not to be suppose that any other people could be mean than those with whom she be connect. there could not exist in the world two man over whom Mr. Darcy could have such boundless influence. that he have be concern in the measure take to separate Bingley and Jane she have never doubt; but she have always attribute to Miss Bingley the principal design and arrangement of they. if his own vanity, however, do not mislead he, he be the cause, his pride and caprice be the cause, of all that Jane have suffer, and still continue to suffer. he have ruin for a while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, 
generous heart in the world; and no one could say how last an evil he might have inflict.
"there be some very strong objection against the lady," be Colonel Fitzwilliam's word; and those strong objection probably be, her have one uncle who be a country attorney, and another who be in business in London.
"to Jane herself," she exclaim, "there could be no possibility of objection; all loveliness and goodness as she is!--her understand excellent, her mind improve, and her manner captivate. neither could anything be urge against my father, who, though with some peculiarity, have ability Mr. Darcy himself need not disdain, and respectability which he will probably never each." when she think of her mother, her confidence give way a little; but she would not allow that any objection there have material weight with Mr. Darcy, whose pride, she be convince, would receive a deep wound from the want of importance in his friend's connection, than from their want of sense; and she be quite decide, at last, that he have be partly govern by this bad kind of pride, and partly by the wish of retain Mr. Bingley for his sister.
the agitation and tear which the subject occasion, bring on a headache; and it grow so much bad towards the evening, that, add to her unwillingness to see Mr. Darcy, it determine she not to attend her cousin to Rosings, where they be engage to drink tea. Mrs. Collins, see that she be really unwell, do not press she to go and as much as possible prevent her husband from press she; but Mr. Collins could not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine's be rather displeased by her stay at home.
chapter 34
when they be go, Elizabeth, as if intend to exasperate herself as much as possible against Mr. Darcy, choose for her employment the examination of all the letter which Jane have write to she since her be in Kent. they contain no actual complaint, nor be there any revival of past occurrence, or any communication of present suffering. but in all, and in almost every line of each, there be a want of that cheerfulness which have be use to characterise her style, and which, proceed from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself and kindly dispose towards everyone, have be scarcely ever clouded. Elizabeth notice every sentence convey the idea of uneasiness, with an attention which it have hardly receive on the first perusal. Mr. Darcy's shameful boast of what misery he have be able to inflict, give she a keener sense of her sister's suffering. it be some consolation to think that his visit to Rosings be to end on the day after the next---and, a still great, that in less than a 
fortnight she should herself be with Jane again, and enable to contribute to the recovery of her spirit, by all that affection could do.
she could not think of Darcy's leave Kent without remember that his cousin be to go with he; but Colonel Fitzwilliam have make it clear that he have no intention at all, and agreeable as he be, she do not mean to be unhappy about he.
while settle this point, she be suddenly rouse by the sound of the door-bell, and her spirit be a little flutter by the idea of its be Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, who have once before call late in the evening, and might now come to inquire particularly after she. but this idea be soon banish, and her spirit be very differently affect, when, to her utter amazement, she see Mr. Darcy walk into the room. in an hurried manner he immediately begin an inquiry after her health, impute his visit to a wish of hear that she be well. she answer he with cold civility. he sit down for a few moment, and then get up, walk about the room. Elizabeth be surprised, but say not a word. after a silence of several minute, he come towards she in an agitated manner, and thus begin:
"in vain I have struggle. it will not do. my feeling will not be repress. you must allow I to tell you how ardently I admire and love you."
Elizabeth's astonishment be beyond expression. she star, colour, doubt, and be silent. this he consider sufficient encouragement; and the avowal of all that he feel, and have long feel for she, immediately follow. he speak well; but there be feeling besides those of the heart to be detail; and he be not more eloquent on the subject of tenderness than of pride. his sense of her inferiority---of its be a degradation---of the family obstacle which have always oppose to inclination, be dwelt on with a warmth which seem due to the consequence he be wound, but be very unlikely to recommend his suit.
in spite of her deeply-root dislike, she could not be insensible to the compliment of such a man's affection, and though her intention do not vary for an instant, she be at first sorry for the pain he be to receive; till, rouse to resentment by his subsequent language, she lose all compassion in anger. she try, however, to compose herself to answer he with patience, when he should have do. he conclude with represent to she the strength of that attachment which, in spite of all his endeavour, he have find impossible to conquer; and with express his hope that it would now be reward by her acceptance of his hand. as he say this, she could easily see that he have no doubt of a favourable answer. he speak of apprehension and anxiety, but his countenance express real security. such a circumstance could only exasperate far, and, when he cease, the colour rise into her cheek, and she say:
"in such case as this, it be, I believe, the establish mode to express a sense of obligation for the sentiment avow, however unequally they may be return. it be natural that obligation should be feel, and if I could feel gratitude, I would now thank you. but I cannot---I have never desire your good opinion, and you have certainly bestow it most unwillingly. I be sorry to have occasion pain to anyone. it have be most unconsciously do, however, and I hope will be of short duration. the feeling which, you tell I, have long prevent the acknowledgment of your regard, can have little difficulty in overcome it after this explanation."
Mr. Darcy, who be lean against the mantelpiece with his eye fix on her face, seem to catch her word with no less resentment than surprise. his complexion become pale with anger, and the disturbance of his mind be visible in every feature. he be struggle for the appearance of composure, and would not open his lip till he believe himself to have attain it. the pause be to Elizabeth's feeling dreadful. at length, with a voice of force calmness, he say:
"and this be all the reply which I be to have the honour of expect! I might, perhaps, wish to be inform why, with so little endeavour at civility, I be thus reject. but it be of small importance."
"I might as well inquire," reply she, "why with so evident a desire of offend and insult I, you choose to tell I that you like I against your will, against your reason, and even against your character? be not this some excuse for incivility, if I be uncivil? but I have other provocation. you know I have. have not my feeling decide against you---have they be indifferent, or have they even be favourable, do you think that any consideration would tempt I to accept the man who have be the mean of ruin, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a most beloved sister?"
as she pronounce these word, Mr. Darcy change colour; but the emotion be short, and he listen without attempt to interrupt she while she continue:
"I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. no motive can excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you act there. you dare not, you cannot deny, that you have be the principal, if not the only mean of divide they from each other---of expose one to the censure of the world for caprice and instability, and the other to its derision for disappointed hope, and involve they both in misery of the acute kind."
she pause, and see with no slight indignation that he be listen with an air which prove he wholly unmove by any feeling of remorse. he even look at she with a smile of affected incredulity.
"can you deny that you have do it?" she repeat.
with assumed tranquillity he then reply: "I have no wish of deny that I do everything in my power to separate my friend from your sister, or that I rejoice in my success. towards he I have be kind than towards myself."
Elizabeth disdain the appearance of notice this civil reflection, but its meaning do not escape, nor be it likely to conciliate she.
"but it be not merely this affair," she continue, "on which my dislike be found. long before it have take place my opinion of you be decide. your character be unfold in the recital which I receive many month ago from Mr. Wickham. on this subject, what can you have to say? in what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself? or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon other?"
"you take an eager interest in that gentleman's concern," say Darcy, in a less tranquil tone, and with a heighten colour.
"who that know what his misfortune have be, can help feel an interest in he?"
"his misfortune!" repeat Darcy contemptuously; "yes, his misfortune have be great indeed."
"and of your infliction," cry Elizabeth with energy. "you have reduce he to his present state of poverty---comparative poverty. you have withhold the advantage which you must know to have be design for he. you have deprive the good year of his life of that independence which be no less his due than his desert. you have do all this! and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortune with contempt and ridicule."
"and this," cry Darcy, as he walk with quick step across the room, "be your opinion of I! this be the estimation in which you hold I! I thank you for explain it so fully. my fault, accord to this calculation, be heavy indeed! but perhaps," add he, stop in his walk, and turn towards she, "these offense might have be overlook, have not your pride be hurt by my honest confession of the scruple that have long prevent my form any serious design. these bitter accusation might have be suppress, have I, with great policy, conceal my struggle, and flatter you into the belief of my be impel by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, by reflection, by everything. but disguise of every sort be my abhorrence. nor be I ashamed of the feeling I relate. they be natural and just. could you expect I to rejoice in the inferiority of your connections?--to congratulate myself on the hope of relation, whose condition in life be so decidedly beneath my own?"
Elizabeth feel herself grow more angry every moment; yet she try to the utmost to speak with composure when she say:
"you be mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your declaration affect I in any other way, than as it spar the concern which I might have feel in refuse you, have you behave in a more gentlemanlike manner."
she see he start at this, but he say nothing, and she continue:
"you could not have make the offer of your hand in any possible way that would have tempt I to accept it."
again his astonishment be obvious; and he look at she with an expression of mingled incredulity and mortification. she go on:
"from the very beginning---from the first moment, I may almost say---of my acquaintance with you, your manner, impress I with the full belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of the feeling of other, be such as to form the groundwork of disapprobation on which succeed event have build so immovable a dislike; and I have not know you a month before I feel that you be the last man in the world whom I could ever be prevail on to marry."
"you have say quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend your feeling, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have be. forgive I for have take up so much of your time, and accept my good wish for your health and happiness."
and with these word he hastily leave the room, and Elizabeth hear he the next moment open the front door and quit the house.
the tumult of her mind, be now painfully great. she know not how to support herself, and from actual weakness sit down and cry for half-an-hour. her astonishment, as she reflect on what have pass, be increase by every review of it. that she should receive an offer of marriage from Mr. Darcy! that he should have be in love with she for so many month! so much in love as to wish to marry she in spite of all the objection which have make he prevent his friend's marry her sister, and which must appear at least with equal force in his own case---be almost incredible! it be gratify to have inspire unconsciously so strong an affection. but his pride, his abominable pride---his shameless avowal of what he have do with respect to Jane---his unpardonable assurance in acknowledge, though he could not justify it, and the unfeele manner in which he have mention Mr. Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he have not attempt to deny, soon overcome the pity which the consideration of his attachment have for a 
moment excited. she continue in very agitated reflection till the sound of Lady Catherine's carriage make she feel how unequal she be to encounter Charlotte's observation, and hurry she away to her room.
chapter 35
Elizabeth awake the next morning to the same thought and meditation which have at length close her eye. she could not yet recover from the surprise of what have happen; it be impossible to think of anything else; and, totally indispose for employment, she resolve, soon after breakfast, to indulge herself in air and exercise. she be proceed directly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy's sometimes come there stop she, and instead of enter the park, she turn up the lane, which lead far from the turnpike-road. the park pal be still the boundary on one side, and she soon pass one of the gate into the ground.
after walk two or three time along that part of the lane, she be tempt, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gate and look into the park. the five week which she have now pass in Kent have make a great difference in the country, and every day be add to the verdure of the early tree. she be on the point of continue her walk, when she catch a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which edge the park; he be move that way; and, fearful of its be Mr. Darcy, she be directly retreat. but the person who advance be now near enough to see she, and step forward with eagerness, pronounce her name. she have turn away; but on hear herself call, though in a voice which prove it to be Mr. Darcy, she move again towards the gate. he have by that time reach it also, and, hold out a letter, which she instinctively take, say, with a look of haughty composure, "I have be walk in the grove some time in the hope of meet you. will you do I the honour 
of read that letter?" and then, with a slight bow, turn again into the plantation, and be soon out of sight.
with no expectation of pleasure, but with the strong curiosity, Elizabeth open the letter, and, to she still increase wonder, perceive an envelope contain two sheet of letter-paper, write quite through, in a very close hand. the envelope itself be likewise full. pursue her way along the lane, she then begin it. it be date from Rosings, at eight o'clock in the morning, and be as follows:--
"be not alarmed, madam, on receive this letter, by the apprehension of its contain any repetition of those sentiment or renewal of those offer which be last night so disgusting to you. I write without any intention of pain you, or humble myself, by dwell on wish which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forget; and the effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should have be spar, have not my character require it to be write and read. you must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand your attention; your feeling, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I demand it of your justice.
"two offense of a very different nature, and by no mean of equal magnitude, you last night lay to my charge. the first mention be, that, regardless of the sentiment of either, I have detach Mr. Bingley from your sister, and the other, that I have, in defiance of various claim, in defiance of honour and humanity, ruin the immediate prosperity and blast the prospect of Mr. Wickham. Wilfully and wantonly to have throw off the companion of my youth, the acknowledge favourite of my father, a young man who have scarcely any other dependence than on our patronage, and who have be bring up to expect its exertion, would be a depravity, to which the separation of two young person, whose affection could be the growth of only a few week, could bear no comparison. but from the severity of that blame which be last night so liberally bestow, respect each circumstance, I shall hope to be in the future secure, when the follow account of my action and their motif have be read. if, in the 
explanation of they, which be due to myself, I be under the necessity of relate feeling which may be offensive to yours, I can only say that I be sorry. the necessity must be obey, and further apology would be absurd.
"I have not be long in Hertfordshire, before I see, in common with other, that Bingley prefer your eld sister to any other young woman in the country. but it be not till the evening of the dance at Netherfield that I have any apprehension of his feeling a serious attachment. I have often see he in love before. at that ball, while I have the honour of dance with you, I be first make acquaint, by Sir William Lucas's accidental information, that Bingley's attention to your sister have give rise to a general expectation of their marriage. he speak of it as a certain event, of which the time alone could be undecided. from that moment I observe my friend's behaviour attentively; and I could then perceive that his partiality for Miss Bennet be beyond what I have ever witness in he. your sister I also watch. her look and manner be open, cheerful, and engage as ever, but without any symptom of peculiar regard, and I remain convinced from the evening's scrutiny, that though she receive his 
attention with pleasure, she do not invite they by any participation of sentiment. if you have not be mistaken here, I must have be in error. your superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter probable. if it be so, if I have be mislead by such error to inflict pain on she, your resentment have not be unreasonable. but I shall not scruple to assert, that the serenity of your sister's countenance and air be such as might have give the most acute observer a conviction that, however amiable her temper, her heart be not likely to be easily touch. that I be desirous of believe her indifferent be certain---but I will venture to say that my investigation and decision be not usually influence by my hope or fear. I do not believe she to be indifferent because I wish it; I believe it on impartial conviction, as truly as I wish it in reason. my objection to the marriage be not merely those which I last night acknowledge to have the utmost force of passion to put aside, in my own 
case; the want of connection could not be so great an evil to my friend as to I. but there be other cause of repugnance; cause which, though still exist, and exist to an equal degree in both instance, I have myself endeavour to forget, because they be not immediately before I. these cause must be state, though briefly. the situation of your mother's family, though objectionable, be nothing in comparison to that total want of propriety so frequently, so almost uniformly betray by herself, by your three young sister, and occasionally even by your father. pardon I. it pain I to offend you. but amidst your concern for the defect of your near relation, and your displeasure at this representation of they, let it give you consolation to consider that, to have conduct yourself so as to avoid any share of the like censure, be praise no less generally bestow on you and your eld sister, than it be honourable to the sense and disposition of both. I will only say far that from 
what pass that evening, my opinion of all party be confirm, and every inducement heighten which could have lead I before, to preserve my friend from what I esteem a most unhappy connection. he leave Netherfield for London, on the day follow, as you, I be certain, remember, with the design of soon return.
"the part which I act be now to be explain. his sister' uneasiness have be equally excited with my own; our coincidence of feeling be soon discover, and, alike sensible that no time be to be lose in detach their brother, we shortly resolve on join he directly in London. we accordingly go---and there I readily engage in the office of point out to my friend the certain evil of such a choice. I describe, and enforce they earnestly. but, however this remonstrance might have stagger or delay his determination, I do not suppose that it would ultimately have prevent the marriage, have it not be second by the assurance that I hesitate not in giving, of your sister's indifference. he have before believe she to return his affection with sincere, if not with equal regard. but Bingley have great natural modesty, with a strong dependence on my judgement than on his own. to convince he, therefore, that he have deceive himself, be no very difficult point. to persuade he against 
return into Hertfordshire, when that conviction have be give, be scarcely the work of a moment. I cannot blame myself for have do thus much. there be but one part of my conduct in the whole affair on which I do not reflect with satisfaction; it be that I condescend to adopt the measure of art so far as to conceal from he your sister's be in town. I know it myself, as it be know to Miss Bingley; but her brother be even yet ignorant of it. that they might have meet without ill consequence be perhaps probable; but his regard do not appear to I enough extinguish for he to see she without some danger. perhaps this concealment, this disguise be beneath I; it be do, however, and it be do for the good. on this subject I have nothing more to say, no other apology to offer. if I have wound your sister's feeling, it be unknowingly do and though the motif which govern I may to you very naturally appear insufficient, I have not yet learn to condemn they.
"with respect to that other, more weighty accusation, of have injure Mr. Wickham, I can only refute it by lay before you the whole of his connection with my family. of what he have particularly accuse I I be ignorant; but of the truth of what I shall relate, I can summon more than one witness of undoubted veracity.
"Mr. Wickham be the son of a very respectable man, who have for many year the management of all the Pemberley estate, and whose good conduct in the discharge of his trust naturally incline my father to be of service to he; and on George Wickham, who be his godson, his kindness be therefore liberally bestow. my father support he at school, and afterwards at Cambridge---most important assistance, as his own father, always poor from the extravagance of his wife, would have be unable to give he a gentleman's education. my father be not only fond of this young man's society, whose manner be always engage; he have also the high opinion of he, and hop the church would be his profession, intend to provide for he in it. as for myself, it be many, many year since I first begin to think of he in a very different manner. the vicious propensity---the want of principle, which he be careful to guard from the knowledge of his good friend, could not escape the observation of a young man of nearly 
the same age with himself, and who have opportunity of see he in unguarded moment, which Mr. Darcy could not have. here again shall give you pain---to what degree you only can tell. but whatever may be the sentiment which Mr. Wickham have create, a suspicion of their nature shall not prevent I from unfold his real character---it add even another motive.
"my excellent father die about five year ago; and his attachment to Mr. Wickham be to the last so steady, that in his will he particularly recommend it to I, to promote his advancement in the good manner that his profession might allow---and if he take order, desire that a valuable family living might be his as soon as it become vacant. there be also a legacy of one thousand pound. his own father do not long survive mine, and within half a year from these event, Mr. Wickham write to inform I that, have finally resolve against take order, he hop I should not think it unreasonable for he to expect some more immediate pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the preferment, by which he could not be benefit. he have some intention, he add, of study law, and I must be aware that the interest of one thousand pound would be a very insufficient support therein. I rather wish, than believe he to be sincere; but, at any rate, be perfectly ready to accede to his proposal. I know that Mr. Wickham 
ought not to be a clergyman; the business be therefore soon settle---he resign all claim to assistance in the church, be it possible that he could ever be in a situation to receive it, and accept in return three thousand pound. all connection between we seem now dissolve. I think too ill of he to invite he to Pemberley, or admit his society in town. in town I believe he chiefly live, but his study the law be a mere pretence, and be now free from all restraint, his life be a life of idleness and dissipation. for about three year I hear little of he; but on the decease of the incumbent of the living which have be design for he, he apply to I again by letter for the presentation. his circumstance, he assure I, and I have no difficulty in believe it, be exceedingly bad. he have find the law a most unprofitable study, and be now absolutely resolve on be ordain, if I would present he to the living in question---of which he trust there could be little doubt, as he be 
well assure that I have no other person to provide for, and I could not have forget my revere father's intention. you will hardly blame I for refuse to comply with this entreaty, or for resist every repetition to it. his resentment be in proportion to the distress of his circumstance---and he be doubtless as violent in his abuse of I to other as in his reproach to myself. after this period every appearance of acquaintance be drop. how he live I know not. but last summer he be again most painfully obtrude on my notice.
"I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget myself, and which no obligation less than the present should induce I to unfold to any human being. have say thus much, I feel no doubt of your secrecy. my sister, who be more than ten year my junior, be leave to the guardianship of my mother's nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and myself. about a year ago, she be take from school, and an establishment form for she in London; and last summer she go with the lady who preside over it, to ramsgate; and thither also go Mr. Wickham, undoubtedly by design; for there prove to have be a prior acquaintance between he and Mrs. Younge, in whose character we be most unhappily deceive; and by her connivance and aid, he so far recommend himself to Georgiana, whose affectionate heart retain a strong impression of his kindness to she as a child, that she be persuade to believe herself in love, and to consent to an elopement. she be then but fifteen, which must be her excuse; and after 
state her imprudence, I be happy to add, that I owe the knowledge of it to herself. I join they unexpectedly a day or two before the intend elopement, and then Georgiana, unable to support the idea of grieve and offend a brother whom she almost look up to as a father, acknowledge the whole to I. you may imagine what I feel and how I act. regard for my sister's credit and feeling prevent any public exposure; but I write to Mr. Wickham, who leave the place immediately, and Mrs. Younge be of course remove from her charge. Mr. Wickham's chief object be unquestionably my sister's fortune, which be thirty thousand pound; but I cannot help suppose that the hope of revenge himself on I be a strong inducement. his revenge would have be complete indeed.
"this, madam, be a faithful narrative of every event in which we have be concerned together; and if you do not absolutely reject it as false, you will, I hope, acquit I henceforth of cruelty towards Mr. Wickham. I know not in what manner, under what form of falsehood he have impose on you; but his success be not perhaps to be wonder at. ignorant as you previously be of everything concern either, detection could not be in your power, and suspicion certainly not in your inclination.
"you may possibly wonder why all this be not tell you last night; but I be not then master enough of myself to know what could or ought to be reveal. for the truth of everything here relate, I can appeal more particularly to the testimony of Colonel Fitzwilliam, who, from our near relationship and constant intimacy, and, still more, as one of the executor of my father's will, have be unavoidably acquaint with every particular of these transaction. if your abhorrence of I should make my assertion valueless, you cannot be prevent by the same cause from confide in my cousin; and that there may be the possibility of consult he, I shall endeavour to find some opportunity of put this letter in your hand in the course of the morning. I will only add, God bless you.
chapter 36
if Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy give she the letter, do not expect it to contain a renewal of his offer, she have form no expectation at all of its content. but such as they be, it may well be suppose how eagerly she go through they, and what a contrariety of emotion they excite. her feeling as she
read be scarcely to be define. with amazement do she first understand that he believe any apology to be in his power; and steadfastly be she persuade, that he could have no explanation to give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal. with a strong prejudice against everything he might say, she begin his account of what have happen at Netherfield. she read with an eagerness which hardly leave her power of comprehension, and from impatience of know what the next sentence might bring, be incapable of attend to the sense of the one before her eye. his belief of her sister's insensibility she instantly resolve to be false; and his account of the real, the bad objection to the match, make she too angry to have any wish of
do he justice. he express no regret for what he have do which satisfy she; his style be not penitent, but haughty. it be all pride and insolence.
but when this subject be succeed by his account of Mr. Wickham---when she read with somewhat clear attention a relation of event which, if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth, and which bear so alarm an affinity to his own history of himself---her feeling be yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition. Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppress she. she wish to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaim, "this must be false! this cannot be! this must be the gross falsehood!"---and when she have go through the whole letter, though scarcely know anything of the last page or two, put it hastily away, protest that she would not regard it, that she would never look in it again.
in this perturb state of mind, with thought that could rest on nothing, she walk on; but it would not do; in half a minute the letter be unfold again, and collect herself as well as she could, she again begin the mortifying perusal of all that relate to Wickham, and command herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence. the account of his connection with the Pemberley family be exactly what he have relate himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy, though she have not before know its extent, agree equally well with his own word. so far each recital confirm the other; but when she come to the will, the difference be great. what Wickham have say of the living be fresh in her memory, and as she recall his very word, it be impossible not to feel that there be gross duplicity on one side or the other; and, for a few moment, she flatter herself that her wish do not err. but when she read and re-read with the close attention, the particular immediately follow 
of Wickham's resign all pretension to the living, of his receive in lieu so considerable a sum as three thousand pound, again be she force to hesitate. she put down the letter, weigh every circumstance with what she mean to be impartiality---deliberate on the probability of each statement---but with little success. on both side it be only assertion. again she read on; but every line prove more clearly that the affair, which she have believe it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to render Mr. Darcy's conduct in it less than infamous, be capable of a turn which must make he entirely blameless throughout the whole.
the extravagance and general profligacy which he scruple not to lay at Mr. Wickham's charge, exceedingly shock she; the more so, as she could bring no proof of its injustice. she have never hear of he before his entrance into the ----shire Militia, in which he have engage at the persuasion of the young man who, on meet he accidentally in town, have there renew a slight acquaintance. of his former way of life nothing have be know in Hertfordshire but what he tell himself. as to his real character, have information be in her power, she have never feel a wish of inquire. his countenance, voice, and manner have establish he at once in the possession of every virtue. she try to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished trait of integrity or benevolence, that might rescue he from the attack of Mr. Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone for those casual error under which she would endeavour to class what Mr. Darcy have describe as the idleness and vice of many 
year' continuance. but no such recollection befriend she. she could see he instantly before she, in every charm of air and address; but she could remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood, and the regard which his social power have gain he in the mess. after pause on this point a considerable while, she once more continue to read. but, alas! the story which follow, of his design on Miss Darcy, receive some confirmation from what have pass between Colonel Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at last she be refer for the truth of every particular to Colonel Fitzwilliam himself---from whom she have previously receive the information of his near concern in all his cousin's affair, and whose character she have no reason to question. at one time she have almost resolve on apply to he, but the idea be check by the awkwardness of the application, and at length wholly banish by the conviction that Mr. Darcy would never have hazard 
such a proposal, if he have not be well assured of his cousin's corroboration.
she perfectly remember everything that have pass in conversation between Wickham and herself, in their first evening at Mr. Phillips's. many of his expression be still fresh in her memory. she be now strike with the impropriety of such communication to a stranger, and wonder it have escape she before. she see the indelicacy of put himself forward as he have do, and the inconsistency of his profession with his conduct. she remember that he have boast of have no fear of see Mr. Darcy---that Mr. Darcy might leave the country, but that he should stand his ground; yet he have avoid the Netherfield ball the very next week. she remember also that, till the Netherfield family have quit the country, he have tell his story to no one but herself; but that after their removal it have be everywhere discuss; that he have then no reserve, no scruple in sink Mr. Darcy's character, though he have assure she that respect for the father would always prevent his expose the son.
how differently do everything now appear in which he be concern! his attention to Miss King be now the consequence of view solely and hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune prove no long the moderation of his wish, but his eagerness to grasp at anything. his behaviour to herself could now have have no tolerable motive; he have either be deceive with regard to her fortune, or have be gratify his vanity by encourage the preference which she believe she have most incautiously show. every lingering struggle in his favour grow fainter and fainter; and in farth justification of Mr. Darcy, she could not but allow Mr. Bingley, when question by Jane, have long ago assert his blamelessness in the affair; that proud and repulsive as be his manner, she have never, in the whole course of their acquaintance---an acquaintance which have latterly bring they much together, and give she a sort of intimacy with his way---see anything that betray he to be unprincipled or 
unjust---anything that speak he of irreligious or immoral habit; that among his own connection he be esteem and value---that even Wickham have allow he merit as a brother, and that she have often hear he speak so affectionately of his sister as to prove he capable of some amiable feeling; that have his action be what Mr. Wickham represent they, so gross a violation of everything right could hardly have be conceal from the world; and that friendship between a person capable of it, and such an amiable man as Mr. Bingley, be incomprehensible.
she grow absolutely ashamed of herself. of neither Darcy nor Wickham could she think without feel she have be blind, partial, prejudiced, absurd.
"how despicably I have act!" she cry; "I, who have pride myself on my discernment! I, who have value myself on my ability! who have often disdain the generous candour of my sister, and gratify my vanity in useless or blameable mistrust! how humiliating be this discovery! yet, how just a humiliation! have I be in love, I could not have be more wretchedly blind! but vanity, not love, have be my folly. please with the preference of one, and offend by the neglect of the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have court prepossession and ignorance, and drive reason away, where either be concern. till this moment I never know myself."
from herself to Jane---from Jane to Bingley, her thought be in a line which soon bring to her recollection that Mr. Darcy's explanation there have appear very insufficient, and she read it again. widely different be the effect of a second perusal. how could she deny that credit to his assertion in one instance, which she have be oblige to give in the other? he declare himself to be totally unsuspicious of her sister's attachment; and she could not help remember what Charlotte's opinion have always be. neither could she deny the justice of his description of Jane. she feel that Jane's feeling, though fervent, be little display, and that there be a constant complacency in her air and manner not often unite with great sensibility.
when she come to that part of the letter in which her family be mention in term of such mortifying, yet merit reproach, her sense of shame be severe. the justice of the charge strike she too forcibly for denial, and the circumstance to which he particularly allude as have pass at the Netherfield ball, and as confirm all his first disapprobation, could not have make a strong impression on his mind than on her.
the compliment to herself and her sister be not unfelt. it soothe, but it could not console she for the contempt which have thus be self-attract by the rest of her family; and as she consider that Jane's disappointment have in fact be the work of her near relation, and reflect how materially the credit of both must be hurt by such impropriety of conduct, she feel depressed beyond anything she have ever know before.
after wander along the lane for two hour, give way to every variety of thought---re-consider event, determine probability, and reconcile herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden and so important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, make she at length return home; and she enter the house with the wish of appear cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repress such reflection as must make she unfit for conversation.
she be immediately tell that the two gentleman from Rosings have each call during her absence; Mr. Darcy, only for a few minute, to take leave---but that Colonel Fitzwilliam have be sit with they at least an hour, hop for her return, and almost resolve to walk after she till she could be find. Elizabeth could but just affect concern in miss he; she really rejoice at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam be no long an object; she could think only of her letter.
chapter 37
the two gentleman leave Rosings the next morning, and Mr. Collins have be in wait near the lodge, to make they his parting obeisance, be able to bring home the pleasing intelligence, of their appear in very good health, and in as tolerable spirit as could be expect, after the melancholy scene so lately go through at Rosings. to Rosings he then hasten, to console Lady Catherine and her daughter; and on his return bring back, with great satisfaction, a message from her ladyship, import that she feel herself so dull as to make she very desirous of have they all to dine with she.
Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollect that, have she choose it, she might by this time have be present to she as her future niece; nor could she think, without a smile, of what her ladyship's indignation would have be. "what would she have say? how would she have behave?" be question with which she amuse herself.
their first subject be the diminution of the Rosings party. "I assure you, I feel it exceedingly," say Lady Catherine; "I believe no one feel the loss of friend so much as I do. but I be particularly attach to these young man, and know they to be so much attach to I! they be excessively sorry to go! but so they always be. the dear Colonel rally his spirit tolerably till just at last; but Darcy seem to feel it most acutely, more, I think, than last year. his attachment to Rosings certainly increase."
Mr. Collins have a compliment, and an allusion to throw in here, which be kindly smile on by the mother and daughter.
Lady Catherine observe, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seem out of spirit, and immediately account for it by herself, by suppose that she do not like to go home again so soon, she add:
"but if that be the case, you must write to your mother and beg that you may stay a little long. Mrs. Collins will be very glad of your company, I be sure."
"I be much oblige to your ladyship for your kind invitation," reply Elizabeth, "but it be not in my power to accept it. I must be in town next Saturday."
"why, at that rate, you will have be here only six week. I expect you to stay two month. I tell Mrs. Collins so before you come. there can be no occasion for your go so soon. Mrs. Bennet could certainly spare you for another fortnight."
"but my father cannot. he write last week to hurry my return."
"oh! your father of course may spare you, if your mother can. daughter be never of so much consequence to a father. and if you will stay another month complete, it will be in my power to take one of you as far as London, for I be go there early in June, for a week; and as Dawson do not object to the barouche-box, there will be very good room for one of you---and indeed, if the weather should happen to be cool, I should not object to take you both, as you be neither of you large."
"you be all kindness, madam; but I believe we must abide by our original plan."
Lady Catherine seem resign. "Mrs. Collins, you must send a servant with they. you know I always speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea of two young woman travel post by themselves. it be highly improper. you must contrive to send somebody. I have the great dislike in the world to that sort of thing. young woman should always be properly guard and attend, accord to their situation in life. when my niece Georgiana go to Ramsgate last summer, I make a point of she have two man-servant go with she. Miss Darcy, the daughter of Mr. Darcy, of Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have appear with propriety in a different manner. I be excessively attentive to all those thing. you must send John with the young lady, Mrs. Collins. I be glad it occur to I to mention it; for it would really be discreditable to you to let they go alone."
"my uncle be to send a servant for we."
"oh! your uncle! he keep a man-servant, do he? I be very glad you have somebody who think of these thing. where shall you change horse? oh! Bromley, of course. if you mention my name at the Bell, you will be attend to."
Lady Catherine have many other question to ask respect their journey, and as she do not answer they all herself, attention be necessary, which Elizabeth believe to be lucky for she; or, with a mind so occupy, she might have forget where she be. reflection must be reserve for solitary hour; whenever she be alone, she give way to it as the great relief; and not a day go by without a solitary walk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of unpleasant recollection.
Mr. Darcy's letter she be in a fair way of soon know by heart. she study every sentence; and her feeling towards its writer be at time widely different. when she remember the style of his address, she be still full of indignation; but when she consider how unjustly she have condemn and upbraid he, her anger be turn against herself; and his disappointed feeling become the object of compassion. his attachment excite gratitude, his general character respect; but she could not approve he; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal, or feel the slight inclination ever to see he again. in her own past behaviour, there be a constant source of vexation and regret; and in the unhappy defect of her family, a subject of yet heavy chagrin. they be hopeless of remedy. her father, content with laugh at they, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his young daughter; and her mother, with manner so far from right herself, be entirely insensible of the 
evil. Elizabeth have frequently unite with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine and Lydia; but while they be support by their mother's indulgence, what chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirit, irritable, and completely under Lydia's guidance, have be always affront by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would scarcely give they a hearing. they be ignorant, idle, and vain. while there be an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with he; and while Meryton be within a walk of longbourn, they would be go there forever.
anxiety on Jane's behalf be another prevailing concern; and Mr. Darcy's explanation, by restore Bingley to all her former good opinion, heighten the sense of what Jane have lose. his affection be prove to have be sincere, and his conduct clear of all blame, unless any could attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend. how grievous then be the thought that, of a situation so desirable in every respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane have be deprive, by the folly and indecorum of her own family!
when to these recollection be add the development of Wickham's character, it may be easily believe that the happy spirit which have seldom be depressed before, be now so much affect as to make it almost impossible for she to appear tolerably cheerful.
their engagement at Rosings be as frequent during the last week of her stay as they have be at first. the very last evening be spend there; and her ladyship again inquire minutely into the particular of their journey, give they direction as to the good method of packing, and be so urgent on the necessity of place gown in the only right way, that Maria think herself oblige, on her return, to undo all the work of the morning, and pack her trunk afresh.
when they part, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wish they a good journey, and invite they to come to Hunsford again next year; and Miss de Bourgh exert herself so far as to curtsey and hold out her hand to both.
chapter 38
on Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr. Collins meet for breakfast a few minute before the other appear; and he take the opportunity of pay the parting civility which he deem indispensably necessary.
"I know not, Miss Elizabeth," say he, "whether Mrs. Collins have yet express her sense of your kindness in come to we; but I be very certain you will not leave the house without receive she thank for it. the favor of your company have be much feel, I assure you. we know how little there be to tempt anyone to our humble abode. our plain manner of living, our small room and few domestic, and the little we see of the world, must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like yourself; but I hope you will believe we grateful for the condescension, and that we have do everything in our power to prevent your spending your time unpleasantly."
Elizabeth be eager with her thank and assurance of happiness. she have spend six week with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of be with Charlotte, and the kind attention she have receive, must make she feel the obliged. Mr. Collins be gratify, and with a more smile solemnity reply:
"it give I great pleasure to hear that you have pass your time not disagreeably. we have certainly do our good; and most fortunately have it in our power to introduce you to very superior society, and, from our connection with Rosings, the frequent mean of vary the humble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that your Hunsford visit cannot have be entirely irksome. our situation with regard to Lady Catherine's family be indeed the sort of extraordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast. you see on what a footing we be. you see how continually we be engage there. in truth I must acknowledge that, with all the disadvantage of this humble parsonage, I should not think anyone abide in it an object of compassion, while they be sharer of our intimacy at Rosings."
word be insufficient for the elevation of his feeling; and he be oblige to walk about the room, while Elizabeth try to unite civility and truth in a few short sentence.
"you may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of we into Hertfordshire, my dear cousin. I flatter myself at least that you will be able to do so. Lady Catherine's great attention to Mrs. Collins you have be a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it do not appear that your friend have draw an unfortunate---but on this point it will be as well to be silent. only let I assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in marriage. my dear Charlotte and I have but one mind and one way of thinking. there be in everything a most remarkable resemblance of character and idea between we. we seem to have be design for each other."
Elizabeth could safely say that it be a great happiness where that be the case, and with equal sincerity could add, that she firmly believe and rejoice in his domestic comfort. she be not sorry, however, to have the recital of they interrupt by the lady from whom they spring. Poor Charlotte! it be melancholy to leave she to such society! but she have choose it with her eye open; and though evidently regret that her visitor be to go, she do not seem to ask for compassion. her home and her housekeeping, her parish and her poultry, and all their dependent concern, have not yet lose their charm.
at length the chaise arrive, the trunk be fasten on, the parcel place within, and it be pronounce to be ready. after an affectionate parting between the friend, Elizabeth be attend to the carriage by Mr. Collins, and as they walk down the garden he be commission she with his good respect to all her family, not forget his thank for the kindness he have receive at Longbourn in the winter, and his compliment to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, though unknown. he then hand she in, Maria follow, and the door be on the point of be close, when he suddenly remind they, with some consternation, that they have hitherto forget to leave any message for the lady at Rosings.
"but," he add, "you will of course wish to have your humble
respect deliver to they, with your grateful thank for their kindness to you while you have be here."
Elizabeth make no objection; the door be then allow to be shut, and the carriage drive off.
"good gracious!" cry Maria, after a few minute' silence, "it seem but a day or two since we first come! and yet how many thing have happen!"
"a great many indeed," say her companion with a sigh.
"we have din nine time at Rosings, besides drink tea there twice! how much I shall have to tell!"
Elizabeth add privately, "and how much I shall have to conceal!"
their journey be perform without much conversation, or any alarm; and within four hour of their leave Hunsford they reach Mr. Gardiner's house, where they be to remain a few day.
Jane look well, and Elizabeth have little opportunity of study her spirit, amidst the various engagement which the kindness of her aunt have reserve for they. but Jane be to go home with she, and at Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation.
it be not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even for Longbourn, before she tell her sister of Mr. Darcy's proposal. to know that she have the power of reveal what would so exceedingly astonish Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own vanity she have not yet be able to reason away, be such a temptation to openness as nothing could have conquer but the state of indecision in which she remain as to the extent of what she should communicate; and her fear, if she once enter on the subject, of be hurry into repeat something of Bingley which might only grieve her sister far.
chapter 39
it be the second week in May, in which the three young lady set out together from Gracechurch Street for the town of ----, in Hertfordshire; and, as they draw near the appoint inn where Mr. Bennet's carriage be to meet they, they quickly perceive, in token of the coachman's punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia look out of a dining-room upstairs. these two girl have be above an hour in the place, happily employ in visit an opposite milliner, watch the sentinel on guard, and dress a salad and cucumber.
after welcome their sister, they triumphantly display a table set out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually afford, exclaim, "be not this nice? be not this an agreeable surprise?"
"and we mean to treat you all," add Lydia, "but you must lend we the money, for we have just spend our at the shop out there." then, show she purchases---"look here, I have buy this bonnet. I do not think it be very pretty; but I think I might as well buy it as not. I shall pull it to piece as soon as I get home, and see if I can make it up any well."
and when her sister abuse it as ugly, she add, with perfect unconcern, "oh! but there be two or three much uglier in the shop; and when I have buy some pretty-coloured satin to trim it with fresh, I think it will be very tolerable. besides, it will not much signify what one wear this summer, after the ----shire have leave Meryton, and they be go in a fortnight."
"be they indeed!" cry Elizabeth, with the great satisfaction.
"they be go to be encamp near Brighton; and I do so want papa to take we all there for the summer! it would be such a delicious scheme; and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all. Mamma would like to go too of all thing! only think what a miserable summer else we shall have!"
"yes," think Elizabeth, "_that_ would be a delightful scheme indeed, and completely do for we at once. Good Heaven! Brighton, and a whole campful of soldier, to we, who have be overset already by one poor regiment of militia, and the monthly ball of Meryton!"
"now I have get some news for you," say Lydia, as they sit down at table. "what do you think? it be excellent news---capital news---and about a certain person we all like!"
Jane and Elizabeth look at each other, and the waiter be tell he need not stay. Lydia laugh, and say:
"Aye, that be just like your formality and discretion. you think the waiter must not hear, as if he care! I dare say he often hear bad thing say than I be go to say. but he be an ugly fellow! I be glad he be go. I never see such a long chin in my life. well, but now for my news; it be about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, be it not? there be no danger of Wickham's marry Mary King. therebe for you! she be go down to her uncle at Liverpool: go to stay. Wickham be safe."
"and Mary King be safe!" add Elizabeth; "safe from a connection imprudent as to fortune."
"she be a great fool for go away, if she like he." 
"but I hope there be no strong attachment on either side," say Jane.
"I be sure there be not on his. I will answer for it, he never care three straw about she---who could about such a nasty little freckle thing?"
Elizabeth be shock to think that, however incapable of such coarseness of expression herself, the coarseness of the sentiment be little other than her own breast have harbour and fancy liberal!
as soon as all have eat, and the elder one pay, the carriage be order; and after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their box, work-bag, and parcel, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty's and Lydia's purchase, be seat in it.
"how nicely we be all cram in," cry Lydia. "I be glad I buy my bonnet, if it be only for the fun of have another bandbox! well, now let we be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way home. and in the first place, let we hear what have happen to you all since you go away. have you see any pleasant man? have you have any flirting? I be in great hope that one of you would have get a husband before you come back. Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare. she be almost three-and-twenty! Lord, how ashamed I should be of not be marry before three-and-twenty! my aunt Phillips want you so to get husband, you cannot think. she say Lizzy have well have take Mr. Collins; but I do not think there would have be any fun in it. Lord! how I should like to be marry before any of you; and then I would chaperon you about to all the ball. dear I! we have such a good piece of fun the other day at Colonel Forster's. Kitty and I be to spend the day there, and Mrs. Forster 
promise to have a little dance in the evening; (by the bye, Mrs. Forster and I be such friend!) and so she ask the two Harringtons to come, but Harriet be ill, and so Pen be force to come by herself; and then, what do you think we do? we dress up Chamberlayne in woman's clothe on purpose to pass for a lady, only think what fun! not a soul know of it, but Colonel and Mrs. Forster, and Kitty and I, except my aunt, for we be force to borrow one of her gown; and you cannot imagine how well he look! when Denny, and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the man come in, they do not know he in the least. Lord! how I laugh! and so do Mrs. Forster. I think I should have die. and that make the man suspect something, and then they soon find out what be the matter."
with such kind of history of their party and good joke, do Lydia, assist by Kitty's hint and addition, endeavour to amuse her companion all the way to longbourn. Elizabeth listen as little as she could, but there be no escape the frequent mention of Wickham's name.
their reception at home be most kind. Mrs. Bennet rejoice to see Jane in undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner do Mr. Bennet say voluntarily to Elizabeth:
"I be glad you be come back, Lizzy."
their party in the dining-room be large, for almost all the Lucases come to meet Maria and hear the news; and various be the subject that occupy they: Lady Lucas be inquire of Maria, after the welfare and poultry of her eld daughter; Mrs. Bennet be doubly engage, on one hand collect an account of the present fashion from Jane, who sit some way below she, and, on the other, retail they all to the young Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice rather louder than any other person's, be enumerate the various pleasure of the morning to anybody who would hear she.
"oh! Mary," say she, "I wish you have go with we, for we have such fun! as we go along, Kitty and I draw up the blind, and pretend there be nobody in the coach; and I should have go so all the way, if Kitty have not be sick; and when we get to the George, I do think we behave very handsomely, for we treat the other three with the nice cold luncheon in the world, and if you would have go, we would have treat you too. and then when we come away it be such fun! I think we never should have get into the coach. I be ready to die of laughter. and then we be so merry all the way home! we talk and laugh so loud, that anybody might have hear we ten mile off!"
to this Mary very gravely reply, "far be it from I, my dear sister, to depreciate such pleasure! they would doubtless be congenial with the generality of female mind. but I confess they would have no charm for _me_--I should infinitely prefer a book."
but of this answer Lydia hear not a word. she seldom listen to anybody for more than half a minute, and never attend to Mary at all.
in the afternoon Lydia be urgent with the rest of the girl to walk to Meryton, and to see how everybody go on; but Elizabeth steadily oppose the scheme. it should not be say that the Miss Bennets could not be at home half a day before they be in pursuit of the officer. there be another reason too for her opposition. she dread see Mr. Wickham again, and be resolve to avoid it as long as possible. the comfort to she of the regiment's approach removal be indeed beyond expression. in a fortnight they be to go---and once go, she hop there could be nothing more to plague she on his account.
she have not be many hour at home before she find that the Brighton scheme, of which Lydia have give they a hint at the inn, be under frequent discussion between her parent. Elizabeth see directly that her father have not the small intention of yield; but his answer be at the same time so vague and equivocal, that her mother, though often dishearten, have never yet despair of succeed at last.
chapter 40
Elizabeth's impatience to acquaint Jane with what have happen could no long be overcome; and at length, resolve to suppress every particular in which her sister be concern, and prepare she to be surprised, she relate to she the next morning the chief of the scene between Mr. Darcy and herself.
Miss Bennet's astonishment be soon lessen by the strong sisterly partiality which make any admiration of Elizabeth appear perfectly natural; and all surprise be shortly lose in other feeling. she be sorry that Mr. Darcy should have deliver his sentiment in a manner so little suited to recommend they; but still more be she grieve for the unhappiness which her sister's refusal must have give he.
"his be so sure of succeed be wrong," say she, "and certainly ought not to have appear; but consider how much it must increase his disappointment!"
"indeed," reply Elizabeth, "I be heartily sorry for he; but he have other feeling, which will probably soon drive away his regard for I. you do not blame I, however, for refuse he?"
"blame you! oh, no."
"but you blame I for have speak so warmly of Wickham?"
"no---I do not know that you be wrong in say what you do."
"but you will know it, when I tell you what happen the very next day."
she then speak of the letter, repeat the whole of its content as far as they concern George Wickham. what a stroke be this for poor Jane! who would willingly have go through the world without believe that so much wickedness exist in the whole race of mankind, as be here collect in one individual. nor be Darcy's vindication, though grateful to her feeling, capable of console she for such discovery. most earnestly do she labour to prove the probability of error, and seek to clear the one without involve the other.
"this will not do," say Elizabeth; "you never will be able to make both of they good for anything. take your choice, but you must be satisfied with only one. there be but such a quantity of merit between they; just enough to make one good sort of man; and of late it have be shift about pretty much. for my part, I be inclined to believe it all Darcy's; but you shall do as you choose."
it be some time, however, before a smile could be extort from Jane.
"I do not know when I have be more shocked," say she. "Wickham so very bad! it be almost past belief. and poor Mr. Darcy! Dear Lizzy, only consider what he must have suffer. such a disappointment! and with the knowledge of your ill opinion, too! and have to relate such a thing of his sister! it be really too distressing. I be sure you must feel it so."
"oh! no, my regret and compassion be all do away by see you so full of both. I know you will do he such ample justice, that I be grow every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. your profusion make I save; and if you lament over he much long, my heart will be as light as a feather."
"Poor Wickham! there be such an expression of goodness in his countenance! such an openness and gentleness in his manner!"
"there certainly be some great mismanagement in the education of those two young man. one have get all the goodness, and the other all the appearance of it."
"I never think Mr. Darcy so deficient in the appearance of it as you use to do."
"and yet I mean to be uncommonly clever in take so decide a dislike to he, without any reason. it be such a spur to one's genius, such an opening for wit, to have a dislike of that kind. one may be continually abusive without say anything just; but one cannot always be laugh at a man without now and then stumble on something witty."
"Lizzy, when you first read that letter, I be sure you could not treat the matter as you do now."
"indeed, I could not. I be uncomfortable enough, I may say unhappy. and with no one to speak to about what I feel, no Jane to comfort I and say that I have not be so very weak and vain and nonsensical as I know I have! oh! how I want you!"
"how unfortunate that you should have use such very strong expression in speak of Wickham to Mr. Darcy, for now they do appear wholly undeserved."
"certainly. but the misfortune of speak with bitterness be a most natural consequence of the prejudice I have be encouraging. there be one point on which I want your advice. I want to be tell whether I ought, or ought not, to make our acquaintance in general understand Wickham's character."
Miss Bennet pause a little, and then reply, "surely there can be no occasion for expose he so dreadfully. what be your opinion?"
"that it ought not to be attempt. Mr. Darcy have not authorise I to make his communication public. on the contrary, every particular relative to his sister be mean to be keep as much as possible to myself; and if I endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of his conduct, who will believe I? the general prejudice against Mr. Darcy be so violent, that it would be the death of half the good people in Meryton to attempt to place he in an amiable light. I be not equal to it. Wickham will soon be go; and therefore it will not signify to anyone here what he really be. some time hence it will be all find out, and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not know it before. at present I will say nothing about it."
"you be quite right. to have his error make public might ruin he for ever. he be now, perhaps, sorry for what he have do, and anxious to re-establish a character. we must not make he desperate."
the tumult of Elizabeth's mind be allay by this conversation. she have get rid of two of the secret which have weigh on she for a fortnight, and be certain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever she might wish to talk again of either. but there be still something lurk behind, of which prudence forbid the disclosure. she dare not relate the other half of Mr. Darcy's letter, nor explain to her sister how sincerely she have be value by her friend. here be knowledge in which no one could partake; and she be sensible that nothing less than a perfect understanding between the party could justify she in throw off this last encumbrance of mystery. "and then," say she, "if that very improbable event should ever take place, I shall merely be able to tell what Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner himself. the liberty of communication cannot be mine till it have lose all its value!"
she be now, on be settle at home, at leisure to observe the real state of her sister's spirit. Jane be not happy. she still cherish a very tender affection for Bingley. have never even fancy herself in love before, her regard have all the warmth of first attachment, and, from her age and disposition, great steadiness than most first attachment often boast; and so fervently do she value his remembrance, and prefer he to every other man, that all her good sense, and all her attention to the feeling of her friend, be requisite to check the indulgence of those regret which must have be injurious to her own health and their tranquillity.
"well, Lizzy," say Mrs. Bennet one day, "what be your opinion now of this sad business of Jane's? for my part, I be determined never to speak of it again to anybody. I tell my sister Phillips so the other day. but I cannot find out that Jane see anything of he in London. well, he be a very undeserving young man---and I do not suppose therebe the least chance in the world of she ever get he now. there be no talk of his come to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have inquire of everybody, too, who be likely to know."
"I do not believe he will ever live at Netherfield any more."
"oh well! it be just as he choose. nobody want he to come. though I shall always say he use my daughter extremely ill; and if I be she, I would not have put up with it. well, my comfort be, I be sure Jane will die of a broken heart; and then he will be sorry for what he have do."
but as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such expectation, she make no answer.
"well, Lizzy," continue her mother, soon afterwards, "and so the Collinses live very comfortable, do they? well, well, I only hope it will last. and what sort of table do they keep? Charlotte be an excellent manager, I dare say. if she be half as sharp as her mother, she be save enough. there be nothing extravagant in their housekeeping, I dare say."
"no, nothing at all."
"a great deal of good management, depend upon it. yes, yes. they will take care not to outrun their income. they will never be distressed for money. well, much good may it do they! and so, I suppose, they often talk of have Longbourn when your father be dead. they look upon it as quite their own, I dare say, whenever that happen."
"it be a subject which they could not mention before I."
"no; it would have be strange if they have; but I make no doubt they often talk of it between themselves. well, if they can be easy with an estate that be not lawfully their own, so much the well. I should be ashamed of have one that be only entail on I."
chapter 41
the first week of their return be soon go. the second begin. it be the last of the regiment's stay in Meryton, and all the young lady in the neighbourhood be droop apace. the dejection be almost universal. the eld Miss Bennets alone be still able to eat, drink, and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employment. very frequently be they reproach for this insensibility by Kitty and Lydia, whose own misery be extreme, and who could not comprehend such hard-heartedness in any of the family.
"Good Heaven! what be to become of we? what be we to do?" would they often exclaim in the bitterness of woe. "how can you be smile so, Lizzy?"
their affectionate mother share all their grief; she remember what she have herself endure on a similar occasion, five-and-twenty year ago.
"I be sure," say she, "I cry for two day together when Colonel Miller's regiment go away. I think I should have break my heart."
"I be sure I shall break mine," say Lydia.
"if one could but go to Brighton!" observe Mrs. Bennet.
"oh, yes!--if one could but go to Brighton! but papa be so disagreeable."
"a little sea-bathing would set I up forever."
"and my aunt Phillips be sure it would do I a great deal of good," add Kitty.
such be the kind of lamentation resound perpetually through Longbourn House. Elizabeth try to be divert by they; but all sense of pleasure be lose in shame. she feel anew the justice of Mr. Darcy's objection; and never have she be so much disposed to pardon his interference in the view of his friend.
but the gloom of Lydia's prospect be shortly clear away; for she receive an invitation from Mrs. Forster, the wife of the colonel of the regiment, to accompany she to Brighton. this invaluable friend be a very young woman, and very lately married. a resemblance in good humour and good spirit have recommend she and Lydia to each other, and out of their three month' acquaintance they have be intimate two.
the rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration of Mrs. Forster, the delight of Mrs. Bennet, and the mortification of Kitty, be scarcely to be describe. wholly inattentive to her sister's feeling, Lydia fly about the house in restless ecstasy, call for everyone's congratulation, and laugh and talk with more violence than ever; whilst the luckless Kitty continue in the parlour repine at her fate in term as unreasonable as her accent be peevish.
"I cannot see why Mrs. Forster should not ask I as well as Lydia," say she, "though I be not her particular friend. I have just as much right to be ask as she have, and more too, for I be two year old."
in vain do Elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and Jane to make she resign. as for Elizabeth herself, this invitation be so far from exciting in she the same feeling as in her mother and Lydia, that she consider it as the death warrant of all possibility of common sense for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make she be it know, she could not help secretly advise her father not to let she go. she represent to he all the impropriety of Lydia's general behaviour, the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of such a woman as Mrs. Forster, and the probability of her be yet more imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the temptation must be great than at home. he hear she attentively, and then say:
"Lydia will never be easy until she have expose herself in some public place or other, and we can never expect she to do it with so little expense or inconvenience to her family as under the present circumstance."
"if you be aware," say Elizabeth, "of the very great disadvantage to we all which must arise from the public notice of Lydia's unguarded and imprudent manner---nay, which have already arise from it, I be sure you would judge differently in the affair."
"already arise?" repeat Mr. Bennet. "what, have she frighten away some of your lover? poor little Lizzy! but do not be cast down. such squeamish youth as cannot bear to be connect with a little absurdity be not worth a regret. come, let I see the list of pitiful fellow who have be keep aloof by Lydia's folly."
"indeed you be mistaken. I have no such injury to resent. it be not of particular, but of general evil, which I be now complain. our importance, our respectability in the world must be affect by the wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark Lydia's character. excuse I, for I must speak plainly. if you, my dear father, will not take the trouble of check her exuberant spirit, and of teach she that her present pursuit be not to be the business of her life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment. her character will be fix, and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt that ever make herself or her family ridiculous; a flirt, too, in the bad and mean degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyond youth and a tolerable person; and, from the ignorance and emptiness of her mind, wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal contempt which her rage for admiration will excite. in this danger Kitty also be comprehend. she will 
follow wherever Lydia lead. vain, ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolle! oh! my dear father, can you suppose it possible that they will not be censure and despise wherever they be know, and that their sister will not be often involve in the disgrace?"
Mr. Bennet see that her whole heart be in the subject, and affectionately take her hand say in reply:
"do not make yourself uneasy, my love. wherever you and Jane be know you must be respect and value; and you will not appear to less advantage for have a couple of---or I may say, three---very silly sister. we shall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia do not go to Brighton. let she go, then. Colonel Forster be a sensible man, and will keep she out of any real mischief; and she be luckily too poor to be an object of prey to anybody. at Brighton she will be of less importance even as a common flirt than she have be here. the officer will find woman well worth their notice. let we hope, therefore, that her be there may teach she her own insignificance. at any rate, she cannot grow many degree bad, without authorise we to lock she up for the rest of her life."
with this answer Elizabeth be force to be content; but her own opinion continue the same, and she leave he disappointed and sorry. it be not in her nature, however, to increase her vexation by dwell on they. she be confident of have perform her duty, and to fret over unavoidable evil, or augment they by anxiety, be no part of her disposition.
have Lydia and her mother know the substance of her conference with her father, their indignation would hardly have find expression in their united volubility. in Lydia's imagination, a visit to Brighton comprise every possibility of earthly happiness. she see, with the creative eye of fancy, the street of that gay bathing-place cover with officer. she see herself the object of attention, to ten and to score of they at present unknown. she see all the glory of the camp---its tent stretch forth in beauteous uniformity of line, crowd with the young and the gay, and dazzle with scarlet; and, to complete the view, she see herself seat beneath a tent, tenderly flirt with at least six officer at once.
have she know her sister seek to tear she from such prospect and such reality as these, what would have be her sensation? they could have be understand only by her mother, who might have feel nearly the same. Lydia's go to Brighton be all that console she for her melancholy conviction of her husbandbe never intend to go there himself.
but they be entirely ignorant of what have pass; and their rapture continue, with little intermission, to the very day of Lydia's leave home.
Elizabeth be now to see Mr. Wickham for the last time. have be frequently in company with he since her return, agitation be pretty well over; the agitation of formal partiality entirely so. she have even learn to detect, in the very gentleness which have first delight she, an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary. in his present behaviour to herself, moreover, she have a fresh source of displeasure, for the inclination he soon testify of renew those intention which
have mark the early part of their acquaintance could only serve, after what have since pass, to provoke she. she lose all concern for he in find herself thus select as the object of such idle and frivolous gallantry; and while she steadily repress it, could not but feel the reproof contain in his believing, that however long, and for whatever cause, his attention have be withdraw, her vanity would be gratify, and her preference secure at any time by their renewal.
on the very last day of the regiment's remain at Meryton, he din, with other of the officer, at Longbourn; and so little be Elizabeth dispose to part from he in good humour, that on his make some inquiry as to the manner in which her time have pass at Hunsford, she mention Colonel Fitzwilliam's and Mr. Darcy's have both spend three week at rosing, and ask he, if he be acquaint with the former.
he look surprised, displeased, alarmed; but with a moment's recollection and a return smile, reply, that he have formerly see he often; and, after observe that he be a very gentlemanlike man, ask she how she have like he. her answer be warmly in his favour. with an air of indifference he soon afterwards add:
"how long do you say he be at rosing?"
"nearly three week."
"and you see he frequently?"
"yes, almost every day."
"his manner be very different from his cousin's."
"yes, very different. but I think Mr. Darcy improve upon acquaintance."
"indeed!" cry Mr. Wickham with a look which do not escape she. "and pray, may I ask?--" but check himself, he add, in a gayer tone, "be it in address that he improve? have he deign to add aught of civility to his ordinary style?--for I dare not hope," he continue in a low and more serious tone, "that he be improve in essential."
"oh, no!" say Elizabeth. "in essential, I believe, he be very much what he ever be."
while she speak, Wickham look as if scarcely know whether to rejoice over her word, or to distrust their meaning. there be a something in her countenance which make he listen with an apprehensive and anxious attention, while she add:
"when I say that he improve on acquaintance, I do not mean that his mind or his manner be in a state of improvement, but that, from know he well, his disposition be well understand."
Wickham's alarm now appear in a heighten complexion and agitated look; for a few minute he be silent, till, shake off his embarrassment, he turn to she again, and say in the gentle of accent:
"you, who so well know my feeling towards Mr. Darcy, will readily comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that he be wise enough to assume even the appearance of what be right. his pride, in that direction, may be of service, if not to himself, to many other, for it must only deter he from such foul misconduct as I have suffer by. I only fear that the sort of cautiousness to which you, I imagine, have be allude, be merely adopt on his visit to his aunt, of whose good opinion and judgement he stand much in awe. his fear of she have always operate, I know, when they be together; and a good deal be to be impute to his wish of forward the match with Miss de Bourgh, which I be certain he have very much at heart."
Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answer only by a slight inclination of the head. she see that he want to engage she on the old subject of his grievance, and she be in no humour to indulge he. the rest of the evening pass with the appearance, on his side, of usual cheerfulness, but with no further attempt to distinguish Elizabeth; and they part at last with mutual civility, and possibly a mutual desire of never meet again.
when the party break up, Lydia return with Mrs. Forster to Meryton, from whence they be to set out early the next morning. the separation between she and her family be rather noisy than pathetic. Kitty be the only one who shed tear; but she do weep from vexation and envy. Mrs. Bennet be diffuse in her good wish for the felicity of her daughter, and impressive in her injunction that she should not miss the opportunity of enjoy herself as much as possible---advice which there be every reason to believe would be well attend to; and in the clamorous happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more gentle adieus of her sister be utter without be hear.
chapter 42
have Elizabeth's opinion be all draw from her own family, she could not have form a very pleasing opinion of conjugal felicity or domestic comfort. her father, captivate by youth and beauty, and that appearance of good humour which youth and beauty generally give, have marry a woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind have very early in their marriage put an end to all real affection for she. respect, esteem, and confidence have vanish for ever; and all his view of domestic happiness be overthrow. but Mr. Bennet be not of a disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which his own imprudence have bring on, in any of those pleasure which too often console the unfortunate for their folly of their vice. he be fond of the country and of book; and from these taste have arise his principal enjoyment. to his wife he be very little otherwise indebted, than as her ignorance and folly have contribute to his amusement. this be not the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish 
to owe to his wife; but where other power of entertainment be want, the true philosopher will derive benefit from such as be give.
Elizabeth, however, have never be blind to the impropriety of her father's behaviour as a husband. she have always see it with pain; but respect his ability, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of herself, she endeavour to forget what she could not overlook, and to banish from her thought that continual breach of conjugal obligation and decorum which, in expose his wife to the contempt of her own child, be so highly reprehensible. but she have never feel so strongly as now the disadvantage which must attend the child of so unsuitable a marriage, nor ever be so fully aware of the evil arise from so ill-judge a direction of talent; talent, which, rightly use, might at least have preserve the respectability of his daughter, even if incapable of enlarge the mind of his wife.
when Elizabeth have rejoice over Wickham's departure she find little other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment. their party abroad be less varied than before, and at home she have a mother and sister whose constant repining at the dullness of everything around they throw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturber of her brain be remove, her other sister, from whose disposition great evil might be apprehend, be likely to be harden in all her folly and assurance by a situation of such double danger as a watering-place and a camp. upon the whole, therefore, she find, what have be sometimes be find before, that an event to which she have be look with impatient desire do not, in take place, bring all the satisfaction she have promise herself. it be consequently necessary to name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity---to have some other point on which her wish and 
hope might be fix, and by again enjoy the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the present, and prepare for another disappointment. her tour to the Lakes be now the object of her happy thought; it be her good consolation for all the uncomfortable hour which the discontentedness of her mother and Kitty make inevitable; and could she have include Jane in the scheme, every part of it would have be perfect.
"but it be fortunate," think she, "that I have something to wish for. be the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain. but here, by carry with I one ceaseless source of regret in my sister's absence, I may reasonably hope to have all my expectation of pleasure realise. a scheme of which every part promise delight can never be successful; and general disappointment be only ward off by the defence of some little peculiar vexation."
when Lydia go away she promise to write very often and very minutely to her mother and Kitty; but her letter be always long expect, and always very short. those to her mother contain little else than that they be just return from the library, where such and such officer have attend they, and where she have see such beautiful ornament as make she quite wild; that she have a new gown, or a new parasol, which she would have describe more fully, but be oblige to leave off in a violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster call she, and they be go off to the camp; and from her correspondence with her
sister, there be still less to be learn---for her letter to Kitty, though rather long, be much too full of line under the word to be make public.
after the first fortnight or three week of her absence, health, good humour, and cheerfulness begin to reappear at Longbourn. everything wear a happy aspect. the family who have be in town for the winter come back again, and summer finery and summer engagement arise. Mrs. Bennet be restore to her usual querulous serenity; and, by the middle of June, Kitty be so much recover as to be able to enter Meryton without tear; an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth hope that by the follow Christmas she might be so tolerably reasonable as not to mention an officer above once a day, unless, by some cruel and malicious arrangement at the War Office, another regiment should be quarter in Meryton.
the time fix for the beginning of their northern tour be now fast approach, and a fortnight only be want of it, when a letter arrive from Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delay its commencement and curtail its extent. Mr. Gardiner would be prevent by business from set out till a fortnight later in July, and must be in London again within a month, and as that leave too short a period for they to go so far, and see so much as they have propose, or at least to see it with the leisure and comfort they have build on, they be oblige to give up the Lakes, and substitute a more contract tour, and, accord to the present plan, be to go no far northward than derbyshire. in that county there be enough to be see to occupy the chief of their three week; and to Mrs. Gardiner it have a peculiarly strong attraction. the town where she have formerly pass some year of her life, and where they be now to spend a few day, be probably as great an object of her curiosity as all the celebrate 
beauty of Matlock, Chatsworth, Dovedale, or the Peak.
Elizabeth be excessively disappointed; she have set her heart on see the Lakes, and still think there might have be time enough. but it be her business to be satisfy---and certainly her temper to be happy; and all be soon right again.
with the mention of derbyshire there be many idea connect. it be impossible for she to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its owner. "but surely," say she, "I may enter his county without impunity, and rob it of a few petrified spar without his perceive I."
the period of expectation be now double. four week be to pass away before her uncle and aunt's arrival. but they do pass away, and Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, with their four child, do at length appear at Longbourn. the child, two girl of six and eight year old, and two young boy, be to be leave under the particular care of their cousin Jane, who be the general favourite, and whose steady sense and sweetness of temper exactly adapt she for attend to they in every way---teach they, play with they, and love they.
the Gardiners stay only one night at Longbourn, and set off the next morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement. one enjoyment be certain---that of suitableness of companion; a suitableness which comprehend health and temper to bear inconvenience---cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure---and affection and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there be disappointment abroad.
it be not the object of this work to give a description of derbyshire, nor of any of the remarkable place through which their route thither lie; Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth, Birmingham, etc. be sufficiently know. a small part of Derbyshire be all the present concern. to the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner's former residence, and where she have lately learn some acquaintance still remain, they bent their step, after have see all the principal wonder of the country; and within five mile of Lambton, Elizabeth find from her aunt that Pemberley be situate. it be not in their direct road, nor more than a mile or two out of it. in talk over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner express an inclination to see the place again. Mr. Gardiner declare his willingness, and Elizabeth be apply to for her approbation.
"my love, should not you like to see a place of which you have hear so much?" say her aunt; "a place, too, with which so many of your acquaintance be connect. Wickham pass all his youth there, you know."
Elizabeth be distressed. she feel that she have no business at Pemberley, and be oblige to assume a disinclination for see it. she must own that she be tired of see great house; after go over so many, she really have no pleasure in fine carpet or satin curtain.
Mrs. Gardiner abuse her stupidity. "if it be merely a fine house richly furnish," say she, "I should not care about it myself; but the ground be delightful. they have some of the fine wood in the country."
Elizabeth say no more---but her mind could not acquiesce. the possibility of meet Mr. Darcy, while view the place, instantly occur. it would be dreadful! she blush at the very idea, and think it would be well to speak openly to her aunt than to run such a risk. but against this there be objection; and she finally resolve that it could be the last resource, if her private inquiry to the absence of the family be unfavourably answer.
accordingly, when she retire at night, she ask the chambermaid whether Pemberley be not a very fine place? what be the name of its proprietor? and, with no little alarm, whether the family be down for the summer? a most welcome negative follow the last question---and her alarm now be remove, she be at leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject be revive the next morning, and she be again apply to, could readily answer, and with a proper air of indifference, that she have not really any dislike to the scheme. to Pemberley, therefore, they be to go.
chapter 43
Elizabeth, as they drive along, watch for the first appearance of Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turn in at the lodge, her spirit be in a high flutter.
the park be very large, and contain great variety of ground. they enter it in one of its low point, and drive for some time through a beautiful wood stretch over a wide extent.
Elizabeth's mind be too full for conversation, but she see and admire every remarkable spot and point of view. they gradually ascend for half-a-mile, and then find themselves at the top of a considerable eminence, where the wood cease, and the eye be instantly catch by Pemberley House, situate on the opposite side of a valley, into which the road with some abruptness wound. it be a large, handsome stone building, stand well on rise ground, and back by a ridge of high woody hill; and in front, a stream of some natural importance be swell into great, but without any artificial appearance. its bank be neither formal nor falsely adorn. Elizabeth be delighted. she have never see a place for which nature have do more, or where natural beauty have be so little counteract by an awkward taste. they be all of they warm in their admiration; and at that moment she feel that to be mistress of Pemberley might be something!
they descend the hill, cross the bridge, and drive to the door; and, while examine the near aspect of the house, all her apprehension of meet its owner return. she dread lest the chambermaid have be mistake. on apply to see the place, they be admit into the hall; and Elizabeth, as they wait for the housekeeper, have leisure to wonder at her be where she be.
the housekeeper come; a respectable-look elderly woman, much less fine, and more civil, than she have any notion of find she. they follow she into the dining-parlour. it be a large, well proportion room, handsomely fit up. Elizabeth, after slightly survey it, go to a window to enjoy its prospect. the hill, crown with wood, which they have descend, receive increase abruptness from the distance, be a beautiful object. every disposition of the ground be good; and she look on the whole scene, the river, the tree scatter on its bank and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace it, with delight. as they pass into other room these object be take different position; but from every window there be beauty to be see. the room be lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable to the fortune of its proprietor; but Elizabeth see, with admiration of his taste, that it be neither gaudy nor uselessly fine; with less of splendour, and more real elegance, than the 
furniture of Rosings.
"and of this place," think she, "I might have be mistress! with these room I might now have be familiarly acquaint! instead of view they as a stranger, I might have rejoice in they as my own, and welcome to they as visitor my uncle and aunt. but no,"---recollecting herself---"that could never be; my uncle and aunt would have be lose to I; I should not have be allow to invite they."
this be a lucky recollection---it save she from something very like regret.
she long to inquire of the housekeeper whether her master be really absent, but have not the courage for it. at length however, the question be ask by her uncle; and she turn away with alarm, while Mrs. Reynolds reply that he be, add, "but we expect he to-morrow, with a large party of friend." how rejoice be Elizabeth that their own journey have not by any circumstance be delay a day!
her aunt now call she to look at a picture. she approach and see the likeness of Mr. Wickham, suspend, amongst several other miniature, over the mantelpiece. her aunt ask she, smilingly, how she like it. the housekeeper come forward, and tell they it be a picture of a young gentleman, the son of her late master's steward, who have be bring up by he at his own expense. "he be now go into the army," she add; "but I be afraid he have turn out very wild."
Mrs. Gardiner look at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could not return it.
"and that," say Mrs. Reynolds, point to another of the miniature, "be my master---and very like he. it be draw at the same time as the other---about eight year ago."
"I have hear much of your master's fine person," say Mrs. Gardiner, look at the picture; "it be a handsome face. but, Lizzy, you can tell we whether it be like or not."
Mrs. Reynolds respect for Elizabeth seem to increase on this intimation of she know her master.
"do that young lady know Mr. Darcy?"
Elizabeth colour, and say: "a little."
"and do not you think he a very handsome gentleman, ma'am?"
"yes, very handsome."
"I be sure I know none so handsome; but in the gallery upstairs you will see a finer, large picture of he than this. this room be my late master's favourite room, and these miniature be just as they use to be then. he be very fond of they."
this account to Elizabeth for Mr. Wickham's be among they.
Mrs. Reynolds then direct their attention to one of Miss Darcy, draw when she be only eight year old.
"and be Miss Darcy as handsome as her brother?" say Mrs. Gardiner.
"oh! yes---the handsome young lady that ever be see; and so accomplished!--She play and sing all day long. in the next room be a new instrument just come down for she---a present from my master; she come here to-morrow with he."
Mr. Gardiner, whose manner be very easy and pleasant, encourage her communicativeness by his question and remark; Mrs. Reynolds, either by pride or attachment, have evidently great pleasure in talk of her master and his sister.
"be your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?"
"not so much as I could wish, sir; but I dare say he may spend half his time here; and Miss Darcy be always down for the summer month."
"except," think Elizabeth, "when she go to Ramsgate."
"if your master would marry, you might see more of he."
"yes, sir; but I do not know when that will be. I do not know who be good enough for he."
Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner smile. Elizabeth could not help say, "it be very much to his credit, I be sure, that you should think so."
"I say no more than the truth, and everybody will say that know he," reply the other. Elizabeth think this be go pretty far; and she listen with increase astonishment as the housekeeper add, "I have never know a cross word from he in my life, and I have know he ever since he be four year old."
this be praise, of all other most extraordinary, most opposite to her idea. that he be not a good-temper man have be her firm opinion. her keen attention be awaken; she long to hear more, and be grateful to her uncle for say:
"there be very few people of whom so much can be say. you be lucky in have such a master."
"yes, sir, I know I be. if I be to go through the world, I could not meet with a well. but I have always observe, that they who be good-natured when child, be good-natured when they grow up; and he be always the sweetest-temper, most generous-hearted boy in the world."
Elizabeth almost star at she. "can this be Mr. Darcy?" think she.
"his father be an excellent man," say Mrs. Gardiner.
"yes, ma'am, that he be indeed; and his son will be just like he---just as affable to the poor."
Elizabeth listen, wonder, doubt, and be impatient for more. Mrs. Reynolds could interest she on no other point. she relate the subject of the picture, the dimension of the room, and the price of the furniture, in vain, Mr. Gardiner, highly amuse by the kind of family prejudice to which he attribute her excessive commendation of her master, soon lead again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his many merit as they proceed together up the great staircase.
"he be the good landlord, and the good master," say she, "that ever live; not like the wild young man nowadays, who think of nothing but themselves. there be not one of his tenant or servant but will give he a good name. some people call he proud; but I be sure I never see anything of it. to my fancy, it be only because he do not rattle away like other young man."
"in what an amiable light do this place he!" think Elizabeth.
"this fine account of he," whisper her aunt as they walk, "be not quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend." 
"perhaps we might be deceive."
"that be not very likely; our authority be too good."
on reach the spacious lobby above they be show into a very pretty sit-room, lately fit up with great elegance and lightness than the apartment below; and be inform that it be but just do to give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who have take a liking to the room when last at Pemberley.
"he be certainly a good brother," say Elizabeth, as she walk towards one of the window.
Mrs. Reynolds anticipate Miss Darcy's delight, when she should enter the room. "and this be always the way with he," she add. "whatever can give his sister any pleasure be sure to be do in a moment. there be nothing he would not do for she."
the picture-gallery, and two or three of the principal bedroom, be all that remain to be show. in the former be many good painting; but Elizabeth know nothing of the art; and from such as have be already visible below, she have willingly turn to look at some drawing of Miss Darcy's, in crayon, whose subject be usually more interesting, and also more intelligible.
in the gallery there be many family portrait, but they could have little to fix the attention of a stranger. Elizabeth walk in quest of the only face whose feature would be know to she. at last it arrest she---and she behold a striking resemblance to Mr. Darcy, with such a smile over the face as she remember to have sometimes see when he look at she. she stand several minute before the picture, in earnest contemplation, and return to it again before they quit the gallery. Mrs. Reynolds inform they that it have be take in his father's lifetime.
there be certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth's mind, a more gentle sensation towards the original than she have ever feel at the height of their acquaintance. the commendation bestow on he by Mrs. Reynolds be of no trifling nature. what praise be more valuable than the praise of an intelligent servant? as a brother, a landlord, a master, she consider how many people's happiness be in his guardianship!--how much of pleasure or pain be it in his power to bestow!--how much of good or evil must be do by he! every idea that have be bring forward by the housekeeper be favourable to his character, and as she stand before the canvas on which he be represent, and fix his eye upon herself, she think of his regard with a deep sentiment of gratitude than it have ever raise before; she remember its warmth, and soften its impropriety of expression.
when all of the house that be open to general inspection have be see, they return downstairs, and, take leave of the housekeeper, be consign over to the gardener, who meet they at the hall-door.
as they walk across the hall towards the river, Elizabeth turn back to look again; her uncle and aunt stop also, and while the former be conjecture as to the date of the building, the owner of it himself suddenly come forward from the road, which lead behind it to the stable.
they be within twenty yard of each other, and so abrupt be his appearance, that it be impossible to avoid his sight. their eye instantly meet, and the cheek of both be overspread with the deep blush. he absolutely start, and for a moment seem immovable from surprise; but shortly recover himself, advance towards the party, and speak to Elizabeth, if not in term of perfect composure, at least of perfect civility.
she have instinctively turn away; but stop on his approach, receive his compliment with an embarrassment impossible to be overcome. have his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture they have just be examine, be insufficient to assure the other two that they now see Mr. Darcy, the gardener's expression of surprise, on behold his master, must immediately have tell it. they stand a little aloof while he be talk to their niece, who, astonish and confused, scarcely dare lift her eye to his face, and know not what answer she return to his civil inquiry after her family. amazed at the alteration of his manner since they last part, every sentence that he utter be increase her embarrassment; and every idea of the impropriety of her be find there recur to her mind, the few minute in which they continue be some of the most uncomfortable in her life. nor do he seem much more at ease; when he speak, his accent have none of its usual sedateness; and he repeat his 
inquiry as to the time of she have leave Longbourn, and of she have stay in Derbyshire, so often, and in so hurry a way, as plainly speak the distraction of his thought.
at length every idea seem to fail he; and, after stand a few moment without say a word, he suddenly recollect himself, and take leave.
the other then join she, and express admiration of his figure; but Elizabeth hear not a word, and wholly engross by her own feeling, follow they in silence. she be overpower by shame and vexation. her come there be the most unfortunate, the most ill-judge thing in the world! how strange it must appear to he! in what a disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man! it might seem as if she have purposely throw herself in his way again! oh! why do she come? or, why do he thus come a day before he be expect? have they be only ten minute soon, they should have be beyond the reach of his discrimination; for it be plain that he be that moment arrive---that moment alight from his horse or his carriage. she blush again and again over the perverseness of the meeting. and his behaviour, so strikingly alter---what could it mean? that he should even speak to she be amazing!--but to speak with such civility, to inquire after her family! never in her life have she see his manner 
so little dignified, never have he speak with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting. what a contrast do it offer to his last address in Rosings Park, when he put his letter into her hand! she know not what to think, or how to account for it.
they have now enter a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and every step be bring forward a nobler fall of ground, or a fine reach of the wood to which they be approach; but it be some time before Elizabeth be sensible of any of it; and, though she answer mechanically to the repeat appeal of her uncle and aunt, and seem to direct her eye to such object as they point out, she distinguish no part of the scene. her thought be all fix on that one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be, where Mr. Darcy then be. she long to know what at the moment be pass in his mind---in what manner he think of she, and whether, in defiance of everything, she be still dear to he. perhaps he have be civil only because he feel himself at ease; yet there have be that in his voice which be not like ease. whether he have feel more of pain or of pleasure in see she she could not tell, but he certainly have not see she with composure.
at length, however, the remark of her companion on her absence of mind arouse she, and she feel the necessity of appear more like herself.
they enter the wood, and bid adieu to the river for a while, ascend some of the high ground; when, in spot where the opening of the tree give the eye power to wander, be many charming view of the valley, the opposite hill, with the long range of wood overspread many, and occasionally part of the stream. Mr. Gardiner express a wish of go round the whole park, but fear it might be beyond a walk. with a triumphant smile they be tell that it be ten mile round. it settle the matter; and they pursue the accustomed circuit; which bring they again, after some time, in a descent among hang wood, to the edge of the water, and one of its narrow part. they cross it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of the scene; it be a spot less adorned than any they have yet visit; and the valley, here contract into a glen, allow room only for the stream, and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which border it. Elizabeth long to explore its winding; 
but when they have cross the bridge, and perceive their distance from the house, Mrs. Gardiner, who be not a great walker, could go no far, and think only of return to the carriage as quickly as possible. her niece be, therefore, oblige to submit, and they take their way towards the house on the opposite side of the river, in the near direction; but their progress be slow, for Mr. Gardiner, though seldom able to indulge the taste, be very fond of fishing, and be so much engage in watch the occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and talk to the man about they, that he advance but little. whilst wander on in this slow manner, they be again surprised, and Elizabeth's astonishment be quite equal to what it have be at first, by the sight of Mr. Darcy approach they, and at no great distance. the walk here be here less sheltered than on the other side, allow they to see he before they meet. Elizabeth, however astonish, be at least more prepared for an 
interview than before, and resolve to appear and to speak with calmness, if he really intend to meet they. for a few moment, indeed, she feel that he would probably strike into some other path. the idea last while a turning in the walk conceal he from their view; the turn past, he be immediately before they. with a glance, she see that he have lose none of his recent civility; and, to imitate his politeness, she begin, as they meet, to admire the beauty of the place; but she have not get beyond the word "delightful," and "charming," when some unlucky recollection obtrude, and she fancy that praise of Pemberley from she might be mischievously construe. her colour change, and she say no more.
Mrs. Gardiner be stand a little behind; and on her pausing, he ask she if she would do he the honour of introduce he to her friend. this be a stroke of civility for which she be quite unprepared; and she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seek the acquaintance of some of those very people against whom his pride have revolt in his offer to herself. "what will be his surprise," think she, "when he know who they be? he take they now for people of fashion."
the introduction, however, be immediately make; and as she name their relationship to herself, she steal a sly look at he, to see how he bear it, and be not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he could from such disgraceful companion. that he be surprise by the connection be evident; he sustain it, however, with fortitude, and so far from go away, turn his back with they, and enter into conversation with Mr. Gardiner. Elizabeth could not but be pleased, could not but triumph. it be console that he should know she have some relation for whom there be no need to blush. she listen most attentively to all that pass between they, and glory in every expression, every sentence of her uncle, which mark his intelligence, his taste, or his good manner.
the conversation soon turn upon fishing; and she hear Mr. Darcy invite he, with the great civility, to fish there as often as he choose while he continue in the neighbourhood, offer at the same time to supply he with fishing tackle, and point out those part of the stream where there be usually most sport. Mrs. Gardiner, who be walk arm-in-arm with Elizabeth, give she a look expressive of wonder. Elizabeth say nothing, but it gratify she exceedingly; the compliment must be all for herself. her astonishment, however, be extreme, and continually be she repeat, "why be he so alter? from what can it proceed? it cannot be for _me_--it cannot be for my sake that his manner be thus soften. my reproof at Hunsford could not work such a change as this. it be impossible that he should still love I."
after walk some time in this way, the two lady in front, the two gentleman behind, on resume their place, after descend to the brink of the river for the well inspection of some curious water-plant, there chance to be a little alteration. it originate in Mrs. Gardiner, who, fatigue by the exercise of the morning, find Elizabeth's arm inadequate to her support, and consequently prefer her husband's. Mr. Darcy take her place by her niece, and they walk on together. after a short silence, the lady first speak. she wish he to know that she have be assure of his absence before she come to the place, and accordingly begin by observe, that his arrival have be very unexpected---"for your housekeeper," she add, "inform we that you would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and indeed, before we leave Bakewell, we understand that you be not immediately expect in the country." he acknowledge the truth of it all, and say that business with his steward have occasion his come 
forward a few hour before the rest of the party with whom he have be travel. "they will join I early to-morrow," he continue, "and among they be some who will claim an acquaintance with you---Mr. Bingley and his sister."
Elizabeth answer only by a slight bow. her thought be instantly drive back to the time when Mr. Bingley's name have be the last mention between they; and, if she might judge by his complexion, his mind be not very differently engage.
"there be also one other person in the party," he continue after a pause, "who more particularly wish to be know to you. will you allow I, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance during your stay at Lambton?"
the surprise of such an application be great indeed; it be too great for she to know in what manner she accede to it. she immediately feel that whatever desire Miss Darcy might have of be acquaint with she must be the work of her brother, and, without look far, it be satisfactory; it be gratify to know that his resentment have not make he think really ill of she.
they now walk on in silence, each of they deep in thought. Elizabeth be not comfortable; that be impossible; but she be flatter and please. his wish of introduce his sister to she be a compliment of the high kind. they soon outstrip the other, and when they have reach the carriage, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner be half a quarter of a mile behind.
he then ask she to walk into the house---but she declare herself not tired, and they stand together on the lawn. at such a time much might have be say, and silence be very awkward. she want to talk, but there seem to be an embargo on every subject. at last she recollect that she have be travel, and they talk of Matlock and Dove Dale with great perseverance. yet time and her aunt move slowly---and her patience and her idea be nearly wear our before the tete-a-tete be over. on Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's come up they be all press to go into the house and take some refreshment; but this be decline, and they part on each side with utmost politeness. Mr. Darcy hand the lady into the carriage; and when it drive off, Elizabeth see he walk slowly towards the house.
the observation of her uncle and aunt now begin; and each of they pronounce he to be infinitely superior to anything they have expect. "he be perfectly well behaved, polite, and unassuming," say her uncle.
"there be something a little stately in he, to be sure," reply her aunt, "but it be confine to his air, and be not unbecoming. I can now say with the housekeeper, that though some people may call he proud, I have see nothing of it."
"I be never more surprised than by his behaviour to we. it be more than civil; it be really attentive; and there be no necessity for such attention. his acquaintance with Elizabeth be very trifling."
"to be sure, Lizzy," say her aunt, "he be not so handsome as Wickham; or, rather, he have not Wickham's countenance, for his feature be perfectly good. but how come you to tell I that he be so disagreeable?"
Elizabeth excuse herself as well as she could; say that she have like he well when they have meet in Kent than before, and that she have never see he so pleasant as this morning.
"but perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civility," reply her uncle. "your great man often be; and therefore I shall not take he at his word, as he might change his mind another day, and warn I off his ground."
Elizabeth feel that they have entirely misunderstand his character, but say nothing.
"from what we have see of he," continue Mrs. Gardiner, "I really should not have think that he could have behave in so cruel a way by anybody as he have do by poor Wickham. he have not an ill-natured look. on the contrary, there be something pleasing about his mouth when he speak. and there be something of dignity in his countenance that would not give one an unfavourable idea of his heart. but, to be sure, the good lady who show we his house do give he a most flaming character! I could hardly help laugh aloud sometimes. but he be a liberal master, I suppose, and that in the eye of a servant comprehend every virtue."
Elizabeth here feel herself call on to say something in vindication of his behaviour to Wickham; and therefore give they to understand, in as guard a manner as she could, that by what she have hear from his relation in Kent, his action be capable of a very different construction; and that his character be by no mean so faulty, nor Wickham's so amiable, as they have be consider in Hertfordshire. in confirmation of this, she relate the particular of all the pecuniary transaction in which they have be connect, without actually name her authority, but state it to be such as such as might be rely on.
Mrs. Gardiner be surprised and concerned; but as they be now approach the scene of her former pleasure, every idea give way to the charm of recollection; and she be too much engage in point out to her husband all the interesting spot in its environ to think of anything else. fatigue as she have be by the morning's walk they have no soon din than she set off again in quest of her former acquaintance, and the evening be spend in the satisfaction of a intercourse renew after many year' discontinuance.
the occurrence of the day be too full of interest to leave Elizabeth much attention for any of these new friend; and she could do nothing but think, and think with wonder, of Mr. Darcy's civility, and, above all, of his wish she to be acquaint with his sister.
chapter 44
Elizabeth have settle it that Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visit she the very day after her reach Pemberley; and be consequently resolve not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning. but her conclusion be false; for on the very morning after their arrival at Lambton, these visitor come. they have be walk about the place with some of their new friend, and be just return to the inn to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a carriage draw they to a window, and they see a gentleman and a lady in a curricle drive up the street. Elizabeth immediately recognize the livery, guess what it mean, and impart no small degree of her surprise to her relation by acquaint they with the honour which she expect. her uncle and aunt be all amazement; and the embarrassment of her manner as she speak, join to the circumstance itself, and many of the circumstance of the precede day, open to they a new idea on the business. nothing have ever 
suggest it before, but they feel that there be no other way of accounting for such attention from such a quarter than by suppose a partiality for their niece. while these newly-bear notion be pass in their head, the perturbation of Elizabeth's feeling be at every moment increase. she be quite amazed at her own discomposure; but amongst other cause of disquiet, she dread lest the partiality of the brother should have say too much in her favour; and, more than commonly anxious to please, she naturally suspect that every power of pleasing would fail she.
she retreat from the window, fearful of be see; and as she walk up and down the room, endeavour to compose herself, see such look of inquire surprise in her uncle and aunt as make everything bad.
Miss Darcy and her brother appear, and this formidable introduction take place. with astonishment do Elizabeth see that her new acquaintance be at least as much embarrassed as herself. since her be at Lambton, she have hear that Miss Darcy be exceedingly proud; but the observation of a very few minute convince she that she be only exceedingly shy. she find it difficult to obtain even a word from she beyond a monosyllable.
Miss Darcy be tall, and on a large scale than Elizabeth; and, though little more than sixteen, her figure be form, and her appearance womanly and graceful. she be less handsome than her brother; but there be sense and good humour in her face, and her manner be perfectly unassuming and gentle. Elizabeth, who have expect to find in she as acute and unembarrasse an observer as ever Mr. Darcy have be, be much relieve by discern such different feeling.
they have not long be together before Mr. Darcy tell she that Bingley be also come to wait on she; and she have barely time to express her satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when Bingley's quick step be hear on the stair, and in a moment he enter the room. all Elizabeth's anger against he have be long do away; but have she still feel any, it could hardly have
stand its ground against the unaffected cordiality with which he express himself on see she again. he inquire in a friendly, though general way, after her family, and look and speak with the same good-humour ease that he have ever do.
to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner he be scarcely a less interesting personage than to herself. they have long wish to see he. the whole party before they, indeed, excite a lively attention. the suspicion which have just arise of Mr. Darcy and their niece direct their observation towards each with an earnest though guard inquiry; and they soon draw from those inquiry the full conviction that one of they at least know what it be to love. of the lady's sensation they remain a little in doubt; but that the gentleman be overflow with admiration be evident enough.
Elizabeth, on her side, have much to do. she want to ascertain the feeling of each of her visitor; she want to compose her own, and to make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she fear most to fail, she be most sure of success, for those to whom she endeavour to give pleasure be prepossess in her favour. Bingley be ready, Georgiana be eager, and Darcy determine, to be please.
in see Bingley, her thought naturally fly to her sister; and, oh! how ardently do she long to know whether any of his be direct in a like manner. sometimes she could fancy that he talk less than on former occasion, and once or twice please herself with the notion that, as he look at she, he be try to trace a resemblance. but, though this might be imaginary, she could not be deceive as to his behaviour to Miss Darcy, who have be set up as a rival to Jane. no look appear on either side that speak particular regard. nothing occur between they that could justify the hope of his sister. on this point she be soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstance occur ere they part, which, in her anxious interpretation, denote a recollection of Jane not untincture by tenderness, and a wish of say more that might lead to the mention of she, have he dare. he observe to she, at a moment when the other be talk together, and in a tone which have something of real
regret, that it "be a very long time since he have have the pleasure of see she;" and, before she could reply, he add, "it be above eight month. we have not meet since the 26th of November, when we be all dance together at Netherfield."
Elizabeth be pleased to find his memory so exact; and he afterwards take occasion to ask she, when unattended to by any of the rest, whether all her sister be at Longbourn. there be not much in the question, nor in the precede remark; but there be a look and a manner which give they meaning.
it be not often that she could turn her eye on Mr. Darcy himself; but, whenever she do catch a glimpse, she see an expression of general complaisance, and in all that he say she hear an accent so removed from hauteur or disdain of his companion, as convince she that the improvement of manner which she have yesterday witness however temporary its existence might prove, have at least outlive one day. when she see he thus seek the acquaintance and court the good opinion of people with whom any intercourse a few month ago would have be a disgrace---when she see he thus civil, not only to herself, but to the very relation whom he have openly disdain, and recollect their last lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage---the difference, the change be so great, and strike so forcibly on her mind, that she could hardly restrain her astonishment from be visible. never, even in the company of his dear friend at Netherfield, or his dignified relation at Rosings, have she see he so desirous to please, 
so free from self-consequence or unbend reserve, as now, when no importance could result from the success of his endeavour, and when even the acquaintance of those to whom his attention be address would draw down the ridicule and censure of the lady both of Netherfield and Rosings.
their visitor stay with they above half-an-hour; and when they arise to depart, Mr. Darcy call on his sister to join he in express their wish of see Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, and Miss Bennet, to dinner at Pemberley, before they leave the country. Miss Darcy, though with a diffidence which mark her little in the habit of give invitation, readily obey. Mrs. Gardiner look at her niece, desirous of know how she, whom the invitation most concerned, feel disposed as to its acceptance, but Elizabeth have turn away her head. presume however, that this studied avoidance speak rather a momentary embarrassment than any dislike of the proposal, and see in her husband, who be fond of society, a perfect willingness to accept it, she venture to engage for her attendance, and the day after the next be fix on.
Bingley express great pleasure in the certainty of see Elizabeth again, have still a great deal to say to she, and many inquiry to make after all their Hertfordshire friend. Elizabeth, construe all this into a wish of hear her speak of her sister, be pleased, and on this account, as well as some other, find herself, when their visitor leave they, capable of consider the last half-hour with some satisfaction, though while it be pass, the enjoyment of it have be little. eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiry or hint from her uncle and aunt, she stay with they only long enough to hear their favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurry away to dress.
but she have no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's curiosity; it be not their wish to force her communication. it be evident that she be much well acquaint with Mr. Darcy than they have before any idea of; it be evident that he be very much in love with she. they see much to interest, but nothing to justify inquiry.
of Mr. Darcy it be now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as far as their acquaintance reach, there be no fault to find. they could not be untouched by his politeness; and have they draw his character from their own feeling and his servant's report, without any reference to any other account, the circle in Hertfordshire to which he be know would not have recognize it for Mr. Darcy. there be now an interest, however, in believe the housekeeper; and they soon become sensible that the authority of a servant who have know he since he be four year old, and whose own manner indicate respectability, be not to be hastily reject. neither have anything occur in the intelligence of their Lambton friend that could materially lessen its weight. they have nothing to accuse he of but pride; pride he probably have, and if not, it would certainly be impute by the inhabitant of a small market-town where the family do not visit. it be acknowledge, however, that he be a liberal man, and do much 
good among the poor.
with respect to Wickham, the traveller soon find that he be not hold there in much estimation; for though the chief of his concern with the son of his patron be imperfectly understand, it be yet a well-know fact that, on his quitting derbyshire, he have leave many debt behind he, which Mr. Darcy afterwards discharge.
as for Elizabeth, her thought be at Pemberley this evening more than the last; and the evening, though as it pass it seem long, be not long enough to determine her feeling towards one in that mansion; and she lie awake two whole hour endeavour to make they out. she certainly do not hate he. no; hatred have vanish long ago, and she have almost as long be ashamed of ever feel a dislike against he, that could be so call. the respect create by the conviction of his valuable quality, though at first unwillingly admit, have for some time cease to be repugnant to her feeling; and it be now heighten into somewhat of a friendly nature, by the testimony so highly in his favour, and bring forward his disposition in so amiable a light, which yesterday have produce. but above all, above respect and esteem, there be a motive within she of goodwill which could not be overlook. it be gratitude; gratitude, not merely for have once love she, but for love she still well enough to 
forgive all the petulance and acrimony of her manner in reject he, and all the unjust accusation accompany her rejection. he who, she have be persuade, would avoid she as his great enemy, seem, on this accidental meeting, most eager to preserve the acquaintance, and without any indelicate display of regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where their two self only be
concern, be solicit the good opinion of her friend, and bend on make she know to his sister. such a change in a man of so much pride exciting not only astonishment but gratitude---for to love, ardent love, it must be attribute; and as such its impression on she be of a sort to be encourage, as by no mean unpleasing, though it could not be exactly define. she respect, she esteem, she be grateful to he, she feel a real interest in his welfare; and she only want to know how far she wish that welfare to depend upon herself, and how far it would be for the happiness of both that she should employ the power, which her fancy tell she she still possess, of bring on she the renewal of his address.
it have be settle in the evening between the aunt and the niece, that such a striking civility as Miss Darcy's in come to see they on the very day of her arrival at Pemberley, for she have reach it only to a late breakfast, ought to be imitate, though it could not be equal, by some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that it would be highly expedient to wait on she at Pemberley the follow morning. they be, therefore, to go. Elizabeth be please; though when she ask herself the reason, she have very little to say in reply.
Mr. Gardiner leave they soon after breakfast. the fishing scheme have be renew the day before, and a positive engagement make of his meeting some of the gentleman at Pemberley before noon.
chapter 45
convince as Elizabeth now be that Miss Bingley's dislike of she have originate in jealousy, she could not help feel how unwelcome her appearance at Pemberley must be to she, and be curious to know with how much civility on that lady's side the acquaintance would now be renew.
on reach the house, they be show through the hall into the saloon, whose northern aspect render it delightful for summer. its window opening to the ground, admit a most refreshing view of the high woody hill behind the house, and of the beautiful oak and spanish chestnut which be scatter over the intermediate lawn.
in this house they be receive by Miss Darcy, who be sit there with Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom she live in London. Georgiana's reception of they be very civil, but attend with all the embarrassment which, though proceed from shyness and the fear of do wrong, would easily give to those who feel themselves inferior the belief of she be proud and reserved. Mrs. Gardiner and her niece, however, do her justice, and pity she.
by Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley they be notice only by a curtsey; and, on their be seat, a pause, awkward as such pause must always be, succeed for a few moment. it be first break by Mrs. Annesley, a genteel, agreeable-look woman, whose endeavour to introduce some kind of discourse prove she to be more truly well-breed than either of the other; and between she and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from Elizabeth, the conversation be carry on. Miss Darcy look as if she wish for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes do venture a short sentence when there be least danger of its being hear.
Elizabeth soon see that she be herself closely watch by Miss Bingley, and that she could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without call her attention. this observation would not have prevent she from try to talk to the latter, have they not be seat at an inconvenient distance; but she be not sorry to be spar the necessity of say much. her own thought be employ she. she expect every moment that some of the gentleman would enter the room. she wish, she fear that the master of the house might be amongst they; and whether she wish or fear it most, she could scarcely determine. after sit in this manner a quarter of an hour without hear Miss Bingley's voice, Elizabeth be rouse by receive from her a cold inquiry after the health of her family. she answer with equal indifference and brevity, and the other say no more.
the next variation which their visit afford be produce by the entrance of servant with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all the fine fruit in season; but this do not take place till after many a significant look and smile from Mrs. Annesley to Miss Darcy have be give, to remind she of her post. there be now employment for the whole party---for though they could not all talk, they could all eat; and the beautiful pyramid of grape, nectarine, and peach soon collect they round the table.
while thus engage, Elizabeth have a fair opportunity of decide whether she most fear or wish for the appearance of Mr. Darcy, by the feeling which prevail on his enter the room; and then, though but a moment before she have believe her wish to predominate, she begin to regret that he come.
he have be some time with Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three other gentleman from the house, be engage by the river, and have leave he only on learn that the lady of the family intend a visit to Georgiana that morning. no soon do he appear than Elizabeth wisely resolve to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed; a resolution the more necessary to be make, but perhaps not the more easily keep, because she see that the suspicion of the whole party be awaken against they, and that there be scarcely an eye which do not watch his behaviour when he first come into the room. in no countenance be attentive curiosity so strongly mark as in Miss Bingley's, in spite of the smile which overspread her face whenever she speak to one of its object; for jealousy have not yet make she desperate, and her attention to Mr. Darcy be by no mean over. Miss Darcy, on her brother's entrance, exert herself much more to talk, and Elizabeth see that he be anxious for his sister and herself to get acquaint,
 and forward as much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side. Miss Bingley see all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, take the first opportunity of say, with sneer civility:
"pray, Miss Eliza, be not the ----shire Militia remove from Meryton? they must be a great loss to your family."
in Darcy's presence she dare not mention Wickham's name; but Elizabeth instantly comprehend that he be uppermost in her thought; and the various recollection connect with he give she a moment's distress; but exert herself vigorously to repel the ill-natured attack, she presently answer the question in a tolerably detach tone. while she speak, an involuntary glance show her Darcy, with a heighten complexion, earnestly look at she, and his sister overcome with confusion, and unable to lift up her eye. have Miss Bingley know what pain she be then give her beloved friend, she undoubtedly would have refrain from the hint; but she have merely intend to discompose Elizabeth by bring forward the idea of a man to whom she believe her partial, to make her betray a sensibility which might injure she in Darcy's opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the folly and absurdity by which some part of her family be connect with that corps. not a syllable have ever reach 
she of Miss Darcy's meditate elopement. to no creature have it be reveal, where secrecy be possible, except to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley's connection her brother be particularly anxious to conceal it, from the very wish which Elizabeth have long ago attribute to he, of their become hereafter her own. he have certainly form such a plan, and without mean that it should effect his endeavour to separate he from Miss Bennet, it be probable that it might add something to his lively concern for the welfare of his friend.
Elizabeth's collect behaviour, however, soon quiet his emotion; and as Miss Bingley, vex and disappoint, dare not approach near to Wickham, Georgiana also recover in time, though not enough to be able to speak any more. her brother, whose eye she fear to meet, scarcely recollect her interest in the affair, and the very circumstance which have be design to turn his thought from Elizabeth seem to have fix they on her more and more cheerfully.
their visit do not continue long after the question and answer above mention; and while Mr. Darcy be attend they to their carriage Miss Bingley be vent her feeling in criticism on Elizabeth's person, behaviour, and dress. but Georgiana would not join she. her brother's recommendation be enough to ensure her favour; his judgement could not err. and he have speak in such term of Elizabeth as to leave Georgiana without the power of find she otherwise than lovely and amiable. when Darcy return to the saloon, Miss Bingley could not help repeat to he some part of what she have be say to his sister.
"how very ill Miss Eliza Bennet look this morning, Mr. Darcy," she cry; "I never in my life see anyone so much alter as she be since the winter. she be grow so brown and coarse! louisa and I be agree that we should not have know she again."
however little Mr. Darcy might have like such an address, he content himself with coolly reply that he perceive no other alteration than her be rather tan, no miraculous consequence of travel in the summer.
"for my own part," she rejoin, "I must confess that I never could see any beauty in she. her face be too thin; her complexion have no brilliancy; and her feature be not at all handsome. her nose want character---there be nothing mark in its line. her tooth be tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eye, which have sometimes be call so fine, I could never see anything extraordinary in they. they have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do not like at all; and in her air altogether there be a self-sufficiency without fashion, which be intolerable."
persuade as Miss Bingley be that Darcy admire Elizabeth, this be not the good method of recommend herself; but angry people be not always wise; and in see he at last look somewhat nettled, she have all the success she expect. he be resolutely silent, however, and, from a determination of make he speak, she continue:
"I remember, when we first know she in Hertfordshire, how amazed we all be to find that she be a reputed beauty; and I particularly recollect your say one night, after they have be din at Netherfield, '_she_ a beauty!--i should as soon call her mother a wit.' but afterwards she seem to improve on you, and I believe you think she rather pretty at one time."
"yes," reply Darcy, who could contain himself no long, "but that be only when I first see she, for it be many month since I have consider she as one of the handsome woman of my acquaintance."
he then go away, and Miss Bingley be leave to all the satisfaction of have force he to say what give no one any pain but herself.
Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talk of all that have occur during their visit, as they return, except what have particularly interested they both. the look and behaviour of everybody they have see be discuss, except of the person who have mostly engage their attention. they talk of his sister, his friend, his house, his fruit---of everything but himself; yet Elizabeth be long to know what Mrs. Gardiner think of he, and Mrs. Gardiner would have be highly gratified by her niece's begin the subject.
chapter 46
Elizabeth have be a good deal disappoint in not find a letter from Jane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment have be renew on each of the morning that have now be spend there; but on the third her repine be over, and her sister justify, by the receipt of two letter from she at once, on one of which be mark that it have be missent elsewhere. Elizabeth be not surprised at it, as Jane have write the direction remarkably ill.
they have just be prepare to walk as the letter come in; and her uncle and aunt, leave she to enjoy they in quiet, set off by themselves. the one missent must first be attend to; it have be write five day ago. the beginning contain an account of all their little party and engagement, with such news as the country afford; but the latter half, which be date a day later, and write in evident agitation, give more important intelligence. it be to this effect:
"since write the above, dear Lizzy, something have occur of a most unexpected and serious nature; but I be afraid of alarm you---be assure that we be all well. what I have to say relate to poor Lydia. an express come at twelve last night, just as we be all go to bed, from Colonel Forster, to inform we that she be go off to Scotland with one of his officer; to own the truth, with Wickham! imagine our surprise. to Kitty, however, it do not seem so wholly unexpected. I be very, very sorry. so imprudent a match on both side! but I be willing to hope the good, and that his character have be misunderstood. thoughtless and indiscreet I can easily believe he, but this step (and let we rejoice over it) mark nothing bad at heart. his choice be disintereste at least, for he must know my father can give she nothing. our poor mother be sadly grieve. my father bear it well. how thankful be I that we never let they know what have be say against he; we must forget it ourselves. they be off 
Saturday night about twelve, as be conjecture, but be not miss till yesterday morning at eight. the express be send off directly. my dear Lizzy, they must have pass within ten mile of we. Colonel Forster give we reason to expect he here soon. Lydia leave a few line for his wife, inform she of their intention. I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poor mother. I be afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I hardly know what I have write."
without allow herself time for consideration, and scarcely know what she feel, Elizabeth on finish this letter instantly seize the other, and open it with the utmost impatience, read as follow: it have be write a day later than the conclusion of the first.
"by this time, my dear sister, you have receive my hurried letter; I wish this may be more intelligible, but though not confine for time, my head be so bewildered that I cannot answer for be coherent. Dearest Lizzy, I hardly know what I would write, but I have bad news for you, and it cannot be delay. Imprudent as the marriage between Mr. Wickham and our poor Lydia would be, we be now anxious to be assure it have take place, for there be but too much reason to fear they be not go to Scotland. Colonel Forster come yesterday, have leave Brighton the day before, not many hour after the express. though Lydia's short letter to Mrs. F. give they to understand that they be go to Gretna Green, something be drop by Denny express his belief that W. never intend to go there, or to marry Lydia at all, which be repeat to Colonel F., who, instantly take the alarm, set off from B. intend to trace their route. he do trace they easily to Clapham, but no far; for on enter that 
place, they remove into a hackney coach, and dismiss the chaise that bring they from Epsom. all that be know after this be, that they be see to continue the London road. I know not what to think. after make every possible inquiry on that side London, Colonel F. come on into Hertfordshire, anxiously renew they at all the turnpike, and at the inn in Barnet and Hatfield, but without any success---no
such people have be see to pass through. with the kind concern he come on to longbourn, and break his apprehension to we in a manner most creditable to his heart. I be sincerely grieve for he and Mrs. F., but no one can throw any blame on they. our distress, my dear Lizzy, be very great. my father and mother believe the bad, but I cannot think so ill of he. many circumstance might make it more eligible for they to be marry privately in town than to pursue their first plan; and even if he could form such a design against a young woman of Lydia's connection, which be not likely, can I suppose she so lose to everything? impossible! I grieve to find, however, that Colonel F. be not disposed to depend upon their marriage; he shake his head when I express my hope, and say he fear W. be not a man to be trust. my poor mother be really ill, and keep her room. could she exert herself, it would be well; but this be not to be expect. and as to my father, I never in my life see he so affected. 
Poor Kitty have anger for have conceal their attachment; but as it be a matter of confidence, one cannot wonder. I be truly glad, dear Lizzy, that you have be spar something of these distressing scene; but now, as the first shock be over, shall I own that I long for your return? I be not so selfish, however, as to press for it, if inconvenient. adieu! I take up my pen again to do what I have just tell you I would not; but circumstance be such that I cannot help earnestly beg you all to come here as soon as possible. I know my dear uncle and aunt so well, that I be not afraid of request it, though I have still something more to ask of the former. my father be go to London with Colonel Forster instantly, to try to discover she. what he mean to do I be sure I know not; but his excessive distress will not allow he to pursue any measure in the good and safest way, and Colonel Forster be oblige to be at Brighton again to-morrow evening. in such an exigence, my uncle's advice and 
assistance would be everything in the world; he will immediately comprehend what I must feel, and I rely upon his goodness."
"oh! where, where be my uncle?" cry Elizabeth, dart from her seat as she finish the letter, in eagerness to follow he, without lose a moment of the time so precious; but as she reach the door it be open by a servant, and Mr. Darcy appear. her pale face and impetuous manner make he start, and before he could recover himself to speak, she, in whose mind every idea be supersede by Lydia's situation, hastily exclaim, "I beg your pardon, but I must leave you. I must find Mr. Gardiner this moment, on business that cannot be delay; I have not an instant to lose."
"good God! what be the matter?" cry he, with more feeling than politeness; then recollect himself, "I will not detain you a minute; but let I, or let the servant go after Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner. you be not well enough; you cannot go yourself."
Elizabeth hesitate, but her knee tremble under she and she feel how little would be gain by her attempt to pursue they. call back the servant, therefore, she commission he, though in so breathless an accent as make she almost unintelligible, to fetch his master and mistress home instantly.
on his quitting the room she sit down, unable to support herself, and look so miserably ill, that it be impossible for Darcy to leave she, or to refrain from say, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration, "let I call your maid. be there nothing you could take to give you present relief? a glass of wine; shall I get you one? you be very ill."
"no, I thank you," she reply, endeavour to recover herself. "there be nothing the matter with I. I be quite well; I be only distress by some dreadful news which I have just receive from Longbourn."
she burst into tear as she allude to it, and for a few minute could not speak another word. Darcy, in wretched suspense, could only say something indistinctly of his concern, and observe she in compassionate silence. at length she speak again. "I have just have a letter from Jane, with such dreadful news. it cannot be conceal from anyone. my young sister have leave all her friend---have elope; have throw herself into the power of---of Mr. Wickham. they be go off together from Brighton. you know he too well to doubt the rest. she have no money, no connection, nothing that can tempt he to---she be lose for ever."
Darcy be fix in astonishment. "when I consider," she add in a yet more agitated voice, "that I might have prevent it! I, who know what he be. have I but explain some part of it only---some part of what I learn, to my own family! have his character be know, this could not have happen. but it be all---all too late now."
"I be grieve indeed," cry Darcy; "grieve---shock. but be it certain---absolutely certain?"
"oh, yes! they leave Brighton together on Sunday night, and be trace almost to London, but not beyond; they be certainly not go to Scotland."
"and what have be do, what have be attempt, to recover she?"
"my father be go to London, and Jane have write to beg my uncle's immediate assistance; and we shall be off, I hope, in half-an-hour. but nothing can be do---I know very well that nothing can be do. how be such a man to be work on? how be they even to be discover? I have not the small hope. it be every way horrible!" 
Darcy shake his head in silent acquiescence.
"when my eye be open to his real character---oh! have I know what I ought, what I dare to do! but I know not---I be afraid of do too much. wretched, wretched mistake!"
Darcy make no answer. he seem scarcely to hear she, and be walk up and down the room in earnest meditation, his brow contract, his air gloomy. Elizabeth soon observe, and instantly understand it. her power be sink; everything must sink under such a proof of family weakness, such an assurance of the deep disgrace. she could neither wonder nor condemn, but the belief of his self-conquest bring nothing consolatory to her bosom, afford no palliation of her distress. it be, on the contrary, exactly calculate to make she understand her own wish; and never have she so honestly feel that she could have love he, as now, when all love must be vain.
but self, though it would intrude, could not engross she. Lydia---the humiliation, the misery she be bring on they all, soon swallow up every private care; and cover her face with her handkerchief, Elizabeth be soon lose to everything else; and, after a pause of several minute, be only recall to a sense of her situation by the voice of her companion, who, in a manner which, though it speak compassion, speak likewise restraint, say, "I be afraid you have be long desire my absence, nor have I anything to plead in excuse of my stay, but real, though unavaile concern. would to Heaven that anything could be either say or do on my part that might offer consolation to such distress! but I will not torment you with vain wish, which may seem purposely to ask for your thank. this unfortunate affair will, I fear, prevent my sister's have the pleasure of see you at Pemberley to-day."
"oh, yes. be so kind as to apologise for we to Miss Darcy. say that urgent business call we home immediately. conceal the unhappy truth as long as it be possible, I know it cannot be long."
he readily assure she of his secrecy; again express his sorrow for her distress, wish it a happy conclusion than there be at present reason to hope, and leave his compliment for her relation, with only one serious, part look, go away.
as he quit the room, Elizabeth feel how improbable it be that they should ever see each other again on such term of cordiality as have mark their several meeting in Derbyshire; and as she throw a retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full of contradiction and variety, sigh at the perverseness of those feeling which would now have promote its continuance, and would formerly have rejoice in its termination.
if gratitude and esteem be good foundation of affection, Elizabeth's change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty. but if otherwise---if regard spring from such source be unreasonable or unnatural, in comparison of what be so often describe as arise on a first interview with its object, and even before two word have be exchange, nothing can be say in her defence, except that she have give somewhat of a trial to the latter method in her partiality for Wickham, and that its ill success might, perhaps, authorise she to seek the other less interesting mode of attachment. be that as it may, she see he go with regret; and in this early example of what Lydia's infamy must produce, find additional anguish as she reflect on that wretched business. never, since read Jane's second letter, have she entertain a hope of Wickham's meaning to marry she. no one but Jane, she think, could flatter herself with such an expectation. surprise be the least of her feeling on this development. 
while the content of the first letter remain in her mind, she be all surprise---all astonishment that Wickham should marry a girl whom it be impossible he could marry for money; and how Lydia could ever have attach he have appear incomprehensible. but now it be all too natural. for such an attachment as this she might have sufficient charm; and though she do not suppose Lydia to be deliberately engage in an elopement without the intention of marriage, she have no difficulty in believe that neither her virtue nor her understanding would preserve she from fall an easy prey.
she have never perceive, while the regiment be in Hertfordshire, that Lydia have any partiality for he; but she be convince that Lydia want only encouragement to attach herself to anybody. sometimes one officer, sometimes another, have be her favourite, as their attention raise they in her opinion. her affection have continually be fluctuate but never without an object. the mischief of neglect and mistaken indulgence towards such a girl---oh! how acutely do she now feel it!
she be wild to be at home---to hear, to see, to be upon the spot to share with Jane in the care that must now fall wholly upon she, in a family so derange, a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and require constant attendance; and though almost persuade that nothing could be do for Lydia, her uncle's interference seem of the utmost importance, and till he enter the room her impatience be severe. Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner have hurry back in alarm, suppose by the servant's account that their niece be take suddenly ill; but satisfy they instantly on that head, she eagerly communicate the cause of their summon, read the two letter aloud, and dwell on the postscript of the last with tremble energy, though Lydia have never be a favourite with they, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner could not but be deeply afflict. not Lydia only, but all be concern in it; and after the first exclamation of surprise and horror, Mr. Gardiner promise every assistance in his power. Elizabeth, though 
expect no less, thank he with tear of gratitude; and all three be actuate by one spirit, everything relate to their journey be speedily settle. they be to be off as soon as possible. "but what be to be do about Pemberley?" cry Mrs. Gardiner. "John tell we Mr. Darcy be here when you send for we; be it so?"
"yes; and I tell he we should not be able to keep our engagement. that be all settle."
"what be all settle?" repeat the other, as she run into her room to prepare. "and be they upon such term as for she to disclose the real truth? oh, that I know how it be!"
but wish be vain, or at least could only serve to amuse she in the hurry and confusion of the following hour. have Elizabeth be at leisure to be idle, she would have remain certain that all employment be impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she have her share of business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there be note to be write to all their friend at Lambton, with false excuse for their sudden departure. an hour, however, see the whole complete; and Mr. Gardiner meanwhile have settle his account at the inn, nothing remain to be do but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of the morning, find herself, in a short space of time than she could have suppose, seat in the carriage, and on the road to Longbourn.
chapter 47
"I have be think it over again, Elizabeth," say her uncle, as they drive from the town; "and really, upon serious consideration, I be much more inclined than I be to judge as your eld sister do on the matter. it appear to I so very unlikely that any young man should form such a design against a girl who be by no mean unprotected or friendless, and who be actually stay in his colonel's family, that I be strongly inclined to hope the good. could he expect that her friend would not step forward? could he expect to be notice again by the regiment, after such an affront to Colonel Forster? his temptation be not adequate to the risk!"
"do you really think so?" cry Elizabeth, brighten up for a moment.
"upon my word," say Mrs. Gardiner, "I begin to be of your uncle's opinion. it be really too great a violation of decency, honour, and interest, for he to be guilty of. I cannot think so very ill of Wickham. can you yourself, Lizzy, so wholly give he up, as to believe he capable of it?"
"not, perhaps, of neglect his own interest; but of every other neglect I can believe he capable. if, indeed, it should be so! but I dare not hope it. why should they not go on to Scotland if that have be the case?"
"in the first place," reply Mr. Gardiner, "there be no absolute proof that they be not go to Scotland."
"oh! but their remove from the chaise into a hackney coach be such a presumption! and, besides, no trace of they be to be find on the Barnet road."
"well, then---suppose they to be in London. they may be there, though for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptional purpose. it be not likely that money should be very abundant on either side; and it might strike they that they could be more economically, though less expeditiously, marry in London than in Scotland."
"but why all this secrecy? why any fear of detection? why must their marriage be private? oh, no, no---this be not likely. his most particular friend, you see by Jane's account, be persuade of his never intend to marry she. Wickham will never marry a woman without some money. he cannot afford it. and what claim have Lydia---what attraction have she beyond youth, health, and good humour that could make he, for her sake, forego every chance of benefit himself by marry well? as to what restraint the apprehension of disgrace in the corps might throw on a dishonourable elopement with she, I be not able to judge; for I know nothing of the effect that such a step might produce. but as to your other objection, I be afraid it will hardly hold good. Lydia have no brother to step forward; and he might imagine, from my father's behaviour, from his indolence and the little attention he have ever seem to give to what be go forward in his family, that he would do as little, and think as little about it, as 
any father could do, in such a matter."
"but can you think that Lydia be so lose to everything but love of he as to consent to live with he on any term other than marriage?"
"it do seem, and it be most shocking indeed," reply Elizabeth, with tear in her eye, "that a sister's sense of decency and virtue in such a point should admit of doubt. but, really, I know not what to say. perhaps I be not do her justice. but she be very young; she have never be teach to think on serious subject; and for the last half-year, nay, for a twelvemonth---she have be give up to nothing but amusement and vanity. she have be allow to dispose of her time in the most idle and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinion that come in her way. since the ----shire be first quarter in Meryton, nothing but love, flirtation, and officer have be in her head. she have be do everything in her power by think and talk on the subject, to give great---what shall I call it? susceptibility to her feeling; which be naturally lively enough. and we all know that Wickham have every charm of person and address that can captivate a woman."
"but you see that Jane," say her aunt, "do not think so very ill of Wickham as to believe he capable of the attempt."
"of whom do Jane ever think ill? and who be there, whatever might be their former conduct, that she would think capable of such an attempt, till it be prove against they? but Jane know, as well as I do, what Wickham really be. we both know that he have be profligate in every sense of the word; that he have neither integrity nor honour; that he be as false and deceitful as he be insinuate."
"and do you really know all this?" cry Mrs. Gardiner, whose curiosity as to the mode of her intelligence be all alive.
"I do indeed," reply Elizabeth, colour. "I tell you, the other day, of his infamous behaviour to Mr. Darcy; and you yourself, when last at Longbourn, hear in what manner he speak of the man who have behave with such forbearance and liberality towards he. and there be other circumstance which I be not at liberty---which it be not worth while to relate; but his lie about the whole Pemberley family be endless. from what he say of Miss Darcy I be thoroughly prepared to see a proud, reserved, disagreeable girl. yet he know to the contrary himself. he must know that she be as amiable and unpretending as we have find she."
"but do Lydia know nothing of this? can she be ignorant of what you and Jane seem so well to understand?"
"oh, yes!--that, that be the bad of all. till I be in Kent, and see so much both of Mr. Darcy and his relation Colonel Fitzwilliam, I be ignorant of the truth myself. and when I return home, the ----shire be to leave Meryton in a week or fortnight's time. as that be the case, neither Jane, to whom I relate the whole, nor I, think it necessary to make our knowledge public; for of what use could it apparently be to any one, that the good opinion which all the neighbourhood have of he should then be overthrow? and even when it be settle that Lydia should go with Mrs. Forster, the necessity of open her eye to his character never occur to I. that she could be in any danger from the deception never enter my head. that such a consequence as this could ensue, you may easily believe, be far enough from my thought."
"when they all remove to Brighton, therefore, you have no reason, I suppose, to believe they fond of each other?"
"not the slight. I can remember no symptom of affection on either side; and have anything of the kind be perceptible, you must be aware that our be not a family on which it could be throw away. when first he enter the corps, she be ready enough to admire he; but so we all be. every girl in or near Meryton be out of her sens about he for the first two month; but he never distinguish she by any particular attention; and, consequently, after a moderate period of extravagant and wild admiration, her fancy for he give way, and other of the regiment, who treat she with more distinction, again become her favourite."
* * * * *
it may be easily believe, that however little of novelty could be add to their fear, hope, and conjecture, on this interesting subject, by its repeat discussion, no other could detain they from it long, during the whole of the journey. from Elizabeth's thought it be never absent. fix there by the keenest of all anguish, self-reproach, she could find no interval of ease or forgetfulness.
they travel as expeditiously as possible, and, sleep one night on the road, reach Longbourn by dinner time the next day. it be a comfort to Elizabeth to consider that Jane could not have be weary by long expectation.
the little gardiner, attract by the sight of a chaise, be stand on the step of the house as they enter the paddock; and, when the carriage drive up to the door, the joyful surprise that light up their face, and display itself over their whole body, in a variety of caper and frisk, be the first pleasing earnest of their welcome.
Elizabeth jump out; and, after give each of they a hasty kiss, hurry into the vestibule, where Jane, who come run down from her mother's apartment, immediately meet she.
Elizabeth, as she affectionately embrace she, whilst tear fill the eye of both, lose not a moment in ask whether anything have be hear of the fugitive.
"not yet," reply Jane. "but now that my dear uncle be come, I hope everything will be well."
"be my father in town?"
"yes, he go on Tuesday, as I write you word."
"and have you hear from he often?"
"we have hear only twice. he write I a few line on Wednesday to say that he have arrive in safety, and to give I his direction, which I particularly beg he to do. he merely add that he should not write again till he have something of importance to mention."
"and my mother---how be she? how be you all?"
"my mother be tolerably well, I trust; though her spirit be greatly shake. she be upstairs and will have great satisfaction in see you all. she do not yet leave her dressing-room. Mary and Kitty, thank Heaven, be quite well."
"but you---how be you?" cry Elizabeth. "you look pale. how much you must have go through!"
her sister, however, assure she of she be perfectly well; and their conversation, which have be pass while Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner be engage with their child, be now put an end to by the approach of the whole party. Jane run to her uncle and aunt, and welcome and thank they both, with alternate smile and tear.
when they be all in the drawing-room, the question which Elizabeth have already ask be of course repeat by the other, and they soon find that Jane have no intelligence to give. the sanguine hope of good, however, which the benevolence of her heart suggest have not yet desert she; she still expect that it would all end well, and that every morning would bring some letter, either from Lydia or her father, to explain their proceeding, and, perhaps, announce their marriage.
Mrs. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repair, after a few minute' conversation together, receive they exactly as might be expect; with tear and lamentation of regret, invective against the villainous conduct of Wickham, and complaint of her own suffering and ill-usage; blame everybody but the person to whose ill-judging indulgence the error of her daughter must principally be owe.
"if I have be able," say she, "to carry my point in go to Brighton, with all my family, this would not have happen; but poor dear Lydia have nobody to take care of she. why do the Forsters ever let she go out of their sight? I be sure there be some great neglect or other on their side, for she be not the kind of girl to do such a thing if she have be well look after. I always think they be very unfit to have the charge of she; but I be overrule, as I always be. poor dear child! and now herebe Mr. Bennet go away, and I know he will fight Wickham, wherever he meet he and then he will be kill, and what be to become of we all? the Collinses will turn we out before he be cold in his grave, and if you be not kind to we, brother, I do not know what we shall do."
they all exclaim against such terrific idea; and Mr. Gardiner, after general assurance of his affection for she and all her family, tell she that he mean to be in London the very next day, and would assist Mr. Bennet in every endeavour for recover Lydia.
"do not give way to useless alarm," add he; "though it be right to be prepare for the bad, there be no occasion to look on it as certain. it be not quite a week since they leave Brighton. in a few day more we may gain some news of they; and till we know that they be not married, and have no design of marrying, do not let we give the matter over as lose. as soon as I get to town I shall go to my brother, and make he come home with I to Gracechurch Street; and then we may consult together as to what be to be do."
"oh! my dear brother," reply Mrs. Bennet, "that be exactly what I could most wish for. and now do, when you get to town, find they out, wherever they may be; and if they be not marry already, make they marry. and as for wedding clothe, do not let they wait for that, but tell Lydia she shall have as much money as she choose to buy they, after they be marry. and, above all, keep Mr. Bennet from fight. tell he what a dreadful state I be in, that I be fright out of my wit---and have such trembling, such fluttering, all over I---such spasm in my side and pain in my head, and such beating at heart, that I can get no rest by night nor by day. and tell my dear Lydia not to give any direction about her clothe till she have see I, for she do not know which be the good warehouse. oh, brother, how kind you be! I know you will contrive it all."
but Mr. Gardiner, though he assure she again of his earnest endeavour in the cause, could not avoid recommend moderation to she, as well in her hope as her fear; and after talk with she in this manner till dinner be on the table, they all leave she to vent all her feeling on the housekeeper, who attend in the absence of her daughter.
though her brother and sister be persuade that there be no real occasion for such a seclusion from the family, they do not attempt to oppose it, for they know that she have not prudence enough to hold her tongue before the servant, while they wait at table, and judge it well that one only of the household, and the one whom they could most trust should comprehend all her fear and solicitude on the subject.
in the dining-room they be soon join by Mary and Kitty, who have be too busily engage in their separate apartment to make their appearance before. one come from her book, and the other from her toilette. the face of both, however, be tolerably calm; and no change be visible in either, except that the loss of her favourite sister, or the anger which she have herself incur in this business, have give more of fretfulness than usual to the accent of Kitty. as for Mary, she be mistress enough of herself to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenance of grave reflection, soon after they be seat at table:
"this be a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much talk of. but we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the wound bosom of each other the balm of sisterly consolation."
then, perceive in Elizabeth no inclination of reply, she add, "Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this useful lesson: that loss of virtue in a female be irretrievable; that one false step involve she in endless ruin; that her reputation be no less brittle than it be beautiful; and that she cannot be too much guard in her behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex."
Elizabeth lift up her eye in amazement, but be too much oppress to make any reply. Mary, however, continue to console herself with such kind of moral extraction from the evil before they.
in the afternoon, the two eld Miss Bennets be able to be for half-an-hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly avail herself of the opportunity of make any inquiry, which Jane be equally eager to satisfy. after join in general lamentation over the dreadful sequel of this event, which Elizabeth consider as all but certain, and Miss Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continue the subject, by say, "but tell I all and everything about it which I have not already hear. give I further particular. what do Colonel Forster say? have they no apprehension of anything before the elopement take place? they must have see they together for ever."
"Colonel Forster do own that he have often suspect some partiality, especially on Lydia's side, but nothing to give he any alarm. I be so grieved for he! his behaviour be attentive and kind to the utmost. he be come to we, in order to assure we of his concern, before he have any idea of their not be go to Scotland: when that apprehension first get abroad, it hasten his journey."
"and be Denny convince that Wickham would not marry? do he know of their intending to go off? have Colonel Forster see Denny himself?"
"yes; but, when question by he, Denny deny know anything of their plan, and would not give his real opinion about it. he do not repeat his persuasion of their not marrying---and from that, I be inclined to hope, he might have be misunderstood before."
"and till Colonel Forster come himself, not one of you entertain a doubt, I suppose, of their be really marry?"
"how be it possible that such an idea should enter our brain? I feel a little uneasy---a little fearful of my sister's happiness with he in marriage, because I know that his conduct have not be always quite right. my father and mother know nothing of that; they only feel how imprudent a match it must be. Kitty then own, with a very natural triumph on know more than the rest of we, that in Lydia's last letter she have prepare she for such a step. she have know, it seem, of their be in love with each other, many week."
"but not before they go to Brighton?"
"no, I believe not."
"and do Colonel Forster appear to think well of Wickham himself? do he know his real character?"
"I must confess that he do not speak so well of Wickham as he formerly do. he believe he to be imprudent and extravagant. and since this sad affair have take place, it be say that he leave Meryton greatly in debt; but I hope this may be false."
"oh, Jane, have we be less secret, have we tell what we know of he, this could not have happen!"
"perhaps it would have be well," reply her sister. "but to expose the former fault of any person without know what their present feeling be, seem unjustifiable. we act with the good intention."
"could Colonel Forster repeat the particular of Lydia's note to his wife?"
"he bring it with he for we to see."
Jane then take it from her pocket-book, and give it to Elizabeth. these be the content:
"you will laugh when you know where I be go, and I cannot help laugh myself at your surprise to-morrow morning, as soon as I be miss. I be go to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with who, I shall think you a simpleton, for there be but one man in the world I love, and he be an angel. I should never be happy without he, so think it no harm to be off. you need not send they word at Longbourn of my going, if you do not like it, for it will make the surprise the great, when I write to they and sign my name 'Lydia Wickham.' what a good joke it will be! I can hardly write for laugh. pray make my excuse to Pratt for not keep my engagement, and dance with he to-night. tell he I hope he will excuse I when he know all; and tell he I will dance with he at the next ball we meet, with great pleasure. I shall send for my clothe when I get to longbourn; but I wish you would tell Sally to mend a great slit in my work muslin gown before they be pack up. good-bye. give my love to Colonel 
Forster. I hope you will drink to our good journey.
"your affectionate friend,
"LYDIA BENNET."
"oh! thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!" cry Elizabeth when she have finish it. "what a letter be this, to be write at such a moment! but at least it show that she be serious on the subject of their journey. whatever he might afterwards persuade she to, it be not on her side a scheme of infamy. my poor father! how he must have feel it!"
"I never see anyone so shocked. he could not speak a word for full ten minute. my mother be take ill immediately, and the whole house in such confusion!"
"oh! jane," cry Elizabeth, "be there a servant belong to it who do not know the whole story before the end of the day?"
"I do not know. I hope there be. but to be guard at such a time be very difficult. my mother be in hysteric, and though I endeavour to give she every assistance in my power, I be afraid I do not do so much as I might have do! but the horror of what might possibly happen almost take from I my faculty."
"your attendance upon she have be too much for you. you do not look well. oh that I have be with you! you have have every care and anxiety upon yourself alone."
"Mary and Kitty have be very kind, and would have share in every fatigue, I be sure; but I do not think it right for either of they. Kitty be slight and delicate; and Mary study so much, that her hour of repose should not be break in on. my aunt Phillips come to longbourn on Tuesday, after my father go away; and be so good as to stay till Thursday with I. she be of great use and comfort to we all. and Lady Lucas have be very kind; she walk here on Wednesday morning to condole with we, and offer her service, or any of her daughter', if they should be of use to we."
"she have well have stay at home," cry Elizabeth; "perhaps she mean well, but, under such a misfortune as this, one cannot see too little of one's neighbour. assistance be impossible; condolence insufferable. let they triumph over we at a distance, and be satisfied."
she then proceed to inquire into the measure which her father have intend to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his daughter.
"he mean I believe," reply Jane, "to go to Epsom, the place where they last change horse, see the postilion and try if anything could be make out from they. his principal object must be to discover the number of the hackney coach which take they from Clapham. it have come with a fare from London; and as he think that the circumstance of a gentleman and lady's remove from one carriage into another might be remark he mean to make inquiry at Clapham. if he could anyhow discover at what house the coachman have before set down his fare, he determine to make inquiry there, and hop it might not be impossible to find out the stand and number of the coach. I do not know of any other design that he have form; but he be in such a hurry to be go, and his spirit so greatly discompose, that I have difficulty in find out even so much as this."
chapter 48
the whole party be in hope of a letter from Mr. Bennet the next morning, but the post come in without bring a single line from he. his family know he to be, on all common occasion, a most negligent and dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they have hop for exertion. they be force to conclude that he have no pleasing intelligence to send; but even of that they would have be glad to be certain. Mr. Gardiner have wait only for the letter before he set off.
when he be go, they be certain at least of receive constant information of what be go on, and their uncle promise, at parting, to prevail on Mr. Bennet to return to Longbourn, as soon as he could, to the great consolation of his sister, who consider it as the only security for her husbandbe not be kill in a duel.
Mrs. Gardiner and the child be to remain in Hertfordshire a few day long, as the former think her presence might be serviceable to her niece. she share in their attendance on Mrs. Bennet, and be a great comfort to they in their hour of freedom. their other aunt also visit they frequently, and always, as she say, with the design of cheer and hearten they up---though, as she never come without report some fresh instance of Wickham's extravagance or irregularity, she seldom go away without leave they more dispirited than she find they.
all Meryton seem strive to blacken the man who, but three month before, have be almost an angel of light. he be declare to be in debt to every tradesman in the place, and his intrigue, all honour with the title of seduction, have be extend into every tradesman's family. everybody declare that he be the wicked young man in the world; and everybody begin to find out that they have always distrust the appearance of his goodness. Elizabeth, though she do not credit above half of what be say, believe enough to make her former assurance of her sister's ruin more certain; and even Jane, who believe still less of it, become almost hopeless, more especially as the time be now come when, if they have go to Scotland, which she have never before entirely despair of, they must in all probability have gain some news of they.
Mr. Gardiner leave Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday his wife receive a letter from he; it tell they that, on his arrival, he have immediately find out his brother, and persuade he to come to Gracechurch Street; that Mr. Bennet have be to Epsom and Clapham, before his arrival, but without gain any satisfactory information; and that he be now determined to inquire at all the principal hotel in town, as Mr. Bennet think it possible they might have go to one of they, on their first come to London, before they procure lodging. Mr. Gardiner himself do not expect any success from this measure, but as his brother be eager in it, he mean to assist he in pursue it. he add that Mr. Bennet seem wholly disinclined at present to leave London and promise to write again very soon. there be also a postscript to this effect:
"I have write to Colonel Forster to desire he to find out, if possible, from some of the young man's intimate in the regiment, whether Wickham have any relation or connection who would be likely to know in what part of town he have now conceal himself. if there be anyone that one could apply to with a probability of gain such a clue as that, it might be of essential consequence. at present we have nothing to guide we. Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do everything in his power to satisfy we on this head. but, on second thought, perhaps, Lizzy could tell we what relation he have now live, well than any other person."
Elizabeth be at no loss to understand from whence this deference to her authority proceed; but it be not in her
power to give any information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserve. she have never hear of his have have any relation, except a father and mother, both of whom have be dead many year. it be possible, however, that some of his companion in the ----shire might be able to give more information; and though she be not very sanguine in expect it, the application be a something to look forward to.
every day at Longbourn be now a day of anxiety; but the most anxious part of each be when the post be expect. the arrival of letter be the grand object of every morning's impatience. through letter, whatever of good or bad be to be tell would be communicate, and every succeed day be expect to bring some news of importance.
but before they hear again from Mr. Gardiner, a letter arrive for their father, from a different quarter, from Mr. Collins; which, as Jane have receive direction to open all that come for he in his absence, she accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who know what curiositie his letter always be, look over she, and read it likewise. it be as follow:
"I feel myself call upon, by our relationship, and my situation in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you be now suffer under, of which we be yesterday inform by a letter from Hertfordshire. be assure, my dear sir, that Mrs. Collins and myself sincerely sympathise with you and all your respectable family, in your present distress, which must be of the bitter kind, because proceed from a cause which no time can remove. no argument shall be want on my part that can alleviate so severe a misfortune---or that may comfort you, under a circumstance that must be of all other the most afflict to a parent's mind. the death of your daughter would have be a blessing in comparison of this. and it be the more to be lament, because there be reason to suppose as my dear Charlotte inform I, that this licentiousness of behaviour in your daughter have proceed from a faulty degree of indulgence; though, at the same time, for the consolation of yourself and Mrs. Bennet, I be 
inclined to think that her own disposition must be naturally bad, or she could not be guilty of such an enormity, at so early an age. howsoever that may be, you be grievously to be pity; in which opinion I be not only join by Mrs. Collins, but likewise by Lady Catherine and her daughter, to whom I have relate the affair. they agree with I in apprehend that this false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortune of all the other; for who, as Lady Catherine herself condescendingly say, will connect themselves with such a family? and this consideration lead I moreover to reflect, with augmented satisfaction, on a certain event of last November; for have it be otherwise, I must have be involve in all your sorrow and disgrace. let I then advise you, dear sir, to console yourself as much as possible, to throw off your unworthy child from your affection for ever, and leave she to reap the fruit of her own heinous offense.
« I be, dear sir, etc., etc. »
Mr. Gardiner do not write again till he have receive an answer from Colonel Forster; and then he have nothing of a pleasant nature to send. it be not know that Wickham have a single relationship with whom he keep up any connection, and it be certain that he have no near one living. his former acquaintance have be numerous; but since he have be in the militia, it do not appear that he be on term of particular friendship with any of they. there be no one, therefore, who could be point out as likely to give any news of he. and in the wretched state of his own finance, there be a very powerful motive for secrecy, in addition to his fear of discovery by Lydia's relation, for it have just transpire that he have leave game debt behind he to a very considerable amount. Colonel Forster believe that more than a thousand pound would be necessary to clear his expense at Brighton. he owe a good deal in town, but his debt of honour be still more formidable. Mr. Gardiner do not attempt to conceal 
these particular from the Longbourn family. Jane hear they with horror. "a gamester!" she cry. "this be wholly unexpected. I have not an idea of it."
Mr. Gardiner add in his letter, that they might expect to see their father at home on the following day, which be Saturday. render spiritless by the ill-success of all their endeavour, he have yield to his brother-in-law's entreaty that he would return to his family, and leave it to he to do whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable for continue their pursuit. when Mrs. Bennet be tell of this, she do not express so much satisfaction as her child expect, consider what her anxiety for his life have be before.
"what, be he come home, and without poor Lydia?" she cry. "sure he will not leave London before he have find they. who be to fight Wickham, and make he marry she, if he come away?"
as Mrs. Gardiner begin to wish to be at home, it be settle that she and the child should go to London, at the same time that Mr. Bennet come from it. the coach, therefore, take they the first stage of their journey, and bring its master back to Longbourn.
Mrs. Gardiner go away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her Derbyshire friend that have attend she from that part of the world. his name have never be voluntarily mention before they by her niece; and the kind of half-expectation which Mrs. Gardiner have form, of their be follow by a letter from he, have end in nothing. Elizabeth have receive none since her return that could come from Pemberley.
the present unhappy state of the family render any other excuse for the lowness of her spirit unnecessary; nothing, therefore, could be fairly conjecture from that, though Elizabeth, who be by this time tolerably well acquainted with her own feeling, be perfectly aware that, have she know nothing of Darcy, she could have bear the dread of Lydia's infamy somewhat well. it would have spar she, she think, one sleepless night out of two.
when Mr. Bennet arrive, he have all the appearance of his usual
philosophic composure. he say as little as he have ever be in the habit of say; make no mention of the business that have take he away, and it be some time before his daughter have courage to speak of it.
it be not till the afternoon, when he have join they at tea, that Elizabeth venture to introduce the subject; and then, on she briefly express her sorrow for what he must have endure, he reply, "say nothing of that. who should suffer but myself? it have be my own doing, and I ought to feel it."
"you must not be too severe upon yourself," reply Elizabeth.
"you may well warn I against such an evil. human nature be so prone to fall into it! no, Lizzy, let I once in my life feel how much I have be to blame. I be not afraid of be overpower by the impression. it will pass away soon enough."
"do you suppose they to be in London?"
"yes; where else can they be so well conceal?"
"and Lydia use to want to go to London," add Kitty.
"she be happy then," say her father drily; "and her residence there will probably be of some duration."
then after a short silence he continue:
"Lizzy, I bear you no ill-will for be justify in your advice to I last May, which, consider the event, show some greatness of mind."
they be interrupt by Miss Bennet, who come to fetch her mother's tea.
"this be a parade," he cry, "which do one good; it give such an elegance to misfortune! another day I will do the same; I will sit in my library, in my nightcap and powdering gown, and give as much trouble as I can; or, perhaps, I may defer it till Kitty run away."
"I be not go to run away, papa," say Kitty fretfully. "if I should ever go to Brighton, I would behave well than Lydia."
"_you_ go to Brighton. I would not trust you so near it as Eastbourne for fifty pound! no, Kitty, I have at last learn to be cautious, and you will feel the effect of it. no officer be ever to enter into my house again, nor even to pass through the village. ball will be absolutely prohibit, unless you stand up with one of your sister. and you be never to stir out of door till you can prove that you have spend ten minute of every day in a rational manner."
Kitty, who take all these threat in a serious light, begin to cry.
"well, well," say he, "do not make yourself unhappy. if you be a good girl for the next ten year, I will take you to a review at the end of they."
chapter 49
two day after Mr. Bennet's return, as Jane and Elizabeth be walk together in the shrubbery behind the house, they see the housekeeper come towards they, and, conclude that she come to call they to their mother, go forward to meet she; but, instead of the expect summon, when they approach she, she say to Miss Bennet, "I beg your pardon, madam, for interrupt you, but I be in hope you might have get some good news from town, so I take the liberty of come to ask."
"what do you mean, Hill? we have hear nothing from town."
"dear madam," cry Mrs. Hill, in great astonishment, "donot you know there be an express come for master from Mr. Gardiner? he have be here this half-hour, and master have have a letter."
Away run the girl, too eager to get in to have time for speech. they run through the vestibule into the breakfast-room; from thence to the library; their father be in neither; and they be on the point of seek he upstairs with their mother, when they be meet by the butler, who say: 
"if you be look for my master, ma'am, he be walk towards the little copse."
upon this information, they instantly pass through the hall once more, and run across the lawn after their father, who be deliberately pursue his way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock.
Jane, who be not so light nor so much in the habit of run as Elizabeth, soon lag behind, while her sister, pant for breath, come up with he, and eagerly cry out:
"oh, papa, what news---what news? have you hear from my uncle?"
"yes I have have a letter from he by express."
"well, and what news do it bring---good or bad?"
"what be there of good to be expect?" say he, take the letter from his pocket. "but perhaps you would like to read it."
Elizabeth impatiently catch it from his hand. Jane now come up.
"read it aloud," say their father, "for I hardly know myself what it be about."
"Gracechurch Street, Monday, August 2.
"at last I be able to send you some tiding of my niece, and such as, upon the whole, I hope it will give you satisfaction. soon after you leave I on Saturday, I be fortunate enough to find out in what part of London they be. the particular I reserve till we meet; it be enough to know they be discover. I have see they both---"
"then it be as I always hop," cry Jane; "they be marry!"
Elizabeth read on:
"I have see they both. they be not married, nor can I find there be any intention of be so; but if you be willing to perform the engagement which I have venture to make on your side, I hope it will not be long before they be. all that be require of you be, to assure to your daughter, by settlement, her equal share of the five thousand pound secure among your child after the decease of yourself and my sister; and, moreover, to enter into an engagement of allow she, during your life, one hundred pound per annum. these be condition which, consider everything, I have no hesitation in comply with, as far as I think myself privilege, for you. I shall send this by express, that no time may be lose in bring I your answer. you will easily comprehend, from these particular, that Mr. Wickham's circumstance be not so hopeless as they be generally believe to be. the world have be deceive in that respect; and I be happy to say there will be some little money, even when all his 
debt be discharge, to settle on my niece, in addition to her own fortune. if, as I conclude will be the case, you send I full power to act in your name throughout the whole of this business, I will immediately give direction to Haggerston for prepare a proper settlement. there will not be the small occasion for your come to town again; therefore stay quiet at Longbourn, and depend on my diligence and care. send back your answer as fast as you can, and be careful to write explicitly. we have judge it well that my niece should be marry from this house, of which I hope you will approve. she come to we to-day. I shall write again as soon as anything more be determine on. your, etc.,
"be it possible?" cry Elizabeth, when she have finish. "can it be possible that he will marry she?" 
"Wickham be not so undeserving, then, as we think he," say her sister. "my dear father, I congratulate you."
"and have you answer the letter?" cry Elizabeth.
"no; but it must be do soon."
most earnestly do she then entreaty he to lose no more time before he write.
"oh! my dear father," she cry, "come back and write immediately. consider how important every moment be in such a case."
"let I write for you," say Jane, "if you dislike the trouble yourself."
"I dislike it very much," he reply; "but it must be do."
and so say, he turn back with they, and walk towards the house.
"and may I ask---" say Elizabeth; "but the term, I suppose, must be comply with."
"comply with! I be only ashamed of his ask so little."
"and they must marry! yet he be such a man!"
"yes, yes, they must marry. there be nothing else to be do. but there be two thing that I want very much to know; one be, how much money your uncle have lay down to bring it about; and the other, how be I ever to pay he."
"money! my uncle!" cry Jane, "what do you mean, sir?"
"I mean, that no man in his sens would marry Lydia on so slight a temptation as one hundred a year during my life, and fifty after I be go."
"that be very true," say Elizabeth; "though it have not occur to I before. his debt to be discharge, and something still to remain! oh! it must be my uncle's doing! generous, good man, I be afraid he have distress himself. a small sum could not do all this."
"no," say her father; "Wickham's a fool if he take she with a farthing less than ten thousand pound. I should be sorry to think so ill of he, in the very beginning of our relationship."
"ten thousand pound! heaven forbid! how be half such a sum to be repay?"
Mr. Bennet make no answer, and each of they, deep in thought, continue silent till they reach the house. their father then go on to the library to write, and the girl walk into the breakfast-room.
"and they be really to be marry!" cry Elizabeth, as soon as they be by themselves. "how strange this be! and for this we be to be thankful. that they should marry, small as be their chance of happiness, and wretche as be his character, we be force to rejoice. oh, Lydia!"
"I comfort myself with thinking," reply Jane, "that he certainly would not marry Lydia if he have not a real regard for she. though our kind uncle have do something towards clear he, I cannot believe that ten thousand pound, or anything like it, have be advance. he have child of his own, and may have more. how could he spare half ten thousand pound?"
"if he be ever able to learn what Wickham's debt have be," say Elizabeth, "and how much be settle on his side on our sister, we shall exactly know what Mr. Gardiner have do for they, because Wickham have not sixpence of his own. the kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be requite. their take her home, and afford she their personal protection and countenance, be such a sacrifice to her advantage as year of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. by this time she be actually with they! if such goodness do not make she miserable now, she will never deserve to be happy! what a meeting for she, when she first see my aunt!"
"we must endeavour to forget all that have pass on either side," say jane: "I hope and trust they will yet be happy. his consent to marry she be a proof, I will believe, that he be come to a right way of thinking. their mutual affection will steady they; and I flatter myself they will settle so quietly, and live in so rational a manner, as may in time make their past imprudence forget."
"their conduct have be such," reply Elizabeth, "as neither you, nor I, nor anybody can ever forget. it be useless to talk of it."
it now occur to the girl that their mother be in all likelihood perfectly ignorant of what have happen. they go to the library, therefore, and ask their father whether he would not wish they to make it known to she. he be write and, without raise his head, coolly reply:
"just as you please."
"may we take my uncle's letter to read to she?"
"take whatever you like, and get away."
Elizabeth take the letter from his writing-table, and they go upstairs together. Mary and Kitty be both with Mrs. Bennet: one communication would, therefore, do for all. after a slight preparation for good news, the letter be read aloud. Mrs. Bennet could hardly contain herself. as soon as Jane have read Mr. Gardiner's hope of Lydia's be soon marry, her joy burst forth, and every follow sentence add to its exuberance. she be now in an irritation as violent from delight, as she have ever be fidgety from alarm and vexation. to know that her daughter would be marry be enough. she be disturb by no fear for her felicity, nor humble by any remembrance of her misconduct.
"my dear, dear Lydia!" she cry. "this be delightful indeed! she will be marry! I shall see she again! she will be marry at sixteen! my good, kind brother! I know how it would be. I know he would manage everything! how I long to see she! and to see dear Wickham too! but the clothe, the wedding clothe! I will write to my sister Gardiner about they directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask he how much he will give she. stay, stay, I will go myself. ring the bell, Kitty, for Hill. I will put on my thing in a moment. my dear, dear Lydia! how merry we shall be together when we meet!"
her eld daughter endeavour to give some relief to the violence of these transport, by lead her thought to the obligation which Mr. Gardiner's behaviour lay they all under.
"for we must attribute this happy conclusion," she add, "in a great measure to his kindness. we be persuade that he have pledge himself to assist Mr. Wickham with money."
"well," cry her mother, "it be all very right; who should do it but her own uncle? if he have not have a family of his own, I and my child must have have all his money, you know; and it be the first time we have ever have anything from he, except a few present. well! I be so happy! in a short time I shall have a daughter marry. Mrs. Wickham! how well it sound! and she be only sixteen last June. my dear Jane, I be in such a flutter, that I be sure I cannot write; so I will dictate, and you write for I. we will settle with your father about the money afterwards; but the thing should be order immediately."
she be then proceed to all the particular of calico, muslin, and cambric, and would shortly have dictate some very plentiful order, have not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuade she to wait till her father be at leisure to be consult. one day's delay, she observe, would be of small importance; and her mother be too happy to be quite so obstinate as usual. other scheme, too, come into her head.
"I will go to Meryton," say she, "as soon as I be dress, and tell the good, good news to my sister Philips. and as I come back, I can call on Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and order the carriage. an airing would do I a great deal of good, I be sure. girl, can I do anything for you in Meryton? oh! here come Hill! my dear Hill, have you hear the good news? Miss Lydia be go to be marry; and you shall all have a bowl of punch to make merry at her wedding."
Mrs. Hill begin instantly to express her joy. Elizabeth receive her congratulation amongst the rest, and then, sick of this folly, take refuge in her own room, that she might think with freedom.
Poor Lydia's situation must, at well, be bad enough; but that it be no bad, she have need to be thankful. she feel it so; and though, in look forward, neither rational happiness nor worldly prosperity could be justly expect for her sister, in look back to what they have fear, only two hour ago, she feel all the advantage of what they have gain.
chapter 50
Mr. Bennet have very often wish before this period of his life that, instead of spend his whole income, he have lay by an annual sum for the well provision of his child, and of his wife, if she survive he. he now wish it more than ever. have he do his duty in that respect, Lydia need not have be indebted to her uncle for whatever of honour or credit could now be purchase for she. the satisfaction of prevail on one of the most worthless young man in Great Britain to be her husband might then have rest in its proper place.
he be seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to anyone should be forward at the sole expense of his brother-in-law, and he be determine, if possible, to find out the extent of his assistance, and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could.
when first Mr. Bennet have marry, economy be hold to be perfectly useless, for, of course, they be to have a son. the son be to join in cut off the entail, as soon as he should be of age, and the widow and young child would by that mean be provide for. five daughter successively enter the world, but yet the son be to come; and Mrs. Bennet, for many year after Lydia's birth, have be certain that he would. this event have at last be despair of, but it be then too late to be save. Mrs. Bennet have no turn for economy, and her husband's love of independence have alone prevent their exceed their income.
five thousand pound be settle by marriage article on Mrs. Bennet and the child. but in what proportion it should be divide amongst the latter depend on the will of the parent. this be one point, with regard to Lydia, at least, which be now to be settle, and Mr. Bennet could have no hesitation in accede to the proposal before he. in term of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of his brother, though express most concisely, he then deliver on paper his perfect approbation of all that be do, and his willingness to fulfil the engagement that have be make for he. he have never before suppose that, could Wickham be prevail on to marry his daughter, it would be do with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present arrangement. he would scarcely be ten pound a year the loser by the hundred that be to be pay they; for, what with her board and pocket allowance, and the continual present in money which pass to she through her mother's hand, Lydia's expense have be 
very little within that sum.
that it would be do with such trifling exertion on his side, too, be another very welcome surprise; for his wish at present be to have as little trouble in the business as possible. when the first transport of rage which have produce his activity in seek she be over, he naturally return to all his former indolence. his letter be soon dispatch; for, though dilatory in undertake business, he be quick in its execution. he beg to know further particular of what he be indebted to his brother, but be too angry with Lydia to send any message to she.
the good news spread quickly through the house, and with proportionate speed through the neighbourhood. it be bear in the latter with decent philosophy. to be sure, it would have be more for the advantage of conversation have Miss Lydia Bennet come upon the town; or, as the happy alternative, be seclude from the world, in some distant farmhouse. but there be much to be talk of in marry she; and the good-natured wish for her well-doing which have proceed before from all the spiteful old lady in Meryton lose but a little of their spirit in this change of circumstance, because with such an husband her misery be consider certain.
it be a fortnight since Mrs. Bennet have be downstairs; but on this happy day she again take her seat at the head of her table, and in spirit oppressively high. no sentiment of shame give a damp to her triumph. the marriage of a daughter, which have be the first object of her wish since Jane be sixteen, be now on the point of accomplishment, and her thought and her word run wholly on those attendant of elegant nuptial, fine muslin, new carriage, and servant. she be busily search through the neighbourhood for a proper situation for her daughter, and, without know or consider what their income might be, reject many as deficient in size and importance.
"Haye Park might do," say she, "if the Gouldings could quit it---or the great house at Stoke, if the drawing-room be large; but Ashworth be too far off! I could not bear to have she ten mile from I; and as for Pulvis Lodge, the attic be dreadful."
her husband allow she to talk on without interruption while the servant remain. but when they have withdraw, he say to she: "Mrs. Bennet, before you take any or all of these house for your son and daughter, let we come to a right understanding. into one house in this neighbourhood they shall never have admittance. I will not encourage the impudence of either, by receive they at Longbourn."
a long dispute follow this declaration; but Mr. Bennet be firm. it soon lead to another; and Mrs. Bennet find, with amazement and horror, that her husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothe for his daughter. he protest that she should receive from he no mark of affection whatever on the occasion. Mrs. Bennet could hardly comprehend it. that his anger could be carry to such a point of inconceivable resentment as to refuse his daughter a privilege without which her marriage would scarcely seem valid, exceed all she could believe possible. she be more alive to the disgrace which her want of new clothe must reflect on her daughter's nuptial, than to any sense of shame at her eloping and live with Wickham a fortnight before they take place.
Elizabeth be now most heartily sorry that she have, from the distress of the moment, be lead to make Mr. Darcy acquaint with their fear for her sister; for since her marriage would so shortly give the proper termination to the elopement, they might hope to conceal its unfavourable beginning from all those who be not immediately on the spot.
she have no fear of its spread far through his mean. there be few people on whose secrecy she would have more confidently depend; but, at the same time, there be no one whose knowledge of a sister's frailty would have mortify she so much---not, however, from any fear of disadvantage from it individually to herself, for, at any rate, there seem a gulf impassable between they. have Lydia's marriage be conclude on the most honourable term, it be not to be suppose that Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family where, to every other objection, would now be add an alliance and relationship of the near kind with a man whom he so justly scorn.
from such a connection she could not wonder that he would shrink. the wish of procure her regard, which she have assure herself of his feeling in Derbyshire, could not in rational expectation survive such a blow as this. she be humble, she be grieve; she repent, though she hardly know of what. she become jealous of his esteem, when she could no long hope to be benefit by it. she want to hear of he, when there seem the least chance of gain intelligence. she be convince that she could have be happy with he, when it be no long likely they should meet.
what a triumph for he, as she often think, could he know that the proposal which she have proudly spurn only four month ago, would now have be most gladly and gratefully receive! he be as generous, she doubt not, as the most generous of his sex; but while he be mortal, there must be a triumph.
she begin now to comprehend that he be exactly the man who, in disposition and talent, would most suit she. his understanding and temper, though unlike her own, would have answer all her wish. it be an union that must have be to the advantage of both; by her ease and liveliness, his mind might have be soften, his manner improve; and from his judgement, information, and knowledge of the world, she must have receive benefit of great importance.
but no such happy marriage could now teach the admire multitude what connubial felicity really be. an union of a different tendency, and preclude the possibility of the other, be soon to be form in their family.
how Wickham and Lydia be to be support in tolerable independence, she could not imagine. but how little of permanent happiness could belong to a couple who be only bring together because their passion be strong than their virtue, she could easily conjecture.
* * * * *
Mr. Gardiner soon write again to his brother. to Mr. Bennet's acknowledgment he briefly reply, with assurance of his eagerness to promote the welfare of any of his family; and conclude with entreaty that the subject might never be mention to he again. the principal purport of his letter be to inform they that Mr. Wickham have resolve on quit the militia.
"it be greatly my wish that he should do so," he add, "as soon as his marriage be fix on. and I think you will agree with I, in consider the removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on his account and my niece's. it be Mr. Wickham's intention to go into the regular; and among his former friend, there be still some who be able and willing to assist he in the army. he have the promise of an ensigncy in General ----'s regiment, now quarter in the North. it be an advantage to have it so far from this part of the kingdom. he promise fairly; and I hope among different people, where they may each have a character to preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have write to Colonel Forster, to inform he of our present arrangement, and to request that he will satisfy the various creditor of Mr. Wickham in and near Brighton, with assurance of speedy payment, for which I have pledge myself. and will you give yourself the trouble of carry similar assurance to his creditor in Meryton,
 of whom I shall subjoin a list accord to his information? he have give in all his debt; I hope at least he have not deceive we. Haggerston have our direction, and all will be complete in a week. they will then join his regiment, unless they be first invite to longbourn; and I understand from Mrs. Gardiner, that my niece be very desirous of see you all before she leave the South. she be well, and beg to be dutifully remember to you and your mother.---your, etc.,
Mr. Bennet and his daughter see all the advantage of Wickham's removal from the ----shire as clearly as Mr. Gardiner could do. but Mrs. Bennet be not so well pleased with it. Lydia's be settle in the North, just when she have expect most pleasure and pride in her company, for she have by no mean give up her plan of their reside in Hertfordshire, be a severe disappointment; and, besides, it be such a pity that Lydia should be take from a regiment where she be acquaint with everybody, and have so many favourite.
"she be so fond of Mrs. Forster," say she, "it will be quite shocking to send she away! and there be several of the young man, too, that she like very much. the officer may not be so pleasant in general----'s regiment."
his daughter's request, for such it might be consider, of be admit into her family again before she set off for the North, receive at first an absolute negative. but Jane and Elizabeth, who agree in wish, for the sake of their sister's feeling and consequence, that she should be notice on her marriage by her parent, urge he so earnestly yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive she and her husband at Longbourn, as soon as they be marry, that he be prevail on to think as they think, and act as they wish. and their mother have the satisfaction of know that she would be able to show her married daughter in the neighbourhood before she be banish to the North. when Mr. Bennet write again to his brother, therefore, he send his permission for they to come; and it be settle, that as soon as the ceremony be over, they should proceed to longbourn. Elizabeth be surprised, however, that Wickham should consent to such a scheme, and have she consult only her own inclination, any 
meeting with he would have be the last object of her wish.
chapter 51
their sister's wedding day arrive; and Jane and Elizabeth feel for she probably more than she feel for herself. the carriage be send to meet they at ----, and they be to return in it by dinner-time. their arrival be dread by the eld Miss Bennets, and Jane more especially, who give Lydia the feeling which would have attend herself, have she be the culprit, and be wretche in the thought of what her sister must endure.
they come. the family be assemble in the breakfast room to receive they. smile deck the face of Mrs. Bennet as the carriage drive up to the door; her husband look impenetrably grave; her daughter, alarmed, anxious, uneasy.
Lydia's voice be hear in the vestibule; the door be throw open, and she run into the room. her mother step forwards, embrace she, and welcome she with rapture; give her hand, with an affectionate smile, to Wickham, who follow his lady; and wish they both joy with an alacrity which shew no doubt of their happiness.
their reception from Mr. Bennet, to whom they then turn, be not quite so cordial. his countenance rather gain in austerity; and he scarcely open his lip. the easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, be enough to provoke he. Elizabeth be disgusted, and even Miss Bennet be shock. Lydia be Lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless. she turn from sister to sister, demand their congratulation; and when at length they all sit down, look eagerly round the room, take notice of some little alteration in it, and observe, with a laugh, that it be a great while since she have be there.
Wickham be not at all more distressed than herself, but his manner be always so pleasing, that have his character and his marriage be exactly what they ought, his smile and his easy address, while he claim their relationship, would have delight they all. Elizabeth have not before believe he quite equal to such assurance; but she sit down, resolve within herself to draw no limit in future to the impudence of an impudent man. she blush, and Jane blush; but the cheek of the two who cause their confusion suffer no variation of colour.
there be no want of discourse. the bride and her mother could neither of they talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happen to sit near Elizabeth, begin inquire after his acquaintance in that neighbourhood, with a good humour ease which she feel
very unable to equal in her reply. they seem each of they to have the happy memory in the world. nothing of the past be recollect with pain; and Lydia lead voluntarily to subject which her sister would not have allude to for the world.
"only think of its be three month," she cry, "since I go away; it seem but a fortnight I declare; and yet there have be thing enough happen in the time. good gracious! when I go away, I be sure I have no more idea of be married till I come back again! though I think it would be very good fun if I be."
her father lift up his eye. Jane be distressed. Elizabeth look expressively at Lydia; but she, who never hear nor see anything of which she choose to be insensible, gaily continue, "oh! mamma, do the people hereabouts know I be married to-day? I be afraid they might not; and we overtake William Goulding in his curricle, so I be determined he should know it, and so I let down the side-glass next to he, and take off my glove, and let my hand just rest upon the window frame, so that he might see the ring, and then I bow and smile like anything."
Elizabeth could bear it no long. she get up, and run out of the room; and return no more, till she hear they pass through the hall to the dining parlour. she then join they soon enough to see Lydia, with anxious parade, walk up to her mother's right hand, and hear she say to her eld sister, "ah! Jane, I take your place now, and you must go lower, because I be a married woman."
it be not to be suppose that time would give Lydia that embarrassment from which she have be so wholly free at first. her ease and good spirit increase. she long to see Mrs. Phillips, the Lucases, and all their other neighbour, and to hear herself call "Mrs. Wickham" by each of they; and in the mean time, she go after dinner to show her ring, and boast of be marry, to Mrs. Hill and the two housemaid.
"well, mamma," say she, when they be all return to the breakfast room, "and what do you think of my husband? be not he a charming man? I be sure my sister must all envy I. I only hope they may have half my good luck. they must all go to Brighton. that be the place to get husband. what a pity it be, mamma, we do not all go."
"very true; and if I have my will, we should. but my dear Lydia, I donot at all like your go such a way off. must it be so?"
"oh, lord! yes;--there be nothing in that. I shall like it of all thing. you and papa, and my sister, must come down and see we. we shall be at Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some ball, and I will take care to get good partner for they all."
"I should like it beyond anything!" say her mother.
"and then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sister behind you; and I dare say I shall get husband for they before the winter be over."
"I thank you for my share of the favour," say Elizabeth; "but I do not particularly like your way of get husband."
their visitor be not to remain above ten day with they. Mr. Wickham have receive his commission before he leave London, and he be to join his regiment at the end of a fortnight.
no one but Mrs. Bennet regret that their stay would be so short; and she make the most of the time by visit about with her daughter, and have very frequent party at home. these party be acceptable to all; to avoid a family circle be even more desirable to such as do think, than such as do not.
Wickham's affection for Lydia be just what Elizabeth have expect to find it; not equal to Lydia's for he. she have scarcely need her present observation to be satisfied, from the reason of thing, that their elopement have be bring on by the strength of her love, rather than by his; and she would have wonder why, without violently care for she, he choose to elope with she at all, have she not feel certain that his flight be render necessary by distress of circumstance; and if that be the case, he be not the young man to resist an opportunity of have a companion.
Lydia be exceedingly fond of he. he be her dear Wickham on every occasion; no one be to be put in competition with he. he do every thing good in the world; and she be sure he would kill more bird on the first of September, than any body else in the country.
one morning, soon after their arrival, as she be sit with her two eld sister, she say to Elizabeth:
"Lizzy, I never give you an account of my wedding, I believe. you be not by, when I tell mamma and the other all about it. be not you curious to hear how it be manage?"
"no really," reply Elizabeth; "I think there cannot be too little say on the subject."
"La! you be so strange! but I must tell you how it go off. we be marry, you know, at St. Clement's, because Wickham's lodging be in that parish. and it be settle that we should all be there by eleven o'clock. my uncle and aunt and I be to go together; and the other be to meet we at the church. well, Monday morning come, and I be in such a fuss! I be so afraid, you know, that something would happen to put it off, and then I should have go quite distracted. and there be my aunt, all the time I be dress, preach and talk away just as if she be read a sermon. however, I do not hear above one word in ten, for I be think, you may suppose, of my dear Wickham. I long to know whether he would be marry in his blue coat."
"well, and so we breakfast at ten as usual; I think it would never be over; for, by the bye, you be to understand, that my uncle and aunt be horrid unpleasant all the time I be with they. if youwill believe I, I do not once put my foot out of door, though I be there a fortnight. not one party, or scheme, or anything. to be sure London be rather thin, but, however, the Little Theatre be open. well, and so just as the carriage come to the door, my uncle be call away upon business to that horrid man Mr. Stone. and then, you know, when once they get together, there be no end of it. well, I be so frightened I do not know what to do, for my uncle be to give I away; and if we be beyond the hour, we could not be marry all day. but, luckily, he come back again in ten minute' time, and then we all set out. however, I recollect afterwards that if he have be prevent go, the wedding need not be put off, for Mr. Darcy might have do as well."
"Mr. Darcy!" repeat Elizabeth, in utter amazement.
"oh, yes!--he be to come there with Wickham, you know. but gracious I! I quite forget! I ought not to have say a word about it. I promise they so faithfully! what will Wickham say? it be to be such a secret!"
"if it be to be secret," say Jane, "say not another word on the subject. you may depend upon my seek no far."
"oh! certainly," say Elizabeth, though burn with curiosity; "we will ask you no question."
"thank you," say Lydia, "for if you do, I should certainly tell you all, and then Wickham would be angry."
on such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth be force to put it out of her power, by run away.
but to live in ignorance on such a point be impossible; or at least it be impossible not to try for information. Mr. Darcy have be at her sister's wedding. it be exactly a scene, and exactly among people, where he have apparently least to do, and least temptation to go. conjecture as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurry into her brain; but she be satisfied with none. those that well please she, as place his conduct in the noble light, seem most improbable. she could not bear such suspense; and hastily seize a sheet of paper, write a short letter to her aunt, to request an explanation of what Lydia have dropt, if it be compatible with the secrecy which have be intend.
"you may readily comprehend," she add, "what my curiosity must be to know how a person unconnected with any of we, and (comparatively speak) a stranger to our family, should have be amongst you at such a time. pray write instantly, and let I understand it---unless it be, for very cogent reason, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seem to think necessary; and then I must endeavour to be satisfied with ignorance."
"not that I shall, though," she add to herself, as she finish the letter; "and my dear aunt, if you do not tell I in an honourable manner, I shall certainly be reduce to trick and stratagem to find it out."
Jane's delicate sense of honour would not allow she to speak to Elizabeth privately of what Lydia have let fall; Elizabeth be glad of it;--till it appear whether her inquiry would receive any satisfaction, she have rather be without a confidante.
chapter 52
Elizabeth have the satisfaction of receive an answer to her letter as soon as she possibly could. she be no soon in possession of it than, hurry into the little copse, where she be least likely to be interrupt, she sit down on one of the bench and prepare to be happy; for the length of the letter convince she that it do not contain a denial.
"Gracechurch street, Sept. 6.
"I have just receive your letter, and shall devote this whole morning to answer it, as I foresee that a little writing will not comprise what I have to tell you. I must confess myself surprised by your application; I do not expect it from you. donot think I angry, however, for I only mean to let you know that I have not imagine such inquiry to be necessary on your side. if you do not choose to understand I, forgive my impertinence. your uncle be as much surprised as I be---and nothing but the belief of your be a party concern would have allow he to act as he have do. but if you be really innocent and ignorant, I must be more explicit.
"on the very day of my come home from Longbourn, your uncle have a most unexpected visitor. Mr. Darcy call, and be shut up with he several hour. it be all over before I arrive; so my curiosity be not so dreadfully rack as your's seem to have be. he come to tell Mr. Gardiner that he have find out where your sister and Mr. Wickham be, and that he have see and talk with they both; Wickham repeatedly, Lydia once. from what I can collect, he leave derbyshire only one day after ourselves, and come to town with the resolution of hunt for they. the motive profess be his conviction of its be owe to himself that Wickham's worthlessness have not be so well know as to make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or confide in he. he generously impute the whole to his mistaken pride, and confess that he have before think it beneath he to lay his private action open to the world. his character be to speak for itself. he call it, therefore, his duty to step forward, 
and endeavour to remedy an evil which have be bring on by himself. if he have another motive, I be sure it would never disgrace he. he have be some day in town, before he be able to discover they; but he have something to direct his search, which be more than we have; and the consciousness of this be another reason for his resolving to follow we.
"there be a lady, it seem, a Mrs. Younge, who be some time ago governess to Miss Darcy, and be dismiss from her charge on some cause of disapprobation, though he do not say what. she then take a large house in Edward-street, and have since maintain herself by let lodging. this Mrs. Younge be, he know, intimately acquaint with Wickham; and he go to she for intelligence of he as soon as he get to town. but it be two or three day before he could get from she what he want. she would not betray her trust, I suppose, without bribery and corruption, for she really do know where her friend be to be find. Wickham indeed have go to she on their first arrival in London, and have she be able to receive they into her house, they would have take up their abode with she. at length, however, our kind friend procure the wish-for direction. they be in ---- street. he see Wickham, and afterwards insist on see Lydia. his first object with she, he acknowledge, have be to persuade she to 
quit her present disgraceful situation, and return to her friend as soon as they could be prevail on to receive she, offer his assistance, as far as it would go. but he find Lydia absolutely resolve on remain where she be. she care for none of her friend; she want no help of his; she would not hear of leave Wickham. she be sure they should be marry some time or other, and it do not much signify when. since such be her feeling, it only remain, he think, to secure and expedite a marriage, which, in his very first conversation with Wickham, he easily learn have never be his design. he confess himself oblige to leave the regiment, on account of some debt of honour, which be very pressing; and scruple not to lay all the ill-consequence of Lydia's flight on her own folly alone. he mean to resign his commission immediately; and as to his future situation, he could conjecture very little about it. he must go somewhere, but he do not know where, and he know he should have 
nothing to live on.
"Mr. Darcy ask he why he have not marry your sister at once. though Mr. Bennet be not imagine to be very rich, he would have be able to do something for he, and his situation must have be benefit by marriage. but he find, in reply to this question, that Wickham still cherish the hope of more effectually make his fortune by marriage in some other country. under such circumstance, however, he be not likely to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief.
"they meet several time, for there be much to be discuss. Wickham of course want more than he could get; but at length be reduce to be reasonable.
"every thing be settle between they, Mr. Darcy's next step be to make your uncle acquaint with it, and he first call in Gracechurch street the evening before I come home. but Mr. Gardiner could not be see, and Mr. Darcy find, on further inquiry, that your father be still with he, but would quit town the next morning. he do not judge your father to be a person whom he could so properly consult as your uncle, and therefore readily postpone see he till after the departure of the former. he do not leave his name, and till the next day it be only know that a gentleman have call on business.
"on Saturday he come again. your father be go, your uncle at home, and, as I say before, they have a great deal of talk together.
"they meet again on Sunday, and then I see he too. it be not all settle before Monday: as soon as it be, the express be send off to longbourn. but our visitor be very obstinate. I fancy, Lizzy, that obstinacy be the real defect of his character, after all. he have be accuse of many fault at different time, but this be the true one. nothing be to be do that he do not do himself; though I be sure (and I do not speak it to be thank, therefore say nothing about it), your uncle would most readily have settle the whole.
"they battle it together for a long time, which be more than either the gentleman or lady concern in it deserve. but at last your uncle be force to yield, and instead of be allow to be of use to his niece, be force to put up with only have the probable credit of it, which go sorely against the grain; and I really believe your letter this morning give he great pleasure, because it require an explanation that would rob he of his borrow feather, and give the praise where it be due. but, Lizzy, this must go no far than yourself, or Jane at most.
"you know pretty well, I suppose, what have be do for the young people. his debt be to be pay, amount, I believe, to considerably more than a thousand pound, another thousand in addition to her own settle upon she, and his commission purchase. the reason why all this be to be do by he alone, be such as I have give above. it be owe to he, to his reserve and want of proper consideration, that Wickham's character have be so misunderstood, and consequently that he have be receive and notice as he be. perhaps there be some truth in this; though I doubt whether his reserve, or anybody's reserve, can be answerable for the event. but in spite of all this fine talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assure that your uncle would never have yield, if we have not give he credit for another interest in the affair.
"when all this be resolve on, he return again to his friend, who be still stay at Pemberley; but it be agree that he should be in London once more when the wedding take place, and all money matter be then to receive the last finish.
"I believe I have now tell you every thing. it be a relation which you tell I be to give you great surprise; I hope at least it will not afford you any displeasure. Lydia come to we; and Wickham have constant admission to the house. he be exactly what he have be, when I know he in Hertfordshire; but I would not tell you how little I be satisfied with her behaviour while she staid with we, if I have not perceive, by Jane's letter last Wednesday, that her conduct on come home be exactly of a piece with it, and therefore what I now tell you can give you no fresh pain. I talk to she repeatedly in the most serious manner, represent to she all the wickedness of what she have do, and all the unhappiness she have bring on her family. if she hear I, it be by good luck, for I be sure she do not listen. I be sometimes quite provoke, but then I recollect my dear Elizabeth and Jane, and for their sake have patience with she.
"Mr. Darcy be punctual in his return, and as Lydia inform you, attend the wedding. he din with we the next day, and be to leave town again on Wednesday or Thursday. will you be very angry with I, my dear Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of say (what I be never bold enough to say before) how much I like he. his behaviour to we have, in every respect, be as pleasing as when we be in Derbyshire. his understanding and opinion all please I; he want nothing but a little more liveliness, and that, if he marry prudently, his wife may teach he. I think he very sly;--he hardly ever mention your name. but slyness seem the fashion.
"pray forgive I if I have be very presuming, or at least do not punish I so far as to exclude I from P. I shall never be quite happy till I have be all round the park. a low phaeton, with a nice little pair of pony, would be the very thing.
"but I must write no more. the child have be want I this half hour.
"your, very sincerely,
"M. GARDINER."
the content of this letter throw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirit, in which it be difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bear the great share. the vague and unsettled suspicion which uncertainty have produce of what Mr. Darcy might have be do to forward her sister's match, which she have fear to encourage as an exertion of goodness too great to be probable, and at the same time dread to be just, from the pain of obligation, be prove beyond their great extent to be true! he have follow they purposely to town, he have take on himself all the trouble and mortification attendant on such a research; in which supplication have be necessary to a woman whom he must abominate and despise, and where he be reduce to meet, frequently meet, reason with, persuade, and finally bribe, the man whom he always most wish to avoid, and whose very name it be punishment to he to pronounce. he have do all this for a girl whom he could neither regard nor esteem. her heart do whisper that he 
have do it for she. but it be a hope shortly check by other consideration, and she soon feel that even her vanity be insufficient, when require to depend on his affection for she---for a woman who have already refuse he---as able to overcome a sentiment so natural as abhorrence against relationship with Wickham. brother-in-law of Wickham! every kind of pride must revolt from the connection. he have, to be sure, do much. she be ashamed to think how much. but he have give a reason for his interference, which ask no extraordinary stretch of belief. it be reasonable that he should feel he have be wrong; he have liberality, and he have the mean of exercise it; and though she would not place herself as his principal inducement, she could, perhaps, believe that remain partiality for she might assist his endeavour in a cause where her peace of mind must be materially concerned. it be painful, exceedingly painful, to know that they be under obligation to a person who could never receive a return. 
they owe the restoration of Lydia, her character, every thing, to he. oh! how heartily do she grieve over every ungracious sensation she have ever encourage, every saucy speech she have ever direct towards he. for herself she be humble; but she be proud of he. proud that in a cause of compassion and honour, he have be able to get the well of himself. she read over her aunt's commendation of he again and again. it be hardly enough; but it please she. she be even sensible of some pleasure, though mix with regret, on find how steadfastly both she and her uncle have be persuade that affection and confidence subsist between Mr. Darcy and herself.
she be rouse from her seat, and her reflection, by some one's approach; and before she could strike into another path, she be overtake by Wickham.
"I be afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear sister?" say he, as he join she.
"you certainly do," she reply with a smile; "but it do not follow that the interruption must be unwelcome."
"I should be sorry indeed, if it be. we be always good friend; and now we be well."
"true. be the other come out?"
"I do not know. Mrs. Bennet and Lydia be go in the carriage to Meryton. and so, my dear sister, I find, from our uncle and aunt, that you have actually see Pemberley."
she reply in the affirmative.
"I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much for I, or else I could take it in my way to Newcastle. and you see the old housekeeper, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she be always very fond of I. but of course she do not mention my name to you."
"yes, she do."
"and what do she say?"
"that you be go into the army, and she be afraid have---not turn out well. at such a distance as that, you know, thing be strangely misrepresented."
"certainly," he reply, bite his lip. Elizabeth hop she have silence he; but he soon afterwards say:
"I be surprised to see Darcy in town last month. we pass each other several time. I wonder what he can be do there."
"perhaps prepare for his marriage with Miss de Bourgh," say Elizabeth. "it must be something particular, to take he there at this time of year." 
"undoubtedly. do you see he while you be at Lambton? I think I understand from the Gardiners that you have."
"yes; he introduce we to his sister."
"and do you like she?"
"very much."
"I have hear, indeed, that she be uncommonly improve within this year or two. when I last see she, she be not very promising. I be very glad you like she. I hope she will turn out well."
"I dare say she will; she have get over the most try age."
"do you go by the village of Kympton?"
"I do not recollect that we do."
"I mention it, because it be the living which I ought to have have. a most delightful place!--excellent Parsonage House! it would have suit I in every respect."
"how should you have like make sermon?"
"exceedingly well. I should have consider it as part of my duty, and the exertion would soon have be nothing. one ought not to repine;--but, to be sure, it would have be such a thing for I! the quiet, the retirement of such a life would have answer all my idea of happiness! but it be not to be. do you ever hear Darcy mention the circumstance, when you be in Kent?"
"I have hear from authority, which I think as good, that it be leave you conditionally only, and at the will of the
present patron."
"you have. yes, there be something in that; I tell you so from the first, you may remember."
"I do hear, too, that there be a time, when sermon-making be not so palatable to you as it seem to be at present; that you actually declare your resolution of never take order, and that the business have be compromise accordingly."
"you do! and it be not wholly without foundation. you may remember what I tell you on that point, when first we talk of it."
they be now almost at the door of the house, for she have walk fast to get rid of he; and unwilling, for her sister's sake, to provoke he, she only say in reply, with a good-humour smile:
"come, Mr. Wickham, we be brother and sister, you know. do not let we quarrel about the past. in future, I hope we shall be always of one mind."
she hold out her hand; he kiss it with affectionate gallantry, though he hardly know how to look, and they enter the house.
chapter 53
Mr. Wickham be so perfectly satisfied with this conversation that he never again distress himself, or provoke his dear sister Elizabeth, by introduce the subject of it; and she be pleased to find that she have say enough to keep he quiet.
the day of his and Lydia's departure soon come, and Mrs. Bennet be force to submit to a separation, which, as her husband by no mean enter into her scheme of their all go to Newcastle, be likely to continue at least a twelvemonth.
"oh! my dear Lydia," she cry, "when shall we meet again?"
"oh, lord! I donot know. not these two or three year, perhaps."
"write to I very often, my dear."
"as often as I can. but you know married woman have never much time for write. my sister may write to I. they will have nothing else to do."
Mr. Wickham's adieus be much more affectionate than his wife's. he smile, look handsome, and say many pretty thing.
"he be as fine a fellow," say Mr. Bennet, as soon as they be out of the house, "as ever I see. he simper, and smirk, and make love to we all. I be prodigiously proud of he. I defy even Sir William Lucas himself to produce a more valuable son-in-law."
the loss of her daughter make Mrs. Bennet very dull for several day.
"I often think," say she, "that there be nothing so bad as part with one's friend. one seem so forlorn without they."
"this be the consequence, you see, Madam, of marry a daughter," say Elizabeth. "it must make you well satisfied that your other four be single."
"it be no such thing. Lydia do not leave I because she be marry, but only because her husband's regiment happen to be so far off. if that have be near, she would not have go so soon."
but the spiritless condition which this event throw she into be shortly relieve, and her mind open again to the agitation of hope, by an article of news which then begin to be in circulation. the housekeeper at Netherfield have receive order to prepare for the arrival of her master, who be come down in a day or two, to shoot there for several week. Mrs. Bennet be quite in the fidget. she look at Jane, and smile and shake her head by turn.
"well, well, and so Mr. Bingley be come down, sister," (for Mrs. Phillips first bring she the news). "well, so much the well. not that I care about it, though. he be nothing to we, you know, and I be sure I never want to see he again. but, however, he be very welcome to come to Netherfield, if he like it. and who know what may happen? but that be nothing to we. you know, sister, we agree long ago never to mention a word about it. and so, be it quite certain he be come?"
"you may depend on it," reply the other, "for Mrs. Nicholls be in Meryton last night; I see she pass by, and go out myself on purpose to know the truth of it; and she tell I that it be certain true. he come down on Thursday at the late, very likely on Wednesday. she be go to the butcher's, she tell I, on purpose to order in some meat on Wednesday, and she have get three couple of duck just fit to be kill."
Miss Bennet have not be able to hear of his come without change colour. it be many month since she have mention his name to Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they be alone together, she say:
"I see you look at I to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt tell we of the present report; and I know I appear distressed. but donot imagine it be from any silly cause. I be only confuse for the moment, because I feel that I should be look at. I do assure you that the news do not affect I either with pleasure or pain. I be glad of one thing, that he come alone; because we shall see the less of he. not that I be afraid of myself, but I dread other people's remark."
Elizabeth do not know what to make of it. have she not see he in Derbyshire, she might have suppose he capable of come there with no other view than what be acknowledge; but she still think he partial to Jane, and she waver as to the great probability of his come there with his friend's permission, or be bold enough to come without it.
"yet it be hard," she sometimes think, "that this poor man cannot come to a house which he have legally hire, without raise all this speculation! I will leave he to himself."
in spite of what her sister declare, and really believe to be her feeling in the expectation of his arrival, Elizabeth could easily perceive that her spirit be affect by it. they be more disturbed, more unequal, than she have often see they.
the subject which have be so warmly canvass between their parent, about a twelvemonth ago, be now bring forward again.
"as soon as ever Mr. Bingley come, my dear," say Mrs. Bennet, "you will wait on he of course."
"no, no. you force I into visit he last year, and promise, if I go to see he, he should marry one of my daughter. but it end in nothing, and I will not be send on a fool's errand again."
his wife represent to he how absolutely necessary such an attention would be from all the neighbouring gentleman, on his return to Netherfield.
"'tis an etiquette I despise," say he. "if he want our society, let he seek it. he know where we live. I will not spend my hour in run after my neighbour every time they go away and come back again."
"well, all I know be, that it will be abominably rude if you do not wait on he. but, however, that shallnot prevent my ask he to dine here, I be determine. we must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon. that will make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room at table for he."
console by this resolution, she be the well able to bear
her husband's incivility; though it be very mortifying to know that her neighbour might all see Mr. Bingley, in consequence of it, before they do. as the day of his arrival draw near:
"I begin to be sorry that he come at all," say Jane to her sister. "it would be nothing; I could see he with perfect indifference, but I can hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talk of. my mother mean well; but she do not know, no one can know, how much I suffer from what she say. happy shall I
be, when his stay at Netherfield be over!"
"I wish I could say anything to comfort you," reply Elizabeth; "but it be wholly out of my power. you must feel it; and the usual satisfaction of preach patience to a sufferer be deny I, because you have always so much."
Mr. Bingley arrive. Mrs. Bennet, through the assistance of servant, contrive to have the early tiding of it, that the period of anxiety and fretfulness on her side might be as long as it could. she count the day that must intervene before their invitation could be send; hopeless of see he before. but on the third morning after his arrival in Hertfordshire, she see he, from her dressing-room window, enter the paddock and ride towards the house.
her daughter be eagerly call to partake of her joy. Jane resolutely keep her place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, go to the window---she looked,--she see Mr. Darcy with he, and sit down again by her sister.
"there be a gentleman with he, mamma," say Kitty; "who can it be?"
"some acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose; I be sure I do not know."
"La!" reply Kitty, "it look just like that man that use to be with he before. Mr. what's-his-name. that tall, proud man."
"good gracious! Mr. Darcy!--and so it do, I vow. well, any friend of Mr. Bingley's will always be welcome here, to be sure; but else I must say that I hate the very sight of he."
Jane look at Elizabeth with surprise and concern. she know but little of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore feel for the awkwardness which must attend her sister, in see he almost for the first time after receive his explanatory letter. both sister be uncomfortable enough. each feel for the other, and of course for themselves; and their mother talk on, of her dislike of Mr. Darcy, and her resolution to be civil to he only as Mr. Bingley's friend, without be hear by either of they. but Elizabeth have source of uneasiness which could not be suspect by Jane, to whom she have never yet have courage to shew Mrs. Gardiner's letter, or to relate her own change of sentiment towards he. to Jane, he could be only a man whose proposal she have refuse, and whose merit she have undervalue; but to her own more extensive information, he be the person to whom the whole family be indebte for the first of benefit, and whom she regard herself with an interest, if not quite so tender, at least 
as reasonable and just as what Jane feel for Bingley. her astonishment at his come---at his come to Netherfield, to longbourn, and voluntarily seek she again, be almost equal to what she have know on first witness his altered behaviour in Derbyshire.
the colour which have be drive from her face, return for half a minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight add lustre to her eye, as she think for that space of time that his affection and wish must still be unshaken. but she would not be secure.
"let I first see how he behave," say she; "it will then be early enough for expectation."
she sit intently at work, strive to be compose, and without dare to lift up her eye, till anxious curiosity carry they to the face of her sister as the servant be approach the door. Jane look a little paler than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth have expect. on the gentleman's appear, her colour increase; yet she receive they with tolerable ease, and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any symptom of resentment or any unnecessary complaisance.
Elizabeth say as little to either as civility would allow, and sit down again to her work, with an eagerness which it do not often command. she have venture only one glance at Darcy. he look serious, as usual; and, she think, more as he have be use to look in Hertfordshire, than as she have see he at Pemberley. but, perhaps he could not in her mother's presence be what he be before her uncle and aunt. it be a painful, but not an improbable, conjecture.
Bingley, she have likewise see for an instant, and in that short period see he look both pleased and embarrassed. he be receive by Mrs. Bennet with a degree of civility which make she two daughter ashame, especially when contrast with the cold and ceremonious politeness of her curtsey and address to his friend.
Elizabeth, particularly, who know that her mother owe to the latter the preservation of her favourite daughter from irremediable infamy, be hurt and distress to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill apply.
Darcy, after inquire of she how Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner do, a question which she could not answer without confusion, say scarcely anything. he be not seat by she; perhaps that be the reason of his silence; but it have not be so in Derbyshire. there he have talk to her friend, when he could not to herself. but now several minute elapse without bring the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, unable to resist the impulse of curiosity, she raise he eye to his face, she as often find he look at Jane as at herself, and frequently on no object but the ground. more thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please, than when they last meet, be plainly express. she be disappointed, and angry with herself for be so.
"could I expect it to be otherwise!" say she. "yet why do he come?"
she be in no humour for conversation with anyone but himself; and to he she have hardly courage to speak.
she inquire after his sister, but could do no more.
"it be a long time, Mr. Bingley, since you go away," say Mrs. Bennet.
he readily agree to it.
"I begin to be afraid you would never come back again. People do say you mean to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas; but, however, I hope it be not true. a great many change have happen in the neighbourhood, since you go away. Miss Lucas be married and settle. and one of my own daughter. I suppose you have hear of it; indeed, you must have see it in the paper. it be in the Times and the Courier, I know; though it be not put in as it ought to be. it be only say, 'lately, George Wickham, Esq. to Miss Lydia Bennet,' without there be a syllable say of her father, or the place where she live, or anything. it be my brother Gardiner's draw up too, and I wonder how he come to make such an awkward business of it. do you see it?"
Bingley reply that he do, and make his congratulation. Elizabeth dare not lift up her eye. how Mr. Darcy look, therefore, she could not tell.
"it be a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well married," continue her mother, "but at the same time, Mr. Bingley, it be very hard to have she take such a way from I. they be go down to Newcastle, a place quite northward, it seem, and there they be to stay I do not know how long. his regiment be there; for I suppose you have hear of his leave the ----shire, and of his be go into the regular. thank Heaven! he have some friend, though perhaps not so many as he deserve."
Elizabeth, who know this to be level at Mr. Darcy, be in such misery of shame, that she could hardly keep her seat. it draw from she, however, the exertion of speaking, which nothing else have so effectually do before; and she ask Bingley whether he mean to make any stay in the country at present. a few week, he believe.
"when you have kill all your own bird, Mr. Bingley," say her mother, "I beg you will come here, and shoot as many as you please on Mr. Bennet's manor. I be sure he will be vastly happy to oblige you, and will save all the good of the covie for you."
Elizabeth's misery increase, at such unnecessary, such officious attention! be the same fair prospect to arise at present as have flatter they a year ago, every thing, she be persuade, would be hasten to the same vexatious conclusion. at that instant, she feel that year of happiness could not make Jane or herself amend for moment of such painful confusion.
"the first wish of my heart," say she to herself, "be never more to be in company with either of they. their society can afford no pleasure that will atone for such wretchedness as this! let I never see either one or the other again!"
yet the misery, for which year of happiness be to offer no compensation, receive soon afterwards material relief, from observe how much the beauty of her sister re-kindle the admiration of her former lover. when first he come in, he have speak to she but little; but every five minute seem to be give she more of his attention. he find she as handsome as she have be last year; as good natured, and as unaffected, though not quite so chatty. Jane be anxious that no difference should be perceive in she at all, and be really persuade that she talk as much as ever. but her mind be so busily engage, that she do not always know when she be silent.
when the gentleman rise to go away, Mrs. Bennet be mindful of her intended civility, and they be invite and engage to dine at Longbourn in a few day time.
"you be quite a visit in my debt, Mr. Bingley," she add, "for when you go to town last winter, you promise to take a family dinner with we, as soon as you return. I have not forget, you see; and I assure you, I be very much disappointed that you do not come back and keep your engagement."
Bingley look a little silly at this reflection, and say something of his concern at have be prevent by business. they then go away.
Mrs. Bennet have be strongly inclined to ask they to stay and dine there that day; but, though she always keep a very good table, she do not think anything less than two course could be good enough for a man on whom she have such anxious design, or satisfy the appetite and pride of one who have ten thousand a year.
chapter 54
as soon as they be go, Elizabeth walk out to recover her spirit; or in other word, to dwell without interruption on those subject that must deaden they more. Mr. Darcy's behaviour astonish and vex she.
"why, if he come only to be silent, grave, and indifferent," say she, "do he come at all?"
she could settle it in no way that give her pleasure.
"he could be still amiable, still pleasing, to my uncle and aunt, when he be in town; and why not to I? if he fear I, why come hither? if he no long care for I, why silent? teasing, teasing, man! I will think no more about he."
her resolution be for a short time involuntarily keep by the approach of her sister, who join she with a cheerful look, which show she well satisfied with their visitor, than Elizabeth.
"now," say she, "that this first meeting be over, I feel perfectly easy. I know my own strength, and I shall never be embarrassed again by his coming. I be glad he din here on Tuesday. it will then be publicly see that, on both side, we meet only as common and indifferent acquaintance."
"yes, very indifferent indeed," say Elizabeth, laughingly. "oh, Jane, take care."
"my dear Lizzy, you cannot think I so weak, as to be in danger now?"
"I think you be in very great danger of make he as much in love with you as ever."
* * * * *
they do not see the gentleman again till Tuesday; and Mrs. Bennet, in the meanwhile, be give way to all the happy scheme, which the good humour and common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour's visit, have revive.
on Tuesday there be a large party assemble at Longbourn; and the two who be most anxiously expect, to the credit of their punctuality as sportsman, be in very good time. when they repair to the dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watch to see whether Bingley would take the place, which, in all their former party, have belong to he, by her sister. her prudent mother, occupy by the same idea, forbore to invite he to sit by herself. on enter the room, he seem to hesitate; but Jane happen to look round, and happen to smile: it be decide. he place himself by she.
Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, look towards his friend. he bear it with noble indifference, and she would have imagine that Bingley have receive his sanction to be happy, have she not see his eye likewise turn towards Mr. Darcy, with an expression of half-laugh alarm.
his behaviour to her sister be such, during dinner time, as show an admiration of she, which, though more guard than formerly, persuade Elizabeth, that if leave wholly to himself, Jane's happiness, and his own, would be speedily secure. though she dare not depend upon the consequence, she yet receive pleasure from observe his behaviour. it give she all the animation that her spirit could boast; for she be in no cheerful humour. Mr. Darcy be almost as far from she as the table could divide they. he be on one side of her mother. she know how little such a situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to advantage. she be not near enough to hear any of their discourse, but she could see how seldom they speak to each other, and how formal and cold be their manner whenever they do. her mother's ungraciousness, make the sense of what they owe he more painful to Elizabeth's mind; and she would, at time, have give anything to be privileged to tell he that his kindness be 
neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the family.
she be in hope that the evening would afford some opportunity of bring they together; that the whole of the visit would not pass away without enable they to enter into something more of conversation than the mere ceremonious salutation attend his entrance. anxious and uneasy, the period which pass in the drawing-room, before the gentleman come, be wearisome and dull to a degree that almost make her uncivil. she look forward to their entrance as the point on which all her chance of pleasure for the evening must depend.
"if he do not come to I, then," say she, "I shall give he up for ever."
the gentleman come; and she think he look as if he would have answer her hope; but, alas! the lady have crowd round the table, where Miss Bennet be make tea, and Elizabeth pour out the coffee, in so close a confederacy that there be not a single vacancy near she which would admit of a chair. and on the gentleman's approach, one of the girl move close to she than ever, and say, in a whisper:
"the man shallnot come and part we, I be determine. we want none of they; do we?"
Darcy have walk away to another part of the room. she follow he with her eye, envy everyone to whom he speak, have scarcely patience enough to help anybody to coffee; and then be enrage against herself for be so silly!
"a man who have once be refuse! how could I ever be foolish enough to expect a renewal of his love? be there one among the sex, who would not protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman? there be no indignity so abhorrent to their feeling!"
she be a little revive, however, by his bring back his coffee cup himself; and she seize the opportunity of say:
"be your sister at Pemberley still?"
"yes, she will remain there till Christmas."
"and quite alone? have all her friend leave she?"
"Mrs. Annesley be with she. the other have be go on to Scarborough, these three week."
she could think of nothing more to say; but if he wish to converse with she, he might have well success. he stand by she, however, for some minute, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady's whispering to Elizabeth again, he walk away.
when the tea-thing be remove, and the card-table place, the lady all rise, and Elizabeth be then hop to be soon join by he, when all her view be overthrow by see he fall a victim to her mother's rapacity for whist player, and in a few moment after seat with the rest of the party. she now lose every expectation of pleasure. they be confine for the evening at different table, and she have nothing to hope, but that his eye be so often turn towards her side of the room, as to make he play as unsuccessfully as herself.
Mrs. Bennet have design to keep the two Netherfield gentleman to supper; but their carriage be unluckily order before any of the other, and she have no opportunity of detain they.
"well girl," say she, as soon as they be leave to themselves, "what say you to the day? I think every thing have pass off uncommonly well, I assure you. the dinner be as well dressed as any I ever see. the venison be roast to a turn---and everybody say they never see so fat a haunch. the soup be fifty time well than what we have at the lucas' last week; and even Mr. Darcy acknowledge, that the partridge be remarkably well do; and I suppose he have two or three french cook at least. and, my dear Jane, I never see you look in great beauty. Mrs. Long say so too, for I ask she whether you do not. and what do you think she say besides? 'ah! Mrs. Bennet, we shall have she at Netherfield at last.' she do indeed. I do think Mrs. Long be as good a creature as ever live---and her niece be very pretty behave girl, and not at all handsome: I like they prodigiously."
Mrs. Bennet, in short, be in very great spirit; she have see enough of Bingley's behaviour to Jane, to be convince that she would get he at last; and her expectation of advantage to her family, when in a happy humour, be so far beyond reason, that she be quite disappointed at not see he there again the next day, to make his proposal.
"it have be a very agreeable day," say Miss Bennet to Elizabeth. "the party seem so well select, so suitable one with the other. I hope we may often meet again."
Elizabeth smile.
"Lizzy, you must not do so. you must not suspect I. it mortify I. I assure you that I have now learn to enjoy his conversation as an agreeable and sensible young man, without have a wish beyond it. I be perfectly satisfied, from what his manner now be, that he never have any design of engage my affection. it be only that he be bless with great sweetness of address, and a strong desire of generally pleasing, than any other man."
"you be very cruel," say her sister, "you will not let I smile, and be provoke I to it every moment."
"how hard it be in some case to be believe!"
"and how impossible in other!"
"but why should you wish to persuade I that I feel more than I acknowledge?"
"that be a question which I hardly know how to answer. we all love to instruct, though we can teach only what be not worth know. forgive I; and if you persist in indifference, do not make I your confidante."
chapter 55
a few day after this visit, Mr. Bingley call again, and alone. his friend have leave he that morning for London, but be to return home in ten day time. he sit with they above an hour, and be in remarkably good spirit. Mrs. Bennet invite he to dine with they; but, with many expression of concern, he confess himself engage elsewhere.
"next time you call," say she, "I hope we shall be more lucky."
he should be particularly happy at any time, etc. etc.; and if she would give he leave, would take an early opportunity of wait on they.
"can you come to-morrow?"
yes, he have no engagement at all for to-morrow; and her invitation be accept with alacrity.
he come, and in such very good time that the lady be none of they dress. in run Mrs. Bennet to her daughter's room, in her dressing gown, and with her hair half finish, cry out:
"my dear jane, make haste and hurry down. he be come---Mr. Bingley be come. he be, indeed. make haste, make haste. here, Sarah, come to Miss Bennet this moment, and help she on with her gown. never mind Miss Lizzy's hair."
"we will be down as soon as we can," say Jane; "but I dare say Kitty be forwarder than either of we, for she go up stair half an hour ago."
"oh! hang Kitty! what have she to do with it? come be quick, be quick! where be your sash, my dear?"
but when her mother be go, Jane would not be prevail on to go down without one of her sister.
the same anxiety to get they by themselves be visible again in the evening. after tea, Mr. Bennet retire to the library, as be his custom, and Mary go up stair to her instrument. two obstacle of the five be thus remove, Mrs. Bennet sit look and wink at Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, without make any impression on they. Elizabeth would not observe she; and when at last Kitty do, she very innocently say, "what be the matter mamma? what do you keep wink at I for? what be I to do?"
"nothing child, nothing. I do not wink at you." she then sit still five minute long; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, she suddenly get up, and say to Kitty, "come here, my love, I want to speak to you," take she out of the room. Jane instantly give a look at Elizabeth which speak her distress at such premeditation, and her entreaty that she would not give in to it. in a few minute, Mrs. Bennet half-open the door and call out:
"Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you."
Elizabeth be force to go.
"we may as well leave they by themselves you know;" say her mother, as soon as she be in the hall. "Kitty and I be go upstairs to sit in my dressing-room."
Elizabeth make no attempt to reason with her mother, but remain quietly in the hall, till she and Kitty be out of sight, then return into the drawing-room.
Mrs. Bennet's scheme for this day be ineffectual. Bingley be every thing that be charming, except the profess lover of her daughter. his ease and cheerfulness render he a most agreeable addition to their evening party; and he bear with the ill-judge officiousness of the mother, and hear all
her silly remark with a forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to the daughter.
he scarcely need an invitation to stay supper; and before he go away, an engagement be form, chiefly through his own and Mrs. Bennet's mean, for his come next morning to shoot with her husband.
after this day, Jane say no more of her indifference. not a word pass between the sister concern Bingley; but Elizabeth go to bed in the happy belief that all must speedily be conclude, unless Mr. Darcy return within the state time. seriously, however, she feel tolerably persuade that all this must have take place with that gentleman's concurrence.
Bingley be punctual to his appointment; and he and Mr. Bennet spend the morning together, as have be agree on. the latter be much more agreeable than his companion expect. there be nothing of presumption or folly in Bingley that could provoke his ridicule, or disgust he into silence; and he be more communicative, and less eccentric, than the other have ever see he. Bingley of course return with he to dinner; and in the evening Mrs. Bennet's invention be again at work to get every body away from he and her daughter. Elizabeth, who have a letter to write, go into the breakfast room for that purpose soon after tea; for as the other be all go to sit down to card, she could not be want to counteract her mother's scheme.
but on return to the drawing-room, when her letter be finish, she see, to her infinite surprise, there be reason to fear that her mother have be too ingenious for she. on open the door, she perceive her sister and Bingley stand together over the hearth, as if engage in earnest conversation; and have this lead to no suspicion, the face of both, as they hastily turn round and move away from each other, would have tell it all. their situation be awkward enough; but shebe she think be still bad. not a syllable be utter by either; and Elizabeth be on the point of go away again, when Bingley, who as well as the other have sit down, suddenly rise, and whisper a few word to her sister, run out of the room.
Jane could have no reserve from Elizabeth, where confidence would give pleasure; and instantly embrace she, acknowledge, with the lively emotion, that she be the happy creature in the world.
"'tis too much!" she add, "by far too much. I do not deserve it. oh! why be not everybody as happy?"
Elizabeth's congratulation be give with a sincerity, a warmth, a delight, which word could but poorly express. every sentence of kindness be a fresh source of happiness to Jane. but she would not allow herself to stay with her sister, or say half that remain to be say for the present.
"I must go instantly to my mother;" she cry. "I would not on any account trifle with her affectionate solicitude; or allow she to hear it from anyone but myself. he be go to my father already. oh! Lizzy, to know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear family! how shall I bear so much happiness!"
she then hasten away to her mother, who have purposely break up the card party, and be sit up stair with Kitty.
Elizabeth, who be leave by herself, now smile at the rapidity and ease with which an affair be finally settle, that have give they so many previous month of suspense and vexation.
"and this," say she, "be the end of all his friend's anxious circumspection! of all his sister's falsehood and contrivance! the happy, wise, most reasonable end!"
in a few minute she be join by Bingley, whose conference with her father have be short and to the purpose.
"where be your sister?" say he hastily, as he open the door.
"with my mother up stair. she will be down in a moment, I dare say."
he then shut the door, and, come up to she, claim the good wish and affection of a sister. Elizabeth honestly and heartily express her delight in the prospect of their relationship. they shake hand with great cordiality; and then, till her sister come down, she have to listen to all he have to say of his own happiness, and of Jane's perfection; and in spite of his be a lover, Elizabeth really believe
all his expectation of felicity to be rationally found, because they have for basis the excellent understanding, and super-excellent disposition of Jane, and a general similarity of feeling and taste between she and himself.
it be an evening of no common delight to they all; the satisfaction of Miss Bennet's mind give a glow of such sweet animation to her face, as make she look handsomer than ever. Kitty simper and smile, and hop her turn be come soon. Mrs. Bennet could not give her consent or speak her approbation in term warm enough to satisfy her feeling, though she talk to Bingley of nothing else for half an hour; and when Mr. Bennet join they at supper, his voice and manner plainly show how really happy he be.
not a word, however, pass his lip in allusion to it, till their visitor take his leave for the night; but as soon as he be go, he turn to his daughter, and say:
"jane, I congratulate you. you will be a very happy woman."
Jane go to he instantly, kiss he, and thank he for his goodness.
"you be a good girl;" he reply, "and I have great pleasure in think you will be so happily settle. I have not a doubt of your do very well together. your temper be by no mean unlike. you be each of you so comply, that nothing will ever be resolve on; so easy, that every servant will cheat you; and so generous, that you will always exceed your income."
"I hope not so. imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matter would be unpardonable in I."
"exceed their income! my dear Mr. Bennet," cry his wife, "what be you talk of? why, he have four or five thousand a year, and very likely more." then address her daughter, "oh! my dear, dear Jane, I be so happy! I be sure I shallnot get a wink of sleep all night. I know how it would be. I always say it must be so, at last. I be sure you could not be so beautiful for nothing! I remember, as soon as ever I see he, when he first come into Hertfordshire last year, I think how likely it be that you should come together. oh! he be the handsome young man that ever be see!"
Wickham, Lydia, be all forget. Jane be beyond competition her favourite child. at that moment, she care for no other. her
young sister soon begin to make interest with she for object of happiness which she might in future be able to dispense.
Mary petition for the use of the library at Netherfield; and Kitty beg very hard for a few ball there every winter.
Bingley, from this time, be of course a daily visitor at Longbourn; come frequently before breakfast, and always remain till after supper; unless when some barbarous neighbour, who could not be enough detest, have give he an invitation to dinner which he think himself oblige to accept.
Elizabeth have now but little time for conversation with her sister; for while he be present, Jane have no attention to bestow on anyone else; but she find herself considerably useful to both of they in those hour of separation that must sometimes occur. in the absence of Jane, he always attach himself to Elizabeth, for the pleasure of talk of she; and when Bingley be go, Jane constantly seek the same mean of relief.
"he have make I so happy," say she, one evening, "by tell I that he be totally ignorant of my being in town last spring! I have not believe it possible."
"I suspect as much," reply Elizabeth. "but how do he account for it?"
"it must have be his sister's doing. they be certainly no friend to his acquaintance with I, which I cannot wonder at, since he might have choose so much more advantageously in many respect. but when they see, as I trust they will, that their brother be happy with I, they will learn to be content, and we shall be on good term again; though we can never be what we once be to each other."
"that be the most unforgiving speech," say Elizabeth, "that I ever hear you utter. good girl! it would vex I, indeed, to see you again the dupe of Miss Bingley's pretended regard."
"would you believe it, Lizzy, that when he go to town last November, he really love I, and nothing but a persuasion of my be indifferent would have prevent his come down again!"
"he make a little mistake to be sure; but it be to the credit of his modesty."
this naturally introduce a panegyric from Jane on his diffidence, and the little value he put on his own good quality. Elizabeth be pleased to find that he have not betray the interference of his friend; for, though Jane have the most generous and forgiving heart in the world, she know it be a circumstance which must prejudice she against he.
"I be certainly the most fortunate creature that ever exist!" cry Jane. "oh! Lizzy, why be I thus single from my family, and bless above they all! if I could but see you as happy! if there be but such another man for you!"
"if you be to give I forty such man, I never could be so happy as you. till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can have your happiness. no, no, let I shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have very good luck, I may meet with another Mr. Collins in time."
the situation of affair in the Longbourn family could not be long a secret. Mrs. Bennet be privileged to whisper it to Mrs. Phillips, and she venture, without any permission, to do the same by all her neighbour in Meryton.
the Bennets be speedily pronounce to be the lucky family in the world, though only a few week before, when Lydia have first run away, they have be generally prove to be mark out for misfortune.
chapter 56
one morning, about a week after Bingley's engagement with Jane have be form, as he and the female of the family be sit together in the dining-room, their attention be suddenly draw to the window, by the sound of a carriage; and they perceive a chaise and four drive up the lawn. it be too early in the morning for visitor, and besides, the equipage do not answer to that of any of their neighbour. the horse be post; and neither the carriage, nor the livery of the servant who precede it, be familiar to they. as it be certain, however, that somebody be come, Bingley instantly prevail on Miss Bennet to avoid the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk away with he into the shrubbery. they both set off, and the conjecture of the remain three continue, though with little satisfaction, till the door be throw open and their visitor enter. it be Lady Catherine de Bourgh.
they be of course all intend to be surprised; but their astonishment be beyond their expectation; and on the part of Mrs. Bennet and Kitty, though she be perfectly unknown to
they, even inferior to what Elizabeth feel.
she enter the room with an air more than usually ungracious, make no other reply to Elizabeth's salutation than a slight inclination of the head, and sit down without say a word. Elizabeth have mention her name to her mother on her ladyship's entrance, though no request of introduction have be make.
Mrs. Bennet, all amazement, though flatter by have a guest of such high importance, receive she with the utmost politeness. after sit for a moment in silence, she say very stiffly to Elizabeth,
"I hope you be well, Miss Bennet. that lady, I suppose, be your mother."
Elizabeth reply very concisely that she be.
"and that I suppose be one of your sister."
"yes, madam," say Mrs. Bennet, delight to speak to a Lady Catherine. "she be my young girl but one. my young of all be lately married, and my eld be somewhere about the ground, walk with a young man who, I believe, will soon become a part of the family."
"you have a very small park here," return Lady Catherine after a short silence.
"it be nothing in comparison of Rosings, my lady, I dare say; but I assure you it be much large than Sir William Lucas's."
"this must be a most inconvenient sitting room for the evening, in summer; the window be full west."
Mrs. Bennet assure she that they never sit there after dinner, and then add:
"may I take the liberty of ask your ladyship whether you leave Mr. and Mrs. Collins well."
"yes, very well. I see they the night before last."
Elizabeth now expect that she would produce a letter for she from Charlotte, as it seem the only probable motive for her calling. but no letter appear, and she be completely puzzle.
Mrs. Bennet, with great civility, beg her ladyship to take some refreshment; but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not very politely, decline eat anything; and then, rise up, say to Elizabeth,
"Miss Bennet, there seem to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness on one side of your lawn. I should be glad to take a turn in it, if you will favour I with your company."
"go, my dear," cry her mother, "and show her ladyship about the different walk. I think she will be pleased with the hermitage."
Elizabeth obey, and run into her own room for her parasol, attend her noble guest downstairs. as they pass through the hall, Lady Catherine open the door into the dining-parlour and drawing-room, and pronounce they, after a short survey, to be decent look room, walk on.
her carriage remain at the door, and Elizabeth see that her waiting-woman be in it. they proceed in silence along the gravel walk that lead to the copse; Elizabeth be determined to make no effort for conversation with a woman who be now more than usually insolent and disagreeable.
"how could I ever think she like her nephew?" say she, as she look in her face.
as soon as they enter the copse, Lady Catherine begin in the follow manner:--
"you can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of my journey hither. your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why I come."
Elizabeth look with unaffected astonishment.
"indeed, you be mistaken, Madam. I have not be at all able to account for the honour of see you here."
"Miss Bennet," reply her ladyship, in an angry tone, "you ought to know, that I be not to be trifle with. but however insincere you may choose to be, you shall not find I so. my character have ever be celebrate for its sincerity and frankness, and in a cause of such moment as this, I shall certainly not depart from it. a report of a most alarming nature reach I two day ago. I be tell that not only your sister be on the point of be most advantageously married, but that you, that Miss Elizabeth Bennet, would, in all likelihood, be soon afterwards unite to my nephew, my own nephew, Mr. Darcy. though I know it must be a scandalous falsehood, though I would not injure he so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolve on set off for this place, that I might make my sentiment know to you."
"if you believe it impossible to be true," say Elizabeth, colour with astonishment and disdain, "I wonder you take the trouble of come so far. what could your ladyship propose by it?"
"at once to insist upon have such a report universally contradict."
"your come to Longbourn, to see I and my family," say
Elizabeth coolly, "will be rather a confirmation of it; if, indeed, such a report be in existence."
"if! do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? have it not be industriously circulate by yourself? do you not know that such a report be spread abroad?"
"I never hear that it be."
"and can you likewise declare, that there be no foundation for it?"
"I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your ladyship. you may ask question which I shall not choose to answer."
"this be not to be bear. Miss Bennet, I insist on be satisfied. have he, have my nephew, make you an offer of marriage?"
"your ladyship have declare it to be impossible."
"it ought to be so; it must be so, while he retain the use of his reason. but your art and allurement may, in a moment of infatuation, have make he forget what he owe to himself and to all his family. you may have draw he in."
"if I have, I shall be the last person to confess it."
"Miss Bennet, do you know who I be? I have not be accustom to such language as this. I be almost the near relation he have in the world, and be entitle to know all his dear concern."
"but you be not entitle to know mine; nor will such behaviour as this, ever induce I to be explicit."
"let I be rightly understand. this match, to which you have the presumption to aspire, can never take place. no, never. Mr. Darcy be engaged to my daughter. now what have you to say?"
"only this; that if he be so, you can have no reason to suppose he will make an offer to I."
Lady Catherine hesitate for a moment, and then reply:
"the engagement between they be of a peculiar kind. from their infancy, they have be intend for each other. it be the favourite wish of his mother, as well as of she's. while in their cradle, we plan the union: and now, at the moment when the wish of both sister would be accomplish in their marriage, to be prevent by a young woman of inferior birth, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to the family! do you pay no regard to the wish of his friend? to his tacit engagement with Miss de Bourgh? be you lose to every feeling of propriety and delicacy? have you not hear I say that from his early hour he be destine for his cousin?"
"yes, and I have hear it before. but what be that to I? if there be no other objection to my marry your nephew, I shall certainly not be keep from it by know that his mother and aunt wish he to marry Miss de Bourgh. you both do as much as you could in plan the marriage. its completion depend on other. if Mr. Darcy be neither by honour nor inclination confine to his cousin, why be not he to make another choice? and if I be that choice, why may not I accept he?"
"because honour, decorum, prudence, nay, interest, forbid it. yes, Miss Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be notice by his family or friend, if you wilfully act against the inclination of all. you will be censure, slight, and despise, by everyone connect with he. your alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mention by any of we."
"these be heavy misfortune," reply Elizabeth. "but the wife of Mr. Darcy must have such extraordinary source of happiness necessarily attach to her situation, that she could, upon the whole, have no cause to repine."
"Obstinate, headstrong girl! I be ashamed of you! be this your gratitude for my attention to you last spring? be nothing due to I on that score? let we sit down. you be to understand, Miss Bennet, that I come here with the determine resolution of carry my purpose; nor will I be dissuade from it. I have not be use to submit to any person's whim. I have not be in the habit of brook disappointment."
"_that_ will make your ladyship's situation at present more pitiable; but it will have no effect on I."
"I will not be interrupt. hear I in silence. my daughter and my nephew be form for each other. they be descend, on the maternal side, from the same noble line; and, on the father's, from respectable, honourable, and ancient---though untitled---family. their fortune on both side be splendid. they be destine for each other by the voice of every member of their respective house; and what be to divide they? the upstart pretension of a young woman without family, connection, or fortune. be this to be endure! but it must not, shall not be. if you be sensible of your own good, you would not wish to quit the sphere in which you have be bring up."
"in marry your nephew, I should not consider myself as quit that sphere. he be a gentleman; I be a gentleman's daughter; so far we be equal."
"true. you be a gentleman's daughter. but who be your mother? who be your uncle and aunt? do not imagine I ignorant of their condition."
"whatever my connection may be," say Elizabeth, "if your nephew do not object to they, they can be nothing to you."
"tell I once for all, be you engaged to he?"
though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of oblige Lady Catherine, have answer this question, she could not but say, after a moment's deliberation:
"I be not."
Lady Catherine seem pleased.
"and will you promise I, never to enter into such an engagement?"
"I will make no promise of the kind."
"Miss Bennet I be shocked and astonish. I expect to find a more reasonable young woman. but do not deceive yourself into a belief that I will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have give I the assurance I require."
"and I certainly never shall give it. I be not to be intimidate into anything so wholly unreasonable. your ladyship want Mr. Darcy to marry your daughter; but would my give you the wish-for promise make their marriage at all more probable? suppose he to be attach to I, would my refuse to accept his hand make he wish to bestow it on his cousin? allow I to say, Lady Catherine, that the argument with which you have support this extraordinary application have be as frivolous as the application be ill-judged. you have widely mistake my character, if you think I can be work on by such persuasion as these. how far your nephew might approve of your interference in his affair, I cannot tell; but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in mine. I must beg, therefore, to be importune no far on the subject."
"not so hasty, if you please. I have by no mean do. to all the objection I have already urge, I have still another to add. I be no strange to the particular of your young sister's infamous elopement. I know it all; that the young man's marry she be a patch-up business, at the expence of your father and uncle. and be such a girl to be my nephew's sister? be her husband, be the son of his late father's steward, to be his brother? Heaven and earth!--of what be you think? be the shade of Pemberley to be thus pollute?"
"you can now have nothing furth to say," she resentfully answer. "you have insult I in every possible method. I must beg to return to the house."
and she rise as she speak. Lady Catherine rise also, and they turn back. her ladyship be highly incense.
"you have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew! unfeeling, selfish girl! do you not consider that a connection with you must disgrace he in the eye of everybody?"
"Lady Catherine, I have nothing furth to say. you know my sentiment."
"you be then resolve to have he?"
"I have say no such thing. I be only resolve to act in that manner, which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness, without reference to you, or to any person so wholly unconnected with I."
"it be well. you refuse, then, to oblige I. you refuse to obey the claim of duty, honour, and gratitude. you be determined to ruin he in the opinion of all his friend, and make he the contempt of the world."
"neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude," reply Elizabeth, "have any possible claim on I, in the present instance. no principle of either would be violate by my marriage with Mr. Darcy. and with regard to the resentment of his family, or the indignation of the world, if the former be excite by his marry I, it would not give I one moment's concern---and the world in general would have too much sense to join in the scorn."
"and this be your real opinion! this be your final resolve! very well. I shall now know how to act. do not imagine, Miss Bennet, that your ambition will ever be gratify. I come to try you. I hop to find you reasonable; but, depend upon it, I will carry my point."
in this manner Lady Catherine talk on, till they be at the door of the carriage, when, turn hastily round, she add, "I take no leave of you, Miss Bennet. I send no compliment to your mother. you deserve no such attention. I be most seriously displeased."
Elizabeth make no answer; and without attempt to persuade her ladyship to return into the house, walk quietly into it herself. she hear the carriage drive away as she proceed up stair. her mother impatiently meet she at the door of the dressing-room, to ask why Lady Catherine would not come in again and rest herself.
"she do not choose it," say her daughter, "she would go."
"she be a very fine-look woman! and her call here be prodigiously civil! for she only come, I suppose, to tell we the Collinses be well. she be on her road somewhere, I dare say, and so, pass through Meryton, think she might as well call on you. I suppose she have nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?"
Elizabeth be force to give into a little falsehood here; for to acknowledge the substance of their conversation be impossible.
chapter 57
the discomposure of spirit which this extraordinary visit throw Elizabeth into, could not be easily overcome; nor could she, for many hour, learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady Catherine, it appear, have actually take the trouble of this journey from Rosings, for the sole purpose of break off her suppose engagement with Mr. Darcy. it be a rational scheme, to be sure! but from what the report of their engagement could originate, Elizabeth be at a loss to imagine; till she recollect that his be the intimate friend of Bingley, and her be the sister of Jane, be enough, at a time when the expectation of one wedding make everybody eager for another, to supply the idea. she have not herself forget to feel that the marriage of her sister must bring they more frequently together. and her neighbour at Lucas Lodge, therefore (for through their communication with the Collinses, the report, she conclude, have reach lady Catherine), have only set that down as almost certain and immediate,
 which she have look forward to as possible at some future time.
in revolve Lady Catherine's expression, however, she could not help feel some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of she persist in this interference. from what she have say of her resolution to prevent their marriage, it occur to Elizabeth that she must meditate an application to her nephew; and how he might take a similar representation of the evil attach to a connection with she, she dare not pronounce. she know not the exact degree of his affection for his aunt, or his dependence on her judgment, but it be natural to suppose that he think much high of her ladyship than she could do; and it be certain that, in enumerate the misery of a marriage with one, whose immediate connection be so unequal to his own, his aunt would address he on his weak side. with his notion of dignity, he would probably feel that the argument, which to Elizabeth have appear weak and ridiculous, contain much good sense and solid reasoning.
if he have be waver before as to what he should do, which have often seem likely, the advice and entreaty of so near a relation might settle every doubt, and determine he at once to be as happy as dignity unblemishe could make he. in that case he would return no more. Lady Catherine might see he in her way through town; and his engagement to Bingley of come again to Netherfield must give way.
"if, therefore, an excuse for not keep his promise should come to his friend within a few day," she add, "I shall know how to understand it. I shall then give over every expectation, every wish of his constancy. if he be satisfied with only regret I, when he might have obtain my affection and hand, I shall soon cease to regret he at all."
* * * * *
the surprise of the rest of the family, on hear who their visitor have be, be very great; but they obligingly satisfy it, with the same kind of supposition which have appease Mrs. Bennet's curiosity; and Elizabeth be spar from much teasing on the subject.
the next morning, as she be go downstairs, she be meet by her father, who come out of his library with a letter in his hand.
"Lizzy," say he, "I be go to look for you; come into my room."
she follow he thither; and her curiosity to know what he have to tell she be heighten by the supposition of its being in some manner connect with the letter he hold. it suddenly strike she that it might be from Lady Catherine; and she anticipate with dismay all the consequent explanation.
she follow her father to the fire place, and they both sit down. he then say,
"I have receive a letter this morning that have astonish I exceedingly. as it principally concern yourself, you ought to know its content. I do not know before, that I have two daughter on the brink of matrimony. let I congratulate you on a very important conquest."
the colour now rush into Elizabeth's cheek in the instantaneous conviction of its be a letter from the nephew, instead of the aunt; and she be undetermined whether most to be pleased that he explain himself at all, or offend that his letter be not rather address to herself; when her father continue:
"you look conscious. young lady have great penetration in such matter as these; but I think I may defy even your sagacity, to discover the name of your admirer. this letter be from Mr. Collins."
"from Mr. Collins! and what can he have to say?"
"something very much to the purpose of course. he begin with congratulation on the approach nuptial of my eld daughter, of which, it seem, he have be tell by some of the good-natured, gossip lucas. I shall not sport with your impatience, by read what he say on that point. what relate to yourself, be as follow: 'have thus offer you the sincere congratulation of Mrs. Collins and myself on this happy event, let I now add a short hint on the subject of another; of which we have be advertise by the same authority. your daughter Elizabeth, it be presume, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after her eld sister have resign it, and the choose partner of her fate may be reasonably look up to as one of the most illustrious personage in this land.'
"can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who be mean by this?" 'this young gentleman be bless, in a peculiar way, with every thing the heart of mortal can most desire,--splendid property, noble kindred, and extensive patronage. yet in spite of all these temptation, let I warn my cousin Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evil you may incur by a precipitate closure with this gentleman's proposal, which, of course, you will be incline to take immediate advantage of.'
"have you any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman be? but now it come out:
"'my motive for caution you be as follow. we have reason to imagine that his aunt, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, do not look on the match with a friendly eye.'
"_Mr. Darcy_, you see, be the man! now, Lizzy, I think I have surprise you. could he, or the Lucases, have pitch on any man within the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have give the lie more effectually to what they relate? Mr. Darcy, who never look at any woman but to see a blemish, and who probably never look at you in his life! it be admirable!"
Elizabeth try to join in her father's pleasantry, but could only force one most reluctant smile. never have his wit be direct in a manner so little agreeable to she.
"be you not divert?"
"oh! yes. pray read on."
"'after mention the likelihood of this marriage to her ladyship last night, she immediately, with her usual condescension, express what she feel on the occasion; when it become apparent, that on the score of some family objection on the part of my cousin, she would never give her consent to what she term so disgraceful a match. I think it my duty to give the speedy intelligence of this to my cousin, that she and her noble admirer may be aware of what they be about, and not run hastily into a marriage which have not be properly sanction.' Mr. Collins moreover add, 'I be truly rejoice that my cousin Lydia's sad business have be so well hush up, and be only concerned that their live together before the marriage take place should be so generally know. I must not, however, neglect the duty of my station, or refrain from declare my amazement at hear that you receive the young couple into your house as soon as they be marry. it be an encouragement of vice; and have I be the 
rector of longbourn, I should very strenuously have oppose it. you ought certainly to forgive they, as a Christian, but never to admit they in your sight, or allow their name to be mention in your hearing.' that be his notion of christian forgiveness! the rest of his letter be only about his dear Charlotte's situation, and his expectation of a young olive-branch. but, Lizzy, you look as if you do not enjoy it. you be not go to be missish, I hope, and pretend to be affront at an idle report. for what do we live, but to make sport for our neighbour, and laugh at they in our turn?"
"oh!" cry Elizabeth, "I be excessively divert. but it be so strange!"
"yes--_that_ be what make it amusing. have they fix on any other man it would have be nothing; but his perfect indifference, and your pointed dislike, make it so delightfully absurd! much as I abominate writing, I would not give up Mr. Collins's correspondence for any consideration. Nay, when I read a letter of his, I cannot help give he the preference even over Wickham, much as I value the impudence and hypocrisy of my son-in-law. and pray, Lizzy, what say Lady Catherine about this report? do she call to refuse her consent?"
to this question his daughter reply only with a laugh; and as it have be ask without the least suspicion, she be not distress by his repeat it. Elizabeth have never be more at a loss to make her feeling appear what they be not. it be necessary to laugh, when she would rather have cry. her father have most cruelly mortify she, by what he say of Mr. Darcy's indifference, and she could do nothing but wonder at such a want of penetration, or fear that perhaps, instead of his see too little, she might have fancy too much.
chapter 58
instead of receive any such letter of excuse from his friend, as Elizabeth half expect Mr. Bingley to do, he be able to bring Darcy with he to Longbourn before many day have pass after Lady Catherine's visit. the gentleman arrive early; and, before Mrs. Bennet have time to tell he of their have see his aunt, of which her daughter sit in momentary dread, Bingley, who want to be alone with Jane, propose their all walk out. it be agree to. Mrs. Bennet be not in the habit of walk; Mary could never spare time; but the remain five set off together. Bingley and Jane, however, soon allow the other to outstrip they. they lag behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy be to entertain each other. very little be say by either; Kitty be too much afraid of he to talk; Elizabeth be secretly form a desperate resolution; and perhaps he might be do the same.
they walk towards the Lucases, because Kitty wish to call upon Maria; and as Elizabeth see no occasion for make it a general concern, when Kitty leave they she go boldly on with he alone. now be the moment for her resolution to be execute, and, while her courage be high, she immediately say:
"Mr. Darcy, I be a very selfish creature; and, for the sake of give relief to my own feeling, care not how much I may be wound your's. I can no long help thank you for your unexampled kindness to my poor sister. ever since I have know it, I have be most anxious to acknowledge to you how gratefully I feel it. be it know to the rest of my family, I should not have merely my own gratitude to express."
"I be sorry, exceedingly sorry," reply Darcy, in a tone of surprise and emotion, "that you have ever be inform of what may, in a mistaken light, have give you uneasiness. I do not think Mrs. Gardiner be so little to be trust."
"you must not blame my aunt. Lydia's thoughtlessness first betray to I that you have be concern in the matter; and, of course, I could not rest till I know the particular. let I thank you again and again, in the name of all my family, for that generous compassion which induce you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortification, for the sake of discover they."
"if you will thank I," he reply, "let it be for yourself alone. that the wish of give happiness to you might add force to the other inducement which lead I on, I shall not attempt to deny. but your family owe I nothing. much as I respect they, I believe I think only of you."
Elizabeth be too much embarrassed to say a word. after a short pause, her companion add, "you be too generous to trifle with I. if your feeling be still what they be last April, tell I so at once. my affection and wish be unchanged, but one word from you will silence I on this subject for ever."
Elizabeth, feel all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of his situation, now force herself to speak; and immediately, though not very fluently, give he to understand that her sentiment have undergo so material a change, since the period to which he allude, as to make she receive with gratitude and pleasure his present assurance. the happiness which this reply produce, be such as he have probably never feel before; and he express himself on the occasion as sensibly and as warmly as a man violently in love can be suppose to do. have Elizabeth be able to encounter his eye, she might have see how well the expression of heartfelt delight, diffuse over his face, become he; but, though she could not look, she could listen, and he tell she of feeling, which, in proving of what importance she be to he, make his affection every moment more valuable.
they walk on, without know in what direction. there be too much to be think, and feel, and say, for attention to any other object. she soon learn that they be indebted for their present good understanding to the effort of his aunt, who do call on he in her return through London, and there relate her journey to longbourn, its motive, and the substance of her conversation with Elizabeth; dwell emphatically on every expression of the latter which, in her ladyship's apprehension, peculiarly denote her perverseness and assurance; in the belief that such a relation must assist her endeavour to obtain that promise from her nephew which she have refuse to give. but, unluckily for her ladyship, its effect have be exactly contrariwise.
"it teach I to hope," say he, "as I have scarcely ever allow myself to hope before. I know enough of your disposition to be certain that, have you be absolutely, irrevocably decide against I, you would have acknowledge it to Lady Catherine, frankly and openly."
Elizabeth colour and laugh as she reply, "yes, you know enough of my frankness to believe I capable of that. after abuse you so abominably to your face, I could have no scruple in abuse you to all your relation."
"what do you say of I, that I do not deserve? for, though your accusation be ill-found, form on mistaken premise, my behaviour to you at the time have merit the severe reproof. it be unpardonable. I cannot think of it without abhorrence."
"we will not quarrel for the great share of blame annex to that evening," say Elizabeth. "the conduct of neither, if strictly examine, will be irreproachable; but since then, we have both, I hope, improve in civility."
"I cannot be so easily reconcile to myself. the recollection of what I then say, of my conduct, my manner, my expression during the whole of it, be now, and have be many month, inexpressibly painful to I. your reproof, so well apply, I shall never forget: 'have you behave in a more gentlemanlike manner.' those be your word. you know not, you can scarcely conceive, how they have torture me;--though it be some time, I confess, before I be reasonable enough to allow their justice."
"I be certainly very far from expect they to make so strong an impression. I have not the small idea of their be ever feel in such a way."
"I can easily believe it. you think I then devoid of every proper feeling, I be sure you do. the turn of your countenance I shall never forget, as you say that I could not have address you in any possible way that would induce you to accept I."
"oh! do not repeat what I then say. these recollection will not do at all. I assure you that I have long be most heartily ashamed of it."
Darcy mention his letter. "do it," say he, "do it soon make you think well of I? do you, on read it, give any credit to its content?"
she explain what its effect on she have be, and how gradually all her former prejudice have be remove.
"I know," say he, "that what I write must give you pain, but it be necessary. I hope you have destroy the letter. there be one part especially, the opening of it, which I should dread your have the power of read again. I can remember some expression which might justly make you hate I."
"the letter shall certainly be burn, if you believe it essential to the preservation of my regard; but, though we have both reason to think my opinion not entirely unalterable, they be not, I hope, quite so easily change as that imply."
"when I write that letter," reply Darcy, "I believe myself perfectly calm and cool, but I be since convince that it be write in a dreadful bitterness of spirit."
"the letter, perhaps, begin in bitterness, but it do not end so. the adieu be charity itself. but think no more of the letter. the feeling of the person who write, and the person who receive it, be now so widely different from what they be then, that every unpleasant circumstance attend it ought to be forget. you must learn some of my philosophy. think only of the past as its remembrance give you pleasure."
"I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind. your retrospection must be so totally void of reproach, that the contentment arise from they be not of philosophy, but, what be much well, of innocence. but with I, it be not so. painful recollection will intrude which cannot, which ought not, to be repel. I have be a selfish be all my life, in practice, though not in principle. as a child I be teach what be right, but I be not teach to correct my temper. I be give good principle, but leave to follow they in pride and conceit. unfortunately an only son (for many year an only child), I be spoil by my parent, who, though good themselves (my father, particularly, all that be benevolent and amiable), allow, encouraged, almost teach I to be selfish and overbearing; to care for none beyond my own family circle; to think meanly of all the rest of the world; to wish at least to think meanly of their sense and worth compare with my own. such I be, from eight to eight and twenty;
 and such I might still have be but for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! what do I not owe you! you teach I a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most advantageous. by you, I be properly humble. I come to you without a doubt of my reception. you show I how insufficient be all my pretension to please a woman worthy of be please."
"have you then persuade yourself that I should?"
"indeed I have. what will you think of my vanity? I believe you to be wish, expect my address."
"my manner must have be in fault, but not intentionally, I assure you. I never mean to deceive you, but my spirit might often lead I wrong. how you must have hat I after that evening?"
"hate you! I be angry perhaps at first, but my anger soon begin to take a proper direction."
"I be almost afraid of ask what you think of I, when we meet at Pemberley. you blame I for come?"
"no indeed; I feel nothing but surprise."
"your surprise could not be great than mine in be notice by you. my conscience tell I that I deserve no extraordinary politeness, and I confess that I do not expect to receive more than my due."
"my object then," reply Darcy, "be to show you, by every civility in my power, that I be not so mean as to resent the past; and I hop to obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill opinion, by let you see that your reproof have be attend to. how soon any other wish introduce themselves I can hardly tell, but I believe in about half an hour after I have see you."
he then tell she of Georgiana's delight in her acquaintance, and of her disappointment at its sudden interruption; which naturally lead to the cause of that interruption, she soon learn that his resolution of follow she from Derbyshire in quest of her sister have be form before he quit the inn, and that his gravity and thoughtfulness there have arise from no other struggle than what such a purpose must comprehend.
she express her gratitude again, but it be too painful a subject to each, to be dwelt on far.
after walk several mile in a leisurely manner, and too busy to know anything about it, they find at last, on examine their watch, that it be time to be at home.
"what could become of Mr. Bingley and Jane!" be a wonder which introduce the discussion of their affair. Darcy be delighted with their engagement; his friend have give he the early information of it.
"I must ask whether you be surprised?" say Elizabeth.
"not at all. when I go away, I feel that it would soon happen."
"that be to say, you have give your permission. I guess as much." and though he exclaim at the term, she find that it have be pretty much the case.
"on the evening before my go to London," say he, "I make a confession to he, which I believe I ought to have make long ago. I tell he of all that have occur to make my former interference in his affair absurd and impertinent. his surprise be great. he have never have the slight suspicion. I tell he, moreover, that I believe myself mistaken in supposing, as I have do, that your sister be indifferent to he; and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to she be unabated, I feel no doubt of their happiness together."
Elizabeth could not help smile at his easy manner of direct his friend.
"do you speak from your own observation," say she, "when you tell he that my sister love he, or merely from my information last spring?"
"from the former. I have narrowly observe she during the two visit which I have lately make here; and I be convince of her affection."
"and your assurance of it, I suppose, carry immediate conviction to he."
"it do. Bingley be most unaffectedly modest. his diffidence have prevent his depend on his own judgment in so anxious a case, but his reliance on mine make every thing easy. I be oblige to confess one thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offend he. I could not allow myself to conceal that your sister have be in town three month last winter, that I have know it, and purposely keep it from he. he be angry. but his anger, I be persuade, last no long than he remain in any doubt of your sister's sentiment. he have heartily forgive I now."
Elizabeth long to observe that Mr. Bingley have be a most delightful friend; so easily guide that his worth be invaluable; but she check herself. she remember that he have yet to learn to be laugh at, and it be rather too early to begin. in anticipate the happiness of Bingley, which of course be to be inferior only to his own, he continue the conversation till they reach the house. in the hall they part.
chapter 59
"my dear Lizzy, where can you have be walk to?" be a question which Elizabeth receive from Jane as soon as she enter their room, and from all the other when they sit down to table. she have only to say in reply, that they have wander about, till she be beyond her own knowledge. she colour as she speak; but neither that, nor anything else, awaken a suspicion of the truth.
the evening pass quietly, unmarke by anything extraordinary. the acknowledge lover talk and laugh, the unacknowledged be silent. Darcy be not of a disposition in which happiness overflow in mirth; and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather know that she be happy than feel herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment, there be other evil before she. she anticipate what would be feel in the family when her situation become know; she be aware that no one like he but Jane; and even fear that with the other it be a dislike which not all his fortune and consequence might do away.
at night she open her heart to Jane. though suspicion be very far from Miss Bennet's general habit, she be absolutely incredulous here.
"you be joke, Lizzy. this cannot be!--engage to Mr. Darcy! no, no, you shall not deceive I. I know it to be impossible."
"this be a wretched beginning indeed! my sole dependence be on you; and I be sure nobody else will believe I, if you do not. yet, indeed, I be in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. he still love I, and we be engage."
Jane look at her doubtingly. "oh, Lizzy! it cannot be. I know how much you dislike he."
"you know nothing of the matter. that be all to be forget. perhaps I do not always love he so well as I do now. but in such case as these, a good memory be unpardonable. this be the last time I shall ever remember it myself."
Miss Bennet still look all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more seriously assure she of its truth.
"Good Heaven! can it be really so! yet now I must believe you," cry Jane. "my dear, dear Lizzy, I would---I do congratulate you---but be you certain? forgive the question---be you quite certain that you can be happy with he?"
"there can be no doubt of that. it be settle between we already, that we be to be the happy couple in the world. but be you pleased, Jane? shall you like to have such a brother?"
"very, very much. nothing could give either Bingley or myself more delight. but we consider it, we talk of it as impossible. and do you really love he quite well enough? oh, Lizzy! do anything rather than marry without affection. be you quite sure that you feel what you ought to do?"
"oh, yes! you will only think I feel more than I ought to do, when I tell you all."
"what do you mean?"
"why, I must confess that I love he well than I do Bingley. I be afraid you will be angry."
"my dear sister, now be serious. I want to talk very seriously. let I know every thing that I be to know, without delay. will you tell I how long you have love he?"
"it have be come on so gradually, that I hardly know when it begin. but I believe I must date it from my first see his beautiful ground at Pemberley."
another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produce the desire effect; and she soon satisfy Jane by her solemn assurance of attachment. when convince on that article, Miss Bennet have nothing furth to wish.
"now I be quite happy," say she, "for you will be as happy as myself. I always have a value for he. be it for nothing but his love of you, I must always have esteem he; but now, as Bingley's friend and your husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to I. but Lizzy, you have be very sly, very reserved with I. how little do you tell I of what pass at Pemberley and Lambton! I owe all that I know of it to another, not to you."
Elizabeth tell she the motif of her secrecy. she have be unwilling to mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feeling have make she equally avoid the name of his friend. but now she would no long conceal from she his share in Lydia's marriage. all be acknowledge, and half the night spend in conversation.
* * * * *
"good gracious!" cry Mrs. Bennet, as she stand at a window the next morning, "if that disagreeable Mr. Darcy be not come here again with our dear Bingley! what can he mean by be so tiresome as to be always come here? I have no notion but he would go a-shooting, or something or other, and not disturb we with his company. what shall we do with he? Lizzy, you must walk out with he again, that he may not be in Bingley's way."
Elizabeth could hardly help laugh at so convenient a proposal; yet be really vex that her mother should be always give he such an epithet.
as soon as they enter, Bingley look at she so expressively, and shake hand with such warmth, as leave no doubt of his good information; and he soon afterwards say aloud, "Mrs. Bennet, have you no more lane hereabout in which Lizzy may lose her way again to-day?"
"I advise Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty," say Mrs. Bennet, "to walk to Oakham Mount this morning. it be a nice long walk, and Mr. Darcy have never see the view."
"it may do very well for the other," reply Mr. Bingley; "but I be sure it will be too much for Kitty. willnot it, Kitty?" Kitty own that she have rather stay at home. Darcy profess a great curiosity to see the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently consent. as she go up stair to get ready, Mrs. Bennet follow she, say:
"I be quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be force to have that disagreeable man all to yourself. but I hope you will not mind it: it be all for Jane's sake, you know; and there be no occasion for talk to he, except just now and then. so, do not put yourself to inconvenience."
during their walk, it be resolve that Mr. Bennet's consent should be ask in the course of the evening. Elizabeth reserve to herself the application for her mother's. she could not determine how her mother would take it; sometimes doubt whether all his wealth and grandeur would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man. but whether she be violently set against the match, or violently delight with it, it be certain that her manner would be equally ill adapt to do credit to her sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear the first rapture of her joy, than the first vehemence of her disapprobation.
* * * * *
in the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdraw to the library, she see Mr. Darcy rise also and follow he, and her agitation on see it be extreme. she do not fear her father's opposition, but he be go to be make unhappy; and that it should be through her mean---that she, his favourite child, should be distress he by her choice, should be fill he
with fear and regret in dispose of she---be a wretched reflection, and she sit in misery till Mr. Darcy appear again, when, look at he, she be a little relieved by his smile. in a few minute he approach the table where she be sit with Kitty; and, while pretend to admire her work say in a whisper, "go to your father, he want you in the library." she be go directly.
her father be walk about the room, look grave and anxious. "Lizzy," say he, "what be you do? be you out of your sens, to be accept this man? have not you always hat he?"
how earnestly do she then wish that her former opinion have be more reasonable, her expression more moderate! it would have spar she from explanation and profession which it be exceedingly awkward to give; but they be now necessary, and she assure he, with some confusion, of her attachment to Mr. Darcy.
"or, in other word, you be determined to have he. he be rich, to be sure, and you may have more fine clothe and fine carriage than Jane. but will they make you happy?"
"have you any other objection," say Elizabeth, "than your belief of my indifference?"
"none at all. we all know he to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but this would be nothing if you really like he."
"I do, I do like he," she reply, with tear in her eye, "I love he. indeed he have no improper pride. he be perfectly amiable. you do not know what he really be; then pray do not pain I by speak of he in such term."
"Lizzy," say her father, "I have give he my consent. he be the kind of man, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse anything, which he condescend to ask. I now give it to you, if you be resolve on have he. but let I advise you to think well of it. I know your disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be neither happy nor respectable, unless you truly esteem your husband; unless you look up to he as a superior. your lively talent would place you in the great danger in an unequal marriage. you could scarcely escape discredit and misery. my child, let I not have the grief of see you unable to respect your partner in life. you know not what you be about."
Elizabeth, still more affected, be earnest and solemn in her reply; and at length, by repeat assurance that Mr. Darcy be really the object of her choice, by explain the gradual change which her estimation of he have undergo, relate her absolute certainty that his affection be not the work of a day, but have stand the test of many month' suspense, and enumerate with energy all his good quality, she do conquer her father's incredulity, and reconcile he to the match.
"well, my dear," say he, when she cease speak, "I have no more to say. if this be the case, he deserve you. I could not have part with you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy."
to complete the favourable impression, she then tell he what Mr. Darcy have voluntarily do for Lydia. he hear she with astonishment.
"this be an evening of wonder, indeed! and so, Darcy do every thing; make up the match, give the money, pay the fellow's debt, and get he his commission! so much the well. it will save I a world of trouble and economy. have it be your uncle's doing, I must and would have pay he; but these violent young lover carry every thing their own way. I shall offer to pay he to-morrow; he will rant and storm about his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter."
he then recollect her embarrassment a few day before, on his reading Mr. Collins's letter; and after laugh at she some time, allow she at last to go---say, as she quit the room, "if any young man come for Mary or Kitty, send they in, for I be quite at leisure."
Elizabeth's mind be now relieve from a very heavy weight; and, after half an hour's quiet reflection in her own room, she be able to join the other with tolerable composure. every thing be too recent for gaiety, but the evening pass tranquilly away; there be no long anything material to be dread, and the comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time.
when her mother go up to her dressing-room at night, she follow she, and make the important communication. its effect be most extraordinary; for on first hear it, Mrs. Bennet sit quite still, and unable to utter a syllable. nor be it under many, many minute that she could comprehend what she hear; though not in general backward to credit what be for the advantage of her family, or that come in the shape of a lover to any of they. she begin at length to recover, to fidget about in her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself.
"good gracious! Lord bless I! only think! dear I! Mr. Darcy! who would have think it! and be it really true? oh! my sweetest Lizzy! how rich and how great you will be! what pin-money, what jewel, what carriage you will have! Jane's be nothing to it---nothing at all. I be so pleased---so happy. such a charming man!--so handsome! so tall!--oh, my dear Lizzy! pray apologise for my have dislike he so much before. I hope he will overlook it. dear, dear Lizzy. a house in town! every thing that be charming! three daughter marry! ten thousand a year! oh, Lord! what will become of I. I shall go distract."
this be enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubt: and Elizabeth, rejoice that such an effusion be hear only by herself, soon go away. but before she have be three minute in her own room, her mother follow she.
"my dear child," she cry, "I can think of nothing else! ten thousand a year, and very likely more! 'tis as good as a Lord! and a special licence. you must and shall be marry by a special licence. but my dear love, tell I what dish Mr. Darcy be particularly fond of, that I may have it to-morrow."
this be a sad omen of what her mother's behaviour to the gentleman himself might be; and Elizabeth find that, though in the certain possession of his warm affection, and secure of her relation' consent, there be still something to be wish for. but the morrow pass off much well than she expect; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stand in such awe of her intended son-in-law that she venture not to speak to he, unless it be in her power to offer he any attention, or mark her deference for his opinion.
Elizabeth have the satisfaction of see her father take pain to get acquaint with he; and Mr. Bennet soon assure she that he be rise every hour in his esteem.
"I admire all my three son-in-law highly," say he. "Wickham, perhaps, be my favourite; but I think I shall like your husband quite as well as Jane's."
chapter 60
Elizabeth's spirit soon rise to playfulness again, she want Mr. Darcy to account for his have ever fall in love with she. "how could you begin?" say she. "I can comprehend your go on charmingly, when you have once make a beginning; but what could set you off in the first place?"
"I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the word, which lay the foundation. it be too long ago. I be in the middle before I know that I have begin."
"my beauty you have early withstood, and as for my manner---my behaviour to you be at least always border on the uncivil, and I never speak to you without rather wish to give you pain than not. now be sincere; do you admire I for my impertinence?"
"for the liveliness of your mind, I do."
"you may as well call it impertinence at once. it be very little less. the fact be, that you be sick of civility, of deference, of officious attention. you be disgust with the woman who be always speak, and look, and think for your approbation alone. I rouse, and interested you, because I be so unlike they. have you not be really amiable, you would have hat I for it; but in spite of the pain you take to disguise yourself, your feeling be always noble and just; and in your heart, you thoroughly despise the person who so assiduously court you. there---I have save you the trouble of account for it; and really, all thing consider, I begin to think it perfectly reasonable. to be sure, you know no actual good of I---but nobody think of that when they fall in love."
"be there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane while she be ill at Netherfield?"
"Dearest Jane! who could have do less for she? but make a virtue of it by all mean. my good quality be under your protection, and you be to exaggerate they as much as possible; and, in return, it belong to I to find occasion for teasing and quarrel with you as often as may be; and I shall begin directly by ask you what make you so unwilling to come to the point at last. what make you so shy of I, when you first call, and afterwards din here? why, especially, when you call, do you look as if you do not care about I?"
"because you be grave and silent, and give I no encouragement."
"but I be embarrassed."
"and so be i."
"you might have talk to I more when you come to dinner."
"a man who have feel less, might."
"how unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that I should be so reasonable as to admit it! but I wonder how long you would have go on, if you have be leave to yourself. I wonder when you would have speak, if I have not ask you! my resolution of thank you for your kindness to Lydia have certainly great effect. too much, I be afraid; for what become of the moral, if our comfort spring from a breach of promise? for I ought not to have mention the subject. this will never do."
"you need not distress yourself. the moral will be perfectly fair. Lady Catherine's unjustifiable endeavour to separate we be the mean of remove all my doubt. I be not indebted for my present happiness to your eager desire of express your gratitude. I be not in a humour to wait for any opening of your's. my aunt's intelligence have give I hope, and I be determine at once to know every thing."
"Lady Catherine have be of infinite use, which ought to make she happy, for she love to be of use. but tell I, what do you come down to Netherfield for? be it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed? or have you intend any more serious consequence?"
"my real purpose be to see you, and to judge, if I could, whether I might ever hope to make you love I. my avow one, or what I avow to myself, be to see whether your sister be still partial to Bingley, and if she be, to make the confession to he which I have since make."
"shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what be to befall she?"
"I be more likely to want more time than courage, Elizabeth. but it ought to do, and if you will give I a sheet of paper, it shall be do directly."
"and if I have not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you
and admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once do. but I have an aunt, too, who must not be long neglect."
from an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with Mr. Darcy have be over-rat, Elizabeth have never yet
answer Mrs. Gardiner's long letter; but now, have that to communicate which she know would be most welcome, she be almost ashamed to find that her uncle and aunt have already lose three day of happiness, and immediately write as follow:
"I would have thank you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have do, for your long, kind, satisfactory, detail of particular; but to say the truth, I be too cross to write. you suppose more than really exist. but now suppose as much as you choose; give a loose rein to your fancy, indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the subject will afford, and unless you believe I actually marry, you cannot greatly err. you must write again very soon, and praise he a great deal more than you do in your last. I thank you, again and again, for not go to the Lakes. how could I be so silly as to wish it! your idea of the pony be delightful. we will go round the Park every day. I be the happy creature in the world. perhaps other people have say so before, but not one with such justice. I be happy even than Jane; she only smile, I laugh. Mr. Darcy send you all the love in the world that he can spare from I. you be all to come to Pemberley at Christmas. your, etc."
Mr. Darcy's letter to Lady Catherine be in a different style; and still different from either be what Mr. Bennet send to Mr. Collins, in reply to his last.
"I must trouble you once more for congratulation. Elizabeth will soon be the wife of Mr. Darcy. Console Lady Catherine as well as you can. but, if I be you, I would stand by the nephew. he have more to give.
"your sincerely, etc."
Miss Bingley's congratulation to her brother, on his approach marriage, be all that be affectionate and insincere. she write even to Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her former profession of regard. Jane be not deceive, but she be affect; and though feel no reliance on she, could not help write she a much kind answer than she know be deserve.
the joy which Miss Darcy express on receive similar information, be as sincere as her brother's in send it. four side of paper be insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire of be love by her sister.
before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any congratulation to Elizabeth from his wife, the Longbourn family hear that the Collinses be come themselves to Lucas Lodge. the reason of this sudden removal be soon evident. Lady Catherine have be render so exceedingly angry by the content of her nephew's letter, that Charlotte, really rejoice in the match, be anxious to get away till the storm be blow over. at such a moment, the arrival of her friend be a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their meeting she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly buy, when she see Mr. Darcy expose to all the parading and obsequious civility of her husband. he bear it, however, with admirable calmness. he could even listen to Sir William Lucas, when he compliment he on carry away the bright jewel of the country, and express his hope of their all meeting frequently at St. James's, with very decent composure. if he do shrug his shoulder, it be not till Sir William 
be out of sight.
Mrs. Phillips's vulgarity be another, and perhaps a great, tax on his forbearance; and though Mrs. Phillips, as well as her sister, stand in too much awe of he to speak with the familiarity which Bingley's good humour encourage, yet, whenever she do speak, she must be vulgar. nor be her respect for he, though it make she more quiet, at all likely to make she more elegant. Elizabeth do all she could to shield he from the frequent notice of either, and be ever anxious to keep he to herself, and to those of her family with whom he might converse without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feeling arise from all this take from the season of courtship much of its pleasure, it add to the hope of the future; and she look forward with delight to the time when they should be remove from society so little pleasing to either, to all the comfort and elegance of their family party at Pemberley.
chapter 61
Happy for all her maternal feeling be the day on which Mrs. Bennet get rid of her two most deserving daughter. with what delight pride she afterwards visit Mrs. Bingley, and talk of Mrs. Darcy, may be guess. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many of her child produce so happy an effect as to make she a sensible, amiable, well-inform woman for the rest of her life; though perhaps it be lucky for her husband, who might not have relish domestic felicity in so unusual a form, that she still be occasionally nervous and invariably silly.
Mr. Bennet miss his second daughter exceedingly; his affection for she draw he oftener from home than anything else could do. he delight in go to Pemberley, especially when he be least expect.
Mr. Bingley and Jane remain at Netherfield only a twelvemonth. so near a vicinity to her mother and Meryton relation be not desirable even to his easy temper, or her affectionate heart. the darling wish of his sister be then gratify; he buy an estate in a neighbouring county to derbyshire, and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source of happiness, be within thirty mile of each other.
Kitty, to her very material advantage, spend the chief of her time with her two elder sister. in society so superior to what she have generally know, her improvement be great. she be not of so ungovernable a temper as Lydia; and, remove from the influence of Lydia's example, she become, by proper attention and management, less irritable, less ignorant, and less insipid. from the further disadvantage of Lydia's society she be of course carefully keep, and though Mrs. Wickham frequently invite she to come and stay with she, with the promise of ball and young man, her father would never consent to she go.
Mary be the only daughter who remain at home; and she be necessarily draw from the pursuit of accomplishment by Mrs. Bennet's be quite unable to sit alone. Mary be oblige to mix more with the world, but she could still moralize over every morning visit; and as she be no long mortify by comparison between her sister' beauty and her own, it be suspect by her father that she submit to the change without much reluctance.
as for Wickham and Lydia, their character suffer no revolution from the marriage of her sister. he bear with philosophy the conviction that Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of his ingratitude and falsehood have before be unknown to she; and in spite of every thing, be not wholly without hope that Darcy might yet be prevail on to make his fortune. the congratulatory letter which Elizabeth receive from Lydia on her marriage, explain to she that, by his wife at least, if not by himself, such a hope be cherish. the letter be to this effect:
"MY DEAR LIZZY,
"I wish you joy. if you love Mr. Darcy half as well as I do my dear Wickham, you must be very happy. it be a great comfort to have you so rich, and when you have nothing else to do, I hope you will think of we. I be sure Wickham would like a place at court very much, and I do not think we shall have quite money enough to live upon without some help. any place would do, of about three or four hundred a year; but however, do not speak to Mr. Darcy about it, if you have rather not.
"your, etc."
as it happen that Elizabeth have much rather not, she endeavour in her answer to put an end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind. such relief, however, as it be in her power to afford, by the practice of what might be call economy in her own private expence, she frequently send they. it have always be evident to she that such an income as theirs, under the direction of two person so extravagant in their want, and heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to their support; and whenever they change their quarter, either Jane or herself be sure of be apply to for some little assistance towards discharge their bill. their manner of living, even when the restoration of peace dismiss they to a home, be unsettle in the extreme. they be always move from place to place in quest of a cheap situation, and always spend more than they ought. his affection for she soon sink into indifference; shebe last a little long; and in spite of her youth and her manner, she 
retain all the claim to reputation which her marriage have give she.
Though Darcy could never receive he at Pemberley, yet, for Elizabeth's sake, he assist he far in his profession. Lydia be occasionally a visitor there, when her husband be go to enjoy himself in London or Bath; and with the Bingleys they both of they frequently staid so long, that even Bingley's good humour be overcome, and he proceed so far as to talk of give they a hint to be go.
Miss Bingley be very deeply mortify by Darcy's marriage; but as she think it advisable to retain the right of visit at Pemberley, she dropt all her resentment; be fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and pay off every arrear of civility to Elizabeth.
Pemberley be now Georgiana's home; and the attachment of the sister be exactly what Darcy have hop to see. they be able to love each other even as well as they intend. Georgiana have the high opinion in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she often listen with an astonishment border on alarm at her lively, sportive, manner of talk to her brother. he, who have always inspire in herself a respect which almost overcome her affection, she now see the object of open pleasantry. her mind receive knowledge which have never before fall in her way. by Elizabeth's instruction, she begin to comprehend that a woman may take liberty with her husband which a brother will not always allow in a sister more than ten year young than himself.
Lady Catherine be extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew; and as she give way to all the genuine frankness of her character in her reply to the letter which announce its arrangement, she send he language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time all intercourse be at an end. but at length, by Elizabeth's persuasion, he be prevail on to overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation; and, after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her resentment give way, either to her affection for he, or her curiosity to see how his wife conduct herself; and she condescend to wait on they at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its wood have receive, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the visit of her uncle and aunt from the city.
with the Gardiners, they be always on the most intimate term. Darcy, as well as Elizabeth, really love they; and they be both ever sensible of the warm gratitude towards the person who, by bring she into derbyshire, have be the mean of unite they.
125
