the PROFESSOR
by (AKA Charlotte Bronte) Currer Bell
PREFACE.
this little book be write before either "Jane Eyre" or "Shirley,"
and yet no indulgence can be solicit for it on the plea of a first
attempt. a first attempt it certainly be not, as the pen which write it
have be previously wear a good deal in a practice of some year. I have
not indeed publish anything before I commence "the Professor," but
in many a crude effort, destroy almost as soon as compose, I have
get over any such taste as I might once have have for ornamented and
redundant composition, and come to prefer what be plain and homely.
at the same time I have adopt a set of principle on the subject of
incident, &c., such as would be generally approve in theory, but the
result of which, when carry out into practice, often procure for an
author more surprise than pleasure.
I say to myself that my hero should work his way through life as I have
see real live man work theirs--that he should never get a shilling
he have not earn--that no sudden turn should lift he in a moment to
wealth and high station; that whatever small competency he might gain,
should be win by the sweat of his brow; that, before he could find so
much as an arbour to sit down in, he should master at least half the
ascent of "the Hill of Difficulty;" that he should not even marry a
beautiful girl or a lady of rank. as Adam's son he should share Adam's
doom, and drain throughout life a mixed and moderate cup of enjoyment.
in the sequel, however, I find that publisher in general scarcely
approve of this system, but would have like something more imaginative
and poetical--something more consonant with a highly wrought fancy, with
a taste for pathos, with sentiment more tender, elevated, unworldly.
indeed, until an author have try to dispose of a manuscript of this
kind, he can never know what store of romance and sensibility lie
hide in breast he would not have suspect of casket such
treasure. man in business be usually think to prefer the real; on
trial the idea will be often find fallacious: a passionate preference
for the wild, wonderful, and thrilling--the strange, startling, and
harrowing--agitate diver soul that show a calm and sober surface.
such be the case, the reader will comprehend that to have reach
he in the form of a print book, this brief narrative must have go
through some struggle--which indeed it have. and after all, its
bad struggle and strong ordeal be yet to come but it take
comfort--subdue fear--lean on the staff of a moderate expectation--and
mutter under its breath, while lift its eye to that of the public,
"he that be low need fear no fall."
CURRER BELL.
the foregoing preface be write by my wife with a view to the
publication of "the Professor," shortly after the appearance of
"Shirley." be dissuade from her intention, the authoress make some
use of the material in a subsequent work--"villette," as, however,
these two story be in most respect unlike, it have be represent
to I that I ought not to withhold "the Professor" from the public. I
have therefore consent to its publication.
A. B. NICHOLLS
Haworth Parsonage,
September 22nd, 1856.
t h e p r o f E s s o R
CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY.
the other day, in look over my paper, I find in my desk the
follow copy of a letter, send by I a year since to an old school
acquaintance:--
"DEAR CHARLES,
"I think when you and I be at Eton together, we be neither of we
what could be call popular character: you be a sarcastic,
observant, shrewd, cold-blooded creature; my own portrait I will not
attempt to draw, but I cannot recollect that it be a strikingly
attractive one--can you? what animal magnetism draw thee and I together
I know not; certainly I never experience anything of the Pylades and
Orestes sentiment for you, and I have reason to believe that you, on
your part, be equally free from all romantic regard to I. still, out
of school hour we walk and talk continually together; when the
theme of conversation be our companion or our master we understand
each other, and when I recur to some sentiment of affection, some
vague love of an excellent or beautiful object, whether in animate or
inanimate nature, your sardonic coldness do not move I. I feel myself
superior to that check then as I do now.
"it be a long time since I write to you, and a still long time since
I see you. chance to take up a newspaper of your county the other day,
my eye fall upon your name. I begin to think of old time; to run over
the event which have transpire since we separate; and I sit down
and commence this letter. what you have be do I know not; but you
shall hear, if you choose to listen, how the world have wag with I.
"first, after leave Eton, I have an interview with my maternal uncle,
Lord Tynedale and the Hon. John Seacombe. they ask I if I would enter
the Church, and my uncle the nobleman offer I the living of Seacombe,
which be in his gift, if I would; then my other uncle, Mr. Seacombe,
hint that when I become rector of Seacombe-cum-Scaife, I might perhaps
be allow to take, as mistress of my house and head of my parish, one
of my six cousin, his daughter, all of whom I greatly dislike.
"I decline both the Church and matrimony. a good clergyman be a good
thing, but I should have make a very bad one. as to the wife--oh how
like a night-mare be the thought of be bind for life to one of
my cousin! no doubt they be accomplish and pretty; but not an
accomplishment, not a charm of theirs, touch a chord in my bosom.
to think of pass the winter evening by the parlour fire-side of
Seacombe Rectory alone with one of they--for instance, the large and
well-model statue, Sarah--no; I should be a bad husband, under such
circumstance, as well as a bad clergyman.
"when I have decline my uncle' offer they ask I 'what I intend
to do?' I say I should reflect. they remind I that I have no fortune,
and no expectation of any, and, after a considerable pause, Lord
Tynedale demand sternly, 'whether I have thought of follow my
father's step and engage in trade?' now, I have have no thought of the
sort. I do not think that my turn of mind qualify I to make a good
tradesman; my taste, my ambition do not lie in that way; but such be
the scorn express in Lord Tynedale's countenance as he pronounce
the word trade--such the contemptuous sarcasm of his tone--that I be
instantly decide. my father be but a name to I, yet that name I do
not like to hear mention with a sneer to my very face. I answer
then, with haste and warmth, 'I cannot do well than follow in
my father's step; yes, I will be a tradesman.' my uncle do not
remonstrate; they and I part with mutual disgust. in review this
transaction, I find that I be quite right to shake off the burden of
Tynedale's patronage, but a fool to offer my shoulder instantly for the
reception of another burden--one which might be more intolerable, and
which certainly be yet untried.
"I write instantly to Edward--you know Edward--my only brother, ten
year my senior, married to a rich mill-owner's daughter, and now
possessor of the mill and business which be my father's before
he fail. you be aware that my father-once reckon a Croesus of
wealth--become bankrupt a short time previous to his death, and that my
mother live in destitution for some six month after he, unhelped by
her aristocratical brother, whom she have mortally offend by her union
with Crimsworth, the----shire manufacturer. at the end of the six month
she bring I into the world, and then herself leave it without, I
should think, much regret, as it contain little hope or comfort for
she.
"my father's relation take charge of Edward, as they do of I, till I
be nine year old. at that period it chance that the representation of
an important borough in our county fall vacant; Mr. Seacombe stand for
it. my uncle Crimsworth, an astute mercantile man, take the opportunity
of write a fierce letter to the candidate, state that if he and Lord
Tynedale do not consent to do something towards the support of their
sister's orphan child, he would expose their relentless and malignant
conduct towards that sister, and do his good to turn the circumstance
against Mr. Seacombe's election. that gentleman and Lord T. know well
enough that the Crimsworths be an unscrupulous and determined race;
they know also that they have influence in the borough of X----; and,
make a virtue of necessity, they consent to defray the expense of
my education. I be send to Eton, where I remain ten year, during
which space of time Edward and I never meet. he, when he grow up, enter
into trade, and pursue his calling with such diligence, ability, and
success, that now, in his thirtieth year, he be fast make a fortune.
of this I be apprise by the occasional short letter I receive from
he, some three or four time a year; which say letter never conclude
without some expression of determined enmity against the house of
Seacombe, and some reproach to I for living, as he say, on the bounty
of that house. at first, while still in boyhood, I could not understand
why, as I have no parent, I should not be indebted to my uncle Tynedale
and Seacombe for my education; but as I grow up, and hear by degree of
the persevere hostility, the hatred till death evince by they against
my father--of the suffering of my mother--of all the wrong, in short,
of our house--then do I conceive shame of the dependence in which I
live, and form a resolution no more to take bread from hand which have
refuse to minister to the necessity of my die mother. it be by
these feeling I be influence when I refuse the Rectory of Seacombe,
and the union with one of my patrician cousin.
"an irreparable breach thus be effect between my uncle and myself,
I write to Edward; tell he what have occur, and inform he of my
intention to follow his step and be a tradesman. I ask, moreover, if
he could give I employment. his answer express no approbation of my
conduct, but he say I might come down to ----shire, if I like, and he
would 'see what could be do in the way of furnish I with work.'
I repress all--even mental comment on his note--pack my trunk and
carpet-bag, and start for the North directly.
"after two day' travel (railroad be not then in existence) I
arrive, one wet October afternoon, in the town of X----. I have always
understand that Edward live in this town, but on inquiry I find that
it be only Mr. Crimsworth's mill and warehouse which be situate in
the smoky atmosphere of Bigben Close; his residence lie four mile out,
in the country.
"it be late in the evening when I alight at the gate of the
habitation designate to I as my brother's. as I advance up the
avenue, I could see through the shade of twilight, and the dark gloomy
mist which deepen those shade, that the house be large, and the
ground surround it sufficiently spacious. I pause a moment on the
lawn in front, and lean my back against a tall tree which rise in the
centre, I gaze with interest on the exterior of Crimsworth Hall.
"Edward be rich," think I to myself. 'I believe he to be do
well--but I do not know he be master of a mansion like this.' cut
short all marvel; speculation, conjecture, &c., I advance to the
front door and ring. a man-servant open it--I announce myself--he
relieve I of my wet cloak and carpet-bag, and usher I into a
room furnish as a library, where there be a bright fire and candle
burn on the table; he inform I that his master be not yet
return from X----market, but that he would certainly be at home in the
course of half an hour.
"be leave to myself, I take the stuff easy chair, cover with red
morocco, which stand by the fireside, and while my eye watch the
flame dart from the glow coal, and the cinder fall at interval on
the hearth, my mind busy itself in conjecture concern the meeting
about to take place. amidst much that be doubtful in the subject of
these conjecture, there be one thing tolerably certain--I be in no
danger of encounter severe disappointment; from this, the moderation
of my expectation guarantee I. I anticipate no overflowings of
fraternal tenderness; Edward's letter have always be such as to
prevent the engendering or harbouring of delusion of this sort. still,
as I sit await his arrival, I feel eager--very eager--I cannot tell
you why; my hand, so utterly a stranger to the grasp of a kindre hand,
clench itself to repress the tremor with which impatience would fain
have shake it.
"I think of my uncle; and as I be engage in wonder whether
Edward's indifference would equal the cold disdain I have always
experience from they, I hear the avenue gate open: wheel approach
the house; Mr. Crimsworth be arrive; and after the lapse of some
minute, and a brief dialogue between himself and his servant in the
hall, his tread draw near the library door--that tread alone announce
the master of the house.
"I still retain some confused recollection of Edward as he be ten
year ago--a tall, wiry, raw youth; NOW, as I rise from my seat and
turn towards the library door, I see a fine-look and powerful man,
light-complexion, well-make, and of athletic proportion; the first
glance make I aware of an air of promptitude and sharpness, show
as well in his movement as in his port, his eye, and the general
expression of his face. he greet I with brevity, and, in the moment
of shake hand, scan I from head to foot; he take his seat in the
morocco cover arm-chair, and motion I to another send.
"'I expect you would have call at the counting-house in the close,'
say he; and his voice, I notice, have an abrupt accent, probably
habitual to he; he speak also with a guttural northern tone, which
sound harsh in my ear, accustom to the silvery utterance of the
South.
"'the landlord of the inn, where the coach stop, direct I here,'
say I. 'I doubt at first the accuracy of his information, not be
aware that you have such a residence as this.'
"'oh, it be all right!' he reply, 'only I be keep half an hour behind
time, wait for you--that be all. I think you must be come by the
eight o'clock coach.'
"I express regret that he have have to wait; he make no answer, but
stir the fire, as if to cover a movement of impatience; then he
scan I again.
"I feel an inward satisfaction that I have not, in the first moment of
meeting, betray any warmth, any enthusiasm; that I have salute this
man with a quiet and steady phlegm.
"'have you quite break with Tynedale and Seacombe?' he ask hastily.
"'I do not think I shall have any further communication with they; my
refusal of their proposal will, I fancy, operate as a barrier against
all future intercourse.'
"'why,' say he, 'I may as well remind you at the very outset of our
connection, that "no man can serve two master." Acquaintance with Lord
Tynedale will be incompatible with assistance from I.' there be a kind
of gratuitous menace in his eye as he look at I in finish this
observation.
"feel no disposition to reply to he, I content myself with an
inward speculation on the difference which exist in the constitution
of man's mind. I do not know what inference Mr. Crimsworth draw from
my silence--whether he consider it a symptom of contumacity or an
evidence of my be cow by his peremptory manner. after a long and
hard stare at I, he rise sharply from his seat.
"'to-morrow,' say he, 'I shall call your attention to some other
point; but now it be supper time, and Mrs. Crimsworth be probably
wait; will you come?'
"he stride from the room, and I follow. in cross the hall, I
wonder what Mrs. Crimsworth might be. 'be she,' think I, 'as alien
to what I like as Tynedale, Seacombe, the Misses Seacombe--as the
affectionate relative now stride before I? or be she well than
these? shall I, in converse with she, feel free to show something of
my real nature; or--' further conjecture be arrest by my entrance
into the dining-room.
"a lamp, burn under a shade of ground-glass, show a handsome
apartment, wainscote with oak; supper be lay on the table; by the
fire-place, stand as if wait our entrance, appear a lady;
she be young, tall, and well shape; her dress be handsome and
fashionable: so much my first glance suffice to ascertain. a gay
salutation pass between she and Mr. Crimsworth; she chide he, half
playfully, half poutingly, for be late; her voice (I always take
voice into the account in judging of character) be lively--it
indicate, I think, good animal spirit. Mr. Crimsworth soon check
her animate scolding with a kiss--a kiss that still tell of the
bridegroom (they have not yet be marry a year); she take her seat
at the supper-table in first-rate spirit. perceive I, she beg
my pardon for not notice I before, and then shake hand with I, as
lady do when a flow of good-humour dispose they to be cheerful to
all, even the most indifferent of their acquaintance. it be now further
obvious to I that she have a good complexion, and feature sufficiently
marked but agreeable; her hair be red--quite red. she and Edward
talk much, always in a vein of playful contention; she be vex, or
pretend to be vex, that he have that day drive a vicious horse in
the gig, and he make light of her fear. sometimes she appeal to I.
"'now, Mr. William, benot it absurd in Edward to talk so? he say he
will drive Jack, and no other horse, and the brute have throw he twice
already.
"she speak with a kind of lisp, not disagreeable, but childish. I
soon see also that there be more than girlish--a somewhat infantine
expression in she by no mean small feature; this lisp and expression
be, I have no doubt, a charm in Edward's eye, and would be so
to those: of most man, but they be not to mine. I seek her eye,
desirous to read there the intelligence which I could not discern in her
face or hear in her conversation; it be merry, rather small; by turn I
see vivacity, vanity, coquetry, look out through its irid, but I watch
in vain for a glimpse of soul. I be no oriental; white neck, carmine
lip and cheek, cluster of bright curl, do not suffice for I without
that Promethean spark which will live after the rose and lily be
fade, the burnish hair grow grey. in sunshine, in prosperity, the
flower be very well; but how many wet day be there in life--November
season of disaster, when a man's hearth and home would be cold indeed,
without the clear, cheer gleam of intellect.
"have peruse the fair page of Mrs. Crimsworth's face, a deep,
involuntary sigh announce my disappointment; she take it as a homage to
her beauty, and Edward, who be evidently proud of his rich and handsome
young wife, throw on I a glance--half ridicule, half ire.
"I turn from they both, and gaze wearily round the room, I see two
picture set in the oak panelling--one on each side the mantel-piece.
cease to take part in the banter conversation that flow on
between Mr. and Mrs. Crimsworth, I bent my thought to the examination
of these picture. they be portrait--a lady and a gentleman, both
costume in the fashion of twenty year ago. the gentleman be in the
shade. I could not see he well. the lady have the benefit of a full beam
from the softly shaded lamp. I presently recognise she; I have see this
picture before in childhood; it be my mother; that and the companion
picture be the only heir-loom save out of the sale of my father's
property.
"the face, I remember, have please I as a boy, but then I do not
understand it; now I know how rare that class of face be in the world,
and I appreciate keenly its thoughtful, yet gentle expression. the
serious grey eye possess for I a strong charm, as do certain line
in the feature indicative of most true and tender feeling. I be sorry
it be only a picture.
"I soon leave Mr. and Mrs. Crimsworth to themselves; a servant
conduct I to my bed-room; in close my chamber-door, I shut out all
intruder--you, Charles, as well as the rest.
"good-bye for the present,
"WILLIAM CRIMSWORTH."
to this letter I never get an answer; before my old friend receive it,
he have accept a Government appointment in one of the colony, and be
already on his way to the scene of his official labour. what have become
of he since, I know not.
the leisure time I have at command, and which I intend to employ
for his private benefit, I shall now dedicate to that of the public at
large. my narrative be not exciting, and above all, not marvellous;
but it may interest some individual, who, have toil in the same
vocation as myself, will find in my experience frequent reflection
of their own. the above letter will serve as an introduction. I now
proceed.
CHAPTER II.
a fine October morning succeed to the foggy evening that have witness
my first introduction to Crimsworth Hall. I be early up and walk in
the large park-like meadow surround the house. the autumn sun, rise
over the ----shire hill, disclose a pleasant country; wood brown and
mellow vary the field from which the harvest have be lately carry;
a river, glide between the wood, catch on its surface the somewhat
cold gleam of the October sun and sky; at frequent interval along the
bank of the river, tall, cylindrical chimney, almost like slender
round tower, indicate the factory which the tree half conceal;
here and there mansion, similar to Crimsworth Hall, occupy agreeable
site on the hill-side; the country wear, on the whole, a cheerful,
active, fertile look. steam, trade, machinery have long banish from
it all romance and seclusion. at a distance of five mile, a valley,
opening between the low hill, hold in its cup the great town of X----.
a dense, permanent vapour brood over this locality--there lie Edward's
"concern."
I force my eye to scrutinize this prospect, I force my mind to dwell
on it for a time, and when I find that it communicate no pleasurable
emotion to my heart--that it stir in I none of the hope a man ought
to feel, when he see lay before he the scene of his life's career--I
say to myself, "William, you be a rebel against circumstance; you be
a fool, and know not what you want; you have choose trade and you shall
be a tradesman. look!" I continue mentally--"Look at the sooty smoke in
that hollow, and know that there be your post! there you cannot dream,
you cannot speculate and theorize--there you shall out and work!"
thus self-school, I return to the house. my brother be in the
breakfast-room. I meet he collectedly--I could not meet he cheerfully;
he be stand on the rug, his back to the fire--how much do I read in
the expression of his eye as my glance encounter his, when I advance
to bid he good morning; how much that be contradictory to my nature!
he say "good morning" abruptly and nod, and then he snatch, rather
than take, a newspaper from the table, and begin to read it with the air
of a master who seize a pretext to escape the bore of converse with
an underling. it be well I have take a resolution to endure for a time,
or his manner would have go far to render insupportable the disgust
I have just be endeavour to subdue. I look at he: I measure his
robust frame and powerful proportion; I see my own reflection in the
mirror over the mantel-piece; I amuse myself with compare the two
picture. in face I resemble he, though I be not so handsome; my
feature be less regular; I have a dark eye, and a broad brow--in
form I be greatly inferior--thin, slighter, not so tall. as an
animal, Edward excel I far; should he prove as paramount in mind
as in person I must be a slave--for I must expect from he no lion-like
generosity to one weak than himself; his cold, avaricious eye, his
stern, forbid manner tell I he would not spare. have I then force of
mind to cope with he? I do not know; I have never be try.
Mrs. Crimsworth's entrance divert my thought for a moment. she look
well, dress in white, her face and her attire shin in morning
and bridal freshness. I address she with the degree of ease her last
night's careless gaiety seem to warrant, but she reply with coolness
and restraint: her husband have tutor she; she be not to be too
familiar with his clerk.
as soon as breakfast be over Mr. Crimsworth intimate to I that they
be bring the gig round to the door, and that in five minute he
should expect I to be ready to go down with he to X----. I do not
keep he wait; we be soon dash at a rapid rate along the
road. the horse he drive be the same vicious animal about which Mrs.
Crimsworth have express her fear the night before. once or twice
Jack seem disposed to turn restive, but a vigorous and determine
application of the whip from the ruthless hand of his master soon
compel he to submission, and Edward's dilate nostril express his
triumph in the result of the contest; he scarcely speak to I during the
whole of the brief drive, only open his lip at interval to damn his
horse.
X---- be all stir and bustle when we enter it; we leave the clean
street where there be dwelling-house and shop, church, and public
building; we leave all these, and turn down to a region of mill and
warehouse; thence we pass through two massive gate into a great
paved yard, and we be in Bigben Close, and the mill be before we,
vomit soot from its long chimney, and quiver through its thick
brick wall with the commotion of its iron bowel. Workpeople be
pass to and fro; a waggon be be laden with piece. Mr. Crimsworth
look from side to side, and seem at one glance to comprehend all
that be go on; he alight, and leave his horse and gig to the
care of a man who hasten to take the rein from his hand, he bid I
follow he to the counting-house. we enter it; a very different place
from the parlour of Crimsworth Hall--a place for business, with a bare,
planked floor, a safe, two high desk and stool, and some chair. a
person be seat at one of the desk, who take off his square cap when
Mr. Crimsworth enter, and in an instant be again absorb in his
occupation of writing or calculate--I know not which.
Mr. Crimsworth, have remove his mackintosh, sit down by the fire. I
remain stand near the hearth; he say presently--
"Steighton, you may leave the room; I have some business to transact
with this gentleman. come back when you hear the bell."
the individual at the desk rise and depart, close the door as he
go out. Mr. Crimsworth stir the fire, then fold his arm, and sit
a moment thinking, his lip compress, his brow knit. I have nothing to
do but to watch he--how well his feature be cut! what a handsome man
he be! whence, then, come that air of contraction--that narrow and hard
aspect on his forehead, in all his lineament?
turn to I he begin abruptly:
"you be come down to ----shire to learn to be a tradesman?"
"yes, I be."
"have you make up your mind on the point? let I know that at once."
"yes."
"well, I be not bind to help you, but I have a place here vacant, if
you be qualified for it. I will take you on trial. what can you do? do
you know anything besides that useless trash of college learning--greek,
Latin, and so forth?"
"I have study mathematic."
"Stuff! I dare say you have."
"I can read and write french and German."
"Hum!" he reflect a moment, then open a drawer in a desk near he
take out a letter, and give it to I.
"can you read that?" he ask.
it be a german commercial letter; I translate it; I could not tell
whether he be gratify or not--his countenance remain fix.
"it be well;" he-say, after a pause, "that you be acquaint with
something useful, something that may enable you to earn your board and
lodge: since you know french and german, I will take you as second
clerk to manage the foreign correspondence of the house. I shall give
you a good salary--90l. a year--and now," he continue, raise his
voice, "hear once for all what I have to say about our relationship, and
all that sort of humbug! I must have no nonsense on that point; it
would never suit I. I shall excuse you nothing on the plea of be my
brother; if I find you stupid, negligent, dissipate, idle, or possess
of any fault detrimental to the interest of the house, I shall dismiss
you as I would any other clerk. ninety pound a year be good wage,
and I expect to have the full value of my money out of you;
remember, too, that thing be on a practical footing in my
establishment--business-like habit, feeling, and idea, suit I well.
do you understand?"
"partly," I reply. "I suppose you mean that I be to do my work for my
wage; not to expect favour from you, and not to depend on you for any
help but what I earn; that suit I exactly, and on these term I will
consent to be your clerk."
I turn on my heel, and walk to the window; this time I do not
consult his face to learn his opinion: what it be I do not know, nor
do I then care. after a silence of some minute he recommenced:--
"you perhaps expect to be accommodate with apartment at Crimsworth
Hall, and to go and come with I in the gig. I wish you, however, to be
aware that such an arrangement would be quite inconvenient to I. I
like to have the seat in my gig at liberty for any gentleman whom for
business reason I may wish to take down to the hall for a night or so.
you will seek out lodging in X----."
quit the window, I walk back to the hearth.
"of course I shall seek out lodging in X----," I answer. "it would
not suit I either to lodge at Crimsworth Hall."
my tone be quiet. I always speak quietly. yet Mr. Crimsworth's blue eye
become incense; he take his revenge rather oddly. turn to I he say
bluntly--
"you be poor enough, I suppose; how do you expect to live till your
quarter's salary become due?"
"I shall get on," say I.
"how do you expect to live?" he repeat in a loud voice.
"as I can, Mr. Crimsworth."
"get into debt at your peril! thatbe all," he answer. "for aught I
know you may have extravagant aristocratic habit: if you have, drop
they; I tolerate nothing of the sort here, and I will never give you a
shill extra, whatever liability you may incur--mind that."
"yes, Mr. Crimsworth, you will find I have a good memory."
I say no more. I do not think the time be come for much parley. I
have an instinctive feeling that it would be folly to let one's temper
effervesce often with such a man as Edward. I say to myself, "I will
place my cup under this continual dropping; it shall stand there still
and steady; when full, it will run over of itself--meantime patience.
two thing be certain. I be capable of perform the work Mr.
Crimsworth have set I; I can earn my wage conscientiously, and those
wage be sufficient to enable I to live. as to the fact of my brother
assume towards I the bearing of a proud, harsh master, the fault be
his, not mine; and shall his injustice, his bad feeling, turn I at once
aside from the path I have choose? no; at least, ere I deviate, I will
advance far enough to see whither my career tend. as yet I be only
press in at the entrance--a strait gate enough; it ought to have a
good terminus." while I thus reason, Mr. Crimsworth ring a bell; his
first clerk, the individual dismiss previously to our conference,
re-enter.
"Mr. Steighton," say he, "show Mr. William the letter from Voss,
brother, and give he english copy of the answer; he will translate
they."
Mr. Steighton, a man of about thirty-five, with a face at once sly and
heavy, hasten to execute this order; he lay the letter on the
desk, and I be soon seat at it, and engage in render the english
answer into German. a sentiment of keen pleasure accompany this first
effort to earn my own living--a sentiment neither poison nor weaken
by the presence of the taskmaster, who stand and watch I for some
time as I write. I think he be try to read my character, but I
feel as secure against his scrutiny as if I have have on a casque with
the visor down-or rather I show he my countenance with the confidence
that one would show an unlearned man a letter write in Greek; he might
see line, and trace character, but he could make nothing of they; my
nature be not his nature, and its sign be to he like the word of
an unknown tongue. Ere long he turn away abruptly, as if baffle, and
leave the counting-house; he return to it but twice in the course of
that day; each time he mix and swallow a glass of brandy-and-water,
the material for make which he extract from a cupboard on one side
of the fireplace; have glance at my translation--he could read both
french and german--he go out again in silence.
CHAPTER III.
I serve Edward as his second clerk faithfully, punctually, diligently.
what be give I to do I have the power and the determination to do
well. Mr. Crimsworth watch sharply for defect, but find none; he set
Timothy Steighton, his favourite and head man, to watch also. Tim be
baffle; I be as exact as himself, and quick. Mr. Crimsworth make
inquiry as to how I live, whether I get into debt--no, my account
with my landlady be always straight. I have hire small lodging, which
I contrive to pay for out of a slender fund--the accumulate saving of
my Eton pocket-money; for as it have ever be abhorrent to my nature to
ask pecuniary assistance, I have early acquire habit of self-deny
economy; husband my monthly allowance with anxious care, in order to
obviate the danger of be force, in some moment of future exigency,
to beg additional aid. I remember many call I miser at the time,
and I use to couple the reproach with this consolation--well to be
misunderstood now than repulse hereafter. at this day I have my reward;
I have have it before, when on part with my irritated uncle one of
they throw down on the table before I a 5l. note, which I be able to
leave there, say that my travel expense be already provide
for. Mr. Crimsworth employ Tim to find out whether my landlady have
any complaint to make on the score of my moral; she answer that she
believe I be a very religious man, and ask Tim, in her turn, if he
think I have any intention of go into the church some day; for, she
say, she have have young curate to lodge in her house who be nothing
equal to I for steadiness and quietness. Tim be "a religious man"
himself; indeed, he be "a joined Methodist," which do not (be it
understand) prevent he from be at the same time an engraine rascal,
and he come away much pose at hear this account of my piety. have
impart it to Mr. Crimsworth, that gentleman, who himself frequent
no place of worship, and own no God but Mammon, turn the information
into a weapon of attack against the equability of my temper. he
commence a series of covert sneer, of which I do not at first
perceive the drift, till my landlady happen to relate the conversation
she have have with Mr. Steighton; this enlighten I; afterwards I come
to the counting-house prepare, and manage to receive the millowner's
blasphemous sarcasm, when next level at I, on a buckler of
impenetrable indifference. Ere long he tired of waste his ammunition
on a statue, but he do not throw away the shaft--he only keep they
quiet in his quiver.
once during my clerkship I have an invitation to Crimsworth Hall; it
be on the occasion of a large party give in honour of the master's
birthday; he have always be accustom to invite his clerk on similar
anniversary, and could not well pass I over; I be, however, keep
strictly in the background. Mrs. Crimsworth, elegantly dress in satin
and lace, bloom in youth and health, vouchsafe I no more notice
than be express by a distant move; Crimsworth, of course, never
speak to I; I be introduce to none of the band of young lady, who,
envelop in silvery cloud of white gauze and muslin, sit in array
against I on the opposite side of a long and large room; in fact, I be
fairly isolated, and could but contemplate the shin one from affar,
and when weary of such a dazzling scene, turn for a change to the
consideration of the carpet pattern. Mr. Crimsworth, stand on the
rug, his elbow support by the marble mantelpiece, and about he
a group of very pretty girl, with whom he converse gaily--Mr.
Crimsworth, thus place, glance at I; I look weary, solitary, keep
down like some desolate tutor or governess; he be satisfied.
dancing begin; I should have like well enough to be introduce to some
pleasing and intelligent girl, and to have freedom and opportunity
to show that I could both feel and communicate the pleasure of social
intercourse--that I be not, in short, a block, or a piece of furniture,
but an acting, thinking, sentient man. many smile face and graceful
figure glide past I, but the smile be lavish on other eye, the
figure sustain by other hand than mine. I turn away tantalized,
leave the dancer, and wander into the oak-panel dining-room. no
fibre of sympathy unite I to any live thing in this house; I look
for and find my mother's picture. I take a wax taper from a stand,
and hold it up. I gaze long, earnestly; my heart grow to the image.
my mother, I perceive, have bequeath to I much of her feature and
countenance--her forehead, her eye, her complexion. no regular beauty
please egotistical human being so much as a softened and refine
likeness of themselves; for this reason, father regard with complacency
the lineament of their daughter' face, where frequently their own
similitude be find flatteringly associate with softness of hue and
delicacy of outline. I be just wonder how that picture, to I so
interesting, would strike an impartial spectator, when a voice close
behind I pronounce the words--
"Humph! therebe some sense in that face."
I turn; at my elbow stand a tall man, young, though probably five or
six year old than I--in other respect of an appearance the opposite
to common place; though just now, as I be not disposed to paint his
portrait in detail, the reader must be content with the silhouette I
have just throw off; it be all I myself see of he for the moment: I
do not investigate the colour of his eyebrow, nor of his eye either;
I see his stature, and the outline of his shape; I see, too, his
fastidious-look RETROUSSE nose; these observation, few in number,
and general in character (the last excepted), suffice, for they enable
I to recognize he.
"good evening, Mr. Hunsden," mutter I with a bow, and then, like a
shy noodle as I be, I begin move away--and why? simply because Mr.
Hunsden be a manufacturer and a millowner, and I be only a clerk, and
my instinct propel I from my superior. I have frequently see Hunsden
in Bigben Close, where he come almost weekly to transact business with
Mr. Crimsworth, but I have never speak to he, nor he to I, and I owe
he a sort of involuntary grudge, because he have more than once be the
tacit witness of insult offer by Edward to I. I have the conviction
that he could only regard I as a poor-spirited slave, wherefore I now
go about to shun his presence and eschew his conversation.
"where be you go?" ask he, as I edge off sideways. I have already
notice that Mr. Hunsden indulge in abrupt form of speech, and I
perversely say to myself--
"he think he may speak as he like to a poor clerk; but my mood be not,
perhaps, so supple as he deem it, and his rough freedom please I not
at all."
I make some slight reply, rather indifferent than courteous, and
continue to move away. he coolly plant himself in my path.
"stay here awhile," say he: "it be so hot in the dancing-room; besides,
you donot dance; you have not have a partner to-night."
he be right, and as he speak neither his look, tone, nor manner
displease I; my AMOUR-PROPRE be propitiate; he have not address
I out of condescension, but because, have repair to the cool
dining-room for refreshment, he now want some one to talk to, by way
of temporary amusement. I hate to be condescend to, but I like well
enough to oblige; I stay.
"that be a good picture," he continue, recur to the portrait.
"do you consider the face pretty?" I ask.
"Pretty! no--how can it be pretty, with sunk eye and hollow cheek?
but it be peculiar; it seem to think. you could have a talk with that
woman, if she be alive, on other subject than dress, visit, and
compliment."
I agree with he, but do not say so. he go on.
"not that I admire a head of that sort; it want character and force;
therebe too much of the sen-si-tive (so he articulate it, curl
his lip at the same time) in that mouth; besides, there be Aristocrat
write on the brow and define in the figure; I hate your aristocrat."
"you think, then, Mr. Hunsden, that patrician descent may be read in a
distinctive cast of form and feature?"
"patrician descent be hang! who doubt that your lordling may have
their 'distinctive cast of form and feature' as much as we----shire
tradesman have our? but which be the good? not theirs assuredly. as
to their woman, it be a little different: they cultivate beauty from
childhood upwards, and may by care and training attain to a certain
degree of excellence in that point, just like the oriental odalisque.
yet even this superiority be doubtful. compare the figure in that frame
with Mrs. Edward Crimsworth--which be the fine animal?"
I reply quietly: "compare yourself and Mr. Edward Crimsworth, Mr
Hunsden."
"oh, Crimsworth be well fill up than I be, I know besides he have a
straight nose, arch eyebrow, and all that; but these advantage--if
they be advantage--he do not inherit from his mother, the patrician,
but from his father, old Crimsworth, who, MY father say, be as
veritable a ----shire blue-dyer as ever put indigo in a vat yet withal
the handsome man in the three Ridings. it be you, William, who be
the aristocrat of your family, and you be not as fine a fellow as your
plebeian brother by long chalk."
there be something in Mr. Hunsden's point-blank mode of speech which
rather please I than otherwise because it set I at my ease. I
continue the conversation with a degree of interest.
"how do you happen to know that I be Mr. Crimsworth's brother? I think
you and everybody else look upon I only in the light of a poor
clerk."
"well, and so we do; and what be you but a poor clerk? you do
Crimsworth's work, and he give you wage--shabby wage they be, too."
I be silent. Hunsden's language now border on the impertinent, still
his manner do not offend I in the least--it only pique my curiosity;
I want he to go on, which he do in a little while.
"this world be an absurd one," say he.
"why so, Mr. Hunsden?"
"I wonder you should ask: you be yourself a strong proof of the
absurdity I allude to."
I be determined he should explain himself of his own accord, without my
press he so to do--so I resume my silence.
"be it your intention to become a tradesman?" he inquire presently.
"it be my serious intention three month ago."
"Humph! the more fool you--you look like a tradesman! what a practical
business-like face you have!"
"my face be as the Lord make it, Mr. Hunsden."
"the Lord never make either your face or head for X---- what good can
your bump of ideality, comparison, self-esteem, conscientiousness,
do you here? but if you like Bigben Close, stay there; itbe your own
affair, not mine."
"perhaps I have no choice."
"well, I care nought about it--it will make little difference to I what
you do or where you go; but Ibe cool now--I want to dance again; and
I see such a fine girl sit in the corner of the sofa there by
her mamma; see if I donot get she for a partner in a jiffy! therebe
Waddy--Sam Waddy make up to she; willnot I cut he out?"
and Mr. Hunsden stride away. I watch he through the open
folding-door; he outstrip Waddy, apply for the hand of the
fine girl, and lead she off triumphant. she be a tall, well-make,
full-form, dashingly-dress young woman, much in the style of Mrs. E.
Crimsworth; Hunsden whirl she through the waltz with spirit; he keep
at her side during the remainder of the evening, and I read in she
animate and gratified countenance that he succeed in make himself
perfectly agreeable. the mamma too (a stout person in a turban--Mrs.
Lupton by name) look well pleased; prophetic vision probably
flatter her inward eye. the Hunsdens be of an old stem; and scornful
as Yorke (such be my late interlocutor's name) profess to be of
the advantage of birth, in his secret heart he well know and fully
appreciate the distinction his ancient, if not high lineage confer
on he in a mushroom-place like X----, concern whose inhabitant
it be proverbially say, that not one in a thousand know his own
grandfather. moreover the Hunsdens, once rich, be still independent;
and report affirm that Yorke bade fair, by his success in business,
to restore to pristine prosperity the partially decay fortune of his
house. these circumstance consider, Mrs. Lupton's broad face might
well wear a smile of complacency as she contemplate the heir of Hunsden
Wood occupy in pay assiduous court to she darling Sarah Martha. I,
however, whose observation be less anxious, be likely to be more
accurate, soon see that the ground for maternal self-congratulation
be slight indeed; the gentleman appear to I much more desirous of
making, than susceptible of receive an impression. I know not what it
be in Mr. Hunsden that, as I watch he (I have nothing well to do),
suggest to I, every now and then, the idea of a foreigner. in form
and feature he might be pronounce English, though even there one
catch a dash of something Gallic; but he have no english shyness: he have
learn somewhere, somehow, the art of set himself quite at his ease,
and of allow no insular timidity to intervene as a barrier between
he and his convenience or pleasure. refinement he do not affect, yet
vulgar he could not be call; he be not odd--no quiz--yet he resemble
no one else I have ever see before; his general bearing intimate
complete, sovereign satisfaction with himself; yet, at time, an
indescribable shade pass like an eclipse over his countenance, and
seem to I like the sign of a sudden and strong inward doubt of
himself, his word and action-an energetic discontent at his life or
his social position, his future prospect or his mental attainment--I
know not which; perhaps after all it might only be a bilious caprice.
CHAPTER IV.
no man like to acknowledge that he have make a mistake in the choice of
his profession, and every man, worthy of the name, will row long against
wind and tide before he allow himself to cry out, "I be baffle!" and
submit to be float passively back to land. from the first week of my
residence in X---- I feel my occupation irksome. the thing itself--the
work of copy and translate business-letter--be a dry and tedious
task enough, but have that be all, I should long have bear with the
nuisance; I be not of an impatient nature, and influence by the double
desire of get my living and justify to myself and other the
resolution I have take to become a tradesman, I should have endure
in silence the rust and cramp of my good faculty; I should not have
whisper, even inwardly, that I long for liberty; I should have pen
in every sigh by which my heart might have venture to intimate its
distress under the closeness, smoke, monotony and joyless tumult of
Bigben Close, and its pant desire for free and fresher scene; I
should have set up the image of Duty, the fetish of Perseverance, in my
small bedroom at Mrs. King's lodging, and they two should have be
my household god, from which my darling, my cherished-in-secret,
Imagination, the tender and the mighty, should never, either by softness
or strength, have sever I. but this be not all; the antipathy which
have spring up between myself and my employer strike deep root and
spread dense shade daily, exclude I from every glimpse of the
sunshine of life; and I begin to feel like a plant grow in humid
darkness out of the slimy wall of a well.
Antipathy be the only word which can express the feeling Edward
Crimsworth have for I--a feeling, in a great measure, involuntary, and
which be liable to be excite by every, the most trifling movement,
look, or word of mine. my southern accent annoy he; the degree
of education evince in my language irritate he; my punctuality,
industry, and accuracy, fix his dislike, and give it the high flavour
and poignant relish of envy; he fear that I too should one day make a
successful tradesman. have I be in anything inferior to he, he would
not have hat I so thoroughly, but I know all that he know, and, what
be bad, he suspect that I keep the padlock of silence on mental
wealth in which he be no sharer. if he could have once place I in a
ridiculous or mortifying position, he would have forgive I much, but I
be guard by three faculty--Caution, Tact, Observation; and
prowling and prying as be Edward's malignity, it could never baffle
the lynx-eye of these, my natural sentinel. day by day do his malice
watch my tact, hop it would sleep, and prepare to steal snake-like
on its slumber; but tact, if it be genuine, never sleep.
I have receive my first quarter's wage, and be return to my
lodging, possessed heart and soul with the pleasant feeling that
the master who have pay I grudge every penny of that hard-earn
pittance--(I have long cease to regard Mr. Crimsworth as my brother--he
be a hard, grind master; he wish to be an inexorable tyrant: that
be all). thought, not varied but strong, occupy my mind; two voice
speak within I; again and again they utter the same monotonous
phrase. one say: "William, your life be intolerable." the other: "what
can you do to alter it?" I walk fast, for it be a cold, frosty night
in January; as I approach my lodging, I turn from a general view of
my affair to the particular speculation as to whether my fire would be
out; look towards the window of my sitting-room, I see no cheering
red gleam.
"that slut of a servant have neglect it as usual," say I, "and I shall
see nothing but pale ash if I go in; it be a fine starlight night--I
will walk a little far."
it be a fine night, and the street be dry and even clean for X----;
there be a crescent curve of moonlight to be see by the parish church
tower, and hundred of star shine keenly bright in all quarter of the
sky.
unconsciously I steer my course towards the country; I have get into
Grove-street, and begin to feel the pleasure of see dim tree at the
extremity, round a suburban house, when a person lean over the iron
gate of one of the small garden which front the neat dwelling-house in
this street, address I as I be hurry with quick stride past.
"what the deuce be the hurry? just so must Lot have leave Sodom, when he
expect fire to pour down upon it, out of burn brass cloud."
I stop short, and look towards the speaker. I smell the fragrance,
and see the red spark of a cigar; the dusk outline of a man, too, bent
towards I over the wicket.
"you see I be meditate in the field at eventide," continue this
shade. "God know itbe cool work! especially as instead of Rebecca on
a camel's hump, with bracelet on her arm and a ring in her nose, Fate
send I only a counting-house clerk, in a grey tweed wrapper." the
voice be familiar to I--its second utterance enable I to seize the
speaker's identity.
"Mr. Hunsden! good evening."
"good evening, indeed! yes, but you would have pass I without
recognition if I have not be so civil as to speak first."
"I do not know you."
"a famous excuse! you ought to have know I; I know you, though you
be go ahead like a steam-engine. be the police after you?"
"it wouldnot be worth their while; Ibe not of consequence enough to
attract they.
"alas, poor shepherd! alack and well-a-day! what a theme for regret, and
how down in the mouth you must be, judge from the sound of your voice!
but since yoube not run from the police, from whom be you run?
the devil?"
"on the contrary, I be go post to he."
"that be well--you're just in luck: this be Tuesday evening; there be
score of market gig and cart return to Dinneford to-night; and he,
or some of his, have a seat in all regularly; so, if youwill step in
and sit half-an-hour in my bachelor's parlour, you may catch he as he
pass without much trouble. I think though youwould well let he alone
to-night, hewill have so many customer to serve; Tuesday be his busy day
in X---- and Dinneford; come in at all event."
he swing the wicket open as he speak.
"do you really wish I to go in?" I ask.
"as you please--I'm alone; your company for an hour or two would be
agreeable to I; but, if you donot choose to favour I so far, Iwill not
press the point. I hate to bore any one."
it suit I to accept the invitation as it suit Hunsden to give it.
I pass through the gate, and follow he to the front door, which he
open; thence we traverse a passage, and enter his parlour; the door
be shut, he point I to an arm-chair by the hearth; I sit down, and
glance round I.
it be a comfortable room, at once snug and handsome; the bright grate
be fill with a genuine ----shire fire, red, clear, and generous, no
penurious South-of-England ember heap in the corner of a grate. on
the table a shade lamp diffuse around a soft, pleasant, and equal
light; the furniture be almost luxurious for a young bachelor,
comprise a couch and two very easy chair; bookshelf fill the
recess on each side of the mantelpiece; they be well-furnish, and
arrange with perfect order. the neatness of the room suit my taste;
I hate irregular and slovenly habit. from what I see I conclude that
Hunsden's idea on that point correspond with my own. while he remove
from the centre-table to the side-board a few pamphlet and periodical,
I run my eye along the shelf of the book-case nearest I. french and
german work predominate, the old french dramatist, sundry modern
author, Thiers, Villemain, Paul de Kock, George Sand, Eugene Sue; in
German--Goethe, Schiller, Zschokke, Jean Paul Richter; in English there
be work on Political Economy. I examine no far, for Mr. Hunsden
himself recall my attention.
"you shall have something," say he, "for you ought to feel disposed for
refreshment after walk nobody know how far on such a canadian night
as this; but it shall not be brandy-and-water, and it shall not be
a bottle of port, nor ditto of sherry. I keep no such poison. I have
Rhein-wein for my own drinking, and you may choose between that and
coffee."
here again Hunsden suit I: if there be one generally receive
practice I abhor more than another, it be the habitual imbibing of
spirit and strong wine. I have, however, no fancy for his acid German
nectar, but I like coffee, so I responded--
"give I some coffee, Mr. Hunsden."
I perceive my answer please he; he have doubtless expect to see a
chilling effect produce by his steady announcement that he would give
I neither wine nor spirit; he just shoot one search glance at my
face to ascertain whether my cordiality be genuine or a mere feint
of politeness. I smile, because I quite understand he; and, while I
honour his conscientious firmness, I be amuse at his mistrust; he
seem satisfied, rang the bell, and order coffee, which be presently
bring; for himself, a bunch of grape and half a pint of something
sour suffice. my coffee be excellent; I tell he so, and express the
shudder pity with which his anchorite fare inspire I. he do not
answer, and I scarcely think hear my remark. at that moment one of
those momentary eclipse I before allude to have come over his face,
extinguish his smile, and replace, by an abstract and alienated
look, the customarily shrewd, banter glance of his eye. I employ
the interval of silence in a rapid scrutiny of his physiognomy. I have
never observe he closely before; and, as my sight be very short, I have
gather only a vague, general idea of his appearance; I be surprised
now, on examination, to perceive how small, and even feminine, be his
lineament; his tall figure, long and dark lock, his voice and general
bearing, have impress I with the notion of something powerful and
massive; not at all:--my own feature be cast in a harsh and square
mould than his. I discern that there would be contrast between his
inward and outward man; contention, too; for I suspect his soul
have more of will and ambition than his body have of fibre and muscle.
perhaps, in these incompatibility of the "physique" with the "morale,"
lie the secret of that fitful gloom; he would but could not, and the
athletic mind scowl scorn on its more fragile companion. as to his
good look, I should have like to have a woman's opinion on that
subject; it seem to I that his face might produce the same effect
on a lady that a very piquant and interesting, though scarcely pretty,
female face would on a man. I have mention his dark lock--they be
brush sideways above a white and sufficiently expansive forehead; his
cheek have a rather hectic freshness; his feature might have do well
on canvas, but indifferently in marble: they be plastic; character
have set a stamp upon each; expression re-cast they at her pleasure, and
strange metamorphosis she work, give he now the mien of a morose
bull, and anon that of an arch and mischievous girl; more frequently,
the two semblance be blent, and a queer, composite countenance they
make.
start from his silent fit, he began:--
"William! what a fool you be to live in those dismal lodging of Mrs.
King's, when you might take room here in Grove Street, and have a
garden like I!"
"I should be too far from the mill."
"what of that? it would do you good to walk there and back two or three
time a day; besides, be you such a fossil that you never wish to see a
flower or a green leaf?"
"I be no fossil."
"what be you then? you sit at that desk in Crimsworth's counting-house
day by day and week by week, scrap with a pen on paper, just like an
automaton; you never get up; you never say you be tired; you never ask
for a holiday; you never take change or relaxation; you give way to
no excess of an evening; you neither keep wild company, nor indulge in
strong drink."
"do you, Mr. Hunsden?"
"donot think to pose I with short question; your case and mine
be diametrically different, and it be nonsense attempt to draw a
parallel. I say, that when a man endure patiently what ought to be
unendurable, he be a fossil."
"whence do you acquire the knowledge of my patience?"
"why, man, do you suppose you be a mystery? the other night you seem
surprised at my knowing to what family you belong; now you find
subject for wonderment in my call you patient. what do you think I do
with my eye and ear? Ihave be in your counting-house more than once
when Crimsworth have treat you like a dog; call for a book, for
instance, and when you give he the wrong one, or what he choose to
consider the wrong one, fling it back almost in your face; desire you
to shut or open the door as if you have be his flunkey; to say nothing
of your position at the party about a month ago, where you have neither
place nor partner, but hover about like a poor, shabby hanger-on; and
how patient you be under each and all of these circumstance!"
"well, Mr. Hunsden, what then?"
"I can hardly tell you what then; the conclusion to be draw as to
your character depend upon the nature of the motif which guide
your conduct; if you be patient because you expect to make something
eventually out of Crimsworth, notwithstanding his tyranny, or perhaps by
mean of it, you be what the world call an interested and mercenary,
but may be a very wise fellow; if you be patient because you think it a
duty to meet insult with submission, you be an essential sap, and in
no shape the man for my money; if you be patient because your nature be
phlegmatic, flat, inexcitable, and that you cannot get up to the pitch
of resistance, why, God make you to be crush; and lie down by all
mean, and lie flat, and let Juggernaut ride well over you."
Mr. Hunsden's eloquence be not, it will be perceive, of the smooth and
oily order. as he speak, he please I ill. I seem to recognize in he
one of those character who, sensitive enough themselves, be selfishly
relentless towards the sensitiveness of other. moreover, though he
be neither like Crimsworth nor Lord Tynedale, yet he be acrid, and, I
suspect, overbear in his way: there be a tone of despotism in
the urgency of the very reproach by which, he aim at goad the
oppress into rebellion against the oppressor. look at he still
more fixedly than I have yet do, I see write in his eye and mien a
resolution to arrogate to himself a freedom so unlimited that it might
often trench on the just liberty of his neighbour. I rapidly run over
these thought, and then I laugh a low and involuntary laugh, move
thereto by a slight inward revelation of the inconsistency of man.
it be as I think: Hunsden have expect I to take with calm his
incorrect and offensive surmise, his bitter and haughty taunt; and
himself be chafe by a laugh, scarce louder than a whisper.
his brow darken, his thin nostril dilate a little.
"yes," he begin, "I tell you that you be an aristocrat, and who but
an aristocrat would laugh such a laugh as that, and look such a look?
a laugh frigidly jeer; a look lazily mutinous; gentlemanlike irony,
patrician resentment. what a nobleman you would have make, William
Crimsworth! you be cut out for one; pity Fortune have baulk Nature!
look at the feature, figure, even to the hand--distinction all
over--ugly distinction! now, if youhave only an estate and a mansion,
and a park, and a title, how you could play the exclusive, maintain the
right of your class, train your tenantry in habit of respect to the
peerage, oppose at every step the advance power of the people, support
your rotten order, and be ready for its sake to wade knee-deep in
churl' blood; as it be, youhave no power; you can do nothing; yoube
wreck and strand on the shore of commerce; force into collision
with practical man, with whom you cannot cope, for you'll never be a
TRADESMAN."
the first part of Hunsden's speech move I not at all, or, if it do,
it be only to wonder at the perversion into which prejudice have twist
his judgment of my character; the conclude sentence, however, not only
move, but shake I; the blow it give be a severe one, because truth
wield the weapon. if I smile now, it, be only in disdain of myself.
Hunsden see his advantage; he follow it up.
"youwill make nothing by trade," continue he; "nothing more than the
crust of dry bread and the draught of fair water on which you now live;
your only chance of get a competency lie in marry a rich widow,
or run away with an heiress."
"I leave such shift to be put in practice by those who devise they,"
say I, rise.
"and even that be hopeless," he go on coolly. "what widow would have
you? much less, what heiress? yoube not bold and venturesome enough for
the one, nor handsome and fascinating enough for the other. you think
perhaps you look intelligent and polished; carry your intellect and
refinement to market, and tell I in a private note what price be bid
for they."
Mr. Hunsden have take his tone for the night; the string he strike be
out of tune, he would finger no other. averse to discord, of which I have
enough every day and all day long, I conclude, at last, that silence
and solitude be preferable to jarring converse; I bid he good-night.
"what! be you go, lad? well, good-night: youwill find the door." and
he sit still in front of the fire, while I leave the room and the house.
I have get a good way on my return to my lodging before I find out that
I be walk very fast, and breathe very hard, and that my nail be
almost stick into the palm of my clench hand, and that my tooth be
set fast; on make this discovery, I relax both my pace, fist, and
jaw, but I could not so soon cause the regret rush rapidly through
my mind to slacken their tide. why do I make myself a tradesman? why
do I enter Hunsden's house this evening? why, at dawn to-morrow, must
I repair to Crimsworth's mill? all that night do I ask myself these
question, and all that night fiercely demand of my soul an answer. I
get no sleep; my head burn, my foot froze; at last the factory bell
ring, and I spring from my bed with other slave.
CHAPTER V.
there be a climax to everything, to every state of feeling as well as to
every position in life. I turn this truism over in my mind as, in the
frosty dawn of a January morning, I hurry down the steep and now
icy street which descend from Mrs. King's to the Close. the factory
workpeople have precede I by nearly an hour, and the mill be all
light up and in full operation when I reach it. I repair to my
post in the counting-house as usual; the fire there, but just light, as
yet only smoke; Steighton have not yet arrive. I shut the door and sit
down at the desk; my hand, recently wash in half-frozen water, be
still numb; I could not write till they have regain vitality, so I
go on thinking, and still the theme of my thought be the "climax."
self-dissatisfaction trouble exceedingly the current of my meditation.
"Come, William Crimsworth," say my conscience, or whatever it be that
within ourselves take ourselves to task--"come, get a clear notion of
what you would have, or what you would not have. you talk of a climax;
pray have your endurance reach its climax? it be not four month old.
what a fine resolute fellow you imagine yourself to be when you tell
Tynedale you would tread in your father's step, and a pretty treading
you be likely to make of it! how well you like X----! just at this
moment how redolent of pleasant association be its street, its shop,
its warehouse, its factory! how the prospect of this day cheer
you! letter-copying till noon, solitary dinner at your lodging,
letter-copying till evening, solitude; for you neither find pleasure
in Brown's, nor Smith's, nor Nicholl's, nor Eccle's company; and as
to Hunsden, you fancy there be pleasure to be derive from his
society--he! he! how do you like the taste you have of he last night?
be it sweet? yet he be a talented, an original-minded man, and even
he do not like you; your self-respect defy you to like he; he have
always see you to disadvantage; he always will see you to disadvantage;
your position be unequal, and be they on the same level your
mind could not; assimilate; never hope, then, to gather the honey of
friendship out of that thorn-guard plant. hello, Crimsworth! where be
your thought tend? you leave the recollection of Hunsden as a bee
would a rock, as a bird a desert; and your aspiration spread eager
wing towards a land of vision where, now in advance daylight--in
X---- daylight--you dare to dream of congeniality, repose, union. those
three you will never meet in this world; they be angel. the soul of
just man make perfect may encounter they in heaven, but your soul will
never be make perfect. eight o'clock strike! your hand be thaw, get
to work!"
"work? why should I work?" say I sullenly: "I cannot please though I
toil like a slave." "work, work!" reiterate the inward voice. "I may
work, it will do no good," I growl; but nevertheless I draw out a
packet of letter and commence my task--task thankless and bitter as
that of the Israelite crawl over the sun-bake field of Egypt in
search of straw and stubble wherewith to accomplish his tale of brick.
about ten o'clock I hear Mr. Crimsworth's gig turn into the yard, and
in a minute or two he enter the counting-house. it be his custom to
glance his eye at Steighton and myself, to hang up his mackintosh, stand
a minute with his back to the fire, and then walk out. today he do
not deviate from his usual habit; the only difference be that when
he look at I, his brow, instead of be merely hard, be surly; his
eye, instead of be cold, be fierce. he study I a minute or two
long than usual, but go out in silence.
twelve o'clock arrive; the bell ring for a suspension of labour; the
workpeople go off to their dinner; Steighton, too, depart, desire
I to lock the counting-house door, and take the key with I. I
be tie up a bundle of paper, and put they in their place,
preparatory to close my desk, when Crimsworth reappear at the door,
and enter close it behind he.
"youwill stay here a minute," say he, in a deep, brutal voice, while his
nostril distend and his eye shoot a spark of sinister fire.
alone with Edward I remember our relationship, and remember that
forget the difference of position; I put away deference and careful
form of speech; I answer with simple brevity.
"it be time to go home," I say, turn the key in my desk.
"youwill stay here!" he reiterate. "and take your hand off that key!
leave it in the lock!"
"why?" ask I. "what cause be there for change my usual plan?"
"do as I order," be the answer, "and no question! you be my servant,
obey I! what have you be about--?" he be go on in the same
breath, when an abrupt pause announce that rage have for the moment get
the well of articulation.
"you may look, if you wish to know," I reply. "there be the open desk,
there be the paper."
"confound your insolence! what have you be about?"
"your work, and have do it well."
"hypocrite and twaddl! smooth-faced, snivel greasehorn!" (this
last term be, I believe, purely ----shire, and allude to the horn of
black, rancid whale-oil, usually to be see suspend to cart-wheel,
and employ for grease the same.)
"come, Edward Crimsworth, enough of this. it be time you and I wound up
account. I have now give your service three month' trial, and I find
it the most nauseous slavery under the sun. seek another clerk. I stay
no long."
"what I do you dare to give I notice? stop at least for your wage." he
take down the heavy gig whip hang beside his mackintosh.
I permit myself to laugh with a degree of scorn I take no pain to
temper or hide. his fury boil up, and when he have swear half-a-dozen
vulgar, impious oath, without, however, venture to lift the whip, he
continue:
"Ihave find you out and know you thoroughly, you mean, whine
lickspittle! what have you be say all over X---- about I? answer
I that!"
"you? I have neither inclination nor temptation to talk about you."
"you lie! it be your practice to talk about I; it be your constant
habit to make public complaint of the treatment you receive at my hand.
you have go and tell it far and near that I give you low wage and
knock you about like a dog. I wish you be a dog! Iwould set-to this
minute, and never stir from the spot till Iwould cut every strip of flesh
from your bone with this whip."
he flourish his tool. the end of the lash just touch my forehead.
a warm excited thrill run through my vein, my blood seem to give
abound, and then race fast and hot along its channel. I get up nimbly,
come round to where he stand, and face he.
"down with your whip!" say I, "and explain this instant what you mean."
"Sirrah! to whom be you speak?"
"to you. there be no one else present, I think. you say I have be
calumniate you--complain of your low wage and bad treatment. give
your ground for these assertion."
Crimsworth have no dignity, and when I sternly demand an explanation,
he give one in a loud, scold voice.
"Grounds! you shall have they; and turn to the light that I may see your
brazen face blush black, when you hear yourself prove to be a liar and
a hypocrite. at a public meeting in the Town-hall yesterday, I have the
pleasure of hear myself insult by the speaker oppose to I in the
question under discussion, by allusion to my private affair; by cannot
about monster without natural affection, family despot, and such
trash; and when I rise to answer, I be meet by a shout from the filthy
mob, where the mention of your name enable I at once to detect the
quarter in which this base attack have originate. when I look round, I
see that treacherous villain, Hunsden act as fugleman. I detect you
in close conversation with Hunsden at my house a month ago, and I know
that you be at Hunsden's room last night. deny it if you dare."
"oh, I shall not deny it! and if Hunsden hound on the people to hiss
you, he do quite right. you deserve popular execration; for a bad
man, a hard master, a more brutal brother than you be have seldom
exist."
"Sirrah! sirrah!" reiterate Crimsworth; and to complete his apostrophe,
he crack the whip straight over my head.
a minute suffice to wrest it from he, break it in two piece, and
throw it under the grate. he make a headlong rush at I, which I evade,
and said--
"touch I, and Iwill have you up before the near magistrate."
man like Crimsworth, if firmly and calmly resist, always abate
something of their exorbitant insolence; he have no mind to be bring
before a magistrate, and I suppose he see I mean what I say. after
an odd and long stare at I, at once bull-like and amazed, he seem
to bethink himself that, after all, his money give he sufficient
superiority over a beggar like I, and that he have in his hand a surer
and more dignified mode of revenge than the somewhat hazardous one of
personal chastisement.
"take your hat," say he. "take what belong to you, and go out at
that door; get away to your parish, you pauper: beg, steal, starve, get
transport, do what you like; but at your peril venture again into
my sight! if ever I hear of your set foot on an inch of ground
belong to I, Iwill hire a man to cane you."
"it be not likely youwill have the chance; once off your premise, what
temptation can I have to return to they? I leave a prison, I leave a
tyrant; I leave what be bad than the bad that can lie before I, so
no fear of my come back."
"go, or Iwill make you!" exclaim Crimsworth.
I walk deliberately to my desk, take out such of its content as be
my own property, put they in my pocket, lock the desk, and place the
key on the top.
"what be you abstract from that desk?" demand the millowner.
"leave all behind in its place, or Iwill send for a policeman to search
you."
"look sharp about it, then," say I, and I take down my hat, draw on my
glove, and walk leisurely out of the counting-house--walk out of it
to enter it no more.
I recollect that when the mill-bell ring the dinner hour, before Mr.
Crimsworth enter, and the scene above related take place, I have have
rather a sharp appetite, and have be wait somewhat impatiently to
hear the signal of feed time. I forget it now, however; the image
of potato and roast mutton be efface from my mind by the stir and
tumult which the transaction of the last half-hour have there excite. I
only think of walk, that the action of my muscle might harmonize
with the action of my nerve; and walk I do, fast and far. how could
I do otherwise? a load be lift off my heart; I feel light and
liberate. I have get away from Bigben Close without a breach of
resolution; without injury to my self-respect. I have not force
circumstance; circumstance have free I. life be again open to I;
no long be its horizon limit by the high black wall surround
Crimsworth's mill. two hour have elapse before my sensation have so far
subside as to leave I calm enough to remark for what wide and clear
boundary I have exchange that sooty girdle. when I do look up, lo!
straight before I lie Grovetown, a village of villa about five mile
out of X----. the short winter day, as I perceive from the far-decline
sun, be already approach its close; a chill frost-mist be rise
from the river on which X---- stand, and along whose bank the road I
have take lay; it dim the earth, but do not obscure the clear icy
blue of the January sky. there be a great stillness near and far; the
time of the day favour tranquillity, as the people be all employ
within-door, the hour of evening release from the factory not be
yet arrive; a sound of full-flow water alone pervade the air, for
the river be deep and abundant, swell by the melting of a late snow.
I stand awhile, lean over a wall; and look down at the current:
I watch the rapid rush of its wave. I desire memory to take a clear
and permanent impression of the scene, and treasure it for future year.
grovetown church clock strike four; look up, I behold the last of
that day's sun, glint red through the leafless bough of some
very old oak tree surround the church--its light colour and
characterize the picture as I wish. I pause yet a moment, till the
sweet, slow sound of the bell have quite die out of the air; then ear,
eye and feel satisfied, I quit the wall and once more turn my
face towards X----.
CHAPTER VI.
I RE-enter the town a hungry man; the dinner I have forget recurred
seductively to my recollection; and it be with a quick step and sharp
appetite I ascend the narrow street lead to my lodging. it be
dark when I open the front door and walk into the house. I wonder
how my fire would be; the night be cold, and I shudder at the
prospect of a grate full of sparkless cinder. to my joyful surprise,
I find, on enter my sitting-room, a good fire and a clean hearth.
I have hardly notice this phenomenon, when I become aware of another
subject for wonderment; the chair I usually occupy near the hearth be
already fill; a person sit there with his arm fold on his chest,
and his leg stretch out on the rug. short-sighted as I be, doubtful
as be the gleam of the firelight, a moment's examination enable I to
recognize in this person my acquaintance, Mr. Hunsden. I could not of
course be much pleased to see he, consider the manner in which I have
part from he the night before, and as I walk to the hearth, stir
the fire, and say coolly, "good evening," my demeanour evince as
little cordiality as I feel; yet I wonder in my own mind what have
bring he there; and I wonder, also, what motif have induce he to
interfere so actively between I and Edward; it be to he, it appear,
that I owe my welcome dismissal; still I could not bring myself to
ask he question, to show any eagerness of curiosity; if he choose to
explain, he might, but the explanation should be a perfectly voluntary
one on his part; I think he be enter upon it.
"you owe I a debt of gratitude," be his first word.
"do I?" say I; "I hope it be not a large one, for I be much too poor to
charge myself with heavy liability of any kind."
"then declare yourself bankrupt at once, for this liability be a ton
weight at least. when I come in I find your fire out, and I have it light
again, and make that sulky drab of a servant stay and blow at it with
the bellow till it have burn up properly; now, say 'thank you!'"
"not till I have have something to eat; I can thank nobody while I be so
famish."
I ring the bell and order tea and some cold meat.
"cold meat!" exclaim Hunsden, as the servant close the door, "what a
glutton you be; man! meat with tea! youwill die of eat too much."
"no, Mr. Hunsden, I shall not." I feel a necessity for contradict
he; I be irritated with hunger, and irritated at see he there, and
irritate at the continue roughness of his manner.
"it be over-eating that make you so ill-temper," say he.
"how do you know?" I demand. "it be like you to give a pragmatical
opinion without be acquaint with any of the circumstance of the
case; I have have no dinner."
what I say be petulant and snappish enough, and Hunsden only reply
by look in my face and laugh.
"poor thing!" he whine, after a pause. "it have have no dinner, have it?
what! I suppose its master would not let it come home. do crimsworth
order you to fast by way of punishment, William!"
"no, Mr. Hunsden. fortunately at this sulky juncture, tea, be bring
in, and I fall to upon some bread and butter and cold beef directly.
have clear a plateful, I become so far humanize as to intimate to
Mr. Hunsden that he need not sit there star, but might come to the
table and do as I do, if he like."
"but I donot like in the least," say he, and therewith he summon the
servant by a fresh pull of the bell-rope, and intimate a desire to
have a glass of toast-and-water. "and some more coal," he add; "Mr.
Crimsworth shall keep a good fire while I stay."
his order be execute, he wheel his chair round to the table, so
as to be opposite I.
"well," he proceed. "you be out of work, I suppose."
"yes," say I; and not dispose to show the satisfaction I feel on this
point, I, yield to the whim of the moment, take up the subject as
though I consider myself aggrieve rather than benefit by what have
be do. "yes--thank to you, I be. Crimsworth turn I off at
a minute's notice, owe to some interference of yours at a public
meeting, I understand."
"ah! what! he mention that? he observe I signal the lad, do
he? what have he to say about his friend Hunsden--anything sweet?"
"he call you a treacherous villain."
"oh, he hardly know I yet! Ibe one of those shy people who donot come
out all at once, and he be only just begin to make my acquaintance,
but hewill find Ihave some good quality--excellent one! the Hunsdens
be always unrivalle at track a rascal; a downright, dishonourable
villain be their natural prey--they could not keep off he wherever
they meet he; you use the word pragmatical just now--that word be the
property of our family; it have be apply to we from generation to
generation; we have fine nose for abuse; we scent a scoundrel a mile
off; we be reformer bear, radical reformer; and it be impossible for
I to live in the same town with Crimsworth, to come into weekly contact
with he, to witness some of his conduct to you (for whom personally
I care nothing; I only consider the brutal injustice with which he
violate your natural claim to equality)--i say it be impossible for
I to be thus situate and not feel the angel or the demon of my race
at work within I. I follow my instinct, oppose a tyrant, and break a
chain."
now this speech interest I much, both because it bring out
Hunsden's character, and because it explain his motif; it interest
I so much that I forget to reply to it, and sit silent, ponder over
a throng of idea it have suggest.
"be you grateful to I?" he ask, presently.
in fact I be grateful, or almost so, and I believe I half like he at
the moment, notwithstanding his proviso that what he have do be not
out of regard for I. but human nature be perverse. impossible to answer
his blunt question in the affirmative, so I disclaim all tendency
to gratitude, and advise he if he expect any reward for his
championship, to look for it in a well world, as he be not likely
to meet with it here. in reply he term I "a dry-hearted aristocratic
scamp," whereupon I again charge he with have take the bread out of
my mouth.
"your bread be dirty, man!" cry Hunsden--"dirty and unwholesome!
it come through the hand of a tyrant, for I tell you Crimsworth be a
tyrant,--a tyrant to his workpeople, a tyrant to his clerk, and will
some day be a tyrant to his wife."
"nonsense! bread be bread, and a salary be a salary. Ihave lose mine, and
through your mean."
"therebe sense in what you say, after all," rejoin Hunsden. "I must
say I be rather agreeably surprised to hear you make so practical
an observation as that last. I have imagine now, from my previous
observation of your character, that the sentimental delight you would
have take in your newly regain liberty would, for a while at least,
have efface all idea of forethought and prudence. I think well of
you for look steadily to the needful."
"look steadily to the needful! how can I do otherwise? I must live,
and to live I must have what you call 'the needful,' which I can only
get by work. I repeat it, you have take my work from I."
"what do you mean to do?" pursue Hunsden coolly. "you have influential
relation; I suppose theywill soon provide you with another place."
"influential relation? who? I should like to know their name."
"the Seacombes."
"Stuff! I have cut they."
Hunsden look at I incredulously.
"I have," say I, "and that definitively."
"you must mean they have cut you, William."
"as you please. they offer I their patronage on condition of my
enter the Church; I decline both the term and the recompence; I
withdraw from my cold uncle, and prefer throw myself into my
eld brother's arm, from whose affectionate embrace I be now tear by
the cruel intermeddling of a stranger--of yourself, in short."
I could not repress a half-smile as I say this; a similar
demi-manifestation of feeling appear at the same moment on Hunsden's
lip.
"oh, I see!" say he, look into my eye, and it be evident he do
see right down into my heart. have sit a minute or two with his chin
rest on his hand, diligently occupy in the continue perusal of my
countenance, he go on:
"seriously, have you then nothing to expect from the Seacombes?"
"yes, rejection and repulsion. why do you ask I twice? how can hand
stain with the ink of a counting-house, soil with the grease of
a wool-warehouse, ever again be permit to come into contact with
aristocratic palm?"
"there would be a difficulty, no doubt; still you be such a complete
Seacombe in appearance, feature, language, almost manner, I wonder they
should disown you."
"they have disown I; so talk no more about it."
"do you regret it, William?"
"no."
"why not, lad?"
"because they be not people with whom I could ever have have any
sympathy."
"I say you be one of they."
"that merely prove that you know nothing at all about it; I be my
mother's son, but not my uncle' nephew."
"still--one of your uncle be a lord, though rather an obscure and not a
very wealthy one, and the other a right honourable: you should consider
worldly interest."
"Nonsense, Mr. Hunsden. you know or may know that even have I desire to
be submissive to my uncle, I could not have stoop with a good enough
grace ever to have win their favour. I should have sacrifice my own
comfort and not have gain their patronage in return."
"very likely--so you calculate your wise plan be to follow your own
device at once?"
"exactly. I must follow my own device--I must, till the day of my
death; because I can neither comprehend, adopt, nor work out those of
other people."
Hunsden yawn. "well," say he, "in all this, I see but one thing
clearly-that be, that the whole affair be no business of mine." he
stretch himself and again yawn. "I wonder what time it be," he go
on: "I have an appointment for seven o'clock."
"three quarter past six by my watch."
"well, then Iwill go." he get up. "youwill not meddle with trade again?"
say he, lean his elbow on the mantelpiece.
"no; I think not."
"you would be a fool if you do. probably, after all, youwill think
well of your uncle' proposal and go into the Church."
"a singular regeneration must take place in my whole inner and outer man
before I do that. a good clergyman be one of the good of man."
"indeed! do you think so?" interrupt Hunsden, scoffingly.
"I do, and no mistake. but I have not the peculiar point which go to
make a good clergyman; and rather than adopt a profession for which I
have no vocation, I would endure extremity of hardship from poverty."
"yoube a mighty difficult customer to suit. you willnot be a tradesman
or a parson; you cannot be a lawyer, or a doctor, or a gentleman, because
youhave no money. Iwould recommend you to travel."
"what! without money?"
"you must travel in search of money, man. you can speak French--with
a vile English accent, no doubt--still, you can speak it. go on to the
Continent, and see what will turn up for you there."
"God know I should like to go!" exclaim I with involuntary ardour.
"go: what the deuce hinder you? you may get to Brussels, for instance,
for five or six pound, if you know how to manage with economy."
"necessity would teach I if I donot."
"go, then, and let your wit make a way for you when you get there. I
know Brussels almost as well as I know X----, and I be sure it would
suit such a one as you well than London."
"but occupation, Mr. Hunsden! I must go where occupation be to be have;
and how could I get recommendation, or introduction, or employment at
Brussels?"
"there speak the organ of caution. you hate to advance a step before
you know every inch of the way. you havenot a sheet of paper and a
pen-and-ink?"
"I hope so," and I produce write material with alacrity; for I
guess what he be go to do. he sit down, write a few line, fold,
seal, and address a letter, and hold it out to I.
"there, Prudence, therebe a pioneer to hew down the first rough
difficulty of your path. I know well enough, lad, you be not one of
those who will run their neck into a noose without see how they
be to get it out again, and yoube right there. a reckless man be
my aversion, and nothing should ever persuade I to meddle with the
concern of such a one. those who be reckless for themselves be
generally ten time more so for their friend."
"this be a letter of introduction, I suppose?" say I, take the
epistle.
"yes. with that in your pocket you will run no risk of find yourself
in a state of absolute destitution, which, I know, you will regard as a
degradation--so should I, for that matter. the person to whom you will
present it generally have two or three respectable place depend upon
his recommendation."
"that will just suit I," say I.
"well, and wherebe your gratitude?" demand Mr. Hunsden; "donot you
know how to say 'thank you?'"
"Ihave fifteen pound and a watch, which my godmother, whom I never see,
give I eighteen year ago," be my rather irrelevant answer; and I
far avow myself a happy man, and profess that I do not envy any
be in Christendom.
"but your gratitude?"
"I shall be off presently, Mr. Hunsden--to-morrow, if all be well: Iwill
not stay a day long in X---- than Ibe oblige."
"very good--but it will be decent to make due acknowledgment for the
assistance you have receive; be quick! it be just go to strike
seven: Ibe wait to be thank."
"just stand out of the way, will you, Mr. Hunsden: I want a key there be
on the corner of the mantelpiece. Iwill pack my portmanteau before I go
to bed."
the house clock strike seven.
"the lad be a heathen," say Hunsden, and take his hat from a
sideboard, he leave the room, laugh to himself. I have half an
inclination to follow he: I really intend to leave X---- the next
morning, and should certainly not have another opportunity of bid
he good-bye. the front door bang to.
"let he go," say I, "we shall meet again some day."
CHAPTER VII.
READER, perhaps you be never in Belgium? haply you donot know the
physiognomy of the country? you have not its lineament define upon
your memory, as I have they on mine?
three--nay four--picture line the four-wall cell where be store for
I the record of the past. first, Eton. all in that picture be in far
perspective, recede, diminutive; but freshly colour, green, dewy,
with a spring sky, pile with glitter yet showery cloud; for my
childhood be not all sunshine--it have its overcast, its cold, its
stormy hour. second, X----, huge, dingy; the canvas crack and smoke;
a yellow sky, sooty cloud; no sun, no azure; the verdure of the suburb
blight and sully--a very dreary scene.
Third, Belgium; and I will pause before this landscape. as to the
fourth, a curtain cover it, which I may hereafter withdraw, or may not,
as suit my convenience and capacity. at any rate, for the present it
must hang undisturbed. Belgium! name unromantic and unpoetic, yet name
that whenever utter have in my ear a sound, in my heart an echo, such
as no other assemblage of syllable, however sweet or classic, can
produce. Belgium! I repeat the word, now as I sit alone near midnight.
it stir my world of the past like a summon to resurrection; the graf
unclose, the dead be raise; thought, feeling, memorie that sleep,
be see by I ascend from the cloud--haloe most of they--but while
I gaze on their vapoury form, and strive to ascertain definitely their
outline, the sound which waken they die, and they sink, each and all,
like a light wreath of mist, absorb in the mould, recall to urn,
reseal in monument. farewell, luminous phantom!
this be Belgium, reader. look! donot call the picture a flat or a dull
one--it be neither flat nor dull to I when I first behold it. when I
leave Ostend on a mild February morning, and find myself on the road
to Brussels, nothing could look vapid to I. my sense of enjoyment
possess an edge whet to the fine, untouched, keen, exquisite.
I be young; I have good health; pleasure and I have never meet; no
indulgence of hers have enervate or sate one faculty of my nature.
Liberty I clasp in my arm for the first time, and the influence of
her smile and embrace revive my life like the sun and the west wind.
yes, at that epoch I feel like a morning traveller who doubt not that
from the hill he be ascend he shall behold a glorious sunrise; what
if the track be strait, steep, and stony? he see it not; his eye be
fix on that summit, flush already, flushed and gild, and have
gain it he be certain of the scene beyond. he know that the sun will
face he, that his chariot be even now come over the eastern horizon,
and that the herald breeze he feel on his cheek be open for the
god's career a clear, vast path of azure, amidst cloud soft as pearl
and warm as flame. difficulty and toil be to be my lot, but sustain
by energy, draw on by hope as bright as vague, I deem such a lot
no hardship. I mount now the hill in shade; there be pebble,
inequality, briar in my path, but my eye be fix on the crimson
peak above; my imagination be with the refulgent firmament beyond, and
I think nothing of the stone turn under my foot, or of the thorn
scratch my face and hand.
I gaze often, and always with delight, from the window of the diligence
(these, be it remember, be not the day of train and railroad).
well! and what do I see? I will tell you faithfully. Green, reedy
swamp; field fertile but flat, cultivate in patch that make they
look like magnify kitchen-garden; belt of cut tree, formal as
pollard willow, skirt the horizon; narrow canal, glide slow by
the road-side; paint Flemish farmhouse; some very dirty hovel; a
gray, dead sky; wet road, wet field, wet house-top: not a beautiful,
scarcely a picturesque object meet my eye along the whole route; yet to
I, all be beautiful, all be more than picturesque. it continue fair
so long as daylight last, though the moisture of many precede damp
day have sodden the whole country; as it grow dark, however, the rain
recommence, and it be through streaming and starless darkness my eye
catch the first gleam of the light of Brussels. I see little of the
city but its light that night. have alight from the diligence, a
fiacre convey I to the Hotel de ----, where I have be advise by a
fellow-traveller to put up; have eat a traveller's supper, I retire
to bed, and sleep a traveller's sleep.
next morning I awake from prolonged and sound repose with the impression
that I be yet in X----, and perceive it to be broad daylight I
start up, imagine that I have overslept myself and should be behind
time at the counting-house. the momentary and painful sense of restraint
vanish before the revive and revive consciousness of freedom, as,
throw back the white curtain of my bed, I look forth into a wide,
lofty foreign chamber; how different from the small and dingy, though
not uncomfortable, apartment I have occupy for a night or two at a
respectable inn in London while wait for the sailing of the packet!
yet far be it from I to profane the memory of that little dingy room!
it, too, be dear to my soul; for there, as I lay in quiet and darkness,
I first hear the great bell of St. Paul's tell London it be
midnight, and well do I recall the deep, deliberate tone, so full
charge with colossal phlegm and force. from the small, narrow window
of that room, I first see the dome, loom through a London mist. I
suppose the sensation, stir by those first sound, first sight, be
feel but once; treasure they, memory; seal they in urn, and keep they
in safe niche! well--I rise. traveller talk of the apartment in
foreign dwelling be bare and uncomfortable; I think my chamber
look stately and cheerful. it have such large window--croisees that
open like door, with such broad, clear pane of glass; such a great
look-glass stand on my dressing-table--such a fine mirror glitter
over the mantelpiece--the paint floor look so clean and glossy;
when I have dress and be descend the stair, the broad marble step
almost awe I, and so do the lofty hall into which they conduct.
on the first landing I meet a Flemish housemaid: she have wooden shoe, a
short red petticoat, a print cotton bedgown, her face be broad,
her physiognomy eminently stupid; when I speak to she in French, she
answer I in Flemish, with an air the reverse of civil; yet I think
her charming; if she be not pretty or polite, she be, I conceive,
very picturesque; she remind I of the female figure in certain Dutch
painting I have see in other year at Seacombe Hall.
I repair to the public room; that, too, be very large and very lofty,
and warm by a stove; the floor be black, and the stove be black, and
most of the furniture be black: yet I never experience a freer
sense of exhilaration than when I sit down at a very long, black table
(cover, however, in part by a white cloth), and, have order
breakfast, begin to pour out my coffee from a little black coffee-pot.
the stove might be dismal-look to some eye, not to mine, but it
be indisputably very warm, and there be two gentleman seat by
it talk in French; impossible to follow their rapid utterance, or
comprehend much of the purport of what they say--yet French, in the
mouth of Frenchmen, or Belgians (I be not then sensible of the horror
of the Belgian accent) be as music to my ear. one of these gentleman
presently discern I to be an Englishman--no doubt from the fashion in
which I address the waiter; for I would persist in speak French in
my execrable South-of-England style, though the man understand English.
the gentleman, after look towards I once or twice, politely accost
I in very good English; I remember I wish to God that I could speak
French as well; his fluency and correct pronunciation impress I for
the first time with a due notion of the cosmopolitan character of the
capital I be in; it be my first experience of that skill in living
language I afterwards find to be so general in Brussels.
I linger over my breakfast as long as I could; while it be there
on the table, and while that stranger continue talk to I, I be a
free, independent traveller; but at last the thing be remove, the
two gentleman leave the room; suddenly the illusion cease, reality and
business come back. I, a bondsman just release from the yoke, free for
one week from twenty-one year of constraint, must, of necessity, resume
the fetter of dependency. hardly have I taste the delight of be
without a master when duty issue her stern mandate: "go forth and seek
another service." I never linger over a painful and necessary task; I
never take pleasure before business, it be not in my nature to do so;
impossible to enjoy a leisurely walk over the city, though I perceive
the morning be very fine, until I have first present Mr. Hunsden's
letter of introduction, and get fairly on to the track of a new
situation. wrench my mind from liberty and delight, I seize my hat,
and force my reluctant body out of the Hotel de ---- into the foreign
street.
it be a fine day, but I would not look at the blue sky or at the
stately house round I; my mind be bent on one thing, find out "Mr.
Brown, Numero --, Rue Royale," for so my letter be address. by dint
of inquiry I succeed; I stand at last at the desire door, knock,
ask for Mr. Brown, and be admit.
be show into a small breakfast-room, I find myself in the
presence of an elderly gentleman--very grave, business-like, and
respectable-looking. I present Mr. Hunsden's letter; he receive I
very civilly. after a little desultory conversation he ask I if there
be anything in which his advice or experience could be of use. I say,
"yes," and then proceed to tell he that I be not a gentleman of
fortune, travel for pleasure, but an ex-counting-house clerk, who
want employment of some kind, and that immediately too. he reply
that as a friend of Mr. Hunsden's he would be willing to assist I as
well as he could. after some meditation he name a place in a mercantile
house at Liege, and another in a bookseller's shop at Louvain.
"Clerk and shopman!" murmur I to myself. "no." I shake my head. I
have try the high stool; I hat it; I believe there be other
occupation that would suit I well; besides I do not wish to leave
Brussels.
"I know of no place in Brussels," answer Mr. Brown, "unless indeed you
be dispose to turn your attention to teaching. I be acquaint with
the director of a large establishment who be in want of a professor of
English and Latin."
I think two minute, then I seize the idea eagerly.
"the very thing, sir!" say I.
"but," ask he, "do you understand French well enough to teach belgian
boy English?"
fortunately I could answer this question in the affirmative;
have study French under a Frenchman, I could speak the language
intelligibly though not fluently. I could also read it well, and write
it decently.
"then," pursue Mr. Brown, "I think I can promise you the place, for
Monsieur Pelet will not refuse a professor recommend by I; but come
here again at five o'clock this afternoon, and I will introduce you to
he."
the word "professor" strike I. "I be not a professor," say I.
"oh," return Mr. Brown, "professor, here in Belgium, mean a teacher,
that be all."
my conscience thus quiet, I thank Mr. Brown, and, for the present,
withdraw. this time I step out into the street with a relieved heart;
the task I have impose on myself for that day be execute. I might now
take some hour of holiday. I feel free to look up. for the first time
I remark the sparkling clearness of the air, the deep blue of the sky,
the gay clean aspect of the white-washed or paint house; I see what
a fine street be the Rue Royale, and, walk leisurely along its broad
pavement, I continue to survey its stately hotel, till the palisade,
the gate, and tree of the park appear in sight, offer to my eye a
new attraction. I remember, before enter the park, I stand awhile to
contemplate the statue of General Belliard, and then I advance to the
top of the great staircase just beyond, and I look down into a narrow
back street, which I afterwards learn be call the Rue d'Isabelle.
I well recollect that my eye rest on the green door of a rather large
house opposite, where, on a brass plate, be inscribe, "pensionnat de
demoiselle." pensionnat! the word excite an uneasy sensation in
my mind; it seem to speak of restraint. some of the demoiselle,
externat no doubt, be at that moment issue from the door--I look
for a pretty face amongst they, but their close, little french bonnet
hide their feature; in a moment they be go.
I have traverse a good deal of Brussels before five o'clock arrive,
but punctually as that hour strike I be again in the Rue Royale.
Re-admit to Mr. Brown's breakfast-room, I find he, as before,
seat at the table, and he be not alone--a gentleman stand by the
hearth. two word of introduction designate he as my future master.
"M. Pelet, Mr. Crimsworth; Mr. Crimsworth, M. Pelet" a bow on each
side finish the ceremony. I donot know what sort of a bow I make; an
ordinary one, I suppose, for I be in a tranquil, commonplace frame of
mind; I feel none of the agitation which have trouble my first interview
with Edward Crimsworth. M. Pelet's bow be extremely polite, yet not
theatrical, scarcely french; he and I be presently seat opposite to
each other. in a pleasing voice, low, and, out of consideration to my
foreign ear, very distinct and deliberate, M. Pelet intimate that he
have just be receive from "le respectable M. Brown," an account of my
attainment and character, which relieve he from all scruple as to
the propriety of engage I as professor of English and Latin in
his establishment; nevertheless, for form's sake, he would put a few
question to test; my power. he do, and express in flattering term
his satisfaction at my answer. the subject of salary next come on; it
be fix at one thousand franc per annum, besides board and lodge.
"and in addition," suggest M. Pelet, "as there will be some hour
in each day during which your service will not be require in my
establishment, you may, in time, obtain employment in other seminary,
and thus turn your vacant moment to profitable account."
I think this very kind, and indeed I find afterwards that the term
on which M. Pelet have engage I be really liberal for Brussels;
instruction be extremely cheap there on account of the number of
teacher. it be far arrange that I should be instal in my new
post the very next day, after which M. Pelet and I part.
well, and what be he like? and what be my impression concern he?
he be a man of about forty year of age, of middle size, and rather
emaciated figure; his face be pale, his cheek be sink, and his eye
hollow; his feature be pleasing and regular, they have a french
turn (for M. Pelet be no fleming, but a Frenchman both by birth
and parentage), yet the degree of harshness inseparable from Gallic
lineament be, in his case, soften by a mild blue eye, and a
melancholy, almost suffer, expression of countenance; his physiognomy
be "fine et spirituelle." I use two french word because they define
well than any english term the specie of intelligence with which his
feature be imbue. he be altogether an interesting and prepossess
personage. I wonder only at the utter absence of all the ordinary
characteristic of his profession, and almost fear he could not be
stern and resolute enough for a schoolmaster. externally at least
M. Pelet present an absolute contrast to my late master, Edward
Crimsworth.
influence by the impression I have receive of his gentleness, I be a
good deal surprise when, on arrive the next day at my new employer's
house, and be admit to a first view of what be to be the
sphere of my future labour, namely the large, lofty, and well light
schoolroom, I behold a numerous assemblage of pupil, boy of course,
whose collective appearance show all the sign of a full, flourishing,
and well-discipline seminary. as I traverse the class in company
with M. Pelet, a profound silence reign on all side, and if by chance
a murmur or a whisper arise, one glance from the pensive eye of this
most gentle pedagogue still it instantly. it be astonishing, I
think, how so mild a check could prove so effectual. when I have
perambulate the length and breadth of the class, M. Pelet turn and
say to me--
"would you object to take the boy as they be, and test their
proficiency in English?"
the proposal be unexpected. I have think I should have be allow at
least 3 day to prepare; but it be a bad omen to commence any career
by hesitation, so I just step to the professor's desk near which we
stand, and face the circle of my pupil. I take a moment to collect
my thought, and likewise to frame in French the sentence by which I
propose to open business. I make it as short as possible:--
"Messieurs, prenez vos livre de lecture."
"Anglais ou Francais, monsieur?" demand a thickset, moon-face young
Flamand in a blouse. the answer be fortunately easy:--
"Anglais."
I determine to give myself as little trouble as possible in this
lesson; it would not do yet to trust my unpractised tongue with the
delivery of explanation; my accent and idiom would be too open to the
criticism of the young gentleman before I, relative to whom I feel
already it would be necessary at once to take up an advantageous
position, and I proceed to employ mean accordingly.
"Commencez!" cry I, when they have all produce their book. the
moon-face youth (by name Jules Vanderkelkov, as I afterwards learn)
take the first sentence. the "livre de lecture" be the "Vicar of
Wakefield," much use in foreign school because it be suppose to
contain prime sample of conversational English; it might, however,
have be a Runic scroll for any resemblance the word, as enunciate by
Jules, bore to the language in ordinary use amongst the native of Great
Britain. my God! how he do snuffle, snort, and wheeze! all he say be
say in his throat and nose, for it be thus the Flamands speak, but
I hear he to the end of his paragraph without proffer a word of
correction, whereat he look vastly self-complacent, convinced,
no doubt, that he have acquit himself like a real bear and breed
"Anglais." in the same unmoved silence I listen to a dozen in
rotation, and when the twelfth have conclude with splutter, hiss, and
mumble, I solemnly lay down the book.
"Arretez!" say I. there be a pause, during which I regard they all
with a steady and somewhat stern gaze; a dog, if star at hard enough
and long enough, will show symptom of embarrassment, and so at length
do my bench of Belgians. perceive that some of the face before I
be begin to look sullen, and other ashame, I slowly join my
hand, and ejaculate in a deep "voix de poitrine"--
"Comme c'est affreux!"
they look at each other, pout, colour, swing their heel; they
be not pleased, I see, but they be impressed, and in the way
I wish they to be. have thus take they down a peg in their
self-conceit, the next step be to raise myself in their estimation; not
a very easy thing, consider that I hardly dare to speak for fear of
betray my own deficiency.
"Ecoutez, monsieur!" say I, and I endeavour to throw into my
accent the compassionate tone of a superior being, who, touch by the
extremity of the helplessness, which at first only excite his scorn,
deign at length to bestow aid. I then begin at the very beginning of
the "Vicar of Wakefield," and read, in a slow, distinct voice, some
twenty page, they all the while sit mute and listen with fix
attention; by the time I have do nearly an hour have elapse. I then
rise and said:--
"C'est assez pour aujourd'hui, messieur; demain nous recommenceron, et
j'espere que tout ira bien."
with this oracular sentence I bow, and in company with M. Pelet
quit the school-room.
"C'est bien! c'est tre bien!" say my principal as we enter his
parlour. "Je vois que monsieur a de l'adresse; cela, I plait, car, dan
l'instruction, l'adresse fait tout autant que le savoir."
from the parlour M. Pelet conduct I to my apartment, my "chambre,"
as Monsieur say with a certain air of complacency. it be a very small
room, with an excessively small bed, but M. Pelet give I to understand
that I be to occupy it quite alone, which be of course a great
comfort. yet, though so limited in dimension, it have two window. light
not be tax in Belgium, the people never grudge its admission into
their house; just here, however, this observation be not very apropos,
for one of these window be board up; the open window look into
the boy' playground. I glance at the other, as wonder what aspect
it would present if disencumber of the board. M. Pelet read, I
suppose, the expression of my eye; he explained:--
"La fenetre fermee donne sur un jardin appartenant a un pensionnat
de demoiselle," say he, "et les convenance exigent--enfin, vous
comprenez--n'est-ce pas, monsieur?"
"Oui, oui," be my reply, and I look of course quite satisfied; but
when M. Pelet have retire and close the door after he, the first thing
I do be to scrutinize closely the nailed board, hop to find
some chink or crevice which I might enlarge, and so get a peep at the
consecrate ground. my research be vain, for the board be well
joined and strongly nail. it be astonishing how disappointed I feel. I
think it would have be so pleasant to have look out upon a
garden plant with flower and tree, so amusing to have watch the
demoiselle at their play; to have study female character in a variety
of phase, myself the while shelter from view by a modest muslin
curtain, whereas, owe doubtless to the absurd scruple of some old
duenna of a directress, I have now only the option of look at a bare
gravelled court, with an enormous "pas de geant" in the middle, and the
monotonous wall and window of a boy' school-house round. not only
then, but many a time after, especially in moment of weariness and
low spirit, do I look with dissatisfied eye on that most tantalizing
board, long to tear it away and get a glimpse of the green region
which I imagine to lie beyond. I know a tree grow close up to the
window, for though there be as yet no leaf to rustle, I often hear
at night the tap of branch against the pane. in the daytime,
when I listen attentively, I could hear, even through the board, the
voice of the demoiselle in their hour of recreation, and, to speak
the honest truth, my sentimental reflection be occasionally a trifle
disarrange by the not quite silvery, in fact the too often brazen
sound, which, rise from the unseen paradise below, penetrate
clamorously into my solitude. not to mince matter, it really seem to
I a doubtful case whether the lung of Mdlle. Reuter's girl or those
of M. Pelet's boy be the strong, and when it come to shriek
the girl indisputably beat the boy hollow. I forgot to say, by-the-by,
that Reuter be the name of the old lady who have have my window beard
up. I say old, for such I, of course, conclude she to be, judge from
her cautious, chaperon-like proceeding; besides, nobody ever speak of
she as young. I remember I be very much amuse when I first hear her
christian name; it be zoraide--Mademoiselle Zoraide Reuter. but the
continental nation do allow themselves vagary in the choice of name,
such as we sober English never run into. I think, indeed, we have too
limit a list to choose from.
meantime my path be gradually grow smooth before I. I, in a
few week, conquer the teasing difficulty inseparable from the
commencement of almost every career. Ere long I have acquire as much
facility in speak French as set I at my ease with my pupil; and
as I have encounter they on a right footing at the very beginning, and
continue tenaciously to retain the advantage I have early gain, they
never attempt mutiny, which circumstance, all who be in any degree
acquaint with the ongoing of belgian school, and who know the
relation in which professor and pupil too frequently stand towards
each other in those establishment, will consider an important and
uncommon one. before conclude this chapter I will say a word on the
system I pursue with regard to my class: my experience may possibly
be of use to other.
it do not require very keen observation to detect the character of the
youth of Brabant, but it need a certain degree of tact to adopt one's
measure to their capacity. their intellectual faculty be generally
weak, their animal propensity strong; thus there be at once an
impotence and a kind of inert force in their nature; they be dull,
but they be also singularly stubborn, heavy as lead and, like lead,
most difficult to move. such be the case, it would have be truly
absurd to exact from they much in the way of mental exertion; have
short memory, dense intelligence, feeble reflective power, they
recoil with repugnance from any occupation that demand close study
or deep thought. have the abhor effort be extort from they by
injudicious and arbitrary measure on the part of the Professor, they
would have resist as obstinately, as clamorously, as desperate swine;
and though not brave singly, they be relentless act EN MASSE.
I understand that before my arrival in M. Pelet's establishment, the
combine insubordination of the pupil have effect the dismissal of
more than one english master. it be necessary then to exact only the
most moderate application from nature so little qualified to apply--to
assist, in every practicable way, understanding so opaque and
contract--to be ever gentle, considerate, yield even, to a certain
point, with disposition so irrationally perverse; but, have reach
that culminate point of indulgence, you must fix your foot, plant it,
root it in rock--become immutable as the tower of Ste. Gudule; for a
step--but half a step far, and you would plunge headlong into the
gulf of imbecility; there lodge, you would speedily receive proof
of flemish gratitude and magnanimity in shower of brabant saliva and
handfuls of Low Country mud. you might smooth to the utmost the path of
learning, remove every pebble from the track; but then you must finally
insist with decision on the pupil take your arm and allow himself
to be lead quietly along the prepared road. when I have bring down my
lesson to the low level of my dull pupil's capacity--when I
have show myself the mild, the most tolerant of master--a word of
impertinence, a movement of disobedience, change I at once into
a despot. I offer then but one alternative--submission and
acknowledgment of error, or ignominious expulsion. this system answer,
and my influence, by degree, become establish on a firm basis. "the
boy be father to the man," it be say; and so I often think when
look at my boy and remember the political history of their
ancestor. Pelet's school be merely an epitome of the belgian nation.
CHAPTER VIII.
and pelet himself? how do I continue to like he? oh, extremely well!
nothing could be more smooth, gentlemanlike, and even friendly, than
his demeanour to I. I have to endure from he neither cold neglect,
irritate interference, nor pretentious assumption of superiority. I
fear, however, two poor, hard-work belgian usher in the establishment
could not have say as much; to they the director's manner be
invariably dry, stern, and cool. I believe he perceive once or twice
that I be a little shocked at the difference he make between they and
I, and account for it by say, with a quiet sarcastic smile--
"Ce ne sont que des Flamands--allez!"
and then he take his cigar gently from his lip and spat on the paint
floor of the room in which we be sit. flamand certainly they
be, and both have the true Flamand physiognomy, where intellectual
inferiority be mark in line none can mistake; still they be man,
and, in the main, honest man; and I could not see why their being
aboriginal of the flat, dull soil should serve as a pretext for
treat they with perpetual severity and contempt. this idea, of
injustice somewhat poison the pleasure I might otherwise have derive
from Pelet's soft affable manner to myself. certainly it be agreeable,
when the day's work be over, to find one's employer an intelligent
and cheerful companion; and if he be sometimes a little sarcastic
and sometimes a little too insinuating, and if I do discover that
his mildness be more a matter of appearance than of reality--if I do
occasionally suspect the existence of flint or steel under an external
covering of velvet--still we be none of we perfect; and weary as I be
of the atmosphere of brutality and insolence in which I have constantly
live at X----, I have no inclination now, on cast anchor in calm
region, to institute at once a prying search after defect that be
scrupulously withdraw and carefully veil from my view. I be willing
to take Pelet for what he seem--to believe he benevolent and friendly
until some untoward event should prove he otherwise. he be not
marry, and I soon perceive he have all a Frenchman's, all a Parisian's
notion about matrimony and woman. I suspect a degree of laxity in
his code of moral, there be something so cold and BLASE in his tone
whenever he allude to what he call "le beau sexe;" but he be too
gentlemanlike to intrude topic I do not invite, and as he be really
intelligent and really fond of intellectual subject of discourse, he
and I always find enough to talk about, without seek theme in the
mire. I hat his fashion of mention love; I abhor, from my soul,
mere licentiousness. he feel the difference of our notion, and, by
mutual consent, we keep off ground debateable.
Pelet's house be keep and his kitchen manage by his mother, a real
old Frenchwoman; she have be handsome--at least she tell I so, and I
strove to believe she; she be now ugly, as only continental old woman
can be; perhaps, though, her style of dress make her look uglier than
she really be. indoor she would go about without cap, her grey hair
strangely dishevel; then, when at home, she seldom wear a gown--only
a shabby cotton camisole; shoe, too, be stranger to her foot, and in
lieu of they she sport roomy slipper, trodden down at the heel. on
the other hand, whenever it be her pleasure to appear abroad, as on
Sundays and fete-day, she would put on some very brilliant-colour
dress, usually of thin texture, a silk bonnet with a wreath of flower,
and a very fine shawl. she be not, in the main, an ill-natured old
woman, but an incessant and most indiscreet talk; she keep chiefly
in and about the kitchen, and seem rather to avoid her son's august
presence; of he, indeed, she evidently stand in awe. when he reprove
she, his reproof be bitter and unsparing; but he seldom give himself
that trouble.
Madame Pelet have her own society, her own circle of choose visitor,
whom, however, I seldom see, as she generally entertain they in what
she call she "cabinet," a small den of a place adjoin the kitchen,
and descend into it by one or two step. on these step, by-the-by,
I have not unfrequently see Madame Pelet seat with a trencher on
her knee, engage in the threefold employment of eat her dinner,
gossip with her favourite servant, the housemaid, and scold she
antagonist, the cook; she never din, and seldom indeed take any meal
with her son; and as to show her face at the boy' table, that be
quite out of the question. these detail will sound very odd in English
ear, but Belgium be not England, and its way be not our way.
Madame Pelet's habit of life, then, be take into consideration,
I be a good deal surprise when, one Thursday evening (Thursday be
always a half-holiday), as I be sit all alone in my apartment,
correct a huge pile of English and latin exercise, a servant
tap at the door, and, on its being open, present Madame Pelet's
compliment, and she would be happy to see I to take my "gouter" (a
meal which answer to our english "tea") with she in the dining-room.
"Plait-il?" say I, for I think I must have misunderstood, the
message and invitation be so unusual; the same word be repeat. I
accept, of course, and as I descend the stair, I wonder what
whim have enter the old lady's brain; her son be out--go to pass the
evening at the Salle of the Grande Harmonie or some other club of which
he be a member. just as I lay my hand on the handle of the dining-room
door, a queer idea glance across my mind.
"surely shebe not go to make love to I," say i. "Ihave hear of
old Frenchwomen do odd thing in that line; and the gouter? they
generally begin such affair with eating and drink, I believe."
there be a fearful dismay in this suggestion of my excited imagination,
and if I have allow myself time to dwell upon it, I should no doubt
have cut there and then, rush back to my chamber, and bolt myself
in; but whenever a danger or a horror be veil with uncertainty,
the primary wish of the mind be to ascertain first the naked truth,
reserve the expedient of flight for the moment when its dread
anticipation shall be realize. I turn the door-handle, and in an
instant have cross the fatal threshold, close the door behind I, and
stand in the presence of Madame Pelet.
gracious heaven! the first view of she seem to confirm my bad
apprehension. there she sit, dress out in a light green muslin gown,
on her head a lace cap with flourish red rose in the frill; her
table be carefully spread; there be fruit, cake, and coffee, with a
bottle of something--I do not know what. already the cold sweat start
on my brow, already I glance back over my shoulder at the closed
door, when, to my unspeakable relief, my eye, wander mildly in the
direction of the stove, rest upon a second figure, seat in a large
fauteuil beside it. this be a woman, too, and, moreover, an old woman,
and as fat and as rubicund as Madame Pelet be meagre and yellow; she
attire be likewise very fine, and spring flower of different hue
circle in a bright wreath the crown of her violet-colour velvet
bonnet.
I have only time to make these general observation when Madame Pelet,
come forward with what she intend should be a graceful and elastic
step, thus accost I:
"Monsieur be indeed most oblige to quit his book, his study, at the
request of an insignificant person like I--will Monsieur complete his
kindness by allow I to present he to my dear friend Madame Reuter,
who reside in the neighbouring house--the young lady' school."
"ah!" think I, "I know she be old," and I bow and take my seat.
Madame Reuter place herself at the table opposite to I.
"how do you like Belgium, Monsieur?" ask she, in an accent of the
broad bruxellois. I could now well distinguish the difference between
the fine and pure parisian utterance of M. Pelet, for instance, and
the guttural enunciation of the Flamands. I answer politely, and then
wonder how so coarse and clumsy an old woman as the one before I
should be at the head of a lady' seminary, which I have always hear
speak of in term of high commendation. in truth there be something
to wonder at. Madame Reuter look more like a joyous, free-live old
Flemish fermiere, or even a maitresse d'auberge, than a staid, grave,
rigid directrice de pensionnat. in general the continental, or at least
the belgian old woman permit themselves a licence of manner, speech,
and aspect, such as our venerable granddame would recoil from as
absolutely disreputable, and Madame Reuter's jolly face bore evidence
that she be no exception to the rule of her country; there be a
twinkle and leer in her left eye; her right she keep habitually half
shut, which I think very odd indeed. after several vain attempt to
comprehend the motif of these two droll old creature for invite I
to join they at their gouter, I at last fairly give it up, and resign
myself to inevitable mystification, I sit and look first at one, then
at the other, take care meantime to do justice to the confiture,
cake, and coffee, with which they amply supply I. they, too, ate,
and that with no delicate appetite, and have demolish a large
portion of the solid, they propose a "petit verre." I decline. not
so Mesdames Pelet and Reuter; each mix herself what I think rather
a stiff tumbler of punch, and place it on a stand near the stove, they
draw up their chair to that convenience, and invite I to do the same.
I obey; and be seat fairly between they, I be thus address
first by Madame Pelet, then by Madame Reuter.
"we will now speak of business," say Madame Pelet, and she go on to
make an elaborate speech, which, be interpret, be to the effect
that she have ask for the pleasure of my company that evening in
order to give her friend Madame Reuter an opportunity of broach an
important proposal, which might turn out greatly to my advantage.
"pourvu que vous soyez sage," say Madame Reuter, "et a vrai dire,
vous en avez bien l'air. take one drop of the punch" (or ponche, as she
pronounce it); "it be an agreeable and wholesome beverage after a full
meal."
I bow, but again decline it. she go on:
"I feel," say she, after a solemn sip--"i feel profoundly the
importance of the commission with which my dear daughter have entrust
I, for you be aware, Monsieur, that it be my daughter who direct the
establishment in the next house?"
"ah! I think it be yourself, madame." though, indeed, at that moment
I recollect that it be call Mademoiselle, not Madame Reuter's
pensionnat.
"I! oh, no! I manage the house and look after the servant, as my friend
Madame Pelet do for Monsieur her son--nothing more. ah! you think I
give lesson in class--do you?"
and she laugh loud and long, as though the idea tickle her fancy
amazingly.
"Madame be in the wrong to laugh," I observe; "if she do not give
lesson, I be sure it be not because she cannot;" and I whip out a
white pocket-handkerchief and waft it, with a french grace, past my
nose, bow at the name time.
"Quel charmant jeune homme!" murmur Madame Pelet in a low voice.
Madame Reuter, be less sentimental, as she be Flamand and not
French, only laugh again.
"you be a dangerous person, I fear," say she; "if you can forge
compliment at that rate, Zoraide will positively be afraid of you; but
if you be good, I will keep your secret, and not tell she how well you
can flatter. now, listen what sort of a proposal she make to you. she
have hear that you be an excellent professor, and as she wish to get
the very beet master for her school (car Zoraide fait tout comme une
reine, c'est une veritable maitresse-femme), she have commission I to
step over this afternoon, and sound Madame Pelet as to the possibility
of engage you. zoraide be a wary general; she never advance without
first examine well her ground I donot think she would be pleased if
she know I have already disclose her intention to you; she do not
order I to go so far, but I think there would be no harm in let
you into the secret, and Madame Pelet be of the same opinion. take
care, however, you donot betray either of we to Zoraide--to my
daughter, I mean; she be so discreet and circumspect herself, she cannot
understand that one should find a pleasure in gossip a little--"
"C'est absolument comme mon fil!" cry Madame Pelet.
"all the world be so changed since our girlhood!" rejoin the other:
"young people have such old head now. but to return, Monsieur. Madame
Pelet will mention the subject of your give lesson in my daughter's
establishment to her son, and he will speak to you; and then to-morrow,
you will step over to our house, and ask to see my daughter, and you
will introduce the subject as if the first intimation of it have reach
you from M. Pelet himself, and be sure you never mention my name, for I
would not displease Zoraide on any account.
"Bien! bien!" interrupt I--for all this chatter and circumlocution
begin to bore I very much; "I will consult M. Pelet, and the thing
shall be settle as you desire. good evening, mesdames--I be infinitely
oblige to you."
"comment! vous vous en allez deja?" exclaim Madame Pelet.
"Prenez encore quelquechose, monsieur; une pomme cuite, des biscuit,
encore une tasse de cafe?"
"merci, merci, madame--au revoir." and I back at last out of the
apartment.
have regain my own room, I set myself to turn over in my mind
the incident of the evening. it seem a queer affair altogether, and
queerly manage; the two old woman have make quite a little intricate
mess of it; still I find that the uppermost feeling in my mind on the
subject be one of satisfaction. in the first place it would be a change
to give lesson in another seminary, and then to teach young lady
would be an occupation so interesting--to be admit at all into a
lady' boarding-school would be an incident so new in my life. besides,
think I, as I glance at the board window, "I shall now at last see
the mysterious garden: I shall gaze both on the angel and their Eden."
CHAPTER IX.
M. pelet could not of course object to the proposal make by Mdlle.
Reuter; permission to accept such additional employment, should it
offer, have form an article of the term on which he have engage I.
it be, therefore, arrange in the course of next day that I should
be at liberty to give lesson in Mdlle. Reuter's establishment four
afternoon in every week.
when evening come I prepare to step over in order to seek a conference
with Mademoiselle herself on the subject; I have not have time to pay the
visit before, have be all day closely occupy in class. I remember
very well that before quit my chamber, I hold a brief debate with
myself as to whether I should change my ordinary attire for something
smart. at last I conclude it would be a waste of labour. "Doubtless,"
think I, "she be some stiff old maid; for though the daughter of
Madame Reuter, she may well number upwards of forty winter; besides, if
it be otherwise, if she be both young and pretty, I be not handsome,
and no dressing can make I so, therefore Iwill go as I be." and off
I start, cursorily glance sideways as I pass the toilet-table,
surmount by a look-glass: a thin irregular face I see, with sunk,
dark eye under a large, square forehead, complexion destitute of bloom
or attraction; something young, but not youthful, no object to win a
lady's love, no butt for the shafts of Cupid.
I be soon at the entrance of the pensionnat, in a moment I have pull
the bell; in another moment the door be open, and within appear a
passage pave alternately with black and white marble; the wall be
paint in imitation of marble also; and at the far end open a glass
door, through which I see shrub and a grass-plat, look pleasant in
the sunshine of the mild spring evening-for it be now the middle of
April.
this, then, be my first glimpse of the garden; but I have not time to
look long, the portress, after have answer in the affirmative
my question as to whether her mistress be at home, open the
folding-door of a room to the left, and have usher I in, close
they behind I. I find myself in a salon with a very well-paint,
highly varnished floor; chair and sofa cover with white drapery,
a green porcelain stove, wall hang with picture in gilt frame, a gilt
pendule and other ornament on the mantelpiece, a large lustre pendent
from the centre of the ceiling, mirror, console, muslin curtain, and
a handsome centre table complete the inventory of furniture. all look
extremely clean and glitter, but the general effect would have be
somewhat chilling have not a second large pair of folding-door, stand
wide open, and disclose another and small salon, more snugly
furnish, offer some relief to the eye. this room be carpet, and
therein be a piano, a couch, a chiffonniere--above all, it contain
a lofty window with a crimson curtain, which, be undrawn, afford
another glimpse of the garden, through the large, clear pane, round
which some leaf of ivy, some tendril of vine be train.
"Monsieur Creemsvort, n'est ce pas?" say a voice behind I; and,
start involuntarily, I turn. I have be so take up with the
contemplation of the pretty little salon that I have not notice the
entrance of a person into the large room. it be, however, Mdlle.
Reuter who now address I, and stand close beside I; and when I have
bow with instantaneously recover sang-froid--for I be not easily
embarrassed--I commence the conversation by remark on the pleasant
aspect of her little cabinet, and the advantage she have over M. Pelet in
possess a garden.
"yes," she say, "she often think so;" and add, "it be my garden,
monsieur, which make I retain this house, otherwise I should probably
have remove to large and more commodious premise long since; but you
see I could not take my garden with I, and I should scarcely find one
so large and pleasant anywhere else in town."
I approve her judgment.
"but you have not see it yet," say she, rise; "come to the window
and take a well view." I follow she; she open the sash, and
lean out I see in full the enclose demesne which have hitherto be
to I an unknown region. it be a long, not very broad strip of cultured
ground, with an alley border by enormous old fruit tree down the
middle; there be a sort of lawn, a parterre of rose-tree, some
flower-border, and, on the far side, a thickly plant copse of lilacs,
laburnum, and acacias. it look pleasant, to I--very pleasant, so
long a time have elapse since I have see a garden of any sort. but it
be not only on Mdlle. Reuter's garden that my eye dwelt; when I have
take a view of her well-trim bed and bud shrubbery, I allow
my glance to come back to herself, nor do I hastily withdraw it.
I have think to see a tall, meagre, yellow, conventual image in black,
with a close white cap, bandage under the chin like a nun's head-gear;
whereas, there stand by I a little and roundly form woman, who might
indeed be old than I, but be still young; she could not, I think,
be more than six or seven and twenty; she be as fair as a fair
Englishwoman; she have no cap; her hair be nut-brown, and she wear it
in curl; pretty her feature be not, nor very soft, nor very regular,
but neither be they in any degree plain, and I already see cause
to deem they expressive. what be their predominant cast? be it
sagacity?--sense? yes, I think so; but I could scarcely as yet be
sure. I discover, however, that there be a certain serenity of eye,
and freshness of complexion, most pleasing to behold. the colour on her
cheek be like the bloom on a good apple, which be as sound at the core
as it be red on the rind.
Mdlle. Reuter and I enter upon business. she say she be not
absolutely certain of the wisdom of the step she be about to take,
because I be so young, and parent might possibly object to a professor
like I for their daughter: "but it be often well to act on one's own
judgment," say she, "and to lead parent, rather than be lead by they.
the fitness of a professor be not a matter of age; and, from what I have
hear, and from what I observe myself, I would much rather trust you
than M. Ledru, the music-master, who be a married man of near fifty."
I remark that I hop she would find I worthy of her good opinion;
that if I know myself, I be incapable of betray any confidence
repose in I. "Du reste," say she, "the surveillance will be strictly
attend to." and then she proceed to discuss the subject of term.
she be very cautious, quite on her guard; she do not absolutely
bargain, but she warily sound I to find out what my expectation
might be; and when she could not get I to name a sum, she reason and
reason with a fluent yet quiet circumlocution of speech, and at last
nail I down to five hundred franc per annum--not too much, but I
agree. before the negotiation be complete, it begin to grow a little
dusk. I do not hasten it, for I like well enough to sit and hear
her talk; I be amuse with the sort of business talent she display.
Edward could not have show himself more practical, though he might have
evince more coarseness and urgency; and then she have so many reason,
so many explanation; and, after all, she succeed in prove herself
quite disinterested and even liberal. at last she conclude, she could
say no more, because, as I acquiesce in all thing, there be no
further ground for the exercise of her part of speech. I be oblige to
rise. I would rather have sit a little long; what have I to return to
but my small empty room? and my eye have a pleasure in look at
Mdlle. Reuter, especially now, when the twilight soften she feature a
little, and, in the doubtful dusk, I could fancy her forehead as open
as it be really elevate, her mouth touch with turn of sweetness
as well as define in line of sense. when I rise to go, I hold out
my hand, on purpose, though I know it be contrary to the etiquette of
foreign habit; she smile, and said--
"ah! c'est comme tous les Anglais," but give I her hand very kindly.
"it be the privilege of my country, Mademoiselle," say I; "and,
remember, I shall always claim it."
she laugh a little, quite good-naturedly, and with the sort of
tranquillity obvious in all she do--a tranquillity which soothe and
suit I singularly, at least I think so that evening. Brussels
seem a very pleasant place to I when I get out again into the street,
and it appear as if some cheerful, eventful, upward-tend career
be even then open to I, on that selfsame mild, still April night.
so impressionable a being be man, or at least such a man as I be in
those day.
CHAPTER X.
next day the morning hour seem to pass very slowly at M. Pelet's; I
want the afternoon to come that I might go again to the neighbouring
pensionnat and give my first lesson within its pleasant precinct; for
pleasant they appear to I. at noon the hour of recreation arrive; at
one o'clock we have lunch; this get on the time, and at last St. Gudule's
deep bell, toll slowly two, mark the moment for which I have be
wait.
at the foot of the narrow back-stair that descend from my room, I meet
M. Pelet.
"Comme vous avez l'air rayonnant!" say he. "Je ne vous ai jamais vu
aussi gai. Que s'est-il donc passe?"
"apparemment que j'aime les changement," reply I.
"Ah! je comprends--c'est cela-soyez sage seulement. vous ete bien
jeune--trop jeune pour le role que vous allez jouer; il faut prendre
garde--savez-vous?"
"mais quel danger y a-t-il?"
"Je n'en sais rien--ne vous laissez pas aller a de vive
impression--voila tout."
I laugh: a sentiment of exquisite pleasure play over my nerve at
the thought that "vives impression" be likely to be create; it be
the deadness, the sameness of life's daily ongoing that have hitherto
be my bane; my blouse-clothe "eleve" in the boy' seminary never
stir in I any "vive impression" except it might be occasionally
some of anger. I break from M. Pelet, and as I stride down the passage
he follow I with one of his laugh--a very french, rakish, mocking
sound.
again I stand at the neighbouring door, and soon be re-admit into
the cheerful passage with its clear dove-colour imitation marble wall.
I follow the portress, and descend a step, and make a turn, I
find myself in a sort of corridor; a side-door open, Mdlle. Reuter's
little figure, as graceful as it be plump, appear. I could now see
her dress in full daylight; a neat, simple mousseline-laine gown fit
her compact round shape to perfection--delicate little collar and
manchette of lace, trim parisian brodequin show her neck, wrist,
and foot, to complete advantage; but how grave be her face as she
come suddenly upon I! Solicitude and business be in her eye--on her
forehead; she look almost stern. her "Bon jour, monsieur," be quite
polite, but so orderly, so commonplace, it spread directly a cool, damp
towel over my "vives impression." the servant turn back when her
mistress appear, and I walk slowly along the corridor, side by side
with Mdlle. Reuter.
"Monsieur will give a lesson in the first class to-day," say she;
"dictation or reading will perhaps be the good thing to begin with, for
those be the easy form of communicate instruction in a foreign
language; and, at the first, a master naturally feel a little
unsettled."
she be quite right, as I have find from experience; it only remain
for I to acquiesce. we proceed now in silence. the corridor
terminate in a hall, large, lofty, and square; a glass door on one side
show within a long narrow refectory, with table, an armoire, and
two lamp; it be empty; large glass door, in front, open on the
playground and garden; a broad staircase ascend spirally on the
opposite side; the remain wall show a pair of great folding-door,
now close, and admit: doubtless, to the class.
Mdlle. Reuter turn her eye laterally on I, to ascertain, probably,
whether I be collect enough to be usher into her sanctum sanctorum.
I suppose she judge I to be in a tolerable state of self-government,
for she open the door, and I follow she through. a rustle sound of
uprising greet our entrance; without look to the right or left, I
walk straight up the lane between two set of bench and desk,
and take possession of the empty chair and isolate desk raise on an
estrade, of one step high, so as to command one division; the other
division be under the surveillance of a maitresse similarly elevated.
at the back of the estrade, and attach to a moveable partition
divide this schoolroom from another beyond, be a large tableau of
wood paint black and varnish; a thick crayon of white chalk lie on
my desk for the convenience of elucidate any grammatical or verbal
obscurity which might occur in my lesson by write it upon the
tableau; a wet sponge appear beside the chalk, to enable I to efface
the mark when they have serve the purpose intend.
I carefully and deliberately make these observation before allow
myself to take one glance at the bench before I; have handle the
crayon, look back at the tableau, finger the sponge in order to
ascertain that it be in a right state of moisture, I find myself cool
enough to admit of look calmly up and gaze deliberately round I.
and first I observe that Mdlle. Reuter have already glide away, she
be nowhere visible; a maitresse or teacher, the one who occupy the
corresponding estrade to my own, alone remain to keep guard over I;
she be a little in the shade, and, with my short sight, I could only
see that she be of a thin bony figure and rather tallowy complexion,
and that her attitude, as she sit, partook equally of listlessness and
affectation. more obvious, more prominent, shine on by the full light of
the large window, be the occupant of the bench just before I, of
whom some be girl of fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, some young woman
from eighteen (as it appear to I) up to twenty; the most modest
attire, the simple fashion of wear the hair, be apparent in all;
and good feature, ruddy, bloom complexion, large and brilliant
eye, form full, even to solidity, seem to abound. I do not bear
the first view like a stoic; I be dazzle, my eye fall, and in a voice
somewhat too low I murmured--
"Prenez vos cahiers de dictee, mademoiselle."
not so have I bid the boy at Pelet's take their reading-book. a
rustle follow, and an opening of desk; behind the lift lid which
momentarily screen the head bend down to search for exercise-book, I
hear titter and whisper.
"Eulalie, je suis prete a pamer de rire," observe one.
"Comme il a rougi en parlant!"
"Oui, c'est un veritable blanc-bec."
"tais-toi, Hortense--il nous ecoute."
and now the lid sink and the head reappear; I have mark three, the
whisperer, and I do not scruple to take a very steady look at they as
they emerge from their temporary eclipse. it be astonish what ease
and courage their little phrase of flippancy have give I; the idea by
which I have be awe be that the youthful being before I, with their
dark nun-like robe and softly braid hair, be a kind of half-angel.
the light titter, the giddy whisper, have already in some measure
relieve my mind of that fond and oppressive fancy.
the three I allude to be just in front, within half a yard of my
estrade, and be among the most womanly-look present. their name
I know afterwards, and may as well mention now; they be Eulalie,
Hortense, Caroline. Eulalie be tall, and very finely shaped: she be
fair, and her feature be those of a Low Country Madonna; many a
"figure de Vierge" have I see in dutch picture exactly resemble
her; there be no angle in her shape or in her face, all be curve
and roundness--neither thought, sentiment, nor passion disturb by line
or flush the equality of her pale, clear skin; her noble bust heave
with her regular breathing, her eye move a little--by these evidence
of life alone could I have distinguish she from some large handsome
figure mould in wax. Hortense be of middle size and stout, her
form be ungraceful, her face strike, more alive and brilliant than
Eulalie's, her hair be dark brown, her complexion richly colour;
there be frolic and mischief in her eye: consistency and good sense
she might possess, but none of her feature betoken those quality.
Caroline be little, though evidently full grown; raven-black hair,
very dark eye, absolutely regular feature, with a colourless olive
complexion, clear as to the face and sallow about the neck, form in
she that assemblage of point whose union many person regard as the
perfection of beauty. how, with the tintless pallor of her skin and the
classic straightness of her lineament, she manage to look sensual, I
donot know. I think her lip and eye contrive the affair between
they, and the result leave no uncertainty on the beholder's mind. she be
sensual now, and in ten year' time she would be coarse--promise plain
be write in her face of much future folly.
if I look at these girl with little scruple, they look at I
with still less. Eulalie raise her unmoved eye to mine, and seem to
expect, passively but securely, an impromptu tribute to her majestic
charm. Hortense regard I boldly, and giggle at the same time, while
she say, with an air of impudent freedom--
"Dictez-nous quelquechose de facile pour commencer, monsieur."
Caroline shake her loose ringlet of abundant but somewhat coarse hair
over her roll black eye; part her lip, as full as those of a
hot-blooded Maroon, she show her well-set tooth sparkle between
they, and treat I at the same time to a smile "de sa facon."
Beautiful as Pauline Borghese, she look at the moment scarcely purer
than Lucrece de Borgia. Caroline be of noble family. I hear she
lady-mother's character afterwards, and then I cease to wonder at the
precocious accomplishment of the daughter. these three, I at once saw,
deem themselves the queen of the school, and conceive that by their
splendour they throw all the rest into the shade. in less than five
minute they have thus reveal to I their character, and in less than
five minute I have buckle on a breast-plate of steely indifference, and
let down a visor of impassible austerity.
"take your pen and commence writing," say I, in as dry and trite a
voice as if I have be address only Jules Vanderkelkov and Co.
the dictee now commence. my three belle interrupt I perpetually
with little silly question and uncalled-for remark, to some of which I
make no answer, and to other reply very quietly and briefly. "comment
dit-on point et virgule en Anglais, monsieur?"
"semi-colon, mademoiselle."
"semi-collong? ah, comme c'est drole!" (giggle.)
"j'ai une si mauvaise plume--impossible d'ecrire!"
"Mais, monsieur--je ne sais pas suivre--vous allez si vite."
"Je n'ai rien compris, moi!"
here a general murmur arise, and the teacher, open her lip for the
first time, ejaculated--
"Silence, mademoiselle!"
no silence follow--on the contrary, the three lady in front begin to
talk more loudly.
"C'est si difficile, l'Anglais!"
"Je deteste la dictee."
"Quel ennui d'ecrire quelquechose que l'on ne comprend pas!"
some of those behind laugh: a degree of confusion begin to pervade the
class; it be necessary to take prompt measure.
"Donnez-moi votre cahier," say I to Eulalie in an abrupt tone; and
bend over, I take it before she have time to give it.
"et vous, mademoiselle-donnez-moi le votre," continue I, more mildly,
address a little pale, plain look girl who sit in the first row of
the other division, and whom I have remark as be at once the ugly
and the most attentive in the room; she rise up, walk over to I, and
deliver her book with a grave, modest curtsey. I glance over the
two dictation; Eulalie's be slur, blot, and full of silly
mistake--Sylvie's (such be the name of the ugly little girl) be
clearly write, it contain no error against sense, and but few
fault of orthography. I coolly read aloud both exercise, mark the
fault--then I look at Eulalie:
"C'est honteux!" say I, and I deliberately tear her dictation in four
part, and present she with the fragment. I return Sylvie her book
with a smile, saying--
"C'est bien--je suis content de vous."
Sylvie look calmly please, Eulalie swell like an incense turkey,
but the mutiny be quell: the conceited coquetry and futile flirtation
of the first bench be exchange for a taciturn sullenness, much more
convenient to I, and the rest of my lesson pass without interruption.
a bell clang out in the yard announce the moment for the cessation
of school labour. I hear our own bell at the same time, and that of a
certain public college immediately after. Order dissolve instantly; up
start every pupil, I hasten to seize my hat, bow to the maitresse,
and quit the room before the tide of externat should pour from the
inner class, where I know near a hundred be prisone, and whose rise
tumult I already hear.
I have scarcely cross the hall and gain the corridor, when Mdlle.
Reuter come again upon I.
"step in here a moment," say she, and she hold open the door of
the side room from whence she have issue on my arrival; it be a
SALLE-A-MANGER, as appear from the beaufet and the armoire vitree,
fill with glass and china, which form part of its furniture. Ere she
have close the door on I and herself, the corridor be already fill
with day-pupil, tear down their cloak, bonnet, and cabas from
the wooden peg on which they be suspend; the shrill voice of a
maitresse be hear at interval vainly endeavour to enforce some
sort of order; vainly, I say: discipline there be none in these rough
rank, and yet this be consider one of the well-conduct school in
Brussels.
"well, you have give your first lesson," begin Mdlle. Reuter in the
most calm, equable voice, as though quite unconscious of the chaos from
which we be separate only by a single wall.
"be you satisfied with your pupil, or do any circumstance in their
conduct give you cause for complaint? conceal nothing from I, repose in
I entire confidence."
happily, I feel in myself complete power to manage my pupil without
aid; the enchantment, the golden haze which have dazzle my perspicuity
at first, have be a good deal dissipate. I cannot say I be chagrin
or downcast by the contrast which the reality of a pensionnat de
demoiselle present to my vague ideal of the same community; I be
only enlighten and amuse; consequently, I feel in no disposition to
complain to Mdlle. Reuter, and I receive her considerate invitation to
confidence with a smile.
"a thousand thank, mademoiselle, all have go very smoothly."
she look more than doubtful.
"et les trois demoiselle du premier banc?" say she.
"ah! tout va au mieux!" be my answer, and Mdlle. Reuter cease to
question I; but her eye--not large, not brilliant, not melt, or
kindling, but astute, penetrate, practical, show she be even with
I; it let out a momentary gleam, which say plainly, "be as close as
you like, I be not dependent on your candour; what you would conceal I
already know."
by a transition so quiet as to be scarcely perceptible, the directress's
manner change; the anxious business-air pass from her face, and she
begin chat about the weather and the town, and ask in neighbourly
wise after M. and Madame Pelet. I answer all her little question; she
prolong her talk, I go on follow its many little winding; she
sit so long, say so much, vary so often the topic of discourse,
that it be not difficult to perceive she have a particular aim in thus
detain I. her mere word could have afford no clue to this
aim, but her countenance aid; while her lip utter only affable
commonplace, her eye revert continually to my face. her glance be
not give in full, but out of the corner, so quietly, so stealthily,
yet I think I lose not one. I watch she as keenly as she watch I;
I perceive soon that she be feel after my real character; she be
search for salient point, and weak; point, and eccentric point;
she be apply now this test, now that, hop in the end to find some
chink, some niche, where she could put in her little firm foot and stand
upon my neck--mistress of my nature, do not mistake I, reader, it be
no amorous influence she wish to gain--at that time it be only the
power of the politician to which she aspire; I be now instal as a
professor in her establishment, and she want to know where her mind
be superior to mine--by what feeling or opinion she could lead I.
I enjoy the game much, and do not hasten its conclusion; sometimes I
give her hope, begin a sentence rather weakly, when her shrewd eye
would light up--she think she have I; have lead she a little way, I
delight to turn round and finish with sound, hard sense, whereat her
countenance would fall. at last a servant enter to announce dinner;
the conflict be thus necessarily terminate, we part without have
gain any advantage on either side: Mdlle. Reuter have not even give
I an opportunity of attack she with feeling, and I have manage to
baffle her little scheme of craft. it be a regular draw battle. I
again hold out my hand when I leave the room, she give I her; it be a
small and white hand, but how cool! I meet her eye too in full--oblige
she to give I a straightforward look; this last test go against
I: it leave she as it find she--moderate, temperate, tranquil; I it
disappoint.
"I be grow wiser," think I, as I walk back to M. Pelet's. "look
at this little woman; be she like the woman of novelist and romancer?
to read of female character as depict in Poetry and Fiction, one would
think it be make up of sentiment, either for good or bad--here be
a speciman, and a most sensible and respectable speciman, too, whose
staple ingredient be abstract reason. no Talleyrand be ever more
passionless than Zoraide Reuter!" so I think then; I find
afterwards that blunt susceptibility be very consistent with strong
propensity.
CHAPTER XI.
I had indeed have a very long talk with the crafty little politician, and
on regain my quarter, I find that dinner be half over. to be late
at meal be against a stand rule of the establishment, and have it
be one of the Flemish usher who thus enter after the removal of the
soup and the commencement of the first course, M. Pelet would probably
have greet he with a public rebuke, and would certainly have mulct
he both of soup and fish; as it be, that polite though partial
gentleman only shake his head, and as I take my place, unroll my
napkin, and say my heretical grace to myself, he civilly despatch a
servant to the kitchen, to bring I a plate of "puree aux carotte"
(for this be a maigre-day), and before send away the first course,
reserve for I a portion of the stock-fish of which it consist.
Dinner be over, the boy rush out for their evening play; Kint and
Vandam (the two usher) of course follow they. poor fellow! if they
have not look so very heavy, so very soulless, so very indifferent to
all thing in heaven above or in the earth beneath, I could have pity
they greatly for the obligation they be under to trail after those
rough lad everywhere and at all time; even as it be, I feel dispose
to scout myself as a privileged prig when I turn to ascend to my
chamber, sure to find there, if not enjoyment, at least liberty; but
this evening (as have often happen before) I be to be still far
distinguish.
"eh bien, mauvais sujet!" say the voice of M. Pelet behind I, as I
set my foot on the first step of the stair, "ou allez-vous? Venez a la
salle-a-manger, que je vous gronde un peu."
"I beg pardon, monsieur," say I, as I follow he to his private
sitting-room, "for have return so late--it be not my fault."
"that be just what I want to know," rejoin M. Pelet, as he usher I
into the comfortable parlour with a good wood-fire--for the stove have
now be remove for the season. have ring the bell he order "Coffee
for two," and presently he and I be seat, almost in English comfort,
one on each side of the hearth, a little round table between we, with
a coffee-pot, a sugar-basin, and two large white china cup. while
M. Pelet employ himself in choose a cigar from a box, my thought
revert to the two outcast usher, whose voice I could hear even now
cry hoarsely for order in the playground.
"C'est une grande responsabilite, que la surveillance," observe I.
"Plait-il?" dit M. Pelet.
I remark that I think Messieurs Vandam and Kint must sometimes be a
little fatigued with their labour.
"Des bete de somme,--des bete de somme," murmur scornfully the
director. meantime I offer he his cup of coffee.
"Servez-vous mon garcon," say he blandly, when I have put a couple of
huge lump of continental sugar into his cup. "and now tell I why you
stay so long at Mdlle. Reuter's. I know that lesson conclude, in her
establishment as in mine, at four o'clock, and when you return it be
past five."
"Mdlle. wish to speak with I, monsieur."
"indeed! on what subject? if one may ask."
"Mademoiselle talk about nothing, monsieur."
"a fertile topic! and do she discourse thereon in the schoolroom,
before the pupil?"
"no; like you, monsieur, she ask I to walk into her parlour."
"and Madame Reuter--the old duenna--my mother's gossip, be there, of
course?"
"no, monsieur; I have the honour of be quite alone with mademoiselle."
"C'est joli--cela," observe M. Pelet, and he smile and look into the
fire.
"honi soit qui mal y pense," murmur I, significantly.
"Je connais un peu ma petite voisine--voyez-vous."
"in that case, monsieur will be able to aid I in find out what be
mademoiselle's reason for make I sit before her sofa one mortal hour,
listen to the most copious and fluent dissertation on the merest
frivolity."
"she be sound your character."
"I think so, monsieur."
"do she find out your weak point?"
"what be my weak point?"
"why, the sentimental. any woman sink her shaft deep enough, will
at last reach a fathomless spring of sensibility in thy breast,
Crimsworth."
I feel the blood stir about my heart and rise warm to my cheek.
"some woman might, monsieur."
"be Mdlle. Reuter of the number? come, speak frankly, mon fil; elle est
encore jeune, plus agee que toi peut-etre, mais juste asset pour unir
la tendresse d'une petite maman a l'amour d'une epouse devouee; n'est-ce
pas que cela t'irait superieurement?"
"no, monsieur; I should like my wife to be my wife, and not half my
mother."
"she be then a little too old for you?"
"no, monsieur, not a day too old if she suit I in other thing."
"in what do she not suit you, William? she be personally agreeable, be
she not?"
"very; her hair and complexion be just what I admire; and her turn of
form, though quite belgian, be full of grace."
"Bravo! and her face? her feature? how do you like they?"
"a little harsh, especially her mouth."
"ah, yes! her mouth," say M. Pelet, and he chuckle inwardly. "there be
character about her mouth--firmness--but she have a very pleasant smile;
donot you think so?"
"rather crafty."
"true, but that expression of craft be owe to her eyebrow; have you
remark her eyebrow?"
I answer that I have not.
"you have not see she look down then?" say he.
"no."
"it be a treat, notwithstanding. observe she when she have some knitting,
or some other woman's work in hand, and sit the image of peace, calmly
intent on her needle and her silk, some discussion meantime go on
around she, in the course of which peculiarity of character be be
develop, or important interest canvass; she take no part in it;
her humble, feminine mind be wholly with her knitting; none of she
feature move; she neither presume to smile approval, nor frown
disapprobation; her little hand assiduously ply their unpretending
task; if she can only get this purse finish, or this bonnet-grec
complete, it be enough for she. if gentleman approach her chair, a
deep quiescence, a meeker modesty settle on her feature, and clothe
her general mien; observe then her eyebrow, et dite-moi s'il n'y a pas
du chat dans l'un et du renard dans l'autre."
"I will take careful notice the first opportunity," say I.
"and then," continue M. Pelet, "the eyelid will flicker, the
light-colour lash be lift a second, and a blue eye, glance out
from under the screen, will take its brief, sly, search survey, and
retreat again."
I smile, and so do Pelet, and after a few minute' silence, I ask:
"will she ever marry, do you think?"
"Marry! will bird pair? of course it be both her intention and
resolution to marry when she find a suitable match, and no one be
well aware than herself of the sort of impression she be capable
of produce; no one like well to captivate in a quiet way. I be
mistaken if she will not yet leave the print of she steal step on
thy heart, Crimsworth."
"of her step? confound it, no! my heart be not a plank to be walk
on."
"but the soft touch of a patte de velour will do it no harm."
"she offer I no patte de velour; she be all form and reserve with
I."
"that to begin with; let respect be the foundation, affection the first
floor, love the superstructure; Mdlle. Reuter be a skilful architect."
"and interest, M. Pelet--interest. will not mademoiselle consider that
point?"
"yes, yes, no doubt; it will be the cement between every stone. and now
we have discuss the directress, what of the pupil? N'y-a-t-il pas de
belle etude parmi ce jeune tete?"
"study of character? yes; curious one, at least, I imagine; but one
cannot divine much from a first interview."
"ah, you affect discretion; but tell I now, be you not a little
abash before these bloom young creature?
"at first, yes; but I rally and get through with all due sang-froid."
"I donot believe you."
"it be true, notwithstanding. at first I think they angel, but they
do not leave I long under that delusion; three of the eld and
handsome undertake the task of set I right, and they manage
so cleverly that in five minute I know they, at least, for what they
be--three arrant coquette."
"Je les connais!" exclaim M. Pelet. "Elles sont toujour au premier
ring a l'eglise et a la promenade; une blonde superbe, une jolie
espiegle, une belle brune."
"exactly."
"lovely creature all of they--head for artist; what a group they
would make, take together! Eulalie (I know their name), with she
smooth braid hair and calm ivory brow. Hortense, with her rich chesnut
lock so luxuriantly knot, plait, twisted, as if she do not know
how to dispose of all their abundance, with her vermilion lip, damask
cheek, and roguish laugh eye. and Caroline de Blemont! ah, there be
beauty! beauty in perfection. what a cloud of sable curl about the face
of a houri! what fascinating lip! what glorious black eye! your Byron
would have worship she, and you--you cold, frigid islander!--you
play the austere, the insensible in the presence of an Aphrodite so
exquisite?"
I might have laugh at the director's enthusiasm have I believe
it real, but there be something in his tone which indicate get-up
rapture. I feel he be only affect fervour in order to put I off my
guard, to induce I to come out in return, so I scarcely even smile. he
go on:
"Confess, William, do not the mere good look of Zoraide Reuter appear
dowdyish and commonplace compare with the splendid charm of some of
her pupil?"
the question discompose I, but I now feel plainly that my principal
be endeavour (for reason well know to himself--at that time I
could not fathom they) to excite idea and wish in my mind alien to
what be right and honourable. the iniquity of the instigation prove
its antidote, and when he far added:--
"each of those three beautiful girl will have a handsome fortune; and
with a little address, a gentlemanlike, intelligent young fellow like
you might make himself master of the hand, heart, and purse of any one
of the trio."
I reply by a look and an interrogative "Monsieur?" which startle he.
he laugh a forced laugh, affirm that he have only be joke, and
demand whether I could possibly have think he in earnest. just then
the bell ring; the play-hour be over; it be an evening on which M.
Pelet be accustom to read passage from the drama and the belle
lettre to his pupil. he do not wait for my answer, but rise, leave
the room, hum as he go some gay strain of Beranger's.
CHAPTER XII.
DAILY, as I continue my attendance at the seminary of Mdlle. Reuter,
do I find fresh occasion to compare the ideal with the real. what
have I know of female character previously to my arrival at Brussels?
precious little. and what be my notion of it? something vague, slight,
gauzy, glitter; now when I come in contact with it I find it to be
a palpable substance enough; very hard too sometimes, and often heavy;
there be metal in it, both lead and iron.
let the idealist, the dreamer about earthly angel and human flower,
just look here while I open my portfolio and show they a sketch or
two, pencil after nature. I take these sketch in the second-class
schoolroom of Mdlle. Reuter's establishment, where about a hundred
specimen of the genus "jeune fille" collect together, offer a
fertile variety of subject. a miscellaneous assortment they be,
differ both in caste and country; as I sit on my estrade and glance
over the long range of desk, I have under my eye French, English,
Belgians, Austrians, and Prussians. the majority belong to the class
bourgeois; but there be many countess, there be the daughter of
two general and of several colonel, captain, and government EMPLOYES;
these lady sit side by side with young female destine to be
demoiselle de magasin, and with some Flamandes, genuine aborigine of
the country. in dress all be nearly similar, and in manner there be
small difference; exception there be to the general rule, but the
majority give the tone to the establishment, and that tone be rough,
boisterous, mask by a point-blank disregard of all forbearance towards
each other or their teacher; an eager pursuit by each individual of her
own interest and convenience; and a coarse indifference to the interest
and convenience of every one else. Most of they could lie with audacity
when it appear advantageous to do so. all understand the art of
speak fair when a point be to be gain, and could with consummate
skill and at a moment's notice turn the cold shoulder the instant
civility cease to be profitable. very little open quarrelling ever take
place amongst they; but backbiting and talebearing be universal. close
friendship be forbid by the rule of the school, and no one girl
seem to cultivate more regard for another than be just necessary to
secure a companion when solitude would have be irksome. they be each
and all suppose to have be rear in utter unconsciousness of vice.
the precaution use to keep they ignorant, if not innocent, be
innumerable. how be it, then, that scarcely one of those girl have
attain the age of fourteen could look a man in the face with modesty
and propriety? an air of bold, impudent flirtation, or a loose, silly
leer, be sure to answer the most ordinary glance from a masculine eye.
I know nothing of the arcana of the roman Catholic religion, and I
be not a bigot in matter of theology, but I suspect the root of this
precocious impurity, so obvious, so general in popish country, be to
be find in the discipline, if not the doctrine of the Church of Rome.
I record what I have see: these girl belong to what be call the
respectable rank of society; they have all be carefully bring up,
yet be the mass of they mentally depraved. so much for the general
view: now for one or two select specimen.
the first picture be a full length of Aurelia Koslow, a german fraulein,
or rather a half-breed between German and Russian. she be eighteen year
of age, and have be send to Brussels to finish her education; she be
of middle size, stiffly make, body long, leg short, bust much develop
but not compactly mould, waist disproportionately compress by an
inhumanly braced corset, dress carefully arrange, large foot torture
into small bottine, head small, hair smooth, braid, oil, and
gum to perfection; very low forehead, very diminutive and vindictive
grey eye, somewhat Tartar feature, rather flat nose, rather high-cheek
bone, yet the ensemble not positively ugly; tolerably good complexion.
so much for person. as to mind, deplorably ignorant and ill-inform:
incapable of writing or speak correctly even German, her native
tongue, a dunce in French, and her attempt at learn English a mere
farce, yet she have be at school twelve year; but as she invariably
get her exercise, of every description, do by a fellow pupil, and
read her lesson off a book; conceal in her lap, it be not wonderful
that her progress have be so snail-like. I do not know what Aurelia's
daily habit of life be, because I have not the opportunity of
observe she at all time; but from what I see of the state of her
desk, book, and paper, I should say she be slovenly and even dirty;
her outward dress, as I have say, be well attend to, but in pass
behind her bench, I have remark that her neck be gray for want of
washing, and her hair, so glossy with gum and grease, be not such as
one feel tempt to pass the hand over, much less to run the finger
through. Aurelia's conduct in class, at least when I be present, be
something extraordinary, consider as an index of girlish innocence.
the moment I enter the room, she nudge she next neighbour and indulge
in a half-suppress laugh. as I take my seat on the estrade, she
fix her eye on I; she seem resolve to attract, and, if possible,
monopolize my notice: to this end she launch at I all sort of look,
languish, provoking, leering, laugh. as I be find quite proof
against this sort of artillery--for we scorn what, unasked, be lavishly
offer--she have recourse to the expedient of make noise; sometimes
she sigh, sometimes groan, sometimes utter inarticulate sound, for
which language have no name. if, in walk up the schoolroom, I pass
near she, she put out her foot that it may touch mine; if I do not
happen to observe the manoeuvre, and my boot come in contact with her
brodequin, she affect to fall into convulsion of suppress laughter;
if I notice the snare and avoid it, she express her mortification in
sullen muttering, where I hear myself abuse in bad French, pronounce
with an intolerable low german accent.
not far from Mdlle. Koslow sit another young lady by name Adele
Dronsart: this be a belgian, rather low of stature, in form heavy,
with broad waist, short neck and limb, good red and white complexion,
feature well chisel and regular, well-cut eye of a clear brown
colour, light brown hair, good tooth, age not much above fifteen, but as
full-grown as a stout young Englishwoman of twenty. this portrait give
the idea of a somewhat dumpy but good-look damsel, do it not? well,
when I look along the row of young head, my eye generally stop at
this of Adele's; her gaze be ever wait for mine, and it frequently
succeed in arrest it. she be an unnatural-look being--so young,
fresh, blooming, yet so Gorgon-like. Suspicion, sullen ill-temper be
on her forehead, vicious propensity in her eye, envy and panther-like
deceit about her mouth. in general she sit very still; her massive shape
look as if it could not bend much, nor do her large head--so broad
at the base, so narrow towards the top--seem make to turn readily on her
short neck. she have but two variety of expression; the prevalent one
a forbidding, dissatisfied scowl, varied sometimes by a most pernicious
and perfidious smile. she be shun by her fellow-pupil, for, bad as
many of they be, few be as bad as she.
Aurelia and Adele be in the first division of the second class; the
second division be head by a pensionnaire name Juanna Trista. this
girl be of mixed belgian and spanish origin; her flemish mother be
dead, her catalonian father be a merchant reside in the ---- isle,
where Juanna have be bear and whence she be send to Europe to be
educate. I wonder that any one, look at that girl's head and
countenance, would have receive she under their roof. she have precisely
the same shape of skull as Pope Alexander the Sixth; her organ
of benevolence, veneration, conscientiousness, adhesiveness, be
singularly small, those of self-esteem, firmness, destructiveness,
combativeness, preposterously large; her head slop up in the penthouse
shape, be contract about the forehead, and prominent behind; she
have rather good, though large and marked feature; her temperament be
fibrous and bilious, her complexion pale and dark, hair and eye black,
form angular and rigid but proportionate, age fifteen.
Juanna be not very thin, but she have a gaunt visage, and her "regard"
be fierce and hungry; narrow as be her brow, it present space enough
for the legible graving of two word, Mutiny and Hate; in some one of
her other lineament I think the eye--cowardice have also its distinct
cipher. Mdlle. Trista think fit to trouble my first lesson with a
coarse work-day sort of turbulence; she make noise with her mouth like
a horse, she eject her saliva, she utter brutal expression; behind
and below she be seat a band of very vulgar, inferior-look
flamande, include two or three example of that deformity of person
and imbecility of intellect whose frequency in the Low Countries would
seem to furnish proof that the climate be such as to induce degeneracy
of the human mind and body; these, I soon find, be completely under
her influence, and with their aid she get up and sustain a swinish
tumult, which I be constrain at last to quell by order she and two
of her tool to rise from their seat, and, have keep they stand
five minute, turn they bodily out of the schoolroom: the accomplice
into a large place adjoining call the grand salle; the principal
into a cabinet, of which I close the door and pocket the key. this
judgment I execute in the presence of Mdlle. Reuter, who look much
aghast at behold so decide a proceeding--the most severe that have
ever be venture on in her establishment. her look of affright I
answer with one of composure, and finally with a smile, which perhaps
flatter, and certainly soothe she. Juanna Trista remain in Europe
long enough to repay, by malevolence and ingratitude, all who have ever
do she a good turn; and she then go to join her father in the----
isle, exult in the thought that she should there have slave, whom,
as she say, she could kick and strike at will.
these three picture be from the life. I possess other, as mark and
as little agreeable, but I will spare my reader the exhibition of they.
doubtless it will be think that I ought now, by way of contrast, to
show something charming; some gentle virgin head, circle with a halo,
some sweet personification of innocence, clasp the dove of peace to
her bosom. no: I see nothing of the sort, and therefore cannot portray
it. the pupil in the school possess the happy disposition be
a young girl from the country, Louise Path; she be sufficiently
benevolent and obliging, but not well teach nor well mannere;
moreover, the plague-spot of dissimulation be in she also; honour and
principle be unknown to she, she have scarcely hear their name. the
least exceptionable pupil be the poor little Sylvie I have mention
once before. Sylvie be gentle in manner, intelligent in mind; she be
even sincere, as far as her religion would permit she to be so, but her
physical organization be defective; weak health stunt her growth and
chill her spirit, and then, destine as she be for the cloister,
her whole soul be warp to a conventual bias, and in the tame, train
subjection of her manner, one read that she have already prepare herself
for her future course of life, by give up her independence of thought
and action into the hand of some despotic confessor. she permit
herself no original opinion, no preference of companion or employment;
in everything she be guide by another. with a pale, passive, automaton
air, she go about all day long do what she be bid; never what she
like, or what, from innate conviction, she think it right to do. the
poor little future religieuse have be early teach to make the dictate
of her own reason and conscience quite subordinate to the will of
her spiritual director. she be the model pupil of Mdlle. Reuter's
establishment; pale, blighted image, where life linger feebly, but
whence the soul have be conjure by Romish wizard-craft!
a few english pupil there be in this school, and these might be
divide into two class. 1st. the continental English--the daughter
chiefly of broken adventurer, whom debt or dishonour have drive from
their own country. these poor girl have never know the advantage
of settled home, decorous example, or honest protestant education;
resident a few month now in one catholic school, now in another, as
their parent wander from land to land--from France to Germany, from
Germany to Belgium--they have pick up some scanty instruction, many bad
habit, lose every notion even of the first element of religion and
moral, and acquire an imbecile indifference to every sentiment that
can elevate humanity; they be distinguishable by an habitual look
of sullen dejection, the result of crushed self-respect and constant
browbeating from their popish fellow-pupil, who hat they as English,
and scorn they as heretics.
the second class be british English. of these I do not encounter half
a dozen during the whole time of my attendance at the seminary; their
characteristic be clean but careless dress, ill-arrange hair
(compare with the tight and trim foreigner), erect carriage, flexible
figure, white and taper hand, feature more irregular, but also more
intellectual than those of the Belgians, grave and modest countenance,
a general air of native propriety and decency; by this last circumstance
alone I could at a glance distinguish the daughter of Albion and
nursling of Protestantism from the foster-child of Rome, the protegee
of Jesuistry: proud, too, be the aspect of these british girl; at once
envy and ridicule by their continental associate, they ward off
insult with austere civility, and meet hate with mute disdain; they
eschew company-keeping, and in the midst of number seem to dwell
isolate.
the teacher preside over this mixed multitude be three in number,
all French--their name mdlle. Zephyrine, Pelagie, and Suzette; the two
last be commonplace personage enough; their look be ordinary,
their manner be ordinary, their temper be ordinary, their thought,
feeling, and view be all ordinary--be I to write a chapter on the
subject I could not elucidate it far. zephyrine be somewhat more
distinguish in appearance and deportment than Pelagie and Suzette,
but in character genuine parisian coquette, perfidious, mercenary, and
dry-hearted. a fourth maitresse I sometimes see who seem to come daily
to teach needlework, or netting, or lace-mending, or some such flimsy
art; but of she I never have more than a pass glimpse, as she sit in
the CARRE, with her frame and some dozen of the elder pupil about she,
consequently I have no opportunity of study her character, or even of
observe her person much; the latter, I remark, have a very english
air for a maitresse, otherwise it be not strike; of character I
should think; she possess but little, as her pupil seem constantly
"en revolte" against her authority. she do not reside in the house; her
name, I think, be Mdlle. Henri.
amidst this assemblage of all that be insignificant and defective, much
that be vicious and repulsive (by that last epithet many would have
describe the two or three stiff, silent, decently behave, ill-dress
british girl), the sensible, sagacious, affable directress shine like a
steady star over a marsh full of Jack-o'-lanthorns; profoundly aware
of her superiority, she derive an inward bliss from that consciousness
which sustain she under all the care and responsibility inseparable
from her position; it keep her temper calm, her brow smooth, her manner
tranquil. she like--as who would not?--on enter the school-room,
to feel that her sole presence suffice to diffuse that order and
quiet which all the remonstrance, and even command, of her underling
frequently fail to enforce; she like to stand in comparison, or
rather--contrast, with those who surround she, and to know that in
personal as well as mental advantage, she bear away the undisputed
palm of preference--(the three teacher be all plain.) her pupil she
manage with such indulgence and address, take always on herself the
office of recompenser and eulogist, and abandon to her subaltern
every invidious task of blame and punishment, that they all regard she
with deference, if not with affection; her teacher do not love she,
but they submit because they be her inferior in everything; the
various master who attend her school be each and all in some way
or other under her influence; over one she have acquire power by her
skilful management of his bad temper; over another by little attention
to his petty caprice; a third she have subdue by flattery; a fourth--a
timid man--she keep in awe by a sort of austere decision of mien; I,
she still watch, still try by the most ingenious test--she rove
round I, baffle, yet persevere; I believe she think I be like
a smooth and bare precipice, which offer neither jut stone nor
tree-root, nor tuft of grass to aid the climber. now she flatter
with exquisite tact, now she moralize, now she try how far I be
accessible to mercenary motif, then she disport on the brink of
affection--know that some man be win by weakness--anon, she talk
excellent sense, aware that other have the folly to admire judgment.
I find it at once pleasant and easy to evade all these effort; it be
sweet, when she think I nearly win, to turn round and to smile in
her very eye, half scornfully, and then to witness she scarcely veil,
though mute mortification. still she persevere, and at last, I be bind
to confess it, her finger, essay, prove every atom of the casket,
touch its secret spring, and for a moment the lid spring open; she
lay her hand on the jewel within; whether she steal and break it, or
whether the lid shut again with a snap on her finger, read on, and you
shall know.
it happen that I come one day to give a lesson when I be indispose;
I have a bad cold and a cough; two hour' incessant talking leave I very
hoarse and tired; as I quit the schoolroom, and be pass along the
corridor, I meet Mdlle. Reuter; she remark, with an anxious air, that
I look very pale and tired. "yes," I say, "I be fatigue;" and then,
with increase interest, she rejoin, "you shall not go away till you
have have some refreshment." she persuade I to step into the parlour,
and be very kind and gentle while I stay. the next day she be kind
still; she come herself into the class to see that the window be
closed, and that there be no draught; she exhort I with friendly
earnestness not to over-exert myself; when I go away, she give I
her hand unasked, and I could not but mark, by a respectful and gentle
pressure, that I be sensible of the favour, and grateful for it. my
modest demonstration kindle a little merry smile on her countenance;
I think she almost charming. during the remainder of the evening, my
mind be full of impatience for the afternoon of the next day to arrive,
that I might see she again.
I be not disappointed, for she sit in the class during the whole of my
subsequent lesson, and often look at I almost with affection. at four
o'clock she accompany I out of the schoolroom, ask with solicitude
after my health, then scold I sweetly because I speak too loud and
give myself too much trouble; I stop at the glass-door which lead into
the garden, to hear her lecture to the end; the door be open, it be a
very fine day, and while I listen to the soothe reprimand, I look
at the sunshine and flower, and feel very happy. the day-scholar begin
to pour from the schoolroom into the passage.
"will you go into the garden a minute or two," ask she, "till they be
go?"
I descend the step without answer, but I look back as much as to
say--
"you will come with I?"
in another minute I and the directress be walk side by side down
the alley border with fruit-tree, whose white blossom be then in
full blow as well as their tender green leaf. the sky be blue, the
air still, the May afternoon be full of brightness and fragrance.
release from the stifle class, surround with flower and foliage,
with a pleasing, smile, affable woman at my side--how do I feel? why,
very enviably. it seem as if the romantic vision my imagination have
suggest of this garden, while it be yet hide from I by the jealous
board, be more than realize; and, when a turn in the alley shut out
the view of the house, and some tall shrub exclude M. Pelet's
mansion, and screen we momentarily from the other house, rise
amphitheatre-like round this green spot, I give my arm to Mdlle. Reuter,
and lead she to a garden-chair, nestle under some lilac near. she sit
down; I take my place at her side. she go on talk to I with that
ease which communicate ease, and, as I listen, a revelation dawn
in my mind that I be on the brink of fall in love. the dinner-bell
rang, both at her house and M. Pelet's; we be oblige to part; I
detain she a moment as she be move away.
"I want something," say I.
"what?" ask Zoraide naively.
"only a flower."
"gather it then--or two, or twenty, if you like."
"no--one will do-but you must gather it, and give it to I."
"what a caprice!" she exclaim, but she raise herself on her tip-toe,
and, pluck a beautiful branch of lilac, offer it to I with grace.
I take it, and go away, satisfied for the present, and hopeful for the
future.
certainly that May day be a lovely one, and it close in moonlight
night of summer warmth and serenity. I remember this well; for, have
sit up late that evening, correct devoir, and feel weary and
a little oppress with the closeness of my small room, I open the
often-mention board window, whose board, however, I have persuade
old Madame Pelet to have remove since I have fill the post of
professor in the pensionnat de demoiselle, as, from that time, it
be no long "inconvenient" for I to overlook my own pupil at their
sport. I sit down in the window-seat, rest my arm on the sill,
and lean out: above I be the clear-obscure of a cloudless
night sky--splendid moonlight subdue the tremulous sparkle of the
star--below lie the garden, vary with silvery lustre and deep shade,
and all fresh with dew--a grateful perfume exhale from the closed
blossom of the fruit-tree--not a leaf stir, the night be
breezeless. my window look directly down upon a certain walk of Mdlle.
Reuter's garden, call "l'allee defendue," so name because the pupil
be forbid to enter it on account of its proximity to the boy'
school. it be here that the lilac and laburnum grow especially thick;
this be the most sheltered nook in the enclosure, its shrub screen
the garden-chair where that afternoon I have sit with the young
directress. I need not say that my thought be chiefly with she as
I lean from the lattice, and let my eye roam, now over the walk and
border of the garden, now along the many-windowed front of the house
which rise white beyond the mass of foliage. I wonder in what part
of the building be situate her apartment; and a single light, shin
through the persienne of one croisee, seem to direct I to it.
"she watch late," think I, "for it must be now near midnight. she
be a fascinating little woman," I continue in voiceless soliloquy; "her
image form a pleasant picture in memory; I know she be not what the
world call pretty--no matter, there be harmony in her aspect, and I
like it; her brown hair, her blue eye, the freshness of her cheek, the
whiteness of her neck, all suit my taste. then I respect her talent;
the idea of marry a doll or a fool be always abhorrent to I: I know
that a pretty doll, a fair fool, might do well enough for the honeymoon;
but when passion cool, how dreadful to find a lump of wax and wood
lay in my bosom, a half idiot clasp in my arm, and to remember that
I have make of this my equal--nay, my idol--to know that I must pass the
rest of my dreary life with a creature incapable of understand what
I say, of appreciate what I think, or of sympathize with what I
feel! "now, Zoraide Reuter," think I, "have tact, CARACTERE, judgment,
discretion; have she heart? what a good, simple little smile play
about her lip when she give I the branch of lilacs! I have think she
crafty, dissembling, interested sometimes, it be true; but may not much
that look like cunning and dissimulation in her conduct be only
the effort make by a bland temper to traverse quietly perplex
difficulty? and as to interest, she wish to make her way in the
world, no doubt, and who can blame she? even if she be truly deficient
in sound principle, be it not rather her misfortune than her fault? she
have be bring up a Catholic: have she be bear an Englishwoman, and
rear a protestant, might she not have add straight integrity to
all her other excellence? suppose she be to marry an English and
protestant husband, would she not, rational, sensible as she be, quickly
acknowledge the superiority of right over expediency, honesty over
policy? it would be worth a man's while to try the experiment; to-morrow
I will renew my observation. she know that I watch she: how calm she
be under scrutiny! it seem rather to gratify than annoy she." here a
strain of music steal in upon my monologue, and suspend it; it be
a bugle, very skilfully play, in the neighbourhood of the park, I
think, or on the Place Royale. so sweet be the tone, so subdue
their effect at that hour, in the midst of silence and under the
quiet reign of moonlight, I cease to think, that I might listen more
intently. the strain retreat, its sound wax fainter and be soon
go; my ear prepare to repose on the absolute hush of midnight once
more. no. what murmur be that which, low, and yet near and approach
nearer, frustrate the expectation of total silence? it be some one
conversing--yes, evidently, an audible, though subdue voice speak in
the garden immediately below I. another answer; the first voice be
that of a man, the second that of a woman; and a man and a woman I see
come slowly down the alley. their form be at first in shade, I
could but discern a dusk outline of each, but a ray of moonlight meet
they at the termination of the walk, when they be under my very nose,
and reveal very plainly, very unequivocally, Mdlle. Zoraide Reuter,
arm-in-arm, or hand-in-hand (I forget which) with my principal,
confidant, and counsellor, M. Francois Pelet. and M. Pelet be saying--
"a quand donc le jour des noces, ma bien-aimee?"
and Mdlle. Reuter answered--
"Mais, Francois, tu sais bien qu'il I serait impossible de I mari
avant les vacance."
"June, July, August, a whole quarter!" exclaim the director. "how can
I wait so long?--I who be ready, even now, to expire at your foot with
impatience!"
"ah! if you die, the whole affair will be settle without any trouble
about notary and contract; I shall only have to order a slight
mourning dress, which will be much soon prepared than the nuptial
trousseau."
"Cruel Zoraide! you laugh at the distress of one who love you so
devotedly as I do: my torment be your sport; you scruple not to stretch
my soul on the rack of jealousy; for, deny it as you will, I be certain
you have cast encourage glance on that school-boy, Crimsworth; he have
presume to fall in love, which he dare not have do unless you have
give he room to hope."
"what do you say, Francois? do you say Crimsworth be in love with I?"
"over head and ear."
"have he tell you so?"
"no--but I see it in his face: he blush whenever your name be
mention." a little laugh of exulte coquetry announce Mdlle.
Reuter's gratification at this piece of intelligence (which be a lie,
by-the-by--I have never be so far go as that, after all). M. Pelet
proceed to ask what she intend to do with I, intimate pretty
plainly, and not very gallantly, that it be nonsense for she to think
of take such a "blanc-bec" as a husband, since she must be at least
ten year old than I (be she then thirty-two? I should not have
think it). I hear her disclaim any intention on the subject--the
director, however, still press she to give a definite answer.
"Francois," say she, "you be jealous," and still she laugh; then, as
if suddenly recollect that this coquetry be not consistent with the
character for modest dignity she wish to establish, she proceed,
in a demure voice: "truly, my dear Francois, I will not deny that this
young Englishman may have make some attempt to ingratiate himself with
I; but, so far from give he any encouragement, I have always treat
he with as much reserve as it be possible to combine with civility;
affiance as I be to you, I would give no man false hope; believe I,
dear friend." still pelet utter murmur of distrust--so I judge, at
least, from her reply.
"what folly! how could I prefer an unknown foreigner to you? and
then--not to flatter your vanity--Crimsworth could not bear comparison
with you either physically or mentally; he be not a handsome man at all;
some may call he gentleman-like and intelligent-looking, but for my
part--"
the rest of the sentence be lose in the distance, as the pair, rise
from the chair in which they have be seat, move away. I wait their
return, but soon the opening and shutting of a door inform I that
they have re-enter the house; I listen a little long, all be
perfectly still; I listen more than an hour--at last I hear M. Pelet
come in and ascend to his chamber. glance once more towards the long
front of the garden-house, I perceive that its solitary light be
at length extinguish; so, for a time, be my faith in love and
friendship. I go to bed, but something feverish and fiery have get into
my vein which prevent I from sleep much that night.
CHAPTER XIII.
next morning I rise with the dawn, and have dress myself and stand
half-an-hour, my elbow lean on the chest of drawer, consider what
mean I should adopt to restore my spirit, fag with sleeplessness,
to their ordinary tone--for I have no intention of get up a scene
with M. Pelet, reproach he with perfidy, send he a challenge, or
perform other gambado of the sort--I hit at last on the
expedient of walk out in the cool of the morning to a neighbouring
establishment of bath, and treat myself to a bracing plunge.
the remedy produce the desire effect. I come back at seven o'clock
steadied and invigorate, and be able to greet M. Pelet, when he
enter to breakfast, with an unchanged and tranquil countenance; even
a cordial offering of the hand and the flattering appellation of "mon
fil," pronounce in that caress tone with which Monsieur have, of
late day especially, be accustom to address I, do not elicit any
external sign of the feeling which, though subdue, still glow at
my heart. not that I nurse vengeance--no; but the sense of insult and
treachery live in I like a kindling, though as yet smother coal. God
know I be not by nature vindictive; I would not hurt a man because I
can no long trust or like he; but neither my reason nor feeling
be of the vacillate order--they be not of that sand-like sort where
impression, if soon make, be as soon efface. once convince that my
friend's disposition be incompatible with my own, once assure that he
be indelibly stain with certain defect obnoxious to my principle,
and I dissolve the connection. I do so with Edward. as to Pelet, the
discovery be yet new; should I act thus with he? it be the question I
place before my mind as I stir my cup of coffee with a half-pistolet
(we never have spoon), pelet meantime be seat opposite, his pallid
face look as know and more haggard than usual, his blue eye
turn, now sternly on his boy and usher, and now graciously on I.
"circumstance must guide I," say I; and meet Pelet's false glance
and insinuate smile, I thank heaven that I have last night open
my window and read by the light of a full moon the true meaning of that
guileful countenance. I feel half his master, because the reality of
his nature be now know to I; smile and flatter as he would, I see his
soul lurk behind his smile, and hear in every one of his smooth phrase
a voice interpret their treacherous import.
but Zoraide Reuter? of course her defection have cut I to the quick?
that stint; must have go too deep for any consolation of philosophy
to be available in cure its smart? not at all. the night fever over,
I look about for balm to that wound also, and find some near home
than at Gilead. Reason be my physician; she begin by prove that the
prize I have miss be of little value: she admit that, physically,
zoraide might have suit I, but affirm that our soul be not in
harmony, and that discord must have result from the union of her mind
with mine. she then insist on the suppression of all repine,
and command I rather to rejoice that I have escape a snare. her
medicament do I good. I feel its strengthen effect when I meet the
directress the next day; its stringent operation on the nerve suffer
no trembling, no faltering; it enable I to face she with firmness,
to pass she with ease. she have hold out her hand to I--that I do not
choose to see. she have greet I with a charming smile--it fall on my
heart like light on stone. I pass on to the estrade, she follow I;
her eye, fasten on my face, demand of every feature the meaning of
my changed and careless manner. "I will give she an answer," think I;
and, meet her gaze full, arresting, fix her glance, I shoot into
her eye, from my own, a look, where there be no respect, no love,
no tenderness, no gallantry; where the strict analysis could detect
nothing but scorn, hardihood, irony. I make she bear it, and feel it;
her steady countenance do not change, but her colour rise, and she
approach I as if fascinated. she step on to the estrade, and
stand close by my side; she have nothing to say. I would not relieve she
embarrassment, and negligently turn over the leaf of a book.
"I hope you feel quite recover to-day," at last she say, in a low
tone.
"and I, mademoiselle, hope that you take no cold last night in
consequence of your late walk in the garden."
quick enough of comprehension, she understand I directly; her face
become a little blanched--a very little--but no muscle in her rather
mark feature move; and, calm and self-possess, she retire from
the estrade, take her seat quietly at a little distance, and occupy
herself with net a purse. I proceed to give my lesson; it be a
"composition," i.e., I dictate certain general question, of which the
pupil be to compose the answer from memory, access to book be
forbid. while Mdlle. Eulalie, Hortense, Caroline, &c., be ponder
over the string of rather abstruse grammatical interrogatory I have
propound, I be at liberty to employ the vacant half hour in far
observe the directress herself. the green silk purse be progress
fast in her hand; her eye be bent upon it; her attitude, as she
sit net within two yard of I, be still yet guard; in her whole
person be express at once, and with equal clearness, vigilance and
repose--a rare union! look at she, I be force, as I have often be
before, to offer her good sense, her wondrous self-control, the tribute
of involuntary admiration. she have feel that I have withdraw from her
my esteem; she have see contempt and coldness in my eye, and to she, who
covet the approbation of all around she, who thirst after universal
good opinion, such discovery must have be an acute wound. I have
witness its effect in the momentary pallor of her cheek-cheek unused
to vary; yet how quickly, by dint of self-control, have she recover
her composure! with what quiet dignity she now sit, almost at my side,
sustain by her sound and vigorous sense; no trembling in her somewhat
lengthened, though shrewd upper lip, no coward shame on her austere
forehead!
"there be metal there," I say, as I gaze. "would that there be fire
also, live ardour to make the steel glow--then I could love she."
presently I discover that she know I be watch she, for she stir
not, she lift not her crafty eyelid; she have glance down from she
net to her small foot, peep from the soft fold of her purple
merino gown; thence her eye revert to her hand, ivory white, with a
bright garnet ring on the forefinger, and a light frill of lace round
the wrist; with a scarcely perceptible movement she turn her head,
cause her nut-brown curl to wave gracefully. in these slight sign
I read that the wish of her heart, the design of her brain, be to lure
back the game she have scar. a little incident give she the opportunity
of address I again.
while all be silence in the class--silence, but for the rustling of
copy-book and the travelling of pen over their page--a leaf of the
large folding-door, open from the hall, unclosed, admit a
pupil who, after make a hasty obeisance, ensconce herself with some
appearance of trepidation, probably occasion by her enter so
late, in a vacant seat at the desk nearest the door. be seat, she
proceed, still with an air of hurry and embarrassment, to open she
cabas, to take out her book; and, while I be wait for she to look
up, in order to make out her identity--for, shortsighte as I be, I have
not recognize she at her entrance--Mdlle. Reuter, leave her chair,
approach the estrade.
"Monsieur Creemsvort," say she, in a whisper: for when the schoolroom
be silent, the directress always move with velvet tread, and speak
in the most subdued key, enforce order and stillness fully as much
by example as precept: "Monsieur Creemsvort, that young person, who have
just enter, wish to have the advantage of take lesson with you in
English; she be not a pupil of the house; she be, indeed, in one sense,
a teacher, for she give instruction in lace-mending, and in little
variety of ornamental needle-work. she very properly propose to
qualify herself for a high department of education, and have ask
permission to attend your lesson, in order to perfect her knowledge
of English, in which language she have, I believe, already make
some progress; of course it be my wish to aid she in an effort
so praiseworthy; you will permit she then to benefit by your
instruction--n'est ce pas, monsieur?" and Mdlle. Reuter's eye be
raise to mine with a look at once naive, benign, and beseech.
I reply, "of course," very laconically, almost abruptly.
"another word," she say, with softness: "Mdlle. Henri have not receive
a regular education; perhaps her natural talent be not of the high
order: but I can assure you of the excellence of her intention, and
even of the amiability of her disposition. Monsieur will then, I be
sure, have the goodness to be considerate with she at first, and not
expose her backwardness, her inevitable deficiency, before the young
lady, who, in a sense, be her pupil. will Monsieur Creemsvort favour
I by attend to this hint?" I nod. she continue with subdued
earnestness--
"Pardon I, monsieur, if I venture to add that what I have just say be
of importance to the poor girl; she already experience great difficulty
in impress these giddy young thing with a due degree of deference
for her authority, and should that difficulty be increase by new
discovery of her incapacity, she might find her position in my
establishment too painful to be retain; a circumstance I should much
regret for her sake, as she can ill afford to lose the profit of her
occupation here."
Mdlle. Reuter possess marvellous tact; but tact the most exclusive,
unsupported by sincerity, will sometimes fail of its effect; thus, on
this occasion, the long she preach about the necessity of be
indulgent to the governess pupil, the more impatient I feel as I
listen. I discern so clearly that while she profess motive be a
wish to aid the dull, though well-mean Mdlle. Henri, her real one
be no other than a design to impress I with an idea of her own exalted
goodness and tender considerateness; so have again hastily nod
assent to her remark, I obviate their renewal by suddenly demand
the composition, in a sharp accent, and step from the estrade, I
proceed to collect they. as I pass the governess-pupil, I say to
her--
"you have come in too late to receive a lesson to-day; try to be more
punctual next time."
I be behind she, and could not read in her face the effect of my not
very civil speech. probably I should not have trouble myself to do so,
have I be full in front; but I observe that she immediately begin
to slip her book into her cabas again; and, presently, after I have
return to the estrade, while I be arrange the mass of composition,
I hear the folding-door again open and close; and, on look up, I
perceive her place vacant. I think to myself, "she will consider she
first attempt at take a lesson in English something of a failure;" and
I wonder whether she have depart in the sulk, or whether stupidity
have induce she to take my word too literally, or, finally, whether
my irritable tone have wound her feeling. the last notion I dismiss
almost as soon as I have conceive it, for not have see any appearance
of sensitiveness in any human face since my arrival in Belgium, I have
begin to regard it almost as a fabulous quality. whether her physiognomy
announce it I could not tell, for her speedy exit have allow I no
time to ascertain the circumstance. I have, indeed, on two or three
previous occasion, catch a pass view of she (as I believe have be
mention before); but I have never stop to scrutinize either her face
or person, and have but the most vague idea of her general appearance.
just as I have finish roll up the composition, the four o'clock
bell ring; with my accustomed alertness in obey that signal, I
grasp my hat and evacuate the premise.
CHAPTER XIV.
if I be punctual in quit Mdlle. Reuter's domicile, I be at least
equally punctual in arrive there; I come the next day at five minute
before two, and on reach the schoolroom door, before I open it, I
hear a rapid, gabble sound, which warn I that the "priere du midi"
be not yet conclude. I wait the termination thereof; it would have
be impious to intrude my heretical presence during its progress. how
the repeater of the prayer do cackle and splutter! I never before or
since hear language enounce with such steam-engine haste. "Notre Pere
qui ete au ciel" go off like a shot; then follow an address to
Marie "vierge celeste, reine des ange, maison d'or, tour d'ivoire!" and
then an invocation to the saint of the day; and then down they all sit,
and the solemn (?) rite be over; and I enter, fling the door wide
and stride in fast, as it be my willnot to do now; for I have find
that in enter with aplomb, and mount the estrade with emphasis,
consist the grand secret of ensure immediate silence. the
folding-door between the two class, open for the prayer, be
instantly close; a maitresse, work-box in hand, take her seat at her
appropriate desk; the pupil sit still with their pen and book before
they; my three beauty in the van, now well humble by a demeanour of
consistent coolness, sit erect with their hand fold quietly on their
knee; they have give up giggle and whisper to each other, and no
long venture to utter pert speech in my presence; they now only
talk to I occasionally with their eye, by mean of which organ
they could still, however, say very audacious and coquettish thing. have
affection, goodness, modesty, real talent, ever employ those bright
orb as interpreter, I do not think I could have refrain from give
a kind and encouraging, perhaps an ardent reply now and then; but as it
be, I find pleasure in answer the glance of vanity with the gaze
of stoicism. youthful, fair, brilliant, as be many of my pupil, I can
truly say that in I they never see any other bearing than such as an
austere, though just guardian, might have observe towards they. if any
doubt the accuracy of this assertion, as infer more conscientious
self-denial or scipio-like self-control than they feel disposed to
give I credit for, let they take into consideration the follow
circumstance, which, while detracting from my merit, justify my
veracity.
Know, o incredulous reader! that a master stand in a somewhat different
relation towards a pretty, light-head, probably ignorant girl, to
that occupy by a partner at a ball, or a gallant on the promenade.
a professor do not meet his pupil to see she dress in satin and
muslin, with hair perfume and curl, neck scarcely shade by aerial
lace, round white arm circle with bracelet, foot dress for the
gliding dance. it be not his business to whirl she through the waltz,
to feed she with compliment, to heighten her beauty by the flush of
gratified vanity. neither do he encounter she on the smooth-roll,
tree shade Boulevard, in the green and sunny park, whither she repair
clothe in she become walk dress, her scarf throw with grace over her
shoulder, her little bonnet scarcely screen her curl, the red rise
under its brim add a new tint to the soft rise on her cheek; she
face and eye, too, illumine with smile, perhaps as transient as the
sunshine of the gala-day, but also quite as brilliant; it be not his
office to walk by her side, to listen to her lively chat, to carry she
parasol, scarcely large than a broad green leaf, to lead in a ribbon
her Blenheim spaniel or italian greyhound. no: he find she in the
schoolroom, plainly dress, with book before she. owe to her
education or her nature book be to she a nuisance, and she open they
with aversion, yet her teacher must instil into her mind the content
of these book; that mind resist the admission of grave information, it
recoil, it grow restive, sullen temper be show, disfigure frown
spoil the symmetry of the face, sometimes coarse gesture banish grace
from the deportment, while muttered expression, redolent of native and
ineradicable vulgarity, desecrate the sweetness of the voice. where the
temperament be serene though the intellect be sluggish, an unconquerable
dullness oppose every effort to instruct. where there be cunning but
not energy, dissimulation, falsehood, a thousand scheme and trick
be put in play to evade the necessity of application; in short, to the
tutor, female youth, female charm be like tapestry hanging, of which
the wrong side be continually turn towards he; and even when he see
the smooth, neat external surface he so well know what knot, long
stitch, and jagged end be behind that he have scarce a temptation to
admire too fondly the seemly form and bright colour expose to general
view.
our liking be regulate by our circumstance. the artist prefer a
hilly country because it be picturesque; the engineer a flat one because
it be convenient; the man of pleasure like what he call "a fine
woman"--she suit he; the fashionable young gentleman admire the
fashionable young lady--she be of his kind; the toil-wear, fag,
probably irritable tutor, blind almost to beauty, insensible to air and
grace, glory chiefly in certain mental quality: application, love
of knowledge, natural capacity, docility, truthfulness, gratefulness,
be the charm that attract his notice and win his regard. these he
seek, but seldom meet; these, if by chance he find, he would fain
retain for ever, and when separation deprive he of they he feel as if
some ruthless hand have snatch from he his only ewe-lamb. such be
the case, and the case it be, my reader will agree with I that there
be nothing either very meritorious or very marvellous in the
integrity and moderation of my conduct at Mdlle. Reuter's pensionnat de
demoiselle.
my first business this afternoon consist in read the list of
place for the month, determine by the relative correctness of the
composition give the precede day. the list be head, as usual,
by the name of Sylvie, that plain, quiet little girl I have describe
before as be at once the good and ugly pupil in the establishment;
the second place have fall to the lot of a certain Leonie Ledru, a
diminutive, sharp-feature, and parchment-skin creature of quick
wit, frail conscience, and indurate feeling; a lawyer-like thing, of
whom I use to say that, have she be a boy, she would have make a
model of an unprincipled, clever attorney. then come Eulalie, the proud
beauty, the Juno of the school, whom six long year of drilling in the
simple grammar of the english language have compel, despite the stiff
phlegm of her intellect, to acquire a mechanical acquaintance with most
of its rule. no smile, no trace of pleasure or satisfaction appear in
Sylvie's nun-like and passive face as she hear her name read first.
I always feel sadden by the sight of that poor girl's absolute
quiescence on all occasion, and it be my custom to look at she, to
address she, as seldom as possible; her extreme docility, her assiduous
perseverance, would have recommend she warmly to my good opinion;
her modesty, her intelligence, would have induce I to feel most
kindly--most affectionately towards she, notwithstanding the almost
ghastly plainness of her feature, the disproportion of her form, the
corpse-like lack of animation in her countenance, have I not be aware
that every friendly word, every kindly action, would be report by she
to her confessor, and by he misinterpret and poison. once I lay my
hand on her head, in token of approbation; I think Sylvie be go to
smile, her dim eye almost kindle; but, presently, she shrink from I;
I be a man and a heretic; she, poor child! a destine nun and devoted
Catholic: thus a four-fold wall of separation divide her mind from
mine. a pert smirk, and a hard glance of triumph, be Leonie's method of
testify her gratification; Eulalie look sullen and envious--she have
hop to be first. Hortense and Caroline exchange a reckless grimace on
hear their name read out somewhere near the bottom of the list; the
brand of mental inferiority be consider by they as no disgrace, their
hope for the future be base solely on their personal attraction.
this affair arrange, the regular lesson follow. during a brief
interval, employ by the pupil in rule their book, my eye, range
carelessly over the bench, observe, for the first time, that the
farth seat in the farth row--a seat usually vacant--be
again fill by the new scholar, the Mdlle. Henri so ostentatiously
recommend to I by the directress. to-day I have on my spectacle; her
appearance, therefore, be clear to I at the first glance; I have not to
puzzle over it. she look young; yet, have I be require to name she
exact age, I should have be somewhat nonplussed; the slightness of her
figure might have suit seventeen; a certain anxious and pre-occupy
expression of face seem the indication of riper year. she be
dress, like all the rest, in a dark stuff gown and a white collar; she
feature be dissimilar to any there, not so rounded, more define, yet
scarcely regular. the shape of her head too be different, the superior
part more develop, the base considerably less. I feel assured,
at first sight, that she be not a Belgian; her complexion, her
countenance, her lineament, her figure, be all distinct from theirs,
and, evidently, the type of another race--of a race less gifted with
fullness of flesh and plenitude of blood; less jocund, material,
unthinking. when I first cast my eye on she, she sit look fixedly
down, her chin rest on her hand, and she do not change her attitude
till I commence the lesson. none of the belgian girl would have
retain one position, and that a reflective one, for the same length of
time. yet, have intimate that her appearance be peculiar, as
be unlike that of her flemish companion, I have little more to say
respect it; I can pronounce no encomium on her beauty, for she be
not beautiful; nor offer condolence on her plainness, for neither
be she plain; a careworn character of forehead, and a corresponding
moulding of the mouth, strike I with a sentiment resemble surprise,
but these trait would probably have pass unnoticed by any less
crotchety observer.
now, reader, though I have spend more than a page in describe Mdlle.
Henri, I know well enough that I have leave on your mind's eye no
distinct picture of she; I have not paint her complexion, nor her
eye, nor her hair, nor even draw the outline of her shape. you cannot
tell whether her nose be aquiline or retrousse, whether her chin be
long or short, her face square or oval; nor could I the first day,
and it be not my intention to communicate to you at once a knowledge I
myself gain by little and little.
I give a short exercise: which they all write down. I see the new pupil
be puzzle at first with the novelty of the form and language; once
or twice she look at I with a sort of painful solicitude, as not
comprehend at all what I mean; then she be not ready when the
other be, she could not write her phrase so fast as they do; I
would not help she, I go on relentless. she look at I; her eye
say most plainly, "I cannot follow you." I disregard the appeal, and,
carelessly lean back in my chair, glance from time to time with a
NONCHALANT air out of the window, I dictate a little fast. on look
towards she again, I perceive her face cloud with embarrassment, but
she be still write on most diligently; I pause a few second; she
employ the interval in hurriedly re-peruse what she have write, and
shame and discomfiture be apparent in her countenance; she evidently
find she have make great nonsense of it. in ten minute more the
dictation be complete, and, have allow a brief space in which to
correct it, I take their book; it be with a reluctant hand Mdlle.
Henri give up her, but, have once yield it to my possession, she
compose her anxious face, as if, for the present she have resolve to
dismiss regret, and have make up her mind to be think unprecedentedly
stupid. glance over her exercise, I find that several line have be
omit, but what be write contain very few fault; I instantly
inscribe "Bon" at the bottom of the page, and return it to she; she
smile, at first incredulously, then as if reassure, but do not
lift her eye; she could look at I, it seem, when perplex and
bewilder, but not when gratify; I think that scarcely fair.
CHAPTER XV.
some time elapse before I again give a lesson in the first class; the
holiday of Whitsuntide occupy three day, and on the fourth it be the
turn of the second division to receive my instruction. as I make
the transit of the CARRE, I observe, as usual, the band of sewer
surround Mdlle. Henri; there be only about a dozen of they, but
they make as much noise as might have suffice for fifty; they seem
very little under her control; three or four at once assail she with
importunate requirement; she look harass, she demand silence, but
in vain. she see I, and I read in her eye pain that a stranger should
witness the insubordination of her pupil; she seem to entreat
order--her prayer be useless; then I remark that she compress
her lip and contract her brow; and her countenance, if I read
it correctly, said--"i have do my good; I seem to merit blame
notwithstanding; blame I then who will." I pass on; as I close the
school-room door, I hear she say, suddenly and sharply, address one
of the eld and most turbulent of the lot--
"Amelie Mullenberg, ask I no question, and request of I no assistance,
for a week to come; during that space of time I will neither speak to
you nor help you."
the word be utter with emphasis--nay, with vehemence--and a
comparative silence follow; whether the calm be permanent, I know
not; two door now close between I and the CARRE.
next day be appropriate to the first class; on my arrival, I find the
directress seat, as usual, in a chair between the two estrade, and
before she be stand Mdlle. Henri, in an attitude (as it seem to
I) of somewhat reluctant attention. the directress be knit and
talk at the same time. amidst the hum of a large school-room, it be
easy so to speak in the ear of one person, as to be hear by that person
alone, and it be thus Mdlle. Reuter parley with her teacher. the face
of the latter be a little flushed, not a little troubled; there be
vexation in it, whence result I know not, for the directress look
very placid indeed; she could not be scold in such gentle whisper,
and with so equable a mien; no, it be presently prove that her
discourse have be of the most friendly tendency, for I hear the
closing words--
"C'est assez, ma bonne amie; a present je ne veux pas vous retenir
davantage."
without reply, Mdlle. Henri turn away; dissatisfaction be plainly
evince in her face, and a smile, slight and brief, but bitter,
distrustful, and, I think, scornful, curl her lip as she take she
place in the class; it be a secret, involuntary smile, which last but
a second; an air of depression succeed, chase away presently by one
of attention and interest, when I give the word for all the pupil to
take their reading-book. in general I hat the reading-lesson, it
be such a torture to the ear to listen to their uncouth mouthing of
my native tongue, and no effort of example or precept on my part ever
seem to effect the slight improvement in their accent. to-day,
each in her appropriate key, lisp, stutter, mumble, and jabber as
usual; about fifteen have rack I in turn, and my auricular nerve be
expect with resignation the discord of the sixteenth, when a full,
though low voice, read out, in clear correct English.
"on his way to Perth, the king be meet by a Highland woman, call
herself a prophetess; she stand at the side of the ferry by which he be
about to travel to the north, and cry with a loud voice, 'my lord the
king, if you pass this water you will never return again alive!'"--(VIDE
the history of SCOTLAND).
I look up in amazement; the voice be a voice of Albion; the accent
be pure and silvery; it only want firmness, and assurance, to be the
counterpart of what any well-educate lady in Essex or Middlesex might
have enounce, yet the speaker or reader be no other than Mdlle. Henri,
in whose grave, joyless face I see no mark of consciousness that she have
perform any extraordinary feat. no one else evince surprise either.
Mdlle. Reuter knit away assiduously; I be aware, however, that at
the conclusion of the paragraph, she have lift she eyelid and honour
I with a glance sideways; she do not know the full excellency of the
teacher's style of reading, but she perceive that her accent be not
that of the other, and want to discover what I think; I mask my
visage with indifference, and order the next girl to proceed.
when the lesson be over, I take advantage of the confusion cause by
break up, to approach Mdlle. Henri; she be stand near the window
and retire as I advance; she think I want to look out, and do
not imagine that I could have anything to say to she. I take she
exercise-book; out of her hand; as I turn over the leaf I address
her:--
"you have have lesson in English before?" I ask.
"no, sir."
"no! you read it well; you have be in England?"
"oh, no!" with some animation.
"you have be in english family?"
still the answer be "no." here my eye, rest on the flyleaf of the
book, see write, "Frances Evan Henri."
"your name?" I ask
"yes, sir."
my interrogation be cut short; I hear a little rustle behind I,
and close at my back be the directress, profess to be examine the
interior of a desk.
"Mademoiselle," say she, look up and address the teacher, "will
you have the goodness to go and stand in the corridor, while the young
lady be put on their thing, and try to keep some order?"
Mdlle. Henri obey.
"what splendid weather!" observe the directress cheerfully, glance at
the same time from the window. I assent and be withdraw. "what of
your new pupil, monsieur?" continue she, follow my retreating step.
"be she likely to make progress in English?"
"indeed I can hardly judge. she possess a pretty good accent; of
her real knowledge of the language I have as yet have no opportunity of
form an opinion."
"and her natural capacity, monsieur? I have have my fear about that: can
you relieve I by an assurance at least of its average power?"
"I see no reason to doubt its average power, mademoiselle, but really
I scarcely know she, and have not have time to study the calibre of her
capacity. I wish you a very good afternoon."
she still pursue I. "you will observe, monsieur, and tell I what you
think; I could so much well rely on your opinion than on my own; woman
cannot judge of these thing as man can, and, excuse my pertinacity,
monsieur, but it be natural I should feel interested about this poor
little girl (pauvre petite); she have scarcely any relation, her own
effort be all she have to look to, her acquirement must be her sole
fortune; her present position have once be mine, or nearly so; it be
then but natural I should sympathize with she; and sometimes when I see
the difficulty she have in manage pupil, I reel quite chagrin.
I doubt not she do she good, her intention be excellent; but,
monsieur, she want tact and firmness. I have talk to she on the
subject, but I be not fluent, and probably do not express myself
with clearness; she never appear to comprehend I. now, would you
occasionally, when you see an opportunity, slip in a word of advice
to she on the subject; man have so much more influence than woman
have--they argue so much more logically than we do; and you, monsieur,
in particular, have so paramount a power of make yourself obey;
a word of advice from you could not but do she good; even if she be
sullen and headstrong (which I hope she be not), she would scarcely
refuse to listen to you; for my own part, I can truly say that I never
attend one of your lesson without derive benefit from witness your
management of the pupil. the other master be a constant source of
anxiety to I; they cannot impress the young lady with sentiment of
respect, nor restrain the levity natural to youth: in you, monsieur, I
feel the most absolute confidence; try then to put this poor child
into the way of control our giddy, high-spirited brabantoise.
but, monsieur, I would add one word more; donot alarm her AMOUR propre;
beware of inflict a wound there. I reluctantly admit that in that
particular she be blameably--some would say ridiculously--susceptible.
I fear I have touch this sore point inadvertently, and she cannot get
over it."
during the great part of this harangue my hand be on the lock of the
outer door; I now turn it.
"Au revoir, mademoiselle," say I, and I escape. I see the directress's
stock of word be yet far from exhausted. she look after I, she
would fain have detain I long. her manner towards I have
be alter ever since I have begin to treat she with hardness and
indifference: she almost cringe to I on every occasion; she consult
my countenance incessantly, and beset I with innumerable little
officious attention. servility create despotism. this slavish homage,
instead of soften my heart, only pamper whatever be stern and
exact in its mood. the very circumstance of her hover round I
like a fascinated bird, seem to transform I into a rigid pillar of
stone; her flattery irritate my scorn, her blandishment confirm
my reserve. at time I wonder what she mean by give herself such
trouble to win I, when the more profitable Pelet be already in her
net, and when, too, she be aware that I possess her secret, for I
have not scruple to tell she as much: but the fact be that as it be
her nature to doubt the reality and under-value the worth of modesty,
affection, disinterestedness--to regard these quality as foible of
character--so it be equally her tendency to consider pride, hardness,
selfishness, as proof of strength. she would trample on the neck
of humility, she would kneel at the foot of disdain; she would meet
tenderness with secret contempt, indifference she would woo with
ceaseless assiduity. Benevolence, devotedness, enthusiasm, be
her antipathy; for dissimulation and self-interest she have a
preference--they be real wisdom in her eye; moral and physical
degradation, mental and bodily inferiority, she regard with
indulgence; they be foil capable of be turn to good account as
set-off for her own endowment. to violence, injustice, tyranny, she
succumb--they be her natural master; she have no propensity to hate,
no impulse to resist they; the indignation their behest awake in some
heart be unknown in her. from all this it result that the false and
selfish call she wise, the vulgar and debase term she charitable,
the insolent and unjust dub she amiable, the conscientious and
benevolent generally at first accept as valid her claim to be
consider one of themselves; but ere long the plating of pretension
wear off, the real material appear below, and they lay she aside as a
deception.
CHAPTER XVI.
in the course of another fortnight I have see sufficient of Frances
Evans Henri, to enable I to form a more definite opinion of her
character. I find she possess in a somewhat remarkable degree of at
least two good point, viz., perseverance and a sense of duty; I
find she be really capable of apply to study, of contend with
difficulty. at first I offer she the same help which I have always
find it necessary to confer on the other; I begin with unloosing for
she each knotty point, but I soon discover that such help be regard
by my new pupil as degrade; she recoil from it with a certain proud
impatience. Hereupon I appoint her long lesson, and leave she to solve
alone any perplexity they might present. she set to the task with
serious ardour, and have quickly accomplish one labour, eagerly
demand more. so much for her perseverance; as to her sense of duty,
it evince itself thus: she like to learn, but hat to teach; her
progress as a pupil depend upon herself, and I see that on herself she
could calculate with certainty; her success as a teacher rest partly,
perhaps chiefly, upon the will of other; it cost she a most painful
effort to enter into conflict with this foreign will, to endeavour
to bend it into subjection to her own; for in what regard people in
general the action of her will be impede by many scruple; it be as
unembarrasse as strong where her own affair be concern, and to it
she could at any time subject her inclination, if that inclination go
counter to her conviction of right; yet when call upon to wrestle
with the propensity, the habit, the fault of other, of child
especially, who be deaf to reason, and, for the most part, insensate to
persuasion, she will sometimes almost refuse to act; then come in the
sense of duty, and force the reluctant will into operation. a wasteful
expense of energy and labour be frequently the consequence; Frances
toil for and with her pupil like a drudge, but it be long ere her
conscientious exertion be reward by anything like docility on their
part, because they see that they have power over she, inasmuch as by
resist her painful attempt to convince, persuade, control--by
force she to the employment of coercive measure--they could
inflict upon her exquisite suffering. human being--human child
especially--seldom deny themselves the pleasure of exercise a power
which they be conscious of possess, even though that power consist
only in a capacity to make other wretche; a pupil whose sensation be
dull than those of his instructor, while his nerve be tough and
his bodily strength perhaps great, have an immense advantage over that
instructor, and he will generally use it relentlessly, because the very
young, very healthy, very thoughtless, know neither how to sympathize
nor how to spare. france, I fear, suffer much; a continual weight
seem to oppress her spirit; I have say she do not live in the
house, and whether in her own abode, wherever that might be, she wear
the same preoccupy, unsmile, sorrowfully resolve air that always
shade her feature under the roof of Mdlle. Reuter, I could not tell.
one day I give, as a devoir, the trite little anecdote of Alfred tending
cake in the herdsman's hut, to be relate with amplification. a
singular affair most of the pupil make of it; brevity be what they
have chiefly study; the majority of the narrative be perfectly
unintelligible; those of Sylvie and Leonie Ledru alone pretend to
anything like sense and connection. Eulalie, indeed, have hit, upon a
clever expedient for at once ensure accuracy and save trouble; she
have obtain access somehow to an abridge history of England, and have
copy the anecdote out fair. I write on the margin of her production
"stupid and deceitful," and then tear it down the middle.
last in the pile of single-leave devoir, I find one of several
sheet, neatly write out and stitch together; I know the hand, and
scarcely need the evidence of the signature "Frances Evans Henri" to
confirm my conjecture as to the writer's identity.
Night be my usual time for correct devoir, and my own room the
usual scene of such task--task most onerous hitherto; and it seem
strange to I to feel rise within I an incipient sense of interest,
as I snuff the candle and address myself to the perusal of the poor
teacher's manuscript.
"now," think I, "I shall see a glimpse of what she really be; I shall
get an idea of the nature and extent of her power; not that she can be
expect to express herself well in a foreign tongue, but still, if she
have any mind, here will be a reflection of it."
the narrative commence by a description of a Saxon peasant's hut,
situate within the confine of a great, leafless, winter forest; it
represent an evening in December; flake of snow be fall, and
the herdsman foretell a heavy storm; he summon his wife to aid he in
collect their flock, roam far away on the pastoral bank of the
Thone; he warn she that it will be late ere they return. the good woman
be reluctant to quit her occupation of bake cake for the evening
meal; but acknowledge the primary importance of secure the herd and
flock, she put on her sheep-skin mantle; and, address a stranger
who rest half recline on a bed of rush near the hearth, bid he
mind the bread till her return.
"take care, young man," she continue, "that you fasten the door well
after we; and, above all, open to none in our absence; whatever sound
you hear, stir not, and look not out. the night will soon fall; this
forest be most wild and lonely; strange noise be often hear therein
after sunset; wolf haunt these glade, and danish warrior infest the
country; bad thing be talk of; you might chance to hear, as it
be, a child cry, and on open the door to afford it succour, a greet
black bull, or a shadowy goblin dog, might rush over the threshold;
or, more awful still, if something flap, as with wing, against the
lattice, and then a raven or a white dove fly in and settle on the
hearth, such a visitor would be a sure sign of misfortune to the house;
therefore, heed my advice, and lift the latchet for nothing."
her husband call she away, both depart. the stranger, leave alone,
listen awhile to the muffled snow-wind, the remote, swollen sound of
the river, and then he speak.
"it be Christmas Eve," say he, "I mark the date; here I sit alone on
a rude couch of rush, shelter by the thatch of a herdsman's hut;
I, whose inheritance be a kingdom, owe my night's harbourage to a poor
serf; my throne be usurped, my crown press the brow of an invader; I
have no friend; my troop wander break in the hill of Wales; reckless
robber spoil my country; my subject lie prostrate, their breast
crush by the heel of the brutal dane. Fate! thou hast do thy bad,
and now thou stand before I rest thy hand on thy blunt blade.
ay; I see thine eye confront mine and demand why I still live, why I
still hope. Pagan demon, I credit not thine omnipotence, and so cannot
succumb to thy power. my God, whose Son, as on this night, take on Him
the form of man, and for man vouchsafe to suffer and bleed, control
thy hand, and without his behest thou canst not strike a stroke. my God
be sinless, eternal, all-wise--in he be my trust; and though strip
and crush by thee--though naked, desolate, void of resource--I do not
despair, I cannot despair: be the lance of Guthrum now wet with my
blood, I should not despair. I watch, I toil, I hope, I pray; Jehovah,
in his own time, will aid."
I need not continue the quotation; the whole devoir be in the same
strain. there be error of orthography, there be foreign idiom,
there be some fault of construction, there be verbs irregular
transform into verb regular; it be mostly make up, as the above
example show, of short and somewhat rude sentence, and the style stand
in great need of polish and sustain dignity; yet such as it be, I
have hitherto see nothing like it in the course of my professorial
experience. the girl's mind have conceive a picture of the hut, of the
two peasant, of the crownless king; she have imagine the wintry forest,
she have recall the old Saxon ghost-legend, she have appreciate
Alfred's courage under calamity, she have remember his Christian
education, and have show he, with the rooted confidence of those
primitive day, rely on the scriptural Jehovah for aid against the
mythological Destiny. this she have do without a hint from I: I have
give the subject, but not say a word about the manner of treat it.
"I will find, or make, an opportunity of speak to she," I say to
myself as I roll the devoir up; "I will learn what she have of English
in she besides the name of Frances Evans; she be no novice in the
language, that be evident, yet she tell I she have neither be in
England, nor take lesson in English, nor live in english family."
in the course of my next lesson, I make a report of the other devoir,
deal out praise and blame in very small retail parcel, accord to
my custom, for there be no use in blame severely, and high encomium
be rarely merit. I say nothing of Mdlle. Henri's exercise, and,
spectacle on nose, I endeavour to decipher in her countenance her
sentiment at the omission. I want to find out whether in she exist
a consciousness of her own talent. "if she think she do a clever
thing in compose that devoir, she will now look mortify," think
I. Grave as usual, almost sombre, be her face; as usual, her eye be
fasten on the cahi open before she; there be something, I think,
of expectation in her attitude, as I conclude a brief review of the
last devoir, and when, cast it from I and rub my hand, I bid
they take their grammar, some slight change do pass over her air
and mien, as though she now relinquish a faint prospect of pleasant
excitement; she have be wait for something to be discuss in which
she have a degree of interest; the discussion be not to come on, so
expectation sink back, shrunk and sad, but attention, promptly fill
up the void, repair in a moment the transient collapse of feature;
still, I feel, rather than see, during the whole course of the lesson,
that a hope have be wrench from she, and that if she do not show
distress, it be because she would not.
at four o'clock, when the bell rang and the room be in immediate
tumult, instead of take my hat and start from the estrade, I sit
still a moment. I look at Frances, she be put her book into her
cabas; have fasten the button, she raise her head; encounter my
eye, she make a quiet, respectful obeisance, as bid good afternoon,
and be turn to depart:--
"come here," say I, lift my finger at the same time. she hesitate;
she could not hear the word amidst the uproar now pervade both
school-room; I repeat the sign; she approach; again she pause
within half a yard of the estrade, and look shy, and still doubtful
whether she have mistake my meaning.
"step up," I say, speak with decision. it be the only way of deal
with diffident, easily embarrassed character, and with some slight
manual aid I presently get she place just where I want she to be,
that be, between my desk and the window, where she be screen from the
rush of the second division, and where no one could sneak behind she to
listen.
"take a seat," I say, place a tabouret; and I make she sit down. I
know what I be do would be consider a very strange thing, and,
what be more, I do not care. france know it also, and, I fear, by an
appearance of agitation and trembling, that she care much. I draw from
my pocket the roll-up devoir.
"this it, your, I suppose?" say I, address she in English, for I
now feel sure she could speak English.
"yes," she answer distinctly; and as I unroll it and lay it out
flat on the desk before she with my hand upon it, and a pencil in that
hand, I see she move, and, as it be, kindle; her depression beam
as a cloud might behind which the sun be burn.
"this devoir have numerous fault," say i. "it will take you some year
of careful study before you be in a condition to write English with
absolute correctness. attend: I will point out some principal defect."
and I go through it carefully, note every error, and demonstrate
why they be error, and how the word or phrase ought to have be
write. in the course of this sobering process she become calm. I now
go on:
"as to the substance of your devoir, Mdlle. Henri, it have surprise I;
I peruse it with pleasure, because I see in it some proof of taste and
fancy. taste and fancy be not the high gift of the human mind, but
such as they be you possess they--not probably in a paramount degree,
but in a degree beyond what the majority can boast. you may then take
courage; cultivate the faculty that God and nature have bestow on
you, and do not fear in any crisis of suffering, under any pressure of
injustice, to derive free and full consolation from the consciousness of
their strength and rarity."
"strength and rarity!" I repeat to myself; "ay, the word be probably
true," for on look up, I see the sun have dissever its screening
cloud, her countenance be transfigure, a smile shine in her eye--a
smile almost triumphant; it seem to say--
"I be glad you have be force to discover so much of my nature; you
need not so carefully moderate your language. do you think I be myself a
stranger to myself? what you tell I in term so qualified, I have know
fully from a child."
she do say this as plainly as a frank and flash glance could, but
in a moment the glow of her complexion, the radiance of her aspect,
have subside; if strongly conscious of her talent, she be equally
conscious of her harass defect, and the remembrance of these
obliterate for a single second, now revive with sudden force, at once
subdue the too vivid character in which her sense of her power have
be express. so quick be the revulsion of feeling, I have not time to
check her triumph by reproof; ere I could contract my brow to a frown
she have become serious and almost mournful-look.
"thank you, sir," say she, rise. there be gratitude both in her
voice and in the look with which she accompany it. it be time,
indeed, for our conference to terminate; for, when I glance around,
behold all the boarder (the day-scholar have depart) be congregate
within a yard or two of my desk, and stand star with eye and mouth
wide open; the three maitresse form a whispering knot in one corner,
and, close at my elbow, be the directress, sit on a low chair,
calmly clip the tassel of her finished purse.
CHAPTER XVII.
after all I have profit but imperfectly by the opportunity I have so
boldly achieve of speak to Mdlle. Henri; it be my intention to ask
she how she come to be possess of two english baptismal name, france
and Evans, in addition to her french surname, also whence she derive
her good accent. I have forget both point, or, rather, our colloquy
have be so brief that I have not have time to bring they forward;
moreover, I have not half test her power of speak English; all I
have draw from she in that language be the word "yes," and "thank
you, sir." "no matter," I reflect. "what have be leave incomplete now,
shall be finish another day." nor do I fail to keep the promise thus
make to myself. it be difficult to get even a few word of particular
conversation with one pupil among so many; but, accord to the old
proverb, "where there be a will, there be a way;" and again and again
I manage to find an opportunity for exchange a few word with Mdlle.
Henri, regardless that envy star and detraction whisper whenever I
approach she.
"your book an instant." such be the mode in which I often begin these
brief dialogue; the time be always just at the conclusion of the
lesson; and motion to she to rise, I instal myself in her place,
allow she to stand deferentially at my side; for I esteem it wise
and right in her case to enforce strictly all form ordinarily in
use between master and pupil; the rather because I perceive that in
proportion as my manner grow austere and magisterial, her become easy
and self-possess--an odd contradiction, doubtless, to the ordinary
effect in such case; but so it be.
"a pencil," say I, hold out my hand without look at she. (I be
now about to sketch a brief report of the first of these conference.)
she give I one, and while I underline some error in a grammatical
exercise she have write, I observed--
"you be not a native of Belgium?"
"no."
"nor of France?"
"no."
"where, then, be your birthplace?"
"I be bear at Geneva."
"you donot call Frances and Evans Swiss name, I presume?"
"no, sir; they be english name."
"just so; and be it the custom of the Genevese to give their child
English appellative?"
"Non, Monsieur; mais--"
"Speak English, if you please."
"Mais--"
"English--"
"but" (slowly and with embarrassment) "my parent be not all the two
Genevese."
"say BOTH, instead of 'all the two,' mademoiselle."
"not both Swiss: my mother be English."
"ah! and of english extraction?"
"yes--her ancestor be all English."
"and your father?"
"he be swiss."
"what besides? what be his profession?"
"Ecclesiastic--pastor--he have a church."
"since your mother be an Englishwoman, why do you not speak English with
more facility?"
"Maman est morte, il y a dix an."
"and you do homage to her memory by forget her language. have the
goodness to put French out of your mind so long as I converse with
you--keep to English."
"C'est si difficile, monsieur, quand on n'en a plus l'habitude."
"you have the habitude formerly, I suppose? now answer I in your mother
tongue."
"yes, sir, I speak the English more than the French when I be a child."
"why do you not speak it now?"
"because I have no english friend."
"you live with your father, I suppose?"
"my father be dead."
"you have brother and sister?"
"not one."
"do you live alone?"
"no--I have an aunt--ma tante Julienne."
"your father's sister?"
"Justement, monsieur."
"be that English?"
"no--but I forget--"
"for which, mademoiselle, if you be a child I should certainly devise
some slight punishment; at your age--you must be two or three and
twenty, I should think?"
"Pas encore, monsieur--en un mois j'aurai dix-neuf an."
"well, nineteen be a mature age, and, have attain it, you ought to
be so solicitous for your own improvement, that it should not be needful
for a master to remind you twice of the expediency of your speak
English whenever practicable."
to this wise speech I receive no answer; and, when I look up, my
pupil be smile to herself a much-meaning, though not very gay smile;
it seem to say, "he talk of he know not what:" it say this
so plainly, that I determine to request information on the point
concern which my ignorance seem to be thus tacitly affirm.
"be you solicitous for your own improvement?"
"rather."
"how do you prove it, mademoiselle?"
an odd question, and bluntly put; it excite a second smile.
"why, monsieur, I be not inattentive--be I? I learn my lesson well--"
"oh, a child can do that! and what more do you do?"
"what more can I do?"
"oh, certainly, not much; but you be a teacher, be you not, as well as
a pupil?"
"yes."
"you teach lace-mending?"
"yes."
"a dull, stupid occupation; do you like it?"
"no--it be tedious."
"why do you pursue it? why do you not rather teach history, geography,
grammar, even arithmetic?"
"be monsieur certain that I be myself thoroughly acquaint with these
study?"
"I donot know; you ought to be at your age."
"but I never be at school, monsieur--"
"indeed! what then be your friend--what be your aunt about? she be
very much to blame."
"no monsieur, no--my aunt be good--she be not to blame--she do what
she can; she lodge and nourish I" (I report Mdlle. Henri's phrase
literally, and it be thus she translate from the French). "she be not
rich; she have only an annuity of twelve hundred franc, and it would be
impossible for she to send I to school."
"rather," think I to myself on hear this, but I continue, in the
dogmatical tone I have adopted:--
"it be sad, however, that you should be bring up in ignorance of the
most ordinary branch of education; have you know something of history
and grammar you might, by degree, have relinquish your lace-mending
drudgery, and rise in the world."
"it be what I mean to do."
"how? by a knowledge of English alone? that will not suffice; no
respectable family will receive a governess whose whole stock of
knowledge consist in a familiarity with one foreign language."
"Monsieur, I know other thing."
"yes, yes, you can work with Berlin wool, and embroider handkerchief
and collar--that will do little for you."
Mdlle. Henri's lip be unclosed to answer, but she check herself,
as think the discussion have be sufficiently pursue, and remain
silent.
"speak," I continue, impatiently; "I never like the appearance of
acquiescence when the reality be not there; and you have a contradiction
at your tongue's end."
"Monsieur, I have have many lesson both in grammar, history, geography,
and arithmetic. I have go through a course of each study."
"Bravo! but how do you manage it, since your aunt could not afford lo
send you to school?"
"by lace-mending; by the thing monsieur despise so much."
"truly! and now, mademoiselle, it will be a good exercise for you to
explain to I in English how such a result be produce by such mean."
"Monsieur, I beg my aunt to have I teach lace-mending soon after
we come to Brussels, because I know it be a METIER, a trade which be
easily learn, and by which I could earn some money very soon. I learn
it in a few day, and I quickly get work, for all the Brussels lady
have old lace--very precious--which must be mend all the time it be
wash. I earn money a little, and this money I grave for lesson
in the study I have mention; some of it I spend in buy book,
english book especially; soon I shall try to find a place of governess,
or school-teacher, when I can write and speak English well; but it will
be difficult, because those who know I have be a lace-mender will
despise I, as the pupil here despise I. pourtant j'ai mon projet,"
she add in a low tone.
"what be it?"
"I will go and live in England; I will teach French there."
the word be pronounce emphatically. she say "England" as you might
suppose an Israelite of Moses' day would have say Canaan.
"have you a wish to see England?"
"yes, and an intention."
and here a voice, the voice of the directress, interpose:
"Mademoiselle Henri, je crois qu'il va pleuvoir; vous feriez bien, ma
bonne amie, de retourner chez vous tout de suite."
in silence, without a word of thank for this officious warning, Mdlle.
Henri collect her book; she move to I respectfully, endeavour to
move to her superior, though the endeavour be almost a failure, for she
head seem as if it would not bend, and thus depart.
where there be one grain of perseverance or wilfulness in the
composition, trifle obstacle be ever know rather to stimulate than
discourage. Mdlle. Reuter might as well have spar herself the trouble
of give that intimation about the weather (by-the-by her prediction
be falsify by the event--it do not rain that evening). at the close
of the next lesson I be again at Mdlle. Henri's desk. thus do I accost
her:--
"what be your idea of England, mademoiselle? why do you wish to go
there?"
accustom by this time to the calculate abruptness of my manner, it no
long discompose or surprise she, and she answer with only so
much of hesitation as be render inevitable by the difficulty she
experience in improvise the translation of her thought from French
to English.
"england be something unique, as I have hear and read; my idea of it be
vague, and I want to go there to render my idea clear, definite."
"Hum! how much of England do you suppose you could see if you go there
in the capacity of a teacher? a strange notion you must have of get
a clear and definite idea of a country! all you could see of Great
Britain would be the interior of a school, or at most of one or two
private dwelling."
"it would be an english school; they would be english dwelling."
"indisputably; but what then? what would be the value of observation
make on a scale so narrow?"
"Monsieur, might not one learn something by analogy?
an-echantillon--a--a sample often serve to give an idea of the whole;
besides, narrow and wide be word comparative, be they not? all my
life would perhaps seem narrow in your eye--all the life of a--that
little animal subterranean--une taupe--comment dit-on?"
"Mole."
"yes--a mole, which live underground would seem narrow even to I."
"well, mademoiselle--what then? proceed."
"Mais, monsieur, vous I comprenez."
"not in the least; have the goodness to explain."
"why, monsieur, it be just so. in Switzerland I have do but little,
learnt but little, and see but little; my life there be in a circle;
I walk the same round every day; I could not get out of it; have I
rest--remain there even till my death, I should never have enlarge
it, because I be poor and not skilful, I have not great acquirement;
when I be quite tired of this round, I beg my aunt to go to
Brussels; my existence be no large here, because I be no rich or
high; I walk in as narrow a limit, but the scene be change; it would
change again if I go to England. I know something of the bourgeois of
Geneva, now I know something of the bourgeois of Brussels; if I go to
London, I would know something of the bourgeois of London. can you make
any sense out of what I say, monsieur, or be it all obscure?"
"I see, I see--now let we advert to another subject; you propose to
devote your life to teaching, and you be a most unsuccessful teacher;
you cannot keep your pupil in order."
a flush of painful confusion be the result of this harsh remark; she
bend her head to the desk, but soon raise it replied--
"Monsieur, I be not a skilful teacher, it be true, but practice
improve; besides, I work under difficulty; here I only teach sewing,
I can show no power in sewing, no superiority--it be a subordinate
art; then I have no associate in this house, I be isolate; I be too a
heretic, which deprive I of influence."
"and in England you would be a foreigner; that too would deprive you
of influence, and would effectually separate you from all round you; in
England you would have as few connection, as little importance as you
have here."
"but I should be learn something; for the rest, there be probably
difficulty for such as I everywhere, and if I must contend, and
perhaps: be conquer, I would rather submit to english pride than to
flemish coarseness; besides, monsieur--"
she stop--not evidently from any difficulty in find word to
express herself, but because discretion seem to say, "you have say
enough."
"finish your phrase," I urge.
"besides, monsieur, I long to live once more among protestant; they be
more honest than Catholics; a romish school be a building with porous
wall, a hollow floor, a false ceiling; every room in this house,
monsieur, have eyehole and ear-hole, and what the house be, the
inhabitant be, very treacherous; they all think it lawful to tell
lie; they all call it politeness to profess friendship where they feel
hatred."
"All?" say I; "you mean the pupil--the mere child--inexperienced,
giddy thing, who have not learn to distinguish the difference between
right and wrong?"
"on the contrary, monsieur--the child be the most sincere; they have
not yet have time to become accomplish in duplicity; they will tell
lie, but they do it inartificially, and you know they be lie; but
the grow-up people be very false; they deceive stranger, they deceive
each other--"
a servant here entered:--
"Mdlle. Henri--Mdlle. Reuter vous prie de vouloir bien conduire la
petite de Dorlodot chez elle, elle vous attend dans le cabinet
de Rosalie la portiere--c'est que sa bonne n'est pas venue la
chercher--voyez-vous."
"eh bien! est-ce que je suis sa bonne--moi?" demand Mdlle. Henri; then
smile, with that same bitter, derisive smile I have see on her lip
once before, she hastily rise and make her exit.
CHAPTER XVIII.
the young anglo-swiss evidently derive both pleasure and profit from
the study of her mother-tongue. in teach she I do not, of course,
confine myself to the ordinary school routine; I make instruction in
English a channel for instruction in literature. I prescribe to she a
course of reading; she have a little selection of english classic, a
few of which have be leave she by her mother, and the other she have
purchase with her own penny-fee. I lend she some more modern work; all
these she read with avidity, give I, in writing, a clear summary of
each work when she have peruse it. composition, too, she delight in.
such occupation seem the very breath of her nostril, and soon she
improve production wring from I the avowal that those quality in
she I have term taste and fancy ought rather to have be denominate
judgment and imagination. when I intimate so much, which I do as usual
in dry and stinted phrase, I look for the radiant and exult smile
my one word of eulogy have elicit before; but Frances colour. if she
do smile, it be very softly and shyly; and instead of look up to I
with a conquering glance, her eye rest on my hand, which, stretch
over her shoulder, be write some direction with a pencil on the
margin of her book.
"well, be you pleased that I be satisfied with your progress?" I ask.
"yes," say she slowly, gently, the blush that have half subside
return.
"but I do not say enough, I suppose?" I continue. "my praise be too
cool?"
she make no answer, and, I think, look a little sad. I divine she
thought, and should much have like to have respond to they, have
it be expedient so to do. she be not now very ambitious of
my admiration--not eagerly desirous of dazzle I; a little
affection--ever so little--please she well than all the panegyric in
the world. feel this, I stand a good while behind she, write on
the margin of her book. I could hardly quit my station or relinquish my
occupation; something retain I bend there, my head very near
her, and my hand near hers too; but the margin of a copy-book be not an
illimitable space--so, doubtless, the directress think; and she take
occasion to walk past in order to ascertain by what art I prolong so
disproportionately the period necessary for fill it. I be oblige to
go. distasteful effort--to leave what we most prefer!
france do not become pale or feeble in consequence of her sedentary
employment; perhaps the stimulus it communicate to her mind
counterbalance the inaction it impose on her body. she change,
indeed, change obviously and rapidly; but it be for the well. when
I first see she, her countenance be sunless, her complexion colourless;
she look like one who have no source of enjoyment, no store of bliss
anywhere in the world; now the cloud have pass from her mien, leave
space for the dawn of hope and interest, and those feeling rise like a
clear morning, animate what have be depressed, tint what have be
pale. her eye, whose colour I have not at first know, so dim be they
with repressed tear, so shadow with ceaseless dejection, now, light by
a ray of the sunshine that cheer her heart, reveal irid of bright
hazel--irid large and full, screen with long lash; and pupil
instinct with fire. that look of wan emaciation which anxiety or low
spirit often communicate to a thoughtful, thin face, rather long than
round, have vanish from her; a clearness of skin almost bloom,
and a plumpness almost embonpoint, soften the decide line of
her feature. her figure share in this beneficial change; it become
rounder, and as the harmony of her form be complete and her stature of
the graceful middle height, one do not regret (or at least I do not
regret) the absence of confirm fulness, in contour, still slight,
though compact, elegant, flexible--the exquisite turning of waist,
wrist, hand, foot, and ankle satisfy completely my notion of
symmetry, and allow a lightness and freedom of movement which
correspond with my idea of grace.
thus improve, thus waken to life, Mdlle. Henri begin to take a
new footing in the school; her mental power, manifest gradually but
steadily, ere long extort recognition even from the envious; and when
the young and healthy see that she could smile brightly, converse gaily,
move with vivacity and alertness, they acknowledge in she a sisterhood
of youth and health, and tolerate she as of their kind accordingly.
to speak truth, I watch this change much as a gardener watch the
growth of a precious plant, and I contribute to it too, even as the
say gardener contribute to the development of his favourite. to I it
be not difficult to discover how I could well foster my pupil, cherish
her starve feeling, and induce the outward manifestation of that
inward vigour which sunless drought and blight blast have hitherto
forbid to expand. constancy of attention--a kindness as mute
as watchful, always stand by she, cloak in the rough garb of
austerity, and make its real nature know only by a rare glance of
interest, or a cordial and gentle word; real respect mask with seeming
imperiousness, direct, urge her action, yet help she too, and
that with devoted care: these be the mean I use, for these mean
well suited Frances' feeling, as susceptible as deep vibrating--her
nature at once proud and shy.
the benefit of my system become apparent also in her alter demeanour
as a teacher; she now take her place amongst her pupil with an air
of spirit and firmness which assure they at once that she mean to be
obey--and obey she be. they feel they have lose their power over
she. if any girl have rebel, she would no long have take she
rebellion to heart; she possess a source of comfort they could not
drain, a pillar of support they could not overthrow: formerly, when
insult, she weep; now, she smile.
the public reading of one of her devoir achieve the revelation of her
talent to all and sundry; I remember the subject--it be an emigrant's
letter to his friend at home. it open with simplicity; some natural
and graphic touch disclose to the reader the scene of virgin forest
and great, New-World river--barren of sail and flag--amidst which the
epistle be suppose to be indite. the difficulty and danger that
attend a settler's life, be hint at; and in the few word say on
that subject, Mdlle. Henri fail not to render audible the voice of
resolve, patience, endeavour. the disaster which have drive he
from his native country be allude to; stainless honour, inflexible
independence, indestructible self-respect there take the word. past
day be speak of; the grief of parting, the regret of absence, be
touch upon; feeling, forcible and fine, breathe eloquent in every
period. at the close, consolation be suggest; religious faith become
there the speaker, and she speak well.
the devoir be powerfully write in language at once chaste and choice,
in a style nerve with vigour and grace with harmony.
Mdlle. Reuter be quite sufficiently acquaint with English to
understand it when read or speak in her presence, though she could
neither speak nor write it herself. during the perusal of this devoir,
she sit placidly busy, her eye and finger occupy with the formation
of a "riviere" or open-work hem round a cambric handkerchief; she
say nothing, and her face and forehead, clothe with a mask of purely
negative expression, be as blank of comment as her lip. as neither
surprise, pleasure, approbation, nor interest be evince in her
countenance, so no more be disdain, envy, annoyance, weariness; if
that inscrutable mien say anything, it be simply this--
"the matter be too trite to excite an emotion, or call forth an
opinion."
as soon as I have do, a hum rise; several of the pupil, press round
Mdlle. Henri, begin to beset she with compliment; the composed voice of
the directress be now heard:--
"young lady, such of you as have cloak and umbrella will hasten
to return home before the shower become heavy" (it be rain a
little), "the remainder will wait till their respective servant arrive
to fetch they." and the school disperse, for it be four o'clock.
"Monsieur, a word," say Mdlle. Reuter, step on to the estrade, and
signifying, by a movement of the hand, that she wish I to relinquish,
for an instant, the castor I have clutch.
"Mademoiselle, I be at your service."
"Monsieur, it be of course an excellent plan to encourage effort in
young people by make conspicuous the progress of any particularly
industrious pupil; but do you not think that in the present instance,
Mdlle. Henri can hardly be consider as a concurrent with the other
pupil? she be old than most of they, and have have advantage of an
exclusive nature for acquire a knowledge of English; on the other
hand, her sphere of life be somewhat beneath theirs; under these
circumstance, a public distinction, confer upon Mdlle. Henri, may be
the mean of suggest comparison, and exciting feeling such as would
be far from advantageous to the individual form their object. the
interest I take in Mdlle. Henri's real welfare make I desirous of
screen she from annoyance of this sort; besides, monsieur, as I
have before hint to you, the sentiment of AMOUR-PROPRE have a somewhat
marked preponderance in her character; celebrity have a tendency to
foster this sentiment, and in she it should be rather repressed--she
rather need keep down than bring forward; and then I think,
monsieur--it appear to I that ambition, LITERARY ambition especially,
be not a feeling to be cherish in the mind of a woman: would not
Mdlle. Henri be much safe and happy if teach to believe that in the
quiet discharge of social duty consist her real vocation, than if
stimulate to aspire after applause and publicity? she may never marry;
scanty as be her resource, obscure as be her connection, uncertain
as be her health (for I think her consumptive, her mother die of that
complaint), it be more than probable she never will. I do not see how
she can rise to a position, whence such a step would be possible; but
even in celibacy it would be well for she to retain the character and
habit of a respectable decorous female."
"indisputably, mademoiselle," be my answer. "your opinion admit of no
doubt;" and, fearful of the harangue be renew, I retreat under
cover of that cordial sentence of assent.
at the date of a fortnight after the little incident note above, I find
it record in my diary that a hiatus occur in Mdlle. Henri's usually
regular attendance in class. the first day or two I wonder at her
absence, but do not like to ask an explanation of it; I think indeed
some chance word might be drop which would afford I the information
I wish to obtain, without my run the risk of exciting silly smile
and gossip whisper by demand it. but when a week pass and
the seat at the desk near the door still remain vacant, and when
no allusion be make to the circumstance by any individual of the
class--when, on the contrary, I find that all observe a marked silence
on the point--I determine, COUTE QUI COUTE, to break the ice of this
silly reserve. I select Sylvie as my informant, because from she I
know that I should at least get a sensible answer, unaccompanie by
wriggle, titter, or other flourish of folly.
"Ou donc est Mdlle. Henri?" I say one day as I return an
exercise-book I have be examine.
"elle e partie, monsieur."
"Partie? et pour combien de temp? Quand reviendra-t-elle?"
"elle est partie pour toujour, monsieur; elle ne reviendra plus."
"ah!" be my involuntary exclamation; then after a pause:--
"En ete-vous bien sure, Sylvie?"
"Oui, oui, monsieur, mademoiselle la directrice nous l'a dit elle-meme
il y a deux ou trois jour."
and I could pursue my inquiry no far; time, place, and
circumstance forbid my add another word. I could neither comment on
what have be say, nor demand further particular. a question as to the
reason of the teacher's departure, as to whether it have be voluntary
or otherwise, be indeed on my lip, but I suppress it--there be
listener all round. an hour after, in pass Sylvie in the corridor as
she be put on her bonnet, I stop short and asked:--
"Sylvie, do you know Mdlle. Henri's address? I have some book of her,"
I add carelessly, "and I should wish to send they to she."
"no, monsieur," reply Sylvie; "but perhaps Rosalie, the portress, will
be able to give it you."
Rosalie's cabinet be just at hand; I step in and repeat the
inquiry. Rosalie--a smart french grisette--look up from her work with
a know smile, precisely the sort of smile I have be so desirous to
avoid exciting. her answer be prepare; she know nothing whatever
of Mdlle. Henri's address--have never know it. turn from she with
impatience--for I believe she lie and be hire to lie--I almost
knock down some one who have be stand at my back; it be the
directress. my abrupt movement make her recoil two or three step. I be
oblige to apologize, which I do more concisely than politely. no man
like to be dog, and in the very irritable mood in which I then
be the sight of Mdlle. Reuter thoroughly incense I. at the moment I
turn her countenance look hard, dark, and inquisitive; her eye
be bent upon I with an expression of almost hungry curiosity. I have
scarcely catch this phase of physiognomy ere it have vanish; a
bland smile play on her feature; my harsh apology be receive with
good-humour facility.
"oh, donot mention it, monsieur; you only touch my hair with your
elbow; it be no bad, only a little dishevelled." she shake it back,
and pass her finger through her curl, loosen they into more
numerous and flow ringlet. then she go on with vivacity:
"Rosalie, I be come to tell you to go instantly and close the window
of the salon; the wind be rise, and the muslin curtain will be
cover with dust."
Rosalie depart. "now," think I, "this will not do; Mdlle. Reuter
think her meanness in eave-dropping be screen by her art in devise
a pretext, whereas the muslin curtain she speak of be not more
transparent than this same pretext." an impulse come over I to thrust
the flimsy screen aside, and confront her craft boldly with a word or
two of plain truth. "the rough-shod foot tread most firmly on slippery
ground," think I; so I begin:
"Mademoiselle Henri have leave your establishment--be dismiss, I
presume?"
"ah, I wish to have a little conversation with you, monsieur," reply
the directress with the most natural and affable air in the world;
"but we cannot talk quietly here; will Monsieur step into the garden a
minute?" and she precede I, step out through the glass-door I have
before mention.
"there," say she, when we have reach the centre of the middle alley,
and when the foliage of shrub and tree, now in their summer pride,
close behind end around we, shut out the view of the house, and thus
impart a sense of seclusion even to this little plot of ground in the
very core of a capital.
"there, one feel quiet and free when there be only pear-tree and
rose-bush about one; I dare say you, like I, monsieur, be sometimes
tired of be eternally in the midst of life; of have human face
always round you, human eye always upon you, human voice always in
your ear. I be sure I often wish intensely for liberty to spend a whole
month in the country at some little farm-house, bien gentille, bien
propre, tout entouree de champs et de bois; quelle vie charmante que la
vie champetre! N'est-ce pas, monsieur?"
"Cela depend, mademoiselle."
"Que le vent est bon et frais!" continue the directress; and she be
right there, for it be a south wind, soft and sweet. I carry my hat
in my hand, and this gentle breeze, pass through my hair, soothe my
temple like balm. its refreshing effect, however, penetrate no deep
than the mere surface of the frame; for as I walk by the side of
Mdlle. Reuter, my heart be still hot within I, and while I be muse
the fire burn; then spake I with my tongue:--
"I understand Mdlle. Henri be go from hence, and will not return?"
"ah, true! I mean to have name the subject to you some day ago, but
my time be so completely take up, I cannot do half the thing I wish:
have you never experience what it be, monsieur, to find the day too
short by twelve hour for your numerous duty?"
"not often. Mdlle. Henri's departure be not voluntary, I presume? if it
have be, she would certainly have give I some intimation of it, be
my pupil."
"oh, do she not tell you? that be strange; for my part, I never
think of advert to the subject; when one have so many thing to
attend to, one be apt to forget little incident that be not of primary
importance."
"you consider Mdlle. Henri's dismission, then, as a very insignificant
event?"
"dismission? ah! she be not dismiss; I can say with truth, monsieur,
that since I become the head of this establishment no master or teacher
have ever be dismiss from it."
"yet some have leave it, mademoiselle?"
"many; I have find it necessary to change frequently--a change of
instructor be often beneficial to the interest of a school; it give
life and variety to the proceeding; it amuse the pupil, and suggest
to the parent the idea of exertion and progress."
"yet when you be tired of a professor or maitresse, you scruple to
dismiss they?"
"no need to have recourse to such extreme measure, I assure you.
allon, monsieur le professeur--asseyon-nous; je vais vous donner une
petite lecon dans votre etat d'instituteur." (I wish I might write
all she say to I in French--it lose sadly by be translate into
English.) we have now reach the garden-chair; the directress sit down,
and sign to I to sit by she, but I only rest my knee on the seat,
and stand lean my head and arm against the embower branch of a
huge laburnum, whose golden flower, blent with the dusky green leaf
of a lilac-bush, form a mixed arch of shade and sunshine over the
retreat. Mdlle. Reuter sit silent a moment; some novel movement be
evidently work in her mind, and they show their nature on her
astute brow; she be meditate some CHEF d'oeuvre of policy. convince
by several month' experience that the affectation of virtue she do
not possess be unavaile to ensnare I--aware that I have read her real
nature, and would believe nothing of the character she give out as be
her--she have determine, at last, to try a new key, and see if the lock
of my heart would yield to that; a little audacity, a word of truth, a
glimpse of the real. "yes, I will try," be her inward resolve; and then
her blue eye glitter upon I--it do not flash--nothing of flame ever
kindle in its temperate gleam.
"Monsieur fear to sit by I?" she inquire playfully.
"I have no wish to usurp Pelet's place," I answer, for I have get the
habit of speak to she bluntly--a habit begin in anger, but continue
because I see that, instead of offend, it fascinate she. she cast
down her eye, and droop her eyelid; she sigh uneasily; she turn
with an anxious gesture, as if she would give I the idea of a bird that
flutter in its cage, and would fain fly from its jail and jailer, and
seek its natural mate and pleasant nest.
"well--and your lesson?" I demand briefly.
"ah!" she exclaim, recover herself, "you be so young, so frank
and fearless, so talented, so impatient of imbecility, so disdainful of
vulgarity, you need a lesson; here it be then: far more be to be do
in this world by dexterity than by strength; but, perhaps, you know
that before, for there be delicacy as well as power in your
character--policy, as well as pride?"
"go on," say I; and I could hardly help smile, the flattery be so
piquant, so finely seasoned. she catch the prohibit smile, though I
pass my hand over my month to conceal it; and again she make room for
I to sit beside she. I shake my head, though temptation penetrate to
my sens at the moment, and once more I tell she to go on.
"well, then, if ever you be at the head of a large establishment,
dismiss nobody. to speak truth, monsieur (and to you I will speak
truth), I despise people who be always make row, bluster, send
off one to the right, and another to the left, urge and hurrying
circumstance. Iwill tell you what I like good to do, monsieur, shall I?"
she look up again; she have compound her glance well this time--much
archness, more deference, a spicy dash of coquetry, an unveil
consciousness of capacity. I nod; she treat I like the great
Mogul; so I become the great Mogul as far as she be concern.
"I like, monsieur, to take my knitting in my hand, and to sit quietly
down in my chair; circumstance defile past I; I watch their march; so
long as they follow the course I wish, I say nothing, and do nothing; I
donot clap my hand, and cry out 'bravo! how lucky I be!' to attract
the attention and envy of my neighbour--I be merely passive; but when
event fall out ill--when circumstance become adverse--I watch very
vigilantly; I knit on still, and still I hold my tongue; but every now
and then, monsieur, I just put my toe out--so--and give the rebellious
circumstance a little secret push, without noise, which send it the way
I wish, and I be successful after all, and nobody have see my expedient.
so, when teacher or master become troublesome and inefficient--when,
in short, the interest of the school would suffer from their retain
their place--I mind my knitting, event progress, circumstance glide
past; I see one which, if push ever so little awry, will render
untenable the post I wish to have vacate--the deed be do--the
stumble-block remove--and no one see I: I have not make an enemy, I
be rid of an incumbrance."
a moment since, and I think she alluring; this speech conclude, I
look on she with distaste. "just like you," be my cold answer.
"and in this way you have oust Mdlle. Henri? you want her office,
therefore you render it intolerable to she?"
"not at all, monsieur, I be merely anxious about Mdlle. Henri's health;
no, your moral sight be clear and pierce, but there you have fail
to discover the truth. I take--I have always take a real interest in
Mdlle. Henri's welfare; I do not like she go out in all weather;
I think it would be more advantageous for she to obtain a permanent
situation; besides, I consider she now qualified to do something more
than teach sewing. I reason with she; leave the decision to herself;
she see the correctness of my view, and adopt they."
"Excellent! and now, mademoiselle, you will have the goodness to give I
her address."
"her address!" and a sombre and stony change come over the mien of
the directress. "her address? Ah?--well--I wish I could oblige you,
monsieur, but I cannot, and I will tell you why; whenever I myself ask
she for her address, she always evade the inquiry. I think--I may
be wrong--but I think her motive for do so, be a natural, though
mistaken reluctance to introduce I to some, probably, very poor
abode; her mean be narrow, her origin obscure; she live somewhere,
doubtless, in the 'basse ville.'"
"Iwill not lose sight of my good pupil yet," say I, "though she be
bear of beggar and lodge in a cellar; for the rest, it be absurd to
make a bugbear of her origin to I--I happen to know that she be a
swiss pastor's daughter, neither more nor less; and, as to her narrow
mean, I care nothing for the poverty of her purse so long as her heart
overflow with affluence."
"your sentiment be perfectly noble, monsieur," say the directress,
affect to suppress a yawn; her sprightliness be now extinct, her
temporary candour shut up; the little, red-colour, piratical-look
pennon of audacity she have allow to float a minute in the air, be
furl, and the broad, sober-hue flag of dissimulation again hung
low over the citadel. I do not like she thus, so I cut short the
TETE-a-tete and depart.
CHAPTER XIX.
NOVELISTS should never allow themselves to weary of the study of real
life. if they observe this duty conscientiously, they would give we
few picture chequer with vivid contrast of light and shade;
they would seldom elevate their hero and heroine to the height of
rapture--still seldomer sink they to the depth of despair; for if we
rarely taste the fulness of joy in this life, we yet more rarely savour
the acrid bitterness of hopeless anguish; unless, indeed, we have
plunge like beast into sensual indulgence, abuse, strained,
stimulate, again overstrain, and, at last, destroy our faculty
for enjoyment; then, truly, we may find ourselves without support,
rob of hope. our agony be great, and how can it end? we have break
the spring of our power; life must be all suffer--too feeble to
conceive faith--death must be darkness--God, spirit, religion can have
no place in our collapse mind, where linger only hideous and pollute
recollection of vice; and time bring we on to the brink of the grave,
and dissolution fling we in--a rag eat through and through with
disease, wring together with pain, stamp into the churchyard sod by
the inexorable heel of despair.
but the man of regular life and rational mind never despair. he lose
his property--it be a blow--he stagger a moment; then, his energy,
rouse by the smart, be at work to seek a remedy; activity soon
mitigate regret. Sickness affect he; he take patience--endure what
he cannot cure. acute pain rack he; his writhing limb know not where
to find rest; he lean on Hope's anchor. death take from he what
he love; root up, and tear violently away the stem round which his
affection be twin--a dark, dismal time, a frightful wrench--but
some morning Religion look into his desolate house with sunrise, and
say, that in another world, another life, he shall meet his kindre
again. she speak of that world as a place unsullie by sin--of that
life, as an era unembittere by suffer; she mightily strengthen
her consolation by connect with it two idea--which mortal cannot
comprehend, but on which they love to repose--Eternity, Immortality; and
the mind of the mourner, be fill with an image, faint yet glorious,
of heavenly hill all light and peace--of a spirit rest there in
bliss--of a day when his spirit shall also alight there, free and
disembodied--of a reunion perfect by love, purify from fear--he
take courage--go out to encounter the necessity and discharge the
duty of life; and, though sadness may never lift her burden from his
mind, Hope will enable he to support it.
well--and what suggest all this? and what be the inference to be draw
therefrom? what suggest it, be the circumstance of my good pupil--my
treasure--be snatch from my hand, and put away out of my reach;
the inference to be draw from it be--that, be a steady, reasonable
man, I do not allow the resentment, disappointment, and grief,
engender in my mind by this evil chance, to grow there to any
monstrous size; nor do I allow they to monopolize the whole space of my
heart; I pen they, on the contrary, in one strait and secret nook. in
the daytime, too, when I be about my duty, I put they on the silent
system; and it be only after I have close the door of my chamber
at night that I somewhat relax my severity towards these morose
nursling, and allow vent to their language of murmur; then, in
revenge, they sit on my pillow, haunt my bed, and keep I awake with
their long, midnight cry.
a week pass. I have say nothing more to Mdlle. Reuter. I have be calm
in my demeanour to she, though stony cold and hard. when I look at
she, it be with the glance fitting to be bestow on one who I know
have consult jealousy as an adviser, and employ treachery as an
instrument--the glance of quiet disdain and rooted distrust. on Saturday
evening, ere I leave the house, I stept into the SALLE-A-MANGER, where
she be sit alone, and, place myself before she, I ask, with
the same tranquil tone and manner that I should have use have I put the
question for the first time--
"Mademoiselle, will you have the goodness to give I the address of
Frances Evans Henri?"
a little surprised, but not disconcert, she smilingly disclaim any
knowledge of that address, add, "Monsieur have perhaps forget that
I explain all about that circumstance before--a week ago?"
"Mademoiselle," I continue, "you would greatly oblige I by direct
I to that young person's abode."
she seem somewhat puzzle; and, at last, look up with an admirably
counterfeit air of naivete, she demand, "do Monsieur think I be
tell an untruth?"
still avoid to give she a direct answer, I say, "it be not then your
intention, mademoiselle, to oblige I in this particular?"
"but, monsieur, how can I tell you what I do not know?"
"very well; I understand you perfectly, mademoiselle, and now I have
only two or three word to say. this be the last week in July; in
another month the vacation will commence, have the goodness to avail
yourself of the leisure it will afford you to look out for another
english master--at the close of August, I shall be under the necessity
of resign my post in your establishment."
I do not wait for her comment on this announcement, but bow and
immediately withdraw.
that same evening, soon after dinner, a servant bring I a small
packet; it be direct in a hand I know, but have not hop so soon to
see again; be in my own apartment and alone, there be nothing to
prevent my immediately open it; it contain four five-franc piece,
and a note in English.
"MONSIEUR,
"I come to Mdlle. Reuter's house yesterday, at the time when
I know you would be just about finish your lesson, and I ask if I
might go into the schoolroom and speak to you. Mdlle. Reuter come out
and say you be already go; it have not yet strike four, so I think
she must be mistake, but conclude it would be vain to call another day
on the same errand. in one sense a note will do as well--it will wrap up
the 20 franc, the price of the lesson I have receive from you; and if
it will not fully express the thank I owe you in addition--if it will
not bid you good-bye as I could wish to have do--if it will not tell
you, as I long to do, how sorry I be that I shall probably never see you
more--why, speak word would hardly be more adequate to the task. have
I see you, I should probably have stammer out something feeble and
unsatisfactory--something belie my feeling rather than explain
they; so it be perhaps as well that I be deny admission to your
presence. you often remark, monsieur, that my devoir dwelt a great
deal on fortitude in bear grief--you say I introduce that theme too
often: I find indeed that it be much easy to write about a severe duty
than to perform it, for I be oppress when I see and feel to what a
reverse fate have condemn I; you be kind to I, monsieur--very kind;
I be afflict--I be heart-break to be quite separated from you; soon
I shall have no friend on earth. but it be useless troubling you with my
distress. what claim have I on your sympathy? none; I will then say no
more.
"Farewell, Monsieur.
"F. E. HENRI."
I put up the note in my pocket-book. I slip the five-franc piece
into my purse--then I take a turn through my narrow chamber.
"Mdlle. Reuter talk about her poverty," say I, "and she be poor;
yet she pay her debt and more. I have not yet give she a quarter's
lesson, and she have send I a quarter's due. I wonder of what she
deprive herself to scrape together the twenty franc--I wonder what
sort of a place she have to live in, and what sort of a woman her aunt
be, and whether she be likely to get employment to supply the place she
have lose. no doubt she will have to trudge about long enough from school
to school, to inquire here, and apply there--be reject in this place,
disappoint in that. many an evening shewill go to her bed tired
and unsuccessful. and the directress would not let she in to bid I
good-bye? I might not have the chance of stand with she for a few
minute at a window in the schoolroom and exchange some half-dozen of
sentence--get to know where she live--put matter in train
for have all thing arrange to my mind? no address on the note"--I
continue, draw it again from the pocket-book and examine it on
each side of the two leaf: "woman be woman, that be certain, and
always do business like woman; man mechanically put a date and address
to their communication. and these five-franc pieces?"--(i haul they
forth from my purse)--"if she have offer I they herself instead of
tie they up with a thread of green silk in a kind of lilliputian
packet, I could have thrust they back into her little hand, and shut
up the small, taper finger over they--so--and compel her shame, her
pride, her shyness, all to yield to a little bit of determined will--now
where be she? how can I get at she?"
open my chamber door I walk down into the kitchen.
"who bring the packet?" I ask of the servant who have deliver it to
I.
"Un petit commissionaire, monsieur."
"do he say anything?"
"Rien."
and I wend my way up the back-stair, wondrously the wiser for my
inquiry.
"no matter," say I to myself, as I again close the door. "no
matter--i'll seek she through Brussels."
and I do. I seek her day by day whenever I have a moment's leisure,
for four week; I seek she on Sundays all day long; I seek she on
the Boulevards, in the Allee Verte, in the Park; I seek she in Ste.
Gudule and St. Jacques; I seek she in the two protestant chapel; I
attend these latter at the german, French, and english service, not
doubt that I should meet she at one of they. all my research be
absolutely fruitless; my security on the last point be prove by the
event to be equally groundless with my other calculation. I stand
at the door of each chapel after the service, and wait till every
individual have come out, scrutinize every gown drape a slender form,
peer under every bonnet cover a young head. in vain; I see
girlish figure pass I, draw their black scarf over their sloping
shoulder, but none of they have the exact turn and air of Mdlle.
Henri's; I see pale and thoughtful face "encadree" in band of brown
hair, but I never find her forehead, her eye, her eyebrow. all the
feature of all the face I meet seem fritter away, because my eye
fail to recognize the peculiarity it be bent upon; an ample space
of brow and a large, dark, and serious eye, with a fine but decide line
of eyebrow trace above.
"she have probably leave Brussels--perhaps be go to England, as she
say she would," mutter I inwardly, as on the afternoon of the fourth
Sunday, I turn from the door of the chapel-royal which the door-keeper
have just close and locked, and follow in the wake of the last of the
congregation, now disperse and disperse over the square. I have
soon outwalke the couple of english gentleman and lady. (gracious
goodness! why donot they dress well? my eye be yet fill with vision
of the high-flounce, slovenly, and tumble dress in costly silk and
satin, of the large unbecoming collar in expensive lace; of the ill-cut
coat and strangely fashioned pantaloon which every Sunday, at the
English service, fill the choir of the chapel-royal, and after it,
issue forth into the square, come into disadvantageous contrast with
freshly and trimly attired foreign figure, hasten to attend salut
at the church of Coburg.) I have pass these pair of Britons, and
the group of pretty british child, and the british footman and
waiting-maid; I have cross the Place Royale, and get into the Rue
Royale, thence I have diverge into the Rue de Louvain--an old and quiet
street. I remember that, feel a little hungry, and not desire to
go back and take my share of the "gouter," now on the refectory-table
at Pelet's--to wit, pistolet and water--I step into a baker's and
refresh myself on a couc(?)--it be a flemish word, I donot know how
to spell it--a CORINTHE-ANGLICE, a currant bun--and a cup of coffee; and
then I stroll on towards the Porte de Louvain. very soon I be out of
the city, and slowly mount the hill, which ascend from the gate, I
take my time; for the afternoon, though cloudy, be very sultry, and not
a breeze stir to refresh the atmosphere. no inhabitant of Brussels
need wander far to search for solitude; let he but move half a league
from his own city and he will find she brood still and blank over
the wide field, so drear though so fertile, spread out treeless and
trackless round the capital of Brabant. have gain the summit of the
hill, and have stand and look long over the cultured but lifeless
campaign, I feel a wish to quit the high road, which I have hitherto
follow, and get in among those till ground--fertile as the bed
of a brobdignagian kitchen-garden--spread far and wide even to the
boundary of the horizon, where, from a dusk green, distance change
they to a sullen blue, and confuse their tint with those of the livid
and thunderous-look sky. accordingly I turn up a by-path to the
right; I have not follow it far ere it bring I, as I expect, into
the field, amidst which, just before I, stretch a long and lofty
white wall enclose, as it seem from the foliage show above, some
thickly plant nursery of yew and cypress, for of that specie be
the branch rest on the pale parapet, and crowd gloomily about a
massive cross, plant doubtless on a central eminence and extend its
arm, which seem of black marble, over the summit of those sinister
tree. I approach, wonder to what house this well-protect garden
appertain; I turn the angle of the wall, think to see some
stately residence; I be close upon great iron gate; there be a
hut serve for a lodge near, but I have no occasion to apply for the
key--the gate be open; I push one leaf back--rain have rust
its hinge, for it groan dolefully as they revolve. thick planting
embower the entrance. pass up the avenue, I see object on
each hand which, in their own mute language of inscription and sign,
explain clearly to what abode I have make my way. this be the
house appoint for all living; cross, monument, and garland of
everlasting announce, "the Protestant Cemetery, outside the gate of
Louvain."
the place be large enough to afford half an hour's strolling without
the monotony of tread continually the same path; and, for those who
love to peruse the annal of graveyard, here be variety of inscription
enough to occupy the attention for double or treble that space of time.
Hither people of many kindred, tongue, and nation, have bring their
dead for interment; and here, on page of stone, of marble, and of
brass, be write name, date, last tribute of pomp or love, in
English, in French, in German, and Latin. here the Englishman have
erect a marble monument over the remain of his Mary Smith or Jane
Brown, and inscribe it only with her name. there the french widower have
shade the grave: of his Elmire or Celestine with a brilliant thicket
of rose, amidst which a little tablet rise, bear an equally bright
testimony to her countless virtue. every nation, tribe, and kindre,
mourn after its own fashion; and how soundless be the mourning of
all! my own tread, though slow and upon smooth-roll path, seem to
startle, because it form the sole break to a silence otherwise total.
not only the wind, but the very fitful, wander air, be that
afternoon, as by common consent, all fall asleep in their various
quarter; the north be hush, the south silent, the east sob not,
nor do the west whisper. the cloud in heaven be condense and
dull, but apparently quite motionless. under the tree of this cemetery
nestle a warm breathless gloom, out of which the cypress stand up
straight and mute, above which the willow hang low and still; where
the flower, as languid as fair, wait listless for night dew or
thunder-shower; where the tomb, and those they hide, lie impassible to
sun or shadow, to rain or drought.
importune by the sound of my own footstep, I turn off upon the turf,
and slowly advanced to a grove of yew; I see something stir among the
stem; I think it might be a broken branch swinging, my short-sight
vision have catch no form, only a sense of motion; but the dusky shade
pass on, appear and disappear at the opening in the avenue. I
soon discern it be a live thing, and a human thing; and, draw
nearer, I perceive it be a woman, pace slowly to and fro, and
evidently deem herself alone as I have deem myself alone, and
meditating as I have be meditate. Ere long she return to a seat
which I fancy she have but just quit, or I should have catch sight
of she before. it be in a nook, screen by a clump of tree; there be
the white wall before she, and a little stone set up against the wall,
and, at the foot of the stone, be an allotment of turf freshly turn
up, a new-make grave. I put on my spectacle, and pass softly close
behind she; glance at the inscription on the stone, I read," Julienne
Henri, die at Brussels, age sixty. August 10th, 18--." have peruse
the inscription, I look down at the form sit bent and thoughtful
just under my eye, unconscious of the vicinity of any live thing; it
be a slim, youthful figure in mourning apparel of the plain black
stuff, with a little simple, black crape bonnet; I feel, as well as
saw, who it be; and, move neither hand nor foot, I stand some moment
enjoy the security of conviction. I have seek she for a month, and
have never discover one of her trace--never meet a hope, or seize
a chance of encounter she anywhere. I have be force to loosen my
grasp on expectation; and, but an hour ago, have sink slackly under
the discouraging think that the current of life, and the impulse
of destiny, have sweep she for ever from my reach; and, behold, while
bend suddenly earthward beneath the pressure of despondency--while
follow with my eye the track of sorrow on the turf of a
graveyard--here be my lost jewel drop on the tear-feed herbage,
nestle in the messy and mouldy root of yew-tree.
france sit very quiet, her elbow on her knee, and her head on her hand.
I know she could retain a thinking attitude a long time without change;
at last, a tear fall; she have be look at the name on the
stone before she, and her heart have no doubt endure one of those
constriction with which the desolate living, regret the dead, be,
at time, so sorely oppress. many tear roll down, which she wipe
away, again and again, with her handkerchief; some distressed sob
escape she, and then, the paroxysm over, she sit quiet as before. I put
my hand gently on her shoulder; no need far to prepare she, for
she be neither hysterical nor liable to fainting-fit; a sudden push,
indeed, might have startle she, but the contact of my quiet touch
merely wake attention as I wish; and, though she turn quickly, yet
so lightning-swift be think--in some mind especially--I believe the
wonder of what--the consciousness of who it be that thus steal unawares
on her solitude, have pass through her brain, and flash into her
heart, even before she have effect that hasty movement; at least,
Amazement have hardly open her eye and raise they to mine, ere
Recognition inform their irid with most speak brightness. nervous
surprise have hardly discompose she feature ere a sentiment of most
vivid joy shine clear and warm on her whole countenance. I have hardly
time to observe that she be waste and pale, ere call to feel a
responsive inward pleasure by the sense of most full and exquisite
pleasure glow in the animate flush, and shin in the expansive
light, now diffuse over my pupil's face. it be the summer sun flash
out after the heavy summer shower; and what fertilize more rapidly than
that beam, burn almost like fire in its ardour?
I hate boldness--that boldness which be of the brassy brow and insensate
nerve; but I love the courage of the strong heart, the fervour of the
generous blood; I love with passion the light of Frances Evans' clear
hazel eye when it do not fear to look straight into mine; I love the
tone with which she utter the words--
"Mon maitre! mon maitre!"
I love the movement with which she confide her hand to my hand; I
love she as she stand there, penniless and parentless; for a sensualist
charmless, for I a treasure--my good object of sympathy on earth,
think such thought as I think, feel such feeling as I feel; my
ideal of the shrine in which to seal my store of love; personification
of discretion and forethought, of diligence and perseverance, of
self-denial and self-control--those guardian, those trusty keeper of
the gift I long to confer on she--the gift of all my affection;
model of truth and honour, of independence and conscientiousness--those
refiner and sustainer of an honest life; silent possessor of a well
of tenderness, of a flame, as genial as still, as pure as quenchless,
of natural feeling, natural passion--those source of refreshment and
comfort to the sanctuary of home. I know how quietly and how deeply the
well bubble in her heart; I know how the more dangerous flame burn
safely under the eye of reason; I have see when the fire shoot up a
moment high and vivid, when the accelerated heat troubled life's current
in its channel; I have see reason reduce the rebel, and humble its
blaze to ember. I have confidence in Frances Evans; I have respect
for she, and as I draw her arm through mine, and lead she out of the
cemetery, I feel I have another sentiment, as strong as confidence, as
firm as respect, more fervid than either--that of love.
"well, my pupil," say I, as the ominous sound gate swing to behind
us--"Well, I have find you again: a month's search have seem long,
and I little think to have discover my lost sheep stray amongst
graf."
never have I address she but as "Mademoiselle" before, and to speak
thus be to take up a tone new to both she and I. her answer suprise
I that this language ruffle none of her feeling, wake no discord in
her heart:
"Mon maitre," she say, "have you trouble yourself to seek I? I little
imagine you would think much of my absence, but I grieve bitterly to
be take away from you. I be sorry for that circumstance when heavy
trouble ought to have make I forget it."
"your aunt be dead?"
"yes, a fortnight since, and she die full of regret, which I could not
chase from her mind; she keep repeat, even during the last night
of her existence, 'france, you will be so lonely when I be go,
so friendless:' she wish too that she could have be bury in
Switzerland, and it be I who persuade she in her old age to leave the
bank of Lake Leman, and to come, only as it seem to die, in this flat
region of Flanders. willingly would I have observe her last wish, and
take her remain back to our own country, but that be impossible; I
be force to lay she here."
"she be ill but a short time, I presume?"
"but three week. when she begin to sink I ask Mdlle. Reuter's leave
to stay with she and wait on she; I readily get leave."
"do you return to the pensionnat!" I demand hastily.
"Monsieur, when I have be at home a week Mdlle. Reuter call one
evening, just after I have get my aunt to bed; she go into her room
to speak to she, and be extremely civil and affable, as she always be;
afterwards she come and sit with I a long time, and just as she rise to
go away, she say: "Mademoiselle, I shall not soon cease to regret your
departure from my establishment, though indeed it be true that you have
teach your class of pupil so well that they be all quite accomplish
in the little work you manage so skilfully, and have not the slight
need of further instruction; my second teacher must in future supply
your place, with regard to the young pupil, as well as she can,
though she be indeed an inferior artiste to you, and doubtless it will
be your part now to assume a high position in your calling; I be sure
you will everywhere find school and family willing to profit by your
talent.' and then she pay I my last quarter's salary. I ask, as
mademoiselle would no doubt think, very bluntly, if she design to
discharge I from the establishment. she smile at my inelegance of
speech, and answer that 'our connection as employer and employ be
certainly dissolve, but that she hop still to retain the pleasure of
my acquaintance; she should always be happy to see I as a friend;' and
then she say something about the excellent condition of the street,
and the long continuance of fine weather, and go away quite cheerful."
I laugh inwardly; all this be so like the directress--so like what I
have expect and guess of her conduct; and then the exposure and proof
of her lie, unconsciously afford by Frances:--"She have frequently
apply for Mdlle. Henri's address," forsooth; "Mdlle. Henri have always
evade give it," &c., &c., and here I find she a visitor at the very
house of whose locality she have profess absolute ignorance!
any comment I might have intend to make on my pupil's communication,
be check by the plashing of large rain-drop on our face and on the
path, and by the muttering of a distant but come storm. the warning
obvious in stagnant air and leaden sky have already induce I to take
the road lead back to Brussels, and now I hasten my own step and
those of my companion, and, as our way lie downhill, we get on rapidly.
there be an interval after the fall of the first broad drop before
heavy rain come on; in the meantime we have pass through the Porte de
Louvain, and be again in the city.
"where do you live?" I ask; "I will see you safe home."
"Rue Notre Dame aux Neiges," answer Frances.
it be not far from the Rue de Louvain, and we stand on the doorstep
of the house we seek ere the cloud, sever with loud peal and
shattered cataract of lightning, empty their livid fold in a torrent,
heavy, prone, and broad.
"come in! come in!" say Frances, as, after put she into the house,
I pause ere I follow: the word decide I; I step across the
threshold, shut the door on the rushing, flash, whiten storm, and
follow her upstairs to her apartment. neither she nor I be wet; a
projection over the door have ward off the straight-descending flood;
none but the first, large drop have touch our garment; one minute
more and we should not have have a dry thread on we.
step over a little mat of green wool, I find myself in a small room
with a paint floor and a square of green carpet in the middle; the
article of furniture be few, but all bright and exquisitely clean;
order reign through its narrow limit--such order as it soothe my
punctilious soul to behold. and I have hesitate to enter the abode,
because I apprehend after all that Mdlle. Reuter's hint about its
extreme poverty might be too well-found, and I fear to embarrass the
lace-mender by enter her lodging unawares! poor the place might be;
poor truly it be; but its neatness be well than elegance, and have
but a bright little fire shine on that clean hearth, I should have
deem it more attractive than a palace. no fire be there, however, and
no fuel lay ready to light; the lace-mender be unable to allow herself
that indulgence, especially now when, deprive by death of her sole
relative, she have only her own unaided exertion to rely on. france
go into an inner room to take off her bonnet, and she come out a
model of frugal neatness, with her well-fit black stuff dress, so
accurately define her elegant bust and taper waist, with her spotless
white collar turn back from a fair and shapely neck, with her
plenteous brown hair arrange in smooth band on her temple, and in
a large grecian plait behind: ornament she have none--neither brooch,
ring, nor ribbon; she do well enough without they--perfection of fit,
proportion of form, grace of carriage, agreeably supply their place.
her eye, as she re-enter the small sitting-room, instantly seek
mine, which be just then linger on the hearth; I know she read at
once the sort of inward ruth and pity pain which the chill vacancy of
that hearth stir in my soul: quick to penetrate, quick to determine,
and quick to put in practice, she have in a moment tie a holland apron
round her waist; then she disappear, and reappear with a basket;
it have a cover; she open it, and produce wood and coal; deftly and
compactly she arrange they in the grate.
"it be her whole stock, and she will exhaust it out of hospitality,"
think I.
"what be you go to do?" I ask: "not surely to light a fire this
hot evening? I shall be smother."
"indeed, monsieur, I feel it very chilly since the rain begin; besides,
I must boil the water for my tea, for I take tea on Sundays; you will be
oblige to try and bear the heat."
she have strike a light; the wood be already in a blaze; and truly, when
contrast with the darkness, the wild tumult of the temp without,
that peaceful glow which begin to beam on the now animate hearth,
seem very cheering. a low, purr sound, from some quarter, announce
that another being, besides myself, be pleased with the change; a
black cat, rouse by the light from its sleep on a little cushioned
foot-stool, come and rub its head against Frances' gown as she knelt;
she caress it, say it have be a favourite with her "pauvre tante
Julienne."
the fire be light, the hearth sweep, and a small kettle of a very
antique pattern, such as I think I remember to have see in old
farmhouse in England, place over the now ruddy flame, Frances' hand
be wash, and her apron remove in an instant then she open a
cupboard, and take out a tea-tray, on which she have soon arrange a
china tea-equipage, whose pattern, shape, and size, denote a remote
antiquity; a little, old-fashioned silver spoon be deposit in each
saucer; and a pair of silver tong, equally old-fashioned, be lay
on the sugar-basin; from the cupboard, too, be produce a tidy
silver cream-ewer, not large then an egg-shell. while make these
preparation, she chance to look up, and, read curiosity in my eye,
she smile and asked--
"be this like England, monsieur?"
"like the England of a hundred year ago," I reply.
"be it truly? well, everything on this tray be at least a hundred
year old: these cup, these spoon, this ewer, be all heirloom; my
great-grandmother leave they to my grandmother, she to my mother, and my
mother bring they with she from England to Switzerland, and leave they
to I; and, ever since I be a little girl, I have think I should like
to carry they back to England, whence they come."
she put some pistolet on the table; she make the tea, as foreigner do
make tea--i.e., at the rate of a teaspoonful to half-a-dozen cup;
she place I a chair, and, as I take it, she ask, with a sort of
exaltation--
"will it make you think yourself at home for a moment?"
"if I have a home in England, I believe it would recall it," I
answer; and, in truth, there be a sort of illusion in see the
fair-complexion English-look girl preside at the English meal,
and speak in the English language.
"you have then no home?" be her remark.
"none, nor ever have have. if ever I possess a home, it must be of my own
making, and the task be yet to begin." and, as I speak, a pang, new to
I, shoot across my heart: it be a pang of mortification at the humility
of my position, and the inadequacy of my mean; while with that pang be
bear a strong desire to do more, earn more, be more, possess more;
and in the increase possession, my roused and eager spirit pant to
include the home I have never have, the wife I inwardly vow to win.
Frances' tea be little well than hot water, sugar, and milk; and her
pistolet, with which she could not offer I butter, be sweet to my
palate as manna.
the repast over, and the treasured plate and porcelain being wash and
put by, the bright table rub still bright, "le chat de ma tante
Julienne" also be feed with provision bring forth on a plate for
its special use, a few stray cinder, and a scattering of ash too,
be sweep from the hearth, france at last sit down; and then, as she
take a chair opposite to I, she betray, for the first time, a little
embarrassment; and no wonder, for indeed I have unconsciously watch
she rather too closely, follow all her step and all her movement
a little too perseveringly with my eye, for she mesmerize I by
the grace and alertness of her action--by the deft, cleanly, and even
decorative effect result from each touch of her slight and fine
finger; and when, at last, she subside to stillness, the intelligence
of her face seem beauty to I, and I dwelt on it accordingly. her
colour, however, rise, rather than settle with repose, and her eye
remain downcast, though I keep wait for the lid to be raise that
I might drink a ray of the light I love--a light where fire dissolve
in softness, where affection temper penetration, where, just now
at least, pleasure play with thought--this expectation not be
gratify, I begin at last to suspect that I have probably myself to
blame for the disappointment; I must cease gazing, and begin talk,
if I wish to break the spell under which she now sit motionless; so
recollect the composing effect which an authoritative tone and manner
have ever be willnot to produce on she, I said--
"get one of your english book, mademoiselle, for the rain yet fall
heavily, and will probably detain I half an hour long."
release, and set at ease, up she rise, get her book, and accept at
once the chair I place for she at my side. she have select "Paradise
Lost" from her shelf of classic, think, I suppose, the religious
character of the book well adapt it to Sunday; I tell she to begin at
the beginning, and while she read Milton's invocation to that heavenly
muse, who on the "secret top of Oreb or Sinai" have teach the hebrew
shepherd how in the womb of chaos, the conception of a world have
originate and ripen, I enjoy, undisturbed, the treble pleasure of
have she near I, hear the sound of her voice--a sound sweet and
satisfying in my ear--and look, by interval, at her face: of this
last privilege, I chiefly avail myself when I find fault with an
intonation, a pause, or an emphasis; as long as I dogmatize, I might
also gaze, without exciting too warm a flush.
"Enough," say I, when she have go through some half dozen page (a
work of time with she, for she read slowly and pause often to ask and
receive information)--"enough; and now the rain be cease, and I must
soon go." for indeed, at that moment, look towards the window, I
see it all blue; the thunder-cloud be break and scatter, and the
set August sun send a gleam like the reflection of ruby through
the lattice. I get up; I draw on my glove.
"you have not yet find another situation to supply the place of that
from which you be dismiss by Mdlle. Reuter?"
"no, monsieur; I have make inquiry everywhere, but they all ask I
for reference; and to speak truth, I do not like to apply to the
directress, because I consider she act neither justly nor honourably
towards I; she use underhand mean to set my pupil against I, and
thereby render I unhappy while I hold my place in her establishment,
and she eventually deprive I of it by a masked and hypocritical
manoeuvre, pretend that she be act for my good, but really
snatch from I my chief mean of subsistence, at a crisis when not
only my own life, but that of another, depend on my exertion: of she
I will never more ask a favour."
"how, then, do you propose to get on? how do you live now?"
"I have still my lace-mend trade; with care it will keep I from
starvation, and I doubt not by dint of exertion to get well employment
yet; it be only a fortnight since I begin to try; my courage or hope
be by no mean wear out yet."
"and if you get what you wish, what then? what be your ultimate view?"
"to save enough to cross the Channel: I always look to England as my
Canaan."
"well, well--ere long I shall pay you another visit; good evening now,"
and I leave she rather abruptly; I have much ado to resist a strong inward
impulse, urge I to take a warmer, more expressive leave: what so
natural as to fold she for a moment in a close embrace, to imprint one
kiss on her cheek or forehead? I be not unreasonable--that be all I
want; satisfied in that point, I could go away content; and Reason
deny I even this; she order I to turn my eye from her face, and
my step from her apartment--to quit she as dryly and coldly as I would
have quit old Madame Pelet. I obey, but I swear rancorously to be
avenge one day. "Iwill earn a right to do as I please in this matter,
or Iwill die in the contest. I have one object before I now--to get that
genevese girl for my wife; and my wife she shall be--that is, provide
she have as much, or half as much regard for her master as he have
for she. and would she be so docile, so smile, so happy under my
instruction if she have not? would she sit at my side when I dictate
or correct, with such a still, content, halcyon mien?" for I have ever
remark, that however sad or harass her countenance might be when
I enter a room, yet after I have be near she, speak to she a few
word, give she some direction, utter perhaps some reproof, she
would, all at once, nestle into a nook of happiness, and look up serene
and revive. the reproof suit she good of all: while I scold she
would chip away with her pen-knife at a pencil or a pen; fidgette a
little, pout a little, defend herself by monosyllable, and when I
deprive she of the pen or pencil, fear it would be all cut away,
and when I interdict even the monosyllabic defence, for the purpose
of work up the subdue excitement a little high, she would at last
raise her eye and give I a certain glance, sweeten with gaiety, and
point with defiance, which, to speak truth, thrill I as nothing have
ever do, and make I, in a fashion (though happily she do not know
it), her subject, if not her slave. after such little scene her spirit
would maintain their flow, often for some hour, and, as I remark
before, her health therefrom take a sustenance and vigour which,
previously to the event of her aunt's death and her dismissal, have
almost recreate her whole frame.
it have take I several minute to write these last sentence; but I have
think all their purport during the brief interval of descend the
stair from Frances' room. just as I be open the outer door,
I remember the twenty franc which I have not restore; I pause:
impossible to carry they away with I; difficult to force they back
on their original owner; I have now see she in her own humble abode,
witness the dignity of her poverty, the pride of order, the fastidious
care of conservatism, obvious in the arrangement and economy of her
little home; I be sure she would not suffer herself to be excuse
pay her debt; I be certain the favour of indemnity would be
accept from no hand, perhaps least of all from mine: yet these four
five-franc piece be a burden to my self-respect, and I must get
rid of they. an expedient--a clumsy one no doubt, but the good I
could devise-suggest itself to I. I dart up the stair, knock,
re-enter the room as if in haste:--
"Mademoiselle, I have forget one of my glove; I must have leave it
here."
she instantly rise to seek it; as she turn she back, I--be now
at the hearth--noiselessly lift a little vase, one of a set of china
ornament, as old-fashioned as the tea-cup--slip the money under it,
then saying--"Oh here be my glove! I have drop it within the fender;
good evening, mademoiselle," I make my second exit.
Brief as my impromptu return have be, it have afford I time to pick
up a heart-ache; I remark that Frances have already remove the red
ember of her cheerful little fire from the grate: force to calculate
every item, to save in every detail, she have instantly on my departure
retrench a luxury too expensive to be enjoy alone.
"I be glad it be not yet winter," think I; "but in two month more
come the wind and rain of November; would to God that before then I
could earn the right, and the power, to shovel coal into that grate ad
LIBITUM!"
already the pavement be dry; a balmy and fresh breeze stir the
air, purify by lightning; I feel the West behind I, where spread a
sky like opal; azure immingle with crimson: the enlarged sun, glorious
in tyrian tint, dip his brim already; step, as I be, eastward,
I face a vast bank of cloud, but also I have before I the arch of an
evening rainbow; a perfect rainbow--high, wide, vivid. I look long;
my eye drink in the scene, and I suppose my brain must have absorb
it; for that night, after lie awake in pleasant fever a long time,
watch the silent sheet-lightning, which still play among the
retreating cloud, and flash silvery over the star, I at last fell
asleep; and then in a dream be reproduce the set sun, the bank of
cloud, the mighty rainbow. I stand, methought, on a terrace; I lean
over a parapete wall; there be space below I, depth I could not
fathom, but hear an endless dash of wave, I believe it to be the
sea; sea spread to the horizon; sea of changeful green and intense
blue: all be soft in the distance; all vapour-veil. a spark of gold
glistened on the line between water and air, float up, approach,
enlarge, change; the object hang midway between heaven and earth,
under the arch of the rainbow; the soft but dusk cloud diffuse behind.
it hover as on wing; pearly, fleecy, gleam air stream like
raiment round it; light, tint with carnation, colour what seem
face and limb; a large star shine with still lustre on an angel's
forehead; an upraised arm and hand, glance like a ray, point to the
bow overhead, and a voice in my heart whispered--
"hope smile on Effort!"
CHAPTER XX.
a competency be what I want; a competency it be now my aim and
resolve to secure; but never have I be far from the mark. with
August the school-year (l'annee scolaire) close, the examination
conclude, the prize be adjudge, the school disperse, the gate of
all college, the door of all pensionnat shut, not to be reopen till
the beginning or middle of October. the last day of August be at hand,
and what be my position? have I advance a step since the commencement
of the past quarter? on the contrary, I have recede one. by renounce
my engagement as english master in Mdlle. Reuter's establishment, I have
voluntarily cut off 20l. from my yearly income; I have diminish my 60l.
per annum to 40l., and even that sum I now hold by a very precarious
tenure.
it be some time since I make any reference to M. Pelet. the moonlight
walk be, I think, the last incident record in this narrative where
that gentleman cut any conspicuous figure: the fact be, since that
event, a change have come over the spirit of our intercourse. he, indeed,
ignorant that the still hour, a cloudless moon, and an open lattice,
have reveal to I the secret of his selfish love and false friendship,
would have continue smooth and complaisant as ever; but I grow spiny as
a porcupine, and inflexible as a blackthorn cudgel; I never have a smile
for his raillery, never a moment for his society; his invitation to
take coffee with he in his parlour be invariably reject, and
very stiffly and sternly reject too; his jesting allusion to the
directress (which he still continue) be hear with a grim calm very
different from the petulant pleasure they be formerly willnot to excite.
for a long time pelet bore with my frigid demeanour very patiently;
he even increase his attention; but find that even a cringing
politeness fail to thaw or move I, he at last alter too; in
his turn he cool; his invitation cease; his countenance become
suspicious and overcast, and I read in the perplexed yet brood aspect
of his brow, a constant examination and comparison of premise, and an
anxious endeavour to draw thence some explanatory inference. Ere long,
I fancy, he succeed, for he be not without penetration; perhaps, too,
Mdlle. zoraide might have aid he in the solution of the enigma; at
any rate I soon find that the uncertainty of doubt have vanish from
his manner; renounce all pretence of friendship and cordiality, he
adopt a reserved, formal, but still scrupulously polite deportment.
this be the point to which I have wish to bring he, and I be now
again comparatively at my ease. I do not, it be true, like my position
in his house; but be free from the annoyance of false profession
and double-dealing I could endure it, especially as no heroic sentiment
of hatred or jealousy of the director distract my philosophical soul;
he have not, I find, wound I in a very tender point, the wound be so
soon and so radically heal, leave only a sense of contempt for
the treacherous fashion in which it have be inflict, and a last
mistrust of the hand which I have detect attempt to stab in the
dark.
this state of thing continue till about the middle of July, and then
there be a little change; Pelet come home one night, an hour after his
usual time, in a state of unequivocal intoxication, a thing anomalous
with he; for if he have some of the bad fault of his countryman,
he have also one at least of their virtue, i.e. sobriety. so drunk,
however, be he upon this occasion, that after have rouse the whole
establishment (except the pupil, whose dormitory be over the class
in a building apart from the dwelling-house, be consequently out of the
reach of disturbance) by violently ring the hall-bell and ordering
lunch to be bring in immediately, for he imagine it be noon, whereas
the city bell have just toll midnight; after have furiously rat
the servant for their want of punctuality, and go near to chastise
his poor old mother, who advise he to go to bed, he begin rave
dreadfully about "le maudit Anglais, Creemsvort." I have not yet retire;
some german book I have get hold of have keep I up late; I hear the
uproar below, and could distinguish the director's voice exalt in
a manner as appalling as it be unusual. open my door a little, I
become aware of a demand on his part for "creemsvort" to be bring
down to he that he might cut his throat on the hall-table and wash
his honour, which he affirm to be in a dirty condition, in infernal
british blood. "he be either mad or drunk," think I, "and in either
case the old woman and the servant will be the well of a man's
assistance," so I descend straight to the hall. I find he staggering
about, his eye in a fine frenzy rolling--a pretty sight he be, a just
medium between the fool and the lunatic.
"Come, M. Pelet," say I, "you have well go to bed," and I take hold of
his arm. his excitement, of course, increase greatly at sight and touch
of the individual for whose blood he have be make application: he
struggle and strike with fury--but a drunken man be no match for a
sober one; and, even in his normal state, Pelet's wear out frame could
not have stand against my sound one. I get he up-stair, and, in
process of time, to bed. during the operation he do not fail to
utter commination which, though break, have a sense in they; while
stigmatize I as the treacherous spawn of a perfidious country, he,
in the same breath, anathematize Zoraide Reuter; he term she "femme
sotte et vicieuse," who, in a fit of lewd caprice, have throw herself
away on an unprincipled adventurer; direct the point of the last
appellation by a furious blow, obliquely aim at I. I leave he in the
act of bound elastically out of the bed into which I have tuck he;
but, as I take the precaution of turn the key in the door behind I,
I retire to my own room, assure of his safe custody till the morning,
and free to draw undisturbed conclusion from the scene I have just
witness.
now, it be precisely about this time that the directress, sting by
my coldness, bewitch by my scorn, and excite by the preference she
suspect I of cherish for another, have fall into a snare of she
own laying--be herself catch in the mesh of the very passion with
which she wish to entangle I. conscious of the state of thing in
that quarter, I gather, from the condition in which I see my
employer, that his lady-love have betray the alienation of her
affection--inclination, rather, I would say; affection be a word at
once too warm and too pure for the subject--have let he see that the
cavity of her hollow heart, empty of his image, be now occupy by
that of his usher. it be not without some surprise that I find
myself oblige to entertain this view of the case; pelet, with
his old-establish school, be so convenient, so profitable a
match--Zoraide be so calculate, so interested a woman--I wonder
mere personal preference could, in her mind, have prevail for a moment
over worldly advantage: yet, it be evident, from what Pelet say, that,
not only have she repulse he, but have even let slip expression of
partiality for I. one of his drunken exclamation be, "and the
jade doat on your youth, you raw blockhead! and talk of your noble
deportment, as she call your accursed english formality--and your pure
moral, forsooth! des moeurs de Caton a-t-elle dit--sotte!" Hers, I
think, must be a curious soul, where in spite of a strong, natural
tendency to estimate unduly advantage of wealth and station, the
sardonic disdain of a fortuneless subordinate have work a deep
impression than could be imprint by the most flattering assiduity of
a prosperous CHEF D'INSTITUTION. I smile inwardly; and strange to say,
though my AMOUR PROPRE be excited not disagreeably by the conquest, my
well feeling remain untouched. next day, when I see the directress,
and when she make an excuse to meet I in the corridor, and besought my
notice by a demeanour and look subdued to Helot humility, I could
not love, I could scarcely pity she. to answer briefly and dryly
some interesting inquiry about my health--to pass she by with a stern
bow--be all I could; her presence and manner have then, and for some
time previously and consequently, a singular effect upon I: they
seal up all that be good elicit all that be noxious in my nature;
sometimes they enervate my sens, but they always harden my heart.
I be aware of the detriment do, and quarrel with myself for the
change. I have ever hat a tyrant; and, behold, the possession of a
slave, self-give, go near to transform I into what I abhor!
there be at once a sort of low gratification in receive this luscious
incense from an attractive and still young worshipper; and an irritate
sense of degradation in the very experience of the pleasure. when she
steal about I with the soft step of a slave, I feel at once barbarous
and sensual as a pasha. I endure her homage sometimes; sometimes I
rebuke it. my indifference or harshness serve equally to increase the
evil I desire to check.
"Que le dedain lui sie bien!" I once overhear she say to her mother:
"il est beau comme Apollon quand il sourit de son air hautain."
and the jolly old dame laugh, and say she think her daughter be
bewitch, for I have no point of a handsome man about I, except be
straight and without deformity. "pour moi," she continue, "il I fait
tout l'effet d'un chat-huant, avec ses besicle."
worthy old girl! I could have go and kiss she have she not be a
little too old, too fat, and too red-faced; her sensible, truthful
word seem so wholesome, contrast with the morbid illusion of her
daughter.
when Pelet awake on the morning after his frenzy fit, he retain no
recollection of what have happen the previous night, and his mother
fortunately have the discretion to refrain from inform he that I have
be a witness of his degradation. he do not again have recourse to
wine for cure his grief, but even in his sober mood he soon show
that the iron of jealousy have enter into his soul. a thorough
Frenchman, the national characteristic of ferocity have not be omit
by nature in compound the ingredient of his character; it have
appear first in his access of drunken wrath, when some of his
demonstration of hatred to my person be of a truly fiendish
character, and now it be more covertly betray by momentary
contraction of the feature, and flash of fierceness in his light
blue eye, when their glance chance to encounter mine. he absolutely
avoid speak to I; I be now spar even the falsehood of his
politeness. in this state of our mutual relation, my soul rebel
sometimes almost ungovernably, against live in the house and
discharge the service of such a man; but who be free from the
constraint of circumstance? at that time, I be not: I use to rise
each morning eager to shake off his yoke, and go out with my portmanteau
under my arm, if a beggar, at least a freeman; and in the evening, when
I come back from the pensionnat de demoiselle, a certain pleasant voice
in my ear; a certain face, so intelligent, yet so docile, so reflective,
yet so soft, in my eye; a certain cast of character, at once proud
and pliant, sensitive and sagacious, serious and ardent, in my head; a
certain tone of feeling, fervid and modest, refined and practical, pure
and powerful, delight and trouble my memory--vision of new tie I
long to contract, of new duty I long to undertake, have take the
rover and the rebel out of I, and have show endurance of my hat lot
in the light of a Spartan virtue.
but Pelet's fury subside; a fortnight suffice for its rise, progress,
and extinction: in that space of time the dismissal of the obnoxious
teacher have be effect in the neighbouring house, and in the same
interval I have declare my resolution to follow and find out my pupil,
and upon my application for her address be refuse, I have summarily
resign my own post. this last act seem at once to restore Mdlle.
Reuter to her sens; her sagacity, her judgment, so long mislead by a
fascinating delusion, strike again into the right track the moment
that delusion vanish. by the right track, I do not mean the steep and
difficult path of principle--in that path she never trod; but the plain
highway of common sense, from which she have of late widely diverge.
when there she carefully seek, and have find, industriously pursue
the trail of her old suitor, M. Pelet. she soon overtake he. what art
she employ to soothe and blind he I know not, but she succeed both
in allay his wrath, and hoodwink his discernment, as be soon
prove by the alteration in his mien and manner; she must have manage
to convince he that I neither be, nor ever have be, a rival of his,
for the fortnight of fury against I terminate in a fit of exceed
graciousness and amenity, not unmixe with a dash of exult
self-complacency, more ludicrous than irritate. Pelet's bachelor's
life have be pass in proper french style with due disregard to moral
restraint, and I think his married life promise to be very french
also. he often boast to I what a terror he have be to certain
husband of his acquaintance; I perceive it would not now be difficult
to pay he back in his own coin.
the crisis draw on. no soon have the holiday commence than note of
preparation for some momentous event sound all through the premise
of Pelet: painter, polisher, and upholsterer be immediately set
to work, and there be talk of "la chambre de Madame," "le salon de
Madame." not deem it probable that the old duenna at present graced
with that title in our house, have inspire her son with such enthusiasm
of filial piety, as to induce he to fit up apartment expressly for her
use, I conclude, in common with the cook, the two housemaid, and the
kitchen-scullion, that a new and more juvenile Madame be destine to be
the tenant of these gay chamber.
presently official announcement of the come event be put forth. in
another week's time M. Francois Pelet, directeur, and Mdlle. Zoraide
Reuter, directrice, be to be join together in the band of
matrimony. Monsieur, in person, herald the fact to I; terminate
his communication by an obliging expression of his desire that I should
continue, as heretofore, his able assistant and most trusted friend;
and a proposition to raise my salary by an additional two hundred franc
per annum. I thank he, give no conclusive answer at the time, and,
when he have leave I, throw off my blouse, put on my coat, and set out
on a long walk outside the Porte de Flandre, in order, as I think, to
cool my blood, calm my nerve, and shake my disarrange idea into some
order. in fact, I have just receive what be virtually my dismissal.
I could not conceal, I do not desire to conceal from myself the
conviction that, be now certain that Mdlle. Reuter be destine to
become Madame Pelet it would not do for I to remain a dependent dweller
in the house which be soon to be her. her present demeanour towards
I be deficient neither in dignity nor propriety; but I know her former
feeling be unchanged. Decorum now repress, and Policy mask it, but
Opportunity would be too strong for either of these--temptation would
shiver their restraint.
I be no pope--I could not boast infallibility: in short, if I stay,
the probability be that, in three month' time, a practical modern
french novel would be in full process of concoction under the roof of
the unsuspecting Pelet. now, modern french novel be not to my
taste, either practically or theoretically. limit as have yet be my
experience of life, I have once have the opportunity of contemplating,
near at hand, an example of the result produce by a course of
interesting and romantic domestic treachery. no golden halo of fiction
be about this example, I see it bare and real, and it be very
loathsome. I see a mind degrade by the practice of mean subterfuge, by
the habit of perfidious deception, and a body deprave by the infectious
influence of the vice-polluted soul. I have suffer much from the forced
and prolonged view of this spectacle; those suffering I do not now
regret, for their simple recollection act as a most wholesome antidote
to temptation. they have inscribe on my reason the conviction that
unlawful pleasure, trench on another's right, be delusive and
envenomed pleasure--its hollowness disappoint at the time, its poison
cruelly torture afterwards, its effect deprave for ever.
from all this result the conclusion that I must leave Pelet's, and
that instantly; "but," say Prudence, "you know not where to go, nor how
to live;" and then the dream of true love come over I: Frances Henri
seem to stand at my side; her slender waist to invite my arm; her
hand to court my hand; I feel it be make to nestle in mine; I could not
relinquish my right to it, nor could I withdraw my eye for ever from
her, where I see so much happiness, such a correspondence of heart with
heart; over whose expression I have such influence; where I could kindle
bliss, infuse awe, stir deep delight, rouse sparkle spirit, and
sometimes waken pleasurable dread. my hope to will and possess, my
resolution to merit and rise, rise in array against I; and here I be
about to plunge into the gulf of absolute destitution; "and all this,"
suggest an inward voice, "because you fear an evil which may never
happen!" "it will happen; you know it will," answer that stubborn
monitor, Conscience. "do what you feel be right; obey I, and even in
the slough of want I will plant for you firm footing." and then, as I
walk fast along the road, there rise upon I a strange, inly-feel idea
of some great Being, unseen, but all present, who in his beneficence
desire only my welfare, and now watch the struggle of good and evil
in my heart, and wait to see whether I should obey his voice, hear in
the whisper of my conscience, or lend an ear to the sophism by which
his enemy and mine--the Spirit of Evil--seek to lead I astray.
rough and steep be the path indicate by divine suggestion; mossy and
decline the green way along which temptation strew flower; but
whereas, methought, the Deity of Love, the Friend of all that exist,
would smile well-pleased be I to gird up my loin and address myself
to the rude ascent; so, on the other hand, each inclination to the
velvet declivity seem to kindle a gleam of triumph on the brow of the
man-hating, God-defy demon. sharp and short I turn round; fast I
retrace my step; in half an hour I be again at M. Pelet's: I seek
he in his study; brief parley, concise explanation suffice; my manner
prove that I be resolve; he, perhaps, at heart approve my
decision. after twenty minute' conversation, I re-enter my own room,
self-deprive of the mean of living, self-sentence to leave my present
home, with the short notice of a week in which to provide another.
CHAPTER XXI.
DIRECTLY as I close the door, I see lay on the table two letter; my
thought be, that they be note of invitation from the friend of some
of my pupil; I have receive such mark of attention occasionally, and
with I, who have no friend, correspondence of more interest be out
of the question; the postman's arrival have never yet be an event of
interest to I since I come to Brussels. I lay my hand carelessly on
the document, and coldly and slowly glance at they, I prepare to
break the seal; my eye be arrest and my hand too; I see what excite
I, as if I have find a vivid picture where I expect only to discover
a blank page: on one cover be an english postmark; on the other, a
lady's clear, fine autograph; the last I open first:--
"MONSIEUR,
"I find out what you have do the very morning after your
visit to I; you might be sure I should dust the china, every day; and,
as no one but you have be in my room for a week, and as fairy-money be
not current in Brussels, I could not doubt who leave the twenty franc
on the chimney-piece. I think I hear you stir the vase when I be
stoop to look for your glove under the table, and I wonder you
should imagine it have get into such a little cup. now, monsieur, the
money be not mine, and I shall not keep it; I will not send it in this
note because it might be lose--besides, it be heavy; but I will restore
it to you the first time I see you, and you must make no difficulty
about take it; because, in the first place, I be sure, monsieur,
you can understand that one like to pay one's debt; that it be
satisfactory to owe no man anything; and, in the second place, I can now
very well afford to be honest, as I be provide with a situation. this
last circumstance be, indeed, the reason of my writing to you, for it
be pleasant to communicate good news; and, in these day, I have only my
master to whom I can tell anything.
"a week ago, monsieur, I be send for by a Mrs. Wharton, an English
lady; her eld daughter be go to be marry, and some rich
relation have make she a present of a veil and dress in costly old
lace, as precious, they say, almost as jewel, but a little damage by
time, I be commission to put they in repair. I have to do it at the
house; they give I, besides, some embroidery to complete, and nearly
a week elapse before I have finish everything. while I work, Miss
Wharton often come into the room and sit with I, and so do Mrs.
Wharton; they make I talk English; ask how I have learn to speak it
so well; then they inquire what I know besides--what book I have read;
soon they seem to make a sort of wonder of I, consider I no doubt
as a learn grisette. one afternoon, Mrs. Wharton bring in a parisian
lady to test the accuracy of my knowledge of French; the result of
it: be that, owe probably in a great degree to the mother's and
daughter's good humour about the marriage, which incline they to
do beneficent deed, and partly, I think, because they be naturally
benevolent people, they decide that the wish I have express to do
something more than mend lace be a very legitimate one; and the same
day they take I in their carriage to Mrs. D.'s, who be the directress
of the first english school at Brussels. it seem she happen to be in
want of a french lady to give lesson in geography, history, grammar,
and composition, in the french language. Mrs. Wharton recommend I
very warmly; and, as two of her young daughter be pupil in the
house, her patronage avail to get I the place. it be settle that I
be to attend six hour daily (for, happily, it be not require that
I should live in the house; I should have be sorry to leave my
lodging), and, for this, Mrs. D. will give I twelve hundred franc per
annum.
"you see, therefore, monsieur, that I be now rich; rich almost than
I ever hop to be: I feel thankful for it, especially as my sight be
begin to be injure by constant work at fine lace; and I be
get, too, very weary of sit up late at night, and yet not be
able to find time for reading or study. I begin to fear that I should
fall ill, and be unable to pay my way; this fear be now, in a great
measure, remove; and, in truth, monsieur, I be very grateful to God for
the relief; and I feel it necessary, almost, to speak of my happiness
to some one who be kind-hearted enough to derive joy from see other
joyful. I could not, therefore, resist the temptation of writing to you;
I argue with myself it be very pleasant for I to write, and it will
not be exactly painful, though it may be tiresome to monsieur to
read. do not be too angry with my circumlocution and inelegancie of
expression, and, believe I
"your attached pupil,
"F. E. HENRI."
have read this letter, I muse on its content for a few
moment--whether with sentiment pleasurable or otherwise I will
hereafter note--and then take up the other. it be direct in a hand
to I unknown--small, and rather neat; neither masculine nor exactly
feminine; the seal bear a coat of arm, concern which I could only
decipher that it be not that of the Seacombe family, consequently the
epistle could be from none of my almost forget, and certainly quite
forget patrician relation. from whom, then, be it? I remove the
envelope; the note fold within ran as follow:
"I have no doubt in the world that you be do well in that greasy
Flanders; live probably on the fat of the unctuous land; sit like
a black-haired, tawny-skin, long-nosed Israelite by the flesh-pot
of Egypt; or like a rascally son of Levi near the brass cauldron of the
sanctuary, and every now and then plunge in a consecrated hook, and
draw out of the sea, of broth the fat of heave-shoulder and the
fleshiest of wave-breast. I know this, because you never write to any
one in England. thankless dog that you be! I, by the sovereign efficacy
of my recommendation, get you the place where you be now live in
clover, and yet not a word of gratitude, or even acknowledgment, have
you ever offer in return; but I be come to see you, and small
conception can you, with your addled aristocratic brain, form of the
sort of moral kicking I have, ready pack in my carpet-bag, destine to
be present to you immediately on my arrival.
"meantime I know all about your affair, and have just get information,
by Brown's last letter, that you be say to be on the point of form
an advantageous match with a pursy, little belgian schoolmistress--a
Mdlle. Zenobie, or some such name. willnot I have a look at she when I
come over! and this you may rely on: if she please my taste, or if I
think it worth while in a pecuniary point of view, Iwill pounce on your
prize and bear she away triumphant in spite of your tooth. yet I donot
like dumpie either, and Brown say she be little and stout--the well
fit for a wiry, starve-look chap like you. "be on the look-out,
for you know neither the day nor hour when your ----" (I donot wish to
blaspheme, so Iwill leave a blank)--cometh.
"your truly,
"HUNSDEN YORKE HUNSDEN."
"Humph!" say I; and ere I lay the letter down, I again glance at the
small, neat handwriting, not a bit like that of a mercantile man, nor,
indeed, of any man except Hunsden himself. they talk of affinity
between the autograph and the character: what affinity be there here?
I recall the writer's peculiar face and certain trait I suspect,
rather than know, to appertain to his nature, and I answer, "a great
deal."
Hunsden, then, be come to Brussels, and come I know not when;
come charge with the expectation of find I on the summit of
prosperity, about to be marry, to step into a warm nest, to lie
comfortably down by the side of a snug, well-feed little mate.
"I wish he joy of the fidelity of the picture he have paint," think
I. "what will he say when, instead of a pair of plump turtle dove,
billing and coo in a bower of rose, he find a single lean
cormorant, stand mateless and shelterless on poverty's bleak cliff?
oh, confound he! let he come, and let he laugh at the contrast
between rumour and fact. be he the devil himself, instead of be
merely very like he, Iwould not condescend to get out of his way, or to
forge a smile or a cheerful word wherewith to avert his sarcasm."
then I recur to the other letter: that strike a chord whose sound I
could not deaden by thrust my finger into my ear, for it vibrate
within; and though its swell might be exquisite music, its cadence be a
groan.
that Frances be relieve from the pressure of want, that the curse of
excessive labour be take off she, fill I with happiness; that her
first thought in prosperity should be to augment her joy by share
it with I, meet and satisfy the wish of my heart. two result of her
letter be then pleasant, sweet as two draught of nectar; but apply
my lip for the third time to the cup, and they be excoriate as with
vinegar and gall.
two person whose desire be moderate may live well enough in Brussels
on an income which would scarcely afford a respectable maintenance for
one in London: and that, not because the necessary of life be so
much dearer in the latter capital, or taxis so much high than in the
former, but because the english surpass in folly all the nation on
God's earth, and be more abject slave to custom, to opinion, to
the desire to keep up a certain appearance, than the Italians be to
priestcraft, the French to vain-glory, the Russians to their Czar, or
the Germans to black beer. I have see a degree of sense in the modest
arrangement of one homely belgian household, that might put to shame the
elegance, the superfluity, the luxury, the strained refinement of
a hundred genteel english mansion. in Belgium, provide you can
make money, you may save it; this be scarcely possible in England;
ostentation there lavish in a month what industry have earn in a
year. More shame to all class in that most bountiful and beggarly
country for their servile following of fashion; I could write a chapter
or two on this subject, but must forbear, at least for the present. have
I retain my 60l. per annum I could, now that Frances be in possession
of 50l., have go straight to she this very evening, and speak out the
word which, repress, keep fret my heart with fever; our united
income would, as we should have manage it, have suffice well for
our mutual support; since we live in a country where economy be not
confound with meanness, where frugality in dress, food, and furniture,
be not synonymous with vulgarity in these various point. but the
placeless usher, bare of resource, and unsupported by connection, must
not think of this; such a sentiment as love, such a word as marriage,
be misplace in his heart, and on his lip. now for the first time do
I truly feel what it be to be poor; now do the sacrifice I have make
in cast from I the mean of live put on a new aspect; instead of
a correct, just, honourable act, it seem a deed at once light and
fanatical; I take several turn in my room, under the goad influence
of most poignant remorse; I walk a quarter of an hour from the wall to
the window; and at the window, self-reproach seem to face I; at the
wall, self-disdain: all at once out speak conscience:--
"down, stupid tormenter!" cry she; "the man have do his duty;
you shall not bait he thus by thought of what might have be; he
relinquish a temporary and contingent good to avoid a permanent and
certain evil he do well. let he reflect now, and when your blinding
dust and deafen hum subside, he will discover a path."
I sit down; I prop my forehead on both my hand; I think and
think an hour-two hour; vainly. I seem like one seal in a
subterranean vault, who gaze at utter blackness; at blackness ensure
by yard-thick stone wall around, and by pile of build above,
expect light to penetrate through granite, and through cement firm
as granite. but there be chink, or there may be chink, in the
well adjust masonry; there be a chink in my cavernous cell; for,
eventually, I see, or seem to see, a ray--pallid, indeed, and cold,
and doubtful, but still a ray, for it show that narrow path which
conscience have promise after two, three hour' torture research in
brain and memory, I disinter certain remain of circumstance, and
conceive a hope that by put they together an expedient might be
frame, and a resource discover. the circumstance be briefly these:
some three month ago M. Pelet have, on the occasion of his fete, give
the boy a treat, which treat consist in a party of pleasure to a
certain place of public resort in the outskirt of Brussels, of which
I do not at this moment remember the name, but near it be several of
those lakelet call etang; and there be one etang, large than the
rest, where on holiday people be accustom to amuse themselves by
rowing round it in little boat. the boy have eat an unlimited
quantity of "gaufre," and drink several bottle of Louvain beer, amid
the shade of a garden make and provide for such cram, petitioned
the director for leave to take a row on the etang. half a dozen of the
eld succeed in obtain leave, and I be commission to accompany
they as surveillant. among the half dozen happen to be a certain Jean
Baptiste Vandenhuten, a most ponderous young Flamand, not tall, but
even now, at the early age of sixteen, possess a breadth and depth of
personal development truly national. it chance that Jean be the first
lad to step into the boat; he stumble, roll to one side, the boat
revolt at his weight and capsize. Vandenhuten sink like lead, rise,
sink again. my coat and waistcoat be off in an instant; I have not be
bring up at Eton and boat and bath and swam there ten long year
for nothing; it be a natural and easy act for I to leap to the rescue.
the lad and the boatman yell; they think there would be two death
by drown instead of one; but as Jean rise the third time, I clutch
he by one leg and the collar, and in three minute more both he and I
be safe land. to speak heaven's truth, my merit in the action be
small indeed, for I have run no risk, and subsequently do not even catch
cold from the wetting; but when M. and Madame Vandenhuten, of whom Jean
Baptiste be the sole hope, come to hear of the exploit, they seem
to think I have evince a bravery and devotion which no thank could
sufficiently repay. Madame, in particular, be "certain I must have
dearly love their sweet son, or I would not thus have hazard my own
life to save his." Monsieur, an honest-look, though phlegmatic man,
say very little, but he would not suffer I to leave the room, till
I have promise that in case I ever stand in need of help I would, by
apply to he, give he a chance of discharge the obligation under
which he affirm I have lay he. these word, then, be my glimmer of
light; it be here I find my sole outlet; and in truth, though the cold
light rouse, it do not cheer I; nor do the outlet seem such as I
should like to pass through. right I have none to M. Vandenhuten's good
office; it be not on the ground of merit I could apply to he; no, I
must stand on that of necessity: I have no work; I want work; my good
chance of obtain it lie in secure his recommendation. this I know
could be have by ask for it; not to ask, because the request revolt
my pride and contradict my habit, would, I feel, be an indulgence of
false and indolent fastidiousness. I might repent the omission all my
life; I would not then be guilty of it.
that evening I go to M. Vandenhuten's; but I have bend the bow and
adjust the shaft in vain; the string break. I ring the bell at the
great door (it be a large, handsome house in an expensive part of the
town); a manservant open; I ask for M. Vandenhuten; M. Vandenhuten
and family be all out of town--go to Ostend--do not know when they
would be back. I leave my card, and retrace my step.
CHAPTER XXII
a week be go; LE JOUR DES NOCES arrive; the marriage be solemnize
at St. Jacques; Mdlle. zoraide become Madame Pelet, NEE Reuter; and, in
about an hour after this transformation, "the happy pair," as newspaper
phrase it, be on their way to Paris; where, accord to previous
arrangement, the honeymoon be to be spend. the next day I quit the
pensionnat. myself and my chattel (some book and clothe) be soon
transfer to a modest lodging I have hire in a street not far off. in
half an hour my clothe be arrange in a commode, my book on a shelf,
and the "flitting" be effect. I should not have be unhappy that day
have not one pang torture I--a longing to go to the Rue Notre Dame
aux Neiges, resist, yet irritate by an inward resolve to avoid
that street till such time as the mist of doubt should clear from my
prospect.
it be a sweet September evening--very mild, very still; I have nothing
to do; at that hour I know Frances would be equally release from
occupation; I think she might possibly be wish for her master, I
know I wish for my pupil. imagination begin with her low whisper,
infuse into my soul the soft tale of pleasure that might be.
"you will find her reading or writing," say she; "you can take your
seat at her side; you need not startle her peace by undue excitement;
you need not embarrass her manner by unusual action or language. be as
you always be; look over what she have write; listen while she read;
chide she, or quietly approve; you know the effect of either system; you
know her smile when please, you know the play of her look when rouse;
you have the secret of awakening that expression you will, and you can
choose amongst that pleasant variety. with you she will sit silent as
long as it suit you to talk alone; you can hold she under a potent
spell: intelligent as she be, eloquent as she can be, you can seal she
lip, and veil her bright countenance with diffidence; yet, you know,
she be not all monotonous mildness; you have see, with a sort of
strange pleasure, revolt, scorn, austerity, bitterness, lie energetic
claim to a place in her feeling and physiognomy; you know that few
could rule she as you do; you know she might break, but never bend under
the hand of Tyranny and Injustice, but Reason and Affection can guide
she by a sign. try their influence now. go--they be not passion; you
may handle they safely."
"I will not go be my answer to the sweet temptress. a man be master
of himself to a certain point, but not beyond it. could I seek france
to-night, could I sit with she alone in a quiet room, and address she
only in the language of Reason and Affection?"
"no," be the brief, fervent reply of that love which have conquer and
now control I.
Time seem to stagnate; the sun would not go down; my watch tick, but
I think the hand be paralyze.
"what a hot evening!" I cry, throw open the lattice; for, indeed, I
have seldom feel so feverish. hear a step ascend the common stair,
I wonder whether the "locataire," now mount to his apartment, be
as unsettle in mind and condition as I be, or whether he live in the
calm of certain resource, and in the freedom of unfettered feeling.
what! be he come in person to solve the problem hardly propose in
inaudible thought? he have actually knock at the door--at MY door; a
smart, prompt rap; and, almost before I could invite he in, he be over
the threshold, and have close the door behind he.
"and how be you?" ask an indifferent, quiet voice, in the English
language; while my visitor, without any sort of bustle or introduction,
put his hat on the table, and his glove into his hat, and draw
the only armchair the room afford a little forward, seat himself
tranquilly therein.
"cannot you speak?" he inquire in a few moment, in a tone whose
nonchalance seem to intimate that it be much the same thing whether
I answer or not. the fact be, I find it desirable to have recourse to
my good friend "les besicle;" not exactly to ascertain the identity of
my visitor--for I already know he, confound his impudence! but to see
how he look--to get a clear notion of his mien and countenance.
I wipe the glass very deliberately, and put they on quite as
deliberately; adjust they so as not to hurt the bridge of my nose
or get entangle in my short tuft of dun hair. I be sit in the
window-seat, with my back to the light, and I have he VIS-a-VIS; a
position he would much rather have have reverse; for, at any time, he
prefer scrutinize to be scrutinize. yes, it be he, and no
mistake, with his six foot of length arrange in a sit attitude;
with his dark travel surtout with its velvet collar, his gray
pantaloon, his black stock, and his face, the most original one Nature
ever model, yet the least obtrusively so; not one feature that could
be term marked or odd, yet the effect of the whole unique. there be no
use in attempt to describe what be indescribable. be in no hurry
to address he, I sit and star at my ease.
"oh, thatbe your game--be it?" say he at last. "well, wewill see which
be soon tired." and he slowly draw out a fine cigar-case, pick one
to his taste, light it, take a book from the shelf convenient to his hand,
then lean back, proceed to smoke and read as tranquilly as if he
have be in his own room, in Grove-street, x---shire, England. I know
he be capable of continue in that attitude till midnight, if he
conceive the whim, so I rise, and take the book from his hand, I
said,--
"you do not ask for it, and you shall not have it."
"it be silly and dull," he observe, "so I have not lose much;" then the
spell be break, he go on. "I think you live at Pelet's; I go
there this afternoon expect to be starve to death by sit in
a boarding-school drawing-room, and they tell I you be go, have
depart this morning; you have leave your address behind you though,
which I wonder at; it be a more practical and sensible precaution
than I should have imagine you capable of. why do you leave?"
"because M. Pelet have just marry the lady whom you and Mr. Brown
assign to I as my wife."
"oh, indeed!" reply Hunsden with a short laugh; "so youhave lose both
your wife and your place?"
"precisely so."
I see he give a quick, covert glance all round my room; he mark its
narrow limit, its scanty furniture: in an instant he have comprehend
the state of matter--have absolve I from the crime of prosperity. a
curious effect this discovery work in his strange mind; I be morally
certain that if he have find I instal in a handsome parlour,
lounge on a soft couch, with a pretty, wealthy wife at my side, he
would have hat I; a brief, cold, haughty visit, would in such a case
have be the extreme limit of his civility, and never would he have
come near I more, so long as the tide of fortune bear I smoothly on
its surface; but the paint furniture, the bare wall, the cheerless
solitude of my room relax his rigid pride, and I know not what
soften change have take place both in his voice and look ere he speak
again.
"you have get another place?"
"no."
"you be in the way of get one?"
"no."
"that be bad; have you apply to Brown?"
"no, indeed."
"you have well; he often have it in his power to give useful information
in such matter."
"he serve I once very well; I have no claim on he, and be not in the
humour to bother he again."
"oh, if yoube bashful, and dread be intrusive, you need only
commission I. I shall see he to-night; I can put in a word."
"I beg you will not, Mr. Hunsden; I be in your debt already; you do I
an important service when I be at X----; get I out of a den where I
be die: that service I have never repay, and at present I decline
positively add another item to the account."
"if the wind sit that way, Ibe satisfied. I think my unexampled
generosity in turn you out of that accursed counting-house would be
duly appreciate some day: 'cast your bread on the water, and it
shall be find after many day,' say the scripture. yes, thatbe right,
lad--make much of I--I'm a nonpareil: therebe nothing like I in the
common herd. in the meantime, to put all humbug aside and talk sense for
a few moment, you would be greatly the well of a situation, and what
be more, you be a fool if you refuse to take one from any hand that
offer it."
"very well, Mr. Hunsden; now you have settle that point, talk of
something else. what news from X----?"
"I have not settle that point, or at least there be another to settle
before we get to X----. be this Miss Zenobie" (Zoraide, interpose
I)--"well, Zoraide--be she really married to Pelet?"
"I tell you yes--and if you donot believe I, go and ask the cure of St.
Jacques."
"and your heart be break?"
"I be not aware that it be; it feel all right--beat as usual."
"then your feeling be less superfine than I take they to be; you must
be a coarse, callous character, to bear such a thwack without staggering
under it."
"stagger under it? what the deuce be there to stagger under in the
circumstance of a belgian schoolmistress marry a french schoolmaster?
the progeny will doubtless be a strange hybrid race; but thatbe their
look out--not mine."
"he indulge in scurrilous jest, and the bride be his affianced one!"
"who say so?"
"Brown."
"Iwill tell you what, Hunsden--Brown be an old gossip."
"he be; but in the meantime, if his gossip be found on less than
fact--if you take no particular interest in Miss Zoraide--why, O
youthful pedagogue! do you leave your place in consequence of she
become Madame Pelet?"
"because--" I feel my face grow a little hot; "because--in short, Mr.
Hunsden, I decline answer any more question," and I plunge my hand
deep in my breech pocket.
Hunsden triumph: his eye--his laugh announce victory.
"what the deuce be you laugh at, Mr. Hunsden?"
"at your exemplary composure. well, lad, Iwill not bore you; I see how
it be: zoraide have jilt you--marry some one rich, as any sensible
woman would have do if she have have the chance."
I make no reply--I let he think so, not feel inclined to enter into
an explanation of the real state of thing, and as little to forge a
false account; but it be not easy to blind Hunsden; my very silence,
instead of convince he that he have hit the truth, seem to render
he doubtful about it; he go on:--
"I suppose the affair have be conduct as such affair always
be amongst rational people: you offer she your youth and your
talent-such as they be--in exchange for her position and money: I
donot suppose you take appearance, or what be call LOVE, into the
account--for I understand she be old than you, and Brown say, rather
sensible-look than beautiful. she, have then no chance of make
a well bargain, be at first incline to come to term with you, but
Pelet--the head of a flourish school--step in with a high bid;
she accept, and he have get she: a correct transaction--perfectly
so--business-like and legitimate. and now wewill talk of something else."
"do," say I, very glad to dismiss the topic, and especially glad to
have baffle the sagacity of my cross-questioner--if, indeed, I have
baffle it; for though his word now lead away from the dangerous point,
his eye, keen and watchful, seem still preoccupy with the former
idea.
"you want to hear news from X----? and what interest can you have in
X----? you leave no friend there, for you make none. nobody ever ask
after you--neither man nor woman; and if I mention your name in company,
the man look as if I have speak of Prester John; and the woman sneer
covertly. our X---- belle must have dislike you. how do you excite
their displeasure?"
"I donot know. I seldom speak to they--they be nothing to I. I
consider they only as something to be glance at from a distance;
their dress and face be often pleasing enough to the eye: but
I could not understand their conversation, nor even read their
countenance. when I catch snatch of what they say, I could never
make much of it; and the play of their lip and eye do not help I at
all."
"that be your fault, not theirs. there be sensible, as well as
handsome woman in X----; woman it be worth any man's while to talk to,
and with whom I can talk with pleasure: but you have and have no pleasant
address; there be nothing in you to induce a woman to be affable. I have
remark you sit near the door in a room full of company, bend on
hearing, not on speak; on observe, not on entertaining; look
frigidly shy at the commencement of a party, confusingly vigilant about
the middle, and insultingly weary towards the end. be that the way, do
you think, ever to communicate pleasure or excite interest? no; and if
you be generally unpopular, it be because you deserve to be so."
"Content!" I ejaculate.
"no, you be not content; you see beauty always turn its back on
you; you be mortified and then you sneer. I verily believe all that be
desirable on earth--wealth, reputation, love--will for ever to you be
the ripe grape on the high trelli: youwill look up at they; they will
tantalize in you the lust of the eye; but they be out of reach: you
have not the address to fetch a ladder, and youwill go away call they
sour."
cut as these word might have be under some circumstance, they
draw no blood now. my life be change; my experience have be vary
since I leave X----, but Hunsden could not know this; he have see I only
in the character of Mr. Crimsworth's clerk--a dependant amongst wealthy
stranger, meet disdain with a hard front, conscious of an unsocial
and unattractive exterior, refuse to sue for notice which I be sure
would be withhold, decline to evince an admiration which I know would
be scorn as worthless. he could not be aware that since then youth and
loveliness have be to I everyday object; that I have study they at
leisure and closely, and have see the plain texture of truth under
the embroidery of appearance; nor could he, keen-sighted as he
be, penetrate into my heart, search my brain, and read my peculiar
sympathy and antipathy; he have not know I long enough, or well
enough, to perceive how low my feeling would ebb under some influence,
powerful over most mind; how high, how fast they would flow under
other influence, that perhaps act with the more intense force on I,
because they act on I alone. neither could he suspect for an instant
the history of my communication with Mdlle. Reuter; secret to he
and to all other be the tale of her strange infatuation; her
blandishment, her wile have be see but by I, and to I only be
they know; but they have change I, for they have prove that I could
impress. a sweet secret nestle deeply in my heart; one full of
tenderness and as full of strength: it take the sting out of Hunsden's
sarcasm; it keep I unbent by shame, and unstirred by wrath. but of all
this I could say nothing--nothing decisive at least; uncertainty seal
my lip, and during the interval of silence by which alone I reply to
Mr. Hunsden, I make up my mind to be for the present wholly misjudge
by he, and misjudge I be; he think he have be rather too hard
upon I, and that I be crush by the weight of his upbraiding; so to
re-assure I he say, doubtless I should mend some day; I be only at
the beginning of life yet; and since happily I be not quite without
sense, every false step I make would be a good lesson.
just then I turn my face a little to the light; the approach of
twilight, and my position in the window-seat, have, for the last ten
minute, prevent he from study my countenance; as I move,
however, he catch an expression which he thus interpreted:--
"confound it! how doggedly self-approve the lad look! I think he
be fit to die with shame, and there he sit grin smile, as good as
to say, 'let the world wag as it will, Ihave the philosopher's stone
in my waist-coat pocket, and the elixir of life in my cupboard; Ibe
independent of both Fate and Fortune.'"
"Hunsden--you speak of grape; I be think of a fruit I like well
than your X---- hot-house grape--an unique fruit, grow wild, which I
have mark as my own, and hope one day to gather and taste. it be of no
use your offer I the draught of bitterness, or threaten I with
death by thirst: I have the anticipation of sweetness on my palate; the
hope of freshness on my lip; I can reject the unsavoury, and endure the
exhausting."
"for how long?"
"till the next opportunity for effort; and as the prize of success will
be a treasure after my own heart, Iwill bring a bull's strength to the
struggle."
"bad luck crush bull as easily as bullace; and, I believe, the fury
dog you: you be bear with a wooden spoon in your mouth, depend on
it."
"I believe you; sad I mean to make my wooden spoon do the work of some
people's silver ladle: grasp firmly, and handle nimbly, even a
wooden spoon will shovel up broth."
Hunsden rise: "I see," say he; "I suppose yoube one of those who
develop well unwatched, and act good unaide-work your own way. now,
Iwill go." and, without another word, he be go; at the door he
turned:--
"Crimsworth Hall be sell," say he.
"sell!" be my echo.
"yes; you know, of course, that your brother fail three month ago?"
"what! Edward Crimsworth?"
"precisely; and his wife go home to her father; when affair go
awry, his temper sympathize with they; he use she ill; I tell you he
would be a tyrant to she some day; as to him--"
"ay, as to he--what be become of he?"
"nothing extraordinary--don't be alarm; he put himself under the
protection of the court, compound with his creditor--tenpence in
the pound; in six week set up again, coax back his wife, and be
flourish like a green bay-tree."
"and Crimsworth Hall--be the furniture sell too?"
"everything--from the grand piano down to the roll-pin."
"and the content of the oak dining-room--be they sell?"
"of course; why should the sofa and chair of that room be hold more
sacred than those of any other?"
"and the picture?"
"what picture? crimsworth have no special collection that I know of--he
do not profess to be an amateur."
"there be two portrait, one on each side the mantelpiece; you cannot
have forget they, Mr. Hunsden; you once notice that of the lady--"
"oh, I know! the thin-faced gentlewoman with a shawl put on like
drapery.--Why, as a matter of course, it would be sell among the other
thing. if you have be rich, you might have buy it, for I remember
you say it represent your mother: you see what it be to be without a
sou."
I do. "but surely," I think to myself, "I shall not always be so
poverty-stricken; I may one day buy it back yet.--Who purchase it? do
you know?" I ask.
"how be it likely? I never inquire who purchase anything; there speak
the unpractical man--to imagine all the world be interested in what
interest himself! now, good night--I'm off for Germany to-morrow
morning; I shall be back here in six week, and possibly I may call
and see you again; I wonder whether youwill be still out of place!"
he laugh, as mockingly, as heartlessly as Mephistopheles, and so
laughing, vanish.
some people, however indifferent they may become after a considerable
space of absence, always contrive to leave a pleasant impression just
at parting; not so Hunsden, a conference with he affect one like a
draught of peruvian bark; it seem a concentration of the specially
harsh, stringent, bitter; whether, like bark, it invigorate, I scarcely
know.
a ruffled mind make a restless pillow; I sleep little on the night
after this interview; towards morning I begin to doze, but hardly have my
slumber become sleep, when I be rouse from it by hear a noise in
my sitting room, to which my bed-room adjoin--a step, and a shoving of
furniture; the movement last barely two minute; with the closing
of the door it cease. I listen; not a mouse stir; perhaps I
have dream it; perhaps a locataire have make a mistake, and enter my
apartment instead of his own. it be yet but five o'clock; neither I nor
the day be wide awake; I turn, and be soon unconscious. when I do
rise, about two hour later, I have forget the circumstance; the first
thing I see, however, on quit my chamber, recall it; just push
in at the door of my sitting-room, and still stand on end, be a
wooden packing-case--a rough deal affair, wide but shallow; a porter
have doubtless shove it forward, but see no occupant of the room, have
leave it at the entrance.
"that be none of mine," think I, approach; "it must be mean for
somebody else." I stoop to examine the address:--
"Wm. Crimsworth, Esq., no --, -- St., Brussels."
I be puzzle, but conclude that the good way to obtain information
be to ask within, I cut the cord and open the case. Green baize
envelop its content, sew carefully at the side; I rip the
pack-thread with my pen-knife, and still, as the seam give way, glimpse
of gilding appear through the widen interstice. board and baize
be at length remove, I lift from the case a large picture, in a
magnificent frame; lean it against a chair, in a position where the
light from the window fall favourably upon it, I step back--already I
have mount my spectacle. a portrait-painter's sky (the most sombre and
threatening of welkin), and distant tree of a conventional depth of
hue, raise in full relief a pale, pensive-looking female face, shadow
with soft dark hair, almost blend with the equally dark cloud;
large, solemn eye look reflectively into mine; a thin cheek rest
on a delicate little hand; a shawl, artistically drape, half hid, half
show a slight figure. a listener (have there be one) might have hear
I, after ten minute' silent gazing, utter the word "Mother!" I might
have say more--but with I, the first word utter aloud in soliloquy
rous consciousness; it remind I that only crazy people talk to
themselves, and then I think out my monologue, instead of speak it.
I have think a long while, and a long while have contemplate the
intelligence, the sweetness, and--alas! the sadness also of those fine,
grey eye, the mental power of that forehead, and the rare sensibility
of that serious mouth, when my glance, travel downward, fall on a
narrow billet, stick in the corner of the picture, between the frame and
the canvas. then I first ask, "who send this picture? who think of
I, save it out of the wreck of Crimsworth Hall, and now commit it to
the care of its natural keeper?" I take the note from its niche; thus it
spoke:--
"there be a sort of stupid pleasure in give a child sweet, a fool his
bell, a dog a bone. you be repay by see the child besmear his face
with sugar; by witness how the fool's ecstasy make a great fool of
he than ever; by watch the dog's nature come out over his bone.
in give William Crimsworth his mother's picture, I give he sweet,
bell, and bone all in one; what grieve I be, that I cannot behold
the result; I would have add five shilling more to my bid if the
auctioneer could only have promise I that pleasure.
"H. Y. H.
"p.s.--you say last night you positively decline add another item
to your account with I; donot you think Ihave save you that trouble?"
I muffle the picture in its green baize cover, restore it to the
case, and have transport the whole concern to my bed-room, put it
out of sight under my bed. my pleasure be now poison by pungent pain;
I determine to look no more till I could look at my ease. if Hunsden
have come in at that moment, I should have say to he, "I owe you
nothing, Hunsden--not a fraction of a farthing: you have pay yourself
in taunt!"
too anxious to remain any long quiescent, I have no soon breakfast,
than I repair once more to M. Vandenhuten's, scarcely hop to find
he at home; for a week have barely elapse since my first call: but
fancy I might be able to glean information as to the time when his
return be expect. a well result await I than I have anticipate,
for though the family be yet at Ostend, M. Vandenhuten have come over
to Brussels on business for the day. he receive I with the quiet
kindness of a sincere though not excitable man. I have not sit five
minute alone with he in his bureau, before I become aware of a sense
of ease in his presence, such as I rarely experience with stranger.
I be surprised at my own composure, for, after all, I have come on
business to I exceedingly painful--that of solicit a favour. I ask
on what basis the calm rest--I fear it might be deceptive. Ere long
I catch a glimpse of the ground, and at once I feel assured of its
solidity; I know where it be.
M. Vandenhuten be rich, respected, and influential; I, poor, despise
and powerless; so we stand to the world at large as member of the
world's society; but to each other, as a pair of human being, our
position be reverse. the Dutchman (he be not Flamand, but pure
Hollandais) be slow, cool, of rather dense intelligence, though sound
and accurate judgment; the Englishman far more nervous, active, quick
both to plan and to practise, to conceive and to realize. the Dutchman
be benevolent, the Englishman susceptible; in short our character
dovetail, but my mind have more fire and action than his,
instinctively assume and keep the predominance.
this point settle, and my position well ascertain, I address he
on the subject of my affair with that genuine frankness which full
confidence can alone inspire. it be a pleasure to he to be so appeal
to; he thank I for give he this opportunity of use a little
exertion in my behalf. I go on to explain to he that my wish be not
so much to be help, as to be put into the way of help myself;
of he I do not want exertion--that be to be my part--but only
information and recommendation. soon after I rise to go. he hold out his
hand at parting--an action of great significance with foreigner
than with Englishmen. as I exchange a smile with he, I think the
benevolence of his truthful face be well than the intelligence of my
own. character of my order experience a balm-like solace in the contact
of such soul as animate the honest breast of Victor Vandenhuten.
the next fortnight be a period of many alternation; my existence
during its lapse resemble a sky of one of those autumnal night which
be specially haunt by meteor and fall star. hope and fear,
expectation and disappointment, descend in glance shower from
zenith to horizon; but all be transient, and darkness follow swift
each vanish apparition. M. Vandenhuten aid I faithfully; he set I
on the track of several place, and himself make effort to secure
they for I; but for a long time solicitation and recommendation be
vain--the door either shut in my face when I be about to walk in,
or another candidate, enter before I, render my further advance
useless. Feverish and rouse, no disappointment arrest I; defeat
follow fast on defeat serve as stimulant to will. I forget
fastidiousness, conquer reserve, thrust pride from I: I ask, I
persevere, I remonstrate, I dun. it be so that opening be force
into the guard circle where Fortune sit deal favour round. my
perseverance make I know; my importunity make I remark. I be
inquire about; my former pupil' parent, gather the report of
their child, hear I speak of as talente, and they echo the
word: the sound, bandy about at random, come at last to ear which,
but for its universality, it might never have reach; and at the very
crisis when I have try my last effort and know not what to do, Fortune
look in at I one morning, as I sit in drear and almost desperate
deliberation on my bedstead, nod with the familiarity of an old
acquaintance--though God know I have never meet she before--and throw a
prize into my lap.
in the second week of October, 18--, I get the appointment of English
professor to all the class of ---- College, Brussels, with a salary
of three thousand franc per annum; and the certainty of be able, by
dint of the reputation and publicity accompany the position, to make
as much more by private mean. the official notice, which communicate
this information, mention also that it be the strong recommendation
of M. Vandenhuten, negociant, which have turn the scale of choice in my
favour.
no soon have I read the announcement than I hurry to M. Vandenhuten's
bureau, push the document under his nose, and when he have peruse
it, take both his hand, and thank he with unrestrained vivacity.
my vivid word and emphatic gesture move his dutch calm to unwonted
sensation. he say he be happy--glad to have serve I; but he have
do nothing merit such thank. he have not lay out a centime--only
scratch a few word on a sheet of paper.
again I repeat to him--
"you have make I quite happy, and in a way that suit I; I do not
feel an obligation irksome, confer by your kind hand; I do not feel
disposed to shun you because you have do I a favour; from this day
you must consent to admit I to your intimate acquaintance, for I shall
hereafter recur again and again to the pleasure of your society."
"Ainsi soit-il," be the reply, accompany by a smile of benignant
content. I go away with its sunshine in my heart.
CHAPTER XXIII
it be two o'clock when I return to my lodging; my dinner, just
bring in from a neighbouring hotel, smoke on the table; I sit down
think to eat--have the plate be heap with potsherd and broken
glass, instead of boil beef and haricot, I could not have make a more
signal failure: appetite have forsake I. impatient of see food
which I could not taste, I put it all aside into a cupboard, and then
demand, "what shall I do till evening?" for before six P.M. it would
be vain to seek the Rue Notre Dame aux Neiges; its inhabitant (for I
it have but one) be detain by her vocation elsewhere. I walk in the
street of Brussels, and I walk in my own room from two o'clock
till six; never once in that space of time do I sit down. I be in my
chamber when the last-name hour strike; I have just bath my face and
feverish hand, and be stand near the glass; my cheek be crimson,
my eye be flame, still all my feature look quite settle and
calm. descend swiftly the stair and step out, I be glad to see
twilight draw on in cloud; such shade be to I like a grateful
screen, and the chill of latter Autumn, breathe in a fitful wind from
the north-west, meet I as a refreshing coolness. still I see it be cold
to other, for the woman I pass be wrap in shawl, and the man
have their coat button close.
when be we quite happy? be I so then? no; an urgent and grow dread
worry my nerve, and have worry they since the first moment good
tiding have reach I. how be france? it be ten week since I have
see she, six since I have hear from she, or of she. I have answer
her letter by a brief note, friendly but calm, in which no mention of
continue correspondence or further visit be make. at that hour my
bark hang on the topmost curl of a wave of fate, and I know not on what
shoal the onward rush of the billow might hurl it; I would not then
attach her destiny to mine by the slight thread; if doom to split
on the rock, or run a aground on the sand-bank, I be resolve no other
vessel should share my disaster: but six week be a long time; and
could it be that she be still well and do well? be not all sage
agree in declare that happiness find no climax on earth? dare
I think that but half a street now divide I from the full cup of
contentment--the draught draw from water say to flow only in heaven?
I be at the door; I enter the quiet house; I mount the stair; the
lobby be void and still, all the door close; I look for the neat
green mat; it lie duly in its place.
"Signal of hope!" I say, and advance. "but I will be a little calm;
I be not go to rush in, and get up a scene directly." forcibly
stay my eager step, I pause on the mat.
"what an absolute hush! be she in? be anybody in?" I demand to
myself. a little tinkle, as of cinder fall from a grate, reply;
a movement--a fire be gently stir; and the slight rustle of life
continue, a step pace equably backwards and forwards, backwards and
forwards, in the apartment. Fascinated, I stand, more fixedly fascinated
when a voice reward the attention of my strained ear--so low, so
self-address, I never fancy the speaker otherwise than alone;
solitude might speak thus in a desert, or in the hall of a forsaken
house.
"'and ne'er but once, my son,' he say,
'be yon dark cavern trod;
in persecution's iron day,
when the land be leave by God.
from Bewley's bog, with slaughter red,
a wanderer hither draw;
and oft he stopp'd and turn'd his head,
as by fit the night-wind blow.
for trample round by Cheviot-edge
be hear the trooper keen;
and frequent from the Whitelaw ridge
the death-shot flash'd between,'" &c. &c.
the old Scotch ballad be partly recite, then dropt; a pause ensue;
then another strain follow, in French, of which the purport,
translate, run as follows:--
I give, at first, attention close;
then interest warm ensue;
from interest, as improvement rise,
succeed gratitude.
obedience be no effort soon,
and labour be no pain;
if tired, a word, a glance alone
would give I strength again.
from other of the studious band,
Ere long he single I;
but only by more close demand,
and sterner urgency.
the task he from another took,
from I he do reject;
he would no slight omission brook,
and suffer no defect.
if my companion go astray,
he scarce their wandering blam'd;
if I but falter'd in the way,
his anger fiercely flam'd.
something stir in an adjoining chamber; it would not do to be
surprised eave-dropping; I tap hastily, and as hastily enter.
france be just before I; she have be walk slowly in her room,
and her step be check by my advent: Twilight only be with she, and
tranquil, ruddy Firelight; to these sister, the Bright and the Dark,
she have be speak, ere I enter, in poetry. Sir Walter Scott's
voice, to she a foreign, far-off sound, a mountain echo, have utter
itself in the first stanzas; the second, I think, from the style and
the substance, be the language of her own heart. her face be grave,
its expression concentrate; she bent on I an unsmile eye--an eye
just return from abstraction, just awake from dream: well-arrange
be her simple attire, smooth her dark hair, orderly her tranquil room;
but what--with her thoughtful look, her serious self-reliance, she
bent to meditation and haply inspiration--what have she to do with love?
"nothing," be the answer of her own sad, though gentle countenance; it
seem to say, "I must cultivate fortitude and cle to poetry; one be
to be my support and the other my solace through life. human affection
do not bloom, nor do human passion glow for I." other woman have such
thought. france, have she be as desolate as she deem, would not
have be bad off than thousand of her sex. look at the rigid and
formal race of old maid--the race whom all despise; they have feed
themselves, from youth upwards, on maxim of resignation and endurance.
many of they get ossify with the dry diet; self-control be so
continually their thought, so perpetually their object, that at last
it absorb the soft and more agreeable quality of their nature; and
they die mere model of austerity, fashion out of a little parchment
and much bone. anatomist will tell you that there be a heart in the
wither old maid's carcase--the same as in that of any cherish wife
or proud mother in the land. can this be so? I really donot know; but
feel inclined to doubt it.
I come forward, bade Frances "good evening," and take my seat. the chair
I have choose be one she have probably just leave; it stand by a little
table where be her open desk and paper. I know not whether she have
fully recognize I at first, but she do so now; and in a voice, soft
but quiet, she return my greeting. I have show no eagerness; she take
her cue from I, and evince no surprise. we meet as I have always meet,
as master and pupil--nothing more. I proceed to handle the paper;
france, observant and serviceable, step into an inner room, bring
a candle, light it, place it by I; then draw the curtain over the
lattice, and have add a little fresh fuel to the already bright
fire, she draw a second chair to the table and sit down at my right
hand, a little removed. the paper on the top be a translation of
some grave french author into English, but underneath lie a sheet with
stanzas; on this I lay hand. france half rise, make a movement to
recover the capture spoil, say, that be nothing--a mere copy of
verse. I put by resistance with the decision I know she never long
opposed; but on this occasion her finger have fasten on the paper. I
have quietly to unloose they; their hold dissolve to my touch; her hand
shrink away; my own would fain have follow it, but for the present I
forbid such impulse. the first page of the sheet be occupy with
the line I have overhear; the sequel be not exactly the writer's own
experience, but a composition by portion of that experience suggest.
thus while egotism be avoid, the fancy be exercise, and the heart
satisfy. I translate as before, and my translation be nearly literal;
it continue thus:--
when sickness stay'd awhile my course,
he seem'd impatient still,
because his pupil's flagging force
could not obey his will.
one day when summon to the bed
where pain and I do strive,
I hear he, as he bend his head,
say, "God, she must revive!"
I feel his hand, with gentle stress,
a moment lay on mine,
and wish to mark my consciousness
by some responsive sign.
but pow'rless then to speak or move,
I only feel, within,
the sense of Hope, the strength of Love,
their healing work begin.
and as he from the room withdraw,
my heart his step pursue;
I long'd to prove, by effort new;
my speechless gratitude.
when once again I take my place,
long vacant, in the class,
Th' unfrequent smile across his face
do for one moment pass.
the lesson do; the signal make
of glad release and play,
he, as he pass, an instant stay'd,
one kindly word to say.
"Jane, till to-morrow you be free
from tedious task and rule;
this afternoon I must not see
that yet pale face in school.
"seek in the garden-shade a seat,
far from the play-ground din;
the sun be warm, the air be sweet:
stay till I call you in."
a long and pleasant afternoon
I pass in those green bower;
all silent, tranquil, and alone
with bird, and bee, and flower.
yet, when my master's voice I hear
Call, from the window, "jane!"
I enter, joyful, at the word,
the busy house again.
he, in the hall, pace up and down;
he pause as I pass by;
his forehead stern relax its frown:
he raise his deep-set eye.
"not quite so pale," he murmur low.
"now Jane, go rest awhile."
and as I smile, his smoothened brow
return as glad a smile.
my perfect health restore, he take
his mien austere again;
and, as before, he would not brook
the slight fault from Jane.
the long task, the hard theme
fall to my share as erst,
and still I toil to place my name
in every study first.
he yet begrudge and stint praise,
but I have learn to read
the secret meaning of his face,
and that be my good meed.
even when his hasty temper speak
in tone that sorrow stir,
my grief be lull as soon as wake
by some relent word.
and when he lend some precious book,
or give some fragrant flower,
I do not quail to Envy's look,
uphold by Pleasure's power.
at last our school rank take their ground,
the hard-fought field I win;
the prize, a laurel-wreath, be bind
my throb forehead on.
Low at my master's knee I bent,
the offer crown to meet;
its green leaf through my temple send
a thrill as wild as sweet.
the strong pulse of Ambition strike
in every vein I own;
at the same instant, bleeding break
a secret, inward wound.
the hour of triumph be to I
the hour of sorrow sore;
a day hence I must cross the sea,
Ne'er to recross it more.
an hour hence, in my master's room
I with he sit alone,
and tell he what a dreary gloom
O'er joy have part throw.
he little say; the time be brief,
the ship be soon to sail,
and while I sob in bitter grief,
my master but look pale.
they call in haste; he bid I go,
then snatch I back again;
he hold I fast and murmur low,
"why will they part we, Jane?"
"be you not happy in my care?
do I not faithful prove?
will other to my darling bear
as true, as deep a love?
"o God, watch o'er my foster child!
o guard her gentle head!
when mind be high and tempest wild
protection round her spread!
"they call again; leave then my breast;
Quit thy true shelter, Jane;
but when deceive, repulse, opprest,
come home to I again!"
I read--then dreamily make mark on the margin with my pencil; think
all the while of other thing; think that "Jane" be now at my side;
no child, but a girl of nineteen; and she might be mine, so my heart
affirm; Poverty's curse be take off I; Envy and Jealousy be
far away, and unapprized of this our quiet meeting; the frost of the
Master's manner might melt; I feel the thaw come fast, whether I would
or not; no further need for the eye to practise a hard look, for the
brow to compress its expense into a stern fold: it be now permit
to suffer the outward revelation of the inward glow--to seek, demand,
elicit an answer ardour. while muse thus, I think that the grass
on Hermon never drink the fresh dew of sunset more gratefully than my
feeling drink the bliss of this hour.
france rise, as if restless; she pass before I to stir the fire,
which do not want stir; she lift and put down the little
ornament on the mantelpiece; her dress wave within a yard of I;
slight, straight, and elegant, she stand erect on the hearth.
there be impulse we can control; but there be other which control
we, because they attain we with a tiger-leap, and be our master ere
we have see they. perhaps, though, such impulse be seldom altogether
bad; perhaps Reason, by a process as brief as quiet, a process that
be finish ere feel, have ascertain the sanity of the deed Instinct
meditate, and feel justify in remain passive while it be
perform. I know I do not reason, I do not plan or intend, yet,
whereas one moment I be sit solus on the chair near the table,
the next, I hold Frances on my knee, place there with sharpness and
decision, and retain with exceed tenacity.
"Monsieur!" cry Frances, and be still: not another word escape she
lip; sorely confound she seem during the lapse of the first few
moment; but the amazement soon subside; terror do not succeed, nor
fury: after all, she be only a little near than she have ever be
before, to one she habitually respect and trust; embarrassment might
have impel she to contend, but self-respect check resistance where
resistance be useless.
"Frances, how much regard have you for I?" be my demand. no answer;
the situation be yet too new and surprising to permit speech. on this
consideration, I compel myself for some second to tolerate she
silence, though impatient of it: presently, I repeat the same
question--probably, not in the calm of tone; she look at I; my
face, doubtless, be no model of composure, my eye no still well of
tranquillity.
"do speak," I urge; and a very low, hurried, yet still arch voice
said--
"Monsieur, vous I faite mal; de grace lachez un peu ma main droite."
in truth I become aware that I be hold the say "main droite" in
a somewhat ruthless grasp: I do as desire; and, for the third time,
ask more gently--
"Frances, how much regard have you for I?"
"Mon maitre, j'en ai beaucoup," be the truthful rejoinder.
"Frances, have you enough to give yourself to I as my wife?--to accept
I as your husband?"
I feel the agitation of the heart, I see "the purple light of love" cast
its glowing reflection on cheek, temple, neck; I desire to consult
the eye, but shelter lash and lid forbid.
"Monsieur," say the soft voice at last,--"Monsieur desire savoir si je
consen--si--enfin, si je veux I marier avec lui?"
"Justement."
"Monsieur sera-t-il aussi bon mari qu'il a ete bon maitre?"
"I will try, Frances."
a pause; then with a new, yet still subdue inflexion of the voice--an
inflexion which provoke while it please I--accompany, too, by a
"sourire a la fois fin et timide" in perfect harmony with the tone:--
"C'est a dire, monsieur sera toujours un peu entete exigeant,
volontaire--?"
"have I be so, Frances?"
"Mais oui; vous le savez bien."
"have I be nothing else?"
"Mais oui; von avez ete mon meilleur ami."
"and what, Frances, be you to I?"
"Votre devouee eleve, qui vous aime de tout son coeur."
"will my pupil consent to pass her life with I? speak English now,
france."
some moment be take for reflection; the answer, pronounce slowly,
run thus:--
"you have always make I happy; I like to hear you speak; I like to
see you; I like to be near you; I believe you be very good, and very
superior; I know you be stern to those who be careless and idle, but
you be kind, very kind to the attentive and industrious, even if they
be not clever. Master, I should be glad to live with you always;"
and she make a sort of movement, as if she would have clung to I, but
restrain herself she only add with earnest emphasis--"master, I
consent to pass my life with you."
"very well, Frances."
I draw she a little near to my heart; I take a first kiss from her
lip, thereby seal the compact, now frame between we; afterwards she
and I be silent, nor be our silence brief. france' thought, during
this interval, I know not, nor do I attempt to guess they; I be not
occupy in search her countenance, nor in otherwise trouble her
composure. the peace I feel, I wish she to feel; my arm, it be true,
still detain she; but with a restraint that be gentle enough, so long
as no opposition tighten it. my gaze be on the red fire; my heart be
measure its own content; it sound and sound, and find the depth
fathomless.
"Monsieur," at last say my quiet companion, as stirless in her
happiness as a mouse in its terror. even now in speak she scarcely
lift her head.
"well, Frances?" I like unexaggerated intercourse; it be not my way to
overpower with amorous epithet, any more than to worry with selfishly
importunate caress.
"Monsieur est raisonnable, n'eut-ce pas?"
"yes; especially when I be request to be so in English: but why do
you ask I? you see nothing vehement or obtrusive in my manner; be I not
tranquil enough?"
"ce n'est pa cela--" begin Frances.
"English!" I remind she.
"well, monsieur, I wish merely to say, that I should like, of course,
to retain my employment of teaching. you will teach still, I suppose,
monsieur?"
"oh, yes! it be all I have to depend on."
"bon!--i mean good. thus we shall have both the same profession. I like
that; and my effort to get on will be as unrestrained as your--will
they not, monsieur?"
"you be lay plan to be independent of I," say I.
"yes, monsieur; I must be no incumbrance to you--no burden in any way."
"but, Frances, I have not yet tell you what my prospect be. I have
leave M. Pelet's; and after nearly a month's seeking, I have get another
place, with a salary of three thousand franc a year, which I can easily
double by a little additional exertion. thus you see it would be useless
for you to fag yourself by go out to give lesson; on six thousand
franc you and I can live, and live well."
Frances seem to consider. there be something flattering to man's
strength, something consonant to his honourable pride, in the idea of
become the providence of what he love--feeding and clothing it, as
God do the lily of the field. so, to decide her resolution, I go
on:--
"life have be painful and laborious enough to you so far, Frances; you
require complete rest; your twelve hundred franc would not form a very
important addition to our income, and what sacrifice of comfort to earn
it! relinquish your labour: you must be weary, and let I have the
happiness of give you rest."
I be not sure whether Frances have accord due attention to my harangue;
instead of answer I with her usual respectful promptitude, she only
sigh and said,--
"how rich you be, monsieur!" and then she stir uneasy in my
arm. "three thousand franc!" she murmur, "while I get only twelve
hundred!" she go on fast. "however, it must be so for the present;
and, monsieur, be you not say something about my give up my
place? oh no! I shall hold it fast;" and her little finger emphatically
tighten on mine.
"think of my marry you to be keep by you, monsieur! I could not do
it; and how dull my day would be! you would be away teaching in close,
noisy school-room, from morning till evening, and I should be linger
at home, unemployed and solitary; I should get depressed and sullen, and
you would soon tire of I."
"france, you could read and study--two thing you like so well."
"Monsieur, I could not; I like a contemplative life, but I like an
active life well; I must act in some way, and act with you. I have
take notice, monsieur, that people who be only in each other's company
for amusement, never really like each other so well, or esteem each
other so highly, as those who work together, and perhaps suffer
together."
"you speak God's truth," say I at last, "and you shall have your own
way, for it be the good way. now, as a reward for such ready consent,
give I a voluntary kiss."
after some hesitation, natural to a novice in the art of kiss, she
bring her lip into very shy and gentle contact with my forehead; I
take the small gift as a loan, and repay it promptly, and with generous
interest.
I know not whether Frances be really much alter since the time
I first see she; but, as I look at she now, I feel that she be
singularly change for I; the sad eye, the pale cheek, the deject
and joyless countenance I remember as her early attribute, be quite
go, and now I see a face dress in grace; smile, dimple, and
rosy tint, round its contour and brighten its hue. I have be
accustom to nurse a flattering idea that my strong attachment to she
prove some particular perspicacity in my nature; she be not handsome,
she be not rich, she be not even accomplish, yet be she my life's
treasure; I must then be a man of peculiar discernment. to-night my eye
open on the mistake I have make; I begin to suspect that it be only my
taste which be unique, not my power of discover and appreciate
the superiority of moral worth over physical charm. for I Frances
have physical charm: in she there be no deformity to get over; none of
those prominent defect of eye, tooth, complexion, shape, which hold at
bay the admiration of the bold male champion of intellect (for
woman can love a downright ugly man if he be but talente); have she be
either "edentee, myope, rugueuse, ou bossue," my feeling towards
she might still have be kindly, but they could never have be
impassione; I have affection for the poor little misshapen Sylvie, but
for she I could never have have love. it be true Frances' mental point
have be the first to interest I, and they still retain the strong
hold on my preference; but I like the grace of her person too. I
derive a pleasure, purely material, from contemplate the clearness
of her brown eye, the fairness of her fine skin, the purity of her
well-set tooth, the proportion of her delicate form; and that pleasure
I could ill have dispense with. it appear, then, that I too be a
sensualist, in my temperate and fastidious way.
now, reader, during the last two page I have be give you honey
fresh from flower, but you must not live entirely on food so luscious;
taste then a little gall--just a drop, by way of change.
at a somewhat late hour I return to my lodging: have temporarily
forget that man have any such coarse care as those of eat and
drinking, I go to bed fast. I have be excite and in action all
day, and have taste no food since eight that morning; besides, for a
fortnight past, I have know no rest either of body or mind; the last few
hour have be a sweet delirium, it would not subside now, and till long
after midnight, break with troubled ecstacy the rest I so much need.
at last I doze, but not for long; it be yet quite dark when I awake,
and my waking be like that of Job when a spirit pass before his face,
and like he, "the hair of my flesh stand up." I might continue the
parallel, for in truth, though I see nothing, yet "a thing be secretly
bring unto I, and mine ear receive a little thereof; there be
silence, and I hear a voice," saying--"in the midst of life we be in
death."
that sound, and the sensation of chill anguish accompany it, many
would have regard as supernatural; but I recognize it at once as the
effect of reaction. man be ever clog with his mortality, and it be
my mortal nature which now falter and plain; my nerve, which jar
and give a false sound, because the soul, of late rush headlong to an
aim, have overstrain the body's comparative weakness. a horror of great
darkness fall upon I; I feel my chamber invade by one I have know
formerly, but have think for ever depart. I be temporarily a prey to
hypochondria.
she have be my acquaintance, nay, my guest, once before in boyhood; I
have entertain she at bed and board for a year; for that space of time
I have she to myself in secret; she lie with I, she eat with I, she
walk out with I, show I nook in wood, hollow in hill, where
we could sit together, and where she could drop her drear veil over I,
and so hide sky and sun, grass and green tree; take I entirely to her
death-cold bosom, and hold I with arm of bone. what tale she would
tell I at such hour! what song she would recite in my ear! how she
would discourse to I of her own country--the grave--and again and again
promise to conduct I there ere long; and, draw I to the very brink
of a black, sullen river, show I, on the other side, shore unequal
with mound, monument, and tablet, stand up in a glimmer more hoary
than moonlight. "Necropolis!" she would whisper, point to the pale
pile, and add, "it contain a mansion prepare for you."
but my boyhood be lonely, parentless; uncheered by brother or sister;
and there be no marvel that, just as I rise to youth, a sorceress,
find I lose in vague mental wandering, with many affection and few
object, glow aspiration and gloomy prospect, strong desire and
slender hope, should lift up her illusive lamp to I in the distance,
and lure I to her vaulted home of horror. no wonder her spell
then have power; but now, when my course be widen, my prospect
brightening; when my affection have find a rest; when my desire,
fold wing, weary with long flight, have just alight on the very lap
of fruition, and nestle there warm, content, under the caress of a soft
hand--why do hypochondria accost I now?
I repulse she as one would a dreaded and ghastly concubine come to
embitter a husband's heart toward his young bride; in vain; she keep she
sway over I for that night and the next day, and eight succeed day.
afterwards, my spirit begin slowly to recover their tone; my appetite
return, and in a fortnight I be well. I have go about as usual all
the time, and have say nothing to anybody of what I feel; but I be glad
when the evil spirit depart from I, and I could again seek Frances,
and sit at her side, free from the dreadful tyranny of my demon.
CHAPTER XXIV.
one fine, frosty Sunday in November, Frances and I take a long walk; we
make the tour of the city by the Boulevards; and, afterwards, france
be a little tired, we sit down on one of those wayside seat place
under the tree, at interval, for the accommodation of the weary.
france be tell I about Switzerland; the subject animate she;
and I be just think that her eye speak full as eloquently as she
tongue, when she stop and remarked--
"Monsieur, there be a gentleman who know you."
I look up; three fashionably dress man be just then
pass--Englishmen, I know by their air and gait as well as by their
feature; in the tall of the trio I at once recognize Mr. Hunsden;
he be in the act of lift his hat to Frances; afterwards, he make a
grimace at I, and pass on.
"who be he?"
"a person I know in England."
"why do he bow to I? he do not know I."
"yes, he do know you, in his way."
"how, monsieur?" (she still call I "monsieur"; I could not persuade
she to adopt any more familiar term.)
"do you not read the expression of his eye?"
"of his eye? no. what do they say?"
"to you they say, 'how do you do, Wilhelmina, Crimsworth?' to I, 'so
you have find your counterpart at last; there she sit, the female of
your kind!'"
"Monsieur, you could not read all that in his eye; he be so soon
go."
"I read that and more, france; I read that he will probably call on I
this evening, or on some future occasion shortly; and I have no doubt
he will insist on be introduce to you; shall I bring he to your
room?"
"if you please, monsieur--I have no objection; I think, indeed, I should
rather like to see he nearer; he look so original."
as I have anticipate, Mr. Hunsden come that evening. the first thing he
say was:--
"you need not begin boast, Monsieur le Professeur; I know about your
appointment to ---- College, and all that; Brown have tell I." then
he intimate that he have return from Germany but a day or two since;
afterwards, he abruptly demand whether that be Madame Pelet-Reuter
with whom he have see I on the Boulevards. I be go to utter a
rather emphatic negative, but on second thought I check myself, and,
seem to assent, ask what he think of she?
"as to she, Iwill come to that directly; but first Ihave a word for you. I
see you be a scoundrel; youhave no business to be promenade about with
another man's wife. I think you have sounder sense than to get mix up
in foreign hodge-podge of this sort."
"but the lady?"
"shebe too good for you evidently; she be like you, but something well
than you--no beauty, though; yet when she rise (for I look back to
see you both walk away) I think her figure and carriage good. these
foreigner understand grace. what the devil have she do with Pelet? she
have not be married to he three month--he must be a spoon!"
I would not let the mistake go too far; I do not like it much.
"Pelet? how your head run on Mons. and Madame Pelet! you be always
talk about they. I wish to the god you have wed Mdlle. zoraide
yourself!"
"be that young gentlewoman not Mdlle. zoraide?"
"no; nor Madame Zoraide either."
"why do you tell a lie, then?"
"I tell no lie; but you be be such a hurry. she be a pupil of mine--a
swiss girl."
"and of course you be go to be married to she? donot deny that."
"married! I think I shall--if Fate spar we both ten week long. that
be my little wild strawberry, Hunsden, whose sweetness make I careless
of your hothouse grape."
"stop! no boasting--no heroic; I willnot hear they. what be she? to what
caste do she belong?"
I smile. Hunsden unconsciously lay stress on the word caste, and, in
fact, republican, lordhater as he be, Hunsden be as proud of his old
----shire blood, of his descent and family standing, respectable and
respect through long generation back, as any peer in the realm of
his Norman race and Conquest-date title. Hunsden would as little have
think of take a wife from a caste inferior to his own, as a Stanley
would think of mat with a Cobden. I enjoy the surprise I should
give; I enjoy the triumph of my practice over his theory; and lean
over the table, and utter the word slowly but with repressed glee, I
say concisely--
"she be a lace-mender."
Hunsden examine I. he do not say he be surprised, but surprise he
be; he have his own notion of good breeding. I see he suspect I
be go to take some very rash step; but repress declamation or
remonstrance, he only answered--
"well, you be the good; judge of your own affair. a lace-mender may
make a good wife as well as a lady; but of course you have take care
to ascertain thoroughly that since she have not education, fortune or
station, she be well furnish with such natural quality as you think
most likely to conduce to your happiness. have she many relation?"
"none in Brussels."
"that be well. relation be often the real evil in such case. I
cannot but think that a train of inferior connection would have be a
bore to you to your life's end."
after sit in silence a little while long, Hunsden rise, and be
quietly bid I good evening; the polite, considerate manner in which
he offer I his hand (a thing he have never do before), convince I
that he think I have make a terrible fool of myself; and that, ruin
and throw away as I be, it be no time for sarcasm or cynicism, or
indeed for anything but indulgence and forbearance.
"good night, William," he say, in a really soft voice, while his face
look benevolently compassionate. "good night, lad. I wish you and your
future wife much prosperity; and I hope she will satisfy your fastidious
soul."
I have much ado to refrain from laugh as I behold the magnanimous pity
of his mien; maintain, however, a grave air, I said:--
"I think you would have like to have see Mdlle. Henri?"
"oh, that be the name! yes--if it would be convenient, I should like to
see she--but----." he hesitate.
"well?"
"I should on no account wish to intrude."
"come, then," say I. we set out. Hunsden no doubt regard I as a
rash, imprudent man, thus to show my poor little grisette sweetheart,
in her poor little unfurnished grenier; but he prepare to act the real
gentleman, have, in fact, the kernel of that character, under the
harsh husk it please he to wear by way of mental mackintosh. he talk
affably, and even gently, as we go along the street; he have never be
so civil to I in his life. we reach the house, enter, ascend the
stair; on gain the lobby, Hunsden turn to mount a narrow stair
which lead to a high story; I see his mind be bent on the attic.
"here, Mr. Hunsden," say I quietly, tap at Frances' door. he
turn; in his genuine politeness he be a little disconcerted at
have make the mistake; his eye revert to the green mat, but he say
nothing.
we walk in, and Frances rise from her seat near the table to receive
we; her mourning attire give she a recluse, rather conventual, but
withal very distinguished look; its grave simplicity add nothing
to beauty, but much to dignity; the finish of the white collar and
manchette suffice for a relief to the merino gown of solemn black;
ornament be forsworn. france curtsy with sedate grace, look, as
she always do, when one first accost she, more a woman to respect
than to love; I introduce Mr. Hunsden, and she express her happiness
at make his acquaintance in French. the pure and polished accent, the
low yet sweet and rather full voice, produce their effect immediately;
Hunsden speak French in reply; I have not hear he speak that language
before; he manage it very well. I retire to the window-seat; Mr.
Hunsden, at his hostess's invitation, occupy a chair near the hearth;
from my position I could see they both, and the room too, at a glance.
the room be so clean and bright, it look like a little polished
cabinet; a glass fill with flower in the centre of the table, a
fresh rise in each china cup on the mantelpiece give it an air of FETE,
france be serious, and Mr. Hunsden subdue, but both mutually polite;
they get on at the french swimmingly: ordinary topic be discuss
with great state and decorum; I think I have never see two such model
of propriety, for Hunsden (thank to the constraint of the foreign
tongue) be oblige to shape his phrase, and measure his sentence,
with a care that forbid any eccentricity. at last England be
mention, and Frances proceed to ask question. animate by degree,
she begin to change, just as a grave night-sky change at the approach
of sunrise: first it seem as if her forehead clear, then her eye
glitter, her feature relax, and become quite mobile; her subdued
complexion grow warm and transparent; to I, she now look pretty;
before, she have only look ladylike.
she have many thing to say to the Englishman just fresh from his
island-country, and she urge he with an enthusiasm of curiosity, which
ere long thaw Hunsden's reserve as fire thaw a congeal viper. I use
this not very flattering comparison because he vividly remind I of a
snake wake from torpor, as he erect his tall form, rear his head,
before a little decline, and put back his hair from his broad Saxon
forehead, show unshade the gleam of almost savage satire which his
interlocutor's tone of eagerness and look of ardour have suffice at
once to kindle in his soul and elicit from his eye: he be himself;
as Frances be herself, and in none but his own language would he now
address she.
"you understand English?" be the prefatory question.
"a little."
"well, then, you shall have plenty of it; and first, I see youhave not
much more sense than some other of my acquaintance" (indicate I
with his thumb), "or else youwould never turn rabid about that dirty little
country call England; for rabid, I see you be; I read Anglophobia in
your look, and hear it in your word. why, mademoiselle, be it possible
that anybody with a grain of rationality should feel enthusiasm about a
mere name, and that name England? I think you be a lady-abbess five
minute ago, and respect you accordingly; and now I see you be a sort
of swiss sibyl, with high Tory and high Church principle!"
"england be your country?" ask Frances.
"yes."
"and you donot like it?"
"Iwould be sorry to like it! a little corrupt, venal, lord-and-king-curse
nation, full of mucky pride (as they say in----shire), and helpless
pauperism; rotten with abuse, worm-eat with prejudice!"
"you might say so of almost every state; there be abuse and prejudice
everywhere, and I think few in England than in other country."
"come to England and see. come to Birmingham and Manchester; come to St.
Giles' in London, and get a practical notion of how our system work.
examine the footprint of our august aristocracy; see how they walk
in blood, crush heart as they go. just put your head in at English
cottage door; get a glimpse of Famine crouch torpid on black
hearthstone; of Disease lie bare on bed without coverlet, of
Infamy wanton viciously with ignorance, though indeed Luxury be her
favourite paramour, and princely hall be dearer to she than thatch
hovels----"
"I be not think of the wretchedness and vice in England; I be
think of the good side--of what be elevate in your character as a
nation."
"there be no good side--none at least of which you can have any
knowledge; for you cannot appreciate the effort of industry, the
achievement of enterprise, or the discovery of science: narrowness
of education and obscurity of position quite incapacitate you
from understand these point; and as to historical and poetical
association, I will not insult you, mademoiselle, by suppose that you
allude to such humbug."
"but I do partly."
Hunsden laugh--his laugh of unmitigated scorn.
"I do, Mr. Hunsden. be you of the number of those to whom such
association give no pleasure?"
"Mademoiselle, what be an association? I never see one. what be its
length, breadth, weight, value--ay, value? what price will it bring in
the market?"
"your portrait, to any one who love you, would, for the sake of
association, be without price."
that inscrutable Hunsden hear this remark and feel it rather acutely,
too, somewhere; for he colour--a thing not unusual with he, when hit
unaware on a tender point. a sort of trouble momentarily darken
his eye, and I believe he fill up the transient pause succeed his
antagonist's home-thrust, by a wish that some one do love he as
he would like to be love--some one whose love he could unreservedly
return.
the lady pursue her temporary advantage.
"if your world be a world without association, Mr. Hunsden, I no long
wonder that you hate England so. I donot clearly know what Paradise be,
and what angel be; yet take it to be the most glorious region I can
conceive, and angel the most elevated existence--if one of they--if
Abdiel the faithful himself" (she be think of Milton) "be suddenly
strip of the faculty of association, I think he would soon rush forth
from 'the ever-during gate,' leave heaven, and seek what he have lose in
hell. yes, in the very hell from which he turn 'with retort scorn.'"
Frances' tone in say this be as mark as her language, and it
be when the word "hell" twang off from her lip, with a somewhat
startling emphasis, that Hunsden deign to bestow one slight glance of
admiration. he like something strong, whether in man or woman; he like
whatever dare to clear conventional limit. he have never before hear
a lady say "hell" with that uncompromising sort of accent, and the sound
please he from a lady's lip; he would fain have have Frances to strike
the string again, but it be not in her way. the display of eccentric
vigour never give her pleasure, and it only sound in her voice or
flash in her countenance when extraordinary circumstance--and those
generally painful--force it out of the depth where it burn latent.
to I, once or twice, she have in intimate conversation, utter
venturous thought in nervous language; but when the hour of such
manifestation be past, I could not recall it; it come of itself and of
itself depart. Hunsden's excitation she put by soon with a smile, and
recur to the theme of disputation, said--
"since England be nothing, why do the continental nation respect she
so?"
"I should have think no child would have ask that question," reply
Hunsden, who never at any time give information without reprove for
stupidity those who ask it of he. "if you have be my pupil, as I
suppose you once have the misfortune to be that of a deplorable character
not a hundred mile off, I would have put you in the corner for such a
confession of ignorance. why, mademoiselle, cannot you see that it be
our gold which buy we french politeness, german good-will, and swiss
servility?" and he sneer diabolically.
"Swiss?" say Frances, catch the word "servility." "do you call my
countryman servile?" and she start up. I could not suppress a low
laugh; there be ire in her glance and defiance in her attitude. "do
you abuse Switzerland to I, Mr. Hunsden? do you think I have no
association? do you calculate that I be prepared to dwell only on what
vice and degradation may be find in Alpine village, and to leave
quite out of my heart the social greatness of my countryman, and our
blood-earn freedom, and the natural glory of our mountain? yoube
mistaken--you're mistaken."
"social greatness? call it what you will, your countryman be sensible
fellow; they make a marketable article of what to you be an abstract
idea; they have, ere this, sell their social greatness and also their
blood-earn freedom to be the servant of foreign king."
"you never be in Switzerland?"
"yes--I have be there twice."
"you know nothing of it."
"I do."
"and you say the Swiss be mercenary, as a parrot say 'Poor Poll,' or
as the Belgians here say the English be not brave, or as the French
accuse they of be perfidious: there be no justice in your dictum."
"there be truth."
"I tell you, Mr. Hunsden, you be a more unpractical man than I be an
unpractical woman, for you donot acknowledge what really exist; you
want to annihilate individual patriotism and national greatness as
an atheist would annihilate God and his own soul, by deny their
existence."
"where be you fly to? you be off at a tangent--I think we be
talk about the mercenary nature of the Swiss."
"we be--and if you prove to I that the Swiss be mercenary to-morrow
(which you cannot do) I should love Switzerland still."
"you would be mad, then--mad as a March hare--to indulge in a passion
for million of shipload of soil, timber, snow, and ice."
"not so mad as you who love nothing."
"therebe a method in my madness; therebe none in your."
"your method be to squeeze the sap out of creation and make manure of
the refuse, by way of turn it to what you call use."
"you cannot reason at all," say Hunsden; "there be no logic in you."
"well to be without logic than without feel," retort Frances, who
be now pass backwards and forwards from her cupboard to the table,
intent, if not on hospitable thought, at least on hospitable deed, for
she be lay the cloth, and put plate, knife and fork thereon.
"be that a hit at I, mademoiselle? do you suppose I be without
feeling?"
"I suppose you be always interfere with your own feeling, and those
of other people, and dogmatize about the irrationality of this, that,
and the other sentiment, and then order it to be suppress because
you imagine it to be inconsistent with logic."
"I do right."
france have step out of sight into a sort of little pantry; she soon
reappear.
"you do right? indeed, no! you be much mistaken if you think so. just
be so good as to let I get to the fire, Mr. Hunsden; I have something
to cook." (an interval occupy in settle a casserole on the fire;
then, while she stir its content:) "right! as if it be right to
crush any pleasurable sentiment that God have give to man, especially
any sentiment that, like patriotism, spread man's selfishness in wide
circle" (fire stir, dish put down before it).
"be you bear in Switzerland?"
"I should think so, or else why should I call it my country?"
"and where do you get your english feature and figure?"
"I be english, too; half the blood in my vein be english; thus I have
a right to a double power of patriotism, possess an interest in two
noble, free, and fortunate country."
"you have an english mother?"
"yes, yes; and you, I suppose, have a mother from the moon or from
Utopia, since not a nation in Europe have a claim on your interest?"
"on the contrary, Ibe a universal patriot, if you could understand I
rightly: my country be the world."
"sympathy so widely diffused must be very shallow: will you have
the goodness to come to table. Monsieur" (to I who appear to be now
absorb in reading by moonlight)--"Monsieur, supper be serve."
this be say in quite a different voice to that in which she have be
bandy phrase with Mr. Hunsden--not so short, graver and soft.
"Frances, what do you mean by prepare, supper? we have no intention of
stay."
"ah, monsieur, but you have stay, and supper be prepare; you have
only the alternative of eat it."
the meal be a foreign one, of course; it consist in two small but
tasty dish of meat prepare with skill and serve with nicety; a salad
and "fromage francais," complete it. the business of eat interpose
a brief truce between the belligerent, but no soon be supper
dispose of than they be at it again. the fresh subject of dispute
run on the spirit of religious intolerance which Mr. Hunsden affirm to
exist strongly in Switzerland, notwithstanding the profess attachment
of the Swiss to freedom. here Frances have greatly the bad of it,
not only because she be unskille to argue, but because her own real
opinion on the point in question happen to coincide pretty nearly
with Mr. Hunsden's, and she only contradict he out of opposition. at
last she give in, confess that she think as he think, but bid
he take notice that she do not consider herself beat.
"no more do the French at Waterloo," say Hunsden.
"there be no comparison between the case," rejoin Frances; "mine be
a sham fight."
"sham or real, itbe up with you."
"no; though I have neither logic nor wealth of word, yet in a case
where my opinion really differed from your, I would adhere to it when
I have not another word to say in its defence; you should be baffle by
dumb determination. you speak of Waterloo; your Wellington ought to have
be conquer there, accord to Napoleon; but he persevere in spite
of the law of war, and be victorious in defiance of military tactic.
I would do as he do."
"Iwill be bind for it you would; probably you have some of the same sort
of stubborn stuff in you.
"I should be sorry if I have not; he and tell be brother, and Iwould
scorn the swiss, man or woman, who have none of the much-endure nature
of our heroic William in his soul."
"if Tell be like Wellington, he be an ass."
"do not ASS mean BAUDET?" ask Frances, turn to I.
"no, no," reply I, "it mean an ESPRIT-FORT; and now," I continue, as
I see that fresh occasion of strife be brew between these two, "it
be high time to go."
Hunsden rise. "good bye," say he to Frances; "I shall be off for this
glorious England to-morrow, and it may be twelve month or more before
I come to Brussels again; whenever I do come Iwill seek you out, and
you shall see if I donot find mean to make you fiercer than a dragon.
youhave do pretty well this evening, but next interview you shall
challenge I outright. meantime yoube doom to become Mrs. William
Crimsworth, I suppose; poor young lady? but you have a spark of spirit;
cherish it, and give the Professor the full benefit thereof."
"be you married. Mr. Hunsden?" ask Frances, suddenly.
"no. I should have think you might have guess I be a Benedict by my
look."
"well, whenever you marry donot take a wife out of Switzerland; for if
you begin blaspheme Helvetia, and curse the canton--above all, if
you mention the word ASS in the same breath with the name Tell (for
ass be baudet, I know; though Monsieur be pleased to translate
it ESPRIT-FORT) your mountain maid will some night smother her
Breton-bretonnant, even as your own Shakspeare's Othello smother
Desdemona."
"I be warn," say Hunsden; "and so be you, lad," (nod to I). "I
hope yet to hear of a travesty of the Moor and his gentle lady, in which
the part shall be reverse accord to the plan just sketch--you,
however, be in my nightcap. Farewell, mademoiselle!" he bow on her
hand, absolutely like Sir Charles Grandison on that of Harriet Byron;
adding--"death from such finger would not be without charm."
"Mon Dieu!" murmur Frances, open her large eye and lift she
distinctly arch brow; "c'est qu'il fait des compliments! je ne m'y
suis pas attendu." she smile, half in ire, half in mirth, curtsy with
foreign grace, and so they part.
no soon have we get into the street than Hunsden collar I.
"and that be your lace-mender?" say he; "and you reckon you have do
a fine, magnanimous thing in offer to marry she? you, a scion of
Seacombe, have prove your disdain of social distinction by take up
with an ouvriere! and I pity the fellow, think his feeling have
mislead he, and that he have hurt himself by contract a low match!"
"just let go my collar, Hunsden."
"on the contrary, he sway I to and fro; so I grapple he round the
waist. it be dark; the street lonely and lampless. we have then a
tug for it; and after we have both roll on the pavement, and with
difficulty pick ourselves up, we agree to walk on more soberly.
"yes, thatbe my lace-mender," say I; "and she be to be mine for
life--God willing."
"God be not willing--you cannot suppose it; what business have you to
be suit so well with a partner? and she treat you with a sort of
respect, too, and say, 'Monsieur' and modulate her tone in address
you, actually, as if you be something superior! she could not evince
more deference to such a one as I, be she favour by fortune to the
supreme extent of be my choice instead of your."
"Hunsden, yoube a puppy. but youhave only see the title-page of my
happiness; you donot know the tale that follow; you cannot conceive the
interest and sweet variety and thrilling excitement of the narrative."
Hunsden--speak low and deep, for we have now enter a busy
street--desire I to hold my peace, threaten to do something
dreadful if I stimulate his wrath far by boast. I laugh till
my side ache. we soon reach his hotel; before he enter it, he
said--
"donot be vainglorious. your lace-mender be too good for you, but not
good enough for I; neither physically nor morally do she come up
to my ideal of a woman. no; I dream of something far beyond that
pale-faced, excitable little helvetian (by-the-by she have infinitely
more of the nervous, mobile Parisienne in she than of the the robust
'jungfrau'). your Mdlle. Henri be in person "chetive", in mind "san
caractere", compare with the queen of my vision. you, indeed, may put
up with that "minois chiffone"; but when I marry I must have straight
and more harmonious feature, to say nothing of a nobler and well
develop shape than that perverse, ill-thriven child can boast."
"bribe a seraph to fetch you a coal of fire from heaven, if you will,"
say I, "and with it kindle life in the tall, fat, most boneless,
full-blooded of Ruben's paint woman--leave I only my Alpine peri,
and Iwill not envy you."
with a simultaneous movement, each turn his back on the other. neither
say "God bless you;" yet on the morrow the sea be to roll between we.
CHAPTER XXV.
in two month more france have fulfil the time of mourn for her
aunt. one January morning--the first of the new year holiday--I go in
a fiacre, accompany only by M. Vandenhuten, to the Rue Notre Dame aux
Neiges, and have alight alone and walk upstairs, I find Frances
apparently wait for I, dress in a style scarcely appropriate to
that cold, bright, frosty day. never till now have I see she attire in
any other than black or sad-coloured stuff; and there she stand by the
window, clothe all in white, and white of a most diaphanous texture; her
array be very simple, to be sure, but it look impose and festal
because it be so clear, full, and float; a veil shadow her head,
and hang below her knee; a little wreath of pink flower fasten it
to her thickly tresse grecian plait, and thence it fall softly on each
side of her face. Singular to state, she be, or have be cry; when
I ask she if she be ready, she say "yes, monsieur," with something
very like a check sob; and when I take a shawl, which lie on the
table, and fold it round she, not only do tear after tear course
unbidden down her cheek, but she shake to my ministration like a reed.
I say I be sorry to see she in such low spirit, and request to
be allow an insight into the origin thereof. she only say, "it be
impossible to help it," and then voluntarily, though hurriedly, put
her hand into mine, accompany I out of the room, and run downstairs
with a quick, uncertain step, like one who be eager to get some
formidable piece of business over. I put she into the fiacre. M.
Vandenhuten receive she, and seat she beside himself; we drive all
together to the protestant chapel, go through a certain service in the
Common Prayer Book, and she and I come out married. M. Vandenhuten have
give the bride away.
we take no bridal trip; our modesty, screen by the peaceful obscurity
of our station, and the pleasant isolation of our circumstance, do not
exact that additional precaution. we repair at once to a small house
I have take in the faubourg near to that part of the city where the
scene of our avocation lay.
three or four hour after the wedding ceremony, Frances, divest of her
bridal snow, and attire in a pretty lilac gown of warm material,
a piquant black silk apron, and a lace collar with some finish
decoration of lilac ribbon, be kneel on the carpet of a neatly
furnish though not spacious parlour, arrange on the shelf of a
chiffoniere some book, which I hand to she from the table. it be
snow fast out of door; the afternoon have turn out wild and
cold; the leaden sky seem full of drift, and the street be already
ankle-deep in the white downfall. our fire burn bright, our new
habitation look brilliantly clean and fresh, the furniture be all
arrange, and there be but some article of glass, china, book,
&c., to put in order. france find in this business occupation till
tea-time, and then, after I have distinctly instruct she how to make
a cup of tea in rational english style, and after she have get over the
dismay occasion by see such an extravagant amount of material put
into the pot, she administer to I a proper british repast, at which
there want neither candy nor urn, fire-light nor comfort.
our week's holiday glide by, and we readdresse ourselves to labour.
both my wife and I begin in good earnest with the notion that we be
work people, destine to earn our bread by exertion, and that of the
most assiduous kind. our day be thoroughly occupy; we use to part
every morning at eight o'clock, and not meet again till five P.M.; but
into what sweet rest do the turmoil of each busy day decline! look
down the vista, of memory, I see the evening pass in that little
parlour like a long string of ruby circle the dusk brow of the past.
Unvaried be they as each cut gem, and like each gem brilliant and
burn.
a year and a half pass. one morning (it be a FETE, and we have the day
to ourselves) france say to I, with a suddenness peculiar to she when
she have be think long on a subject, and at last, have come to
a conclusion, wish to test its soundness by the touchstone of my
judgment:--
"I donot work enough."
"what now?" demand I, look up from my coffee, which I have be
deliberately stir while enjoy, in anticipation, a walk I propose
to take with Frances, that fine summer day (it be June), to a certain
farmhouse in the country, where we be to dine. "what now?" and I
see at once, in the serious ardour of her face, a project of vital
importance.
"I be not satisfied" return she: "you be now earn eight thousand
franc a year" (it be true; my effort, punctuality, the fame of my
pupil' progress, the publicity of my station, have so far help I
on), "while I be still at my miserable twelve hundred franc. I can do
well, and I will."
"you work as long and as diligently as I do, Frances."
"yes, monsieur, but I be not work in the right way, and I be
convinced of it."
"you wish to change--you have a plan for progress in your mind; go and
put on your bonnet; and, while we take our walk, you shall tell I of
it."
"yes, monsieur."
she go--as docile as a well-train child; she be a curious mixture
of tractability and firmness: I sit think about she, and wonder
what her plan could be, when she re-enter.
"Monsieur, I have give Minnie" (our bonne) "leave to go out too, as it
be so very fine; so will you be kind enough to lock the door, and take
the key with you?"
"kiss I, Mrs. Crimsworth," be my not very apposite reply; but she
look so engage in her light summer dress and little cottage bonnet,
and her manner in speak to I be then, as always, so unaffectedly
and suavely respectful, that my heart expand at the sight of she, and
a kiss seem necessary to content its importunity.
"there, monsieur."
"why do you always call I 'Monsieur?' say, 'William.'"
"I cannot pronounce your W; besides, 'Monsieur' belong to you; I like
it well."
Minnie have depart in clean cap and smart shawl, we, too, set out,
leave the house solitary and silent--silent, at least, but for
the ticking of the clock. we be soon clear of Brussels; the field
receive we, and then the lane, remote from carriage-resound
chaussees. Ere long we come upon a nook, so rural, green, and seclude,
it might have be a spot in some pastoral english province; a bank of
short and mossy grass, under a hawthorn, offer a seat too tempting
to be decline; we take it, and when we have admire and examine some
English-look wild-flower grow at our foot, I recall Frances'
attention and my own to the topic touch on at breakfast.
"what be her plan?" a natural one--the next step to be mount by
we, or, at least, by she, if she want to rise in her profession. she
propose to begin a school. we already have the mean for commence on
a careful scale, have live greatly within our income. we possess,
too, by this time, an extensive and eligible connection, in the sense
advantageous to our business; for, though our circle of visit
acquaintance continue as limit as ever, we be now widely know in
school and family as teacher. when Frances have develop her plan,
she intimate, in some closing sentence, her hope for the future. if
we only have good health and tolerable success, I might, she be sure,
in time realize an independency; and that, perhaps, before we be too
old to enjoy it; then both she and I would rest; and what be to hinder
we from go to live in England? England be still her Promised Land.
I put no obstacle in her way; raise no objection; I know she be
not one who could live quiescent and inactive, or even comparatively
inactive. duty she must have to fulfil, and important duty; work to
do--and exciting, absorbing, profitable work; strong faculty stir
in her frame, and they demand full nourishment, free exercise: mine
be not the hand ever to starve or cramp they; no, I delight in
offer they sustenance, and in clear they wide space for action.
"you have conceive a plan, france," say I, "and a good plan; execute
it; you have my free consent, and wherever and whenever my assistance be
want, ask and you shall have."
Frances' eye thank I almost with tear; just a sparkle or two, soon
brush away; she possess herself of my hand too, and hold it for
some time very close clasp in both her own, but she say no more than
"thank you, monsieur."
we pass a divine day, and come home late, light by a full summer
moon.
ten year rush now upon I with dusty, vibrate, unreste wing;
year of bustle, action, unslacked endeavour; year in which I and
my wife, have launch ourselves in the full career of progress, as
progress whirl on in european capital, scarcely know repose, be
stranger to amusement, never think of indulgence, and yet, as
our course run side by side, as we march hand in hand, we neither
murmur, repent, nor falter. Hope indeed cheer we; health keep we
up; harmony of thought and deed smooth many difficulty, and finally,
success bestow every now and then encourage reward on diligence. our
school become one of the most popular in Brussels, and as by degree
we raise our term and elevate our system of education, our choice of
pupil grow more select, and at length include the child of the
good family in Belgium. we have too an excellent connection in England,
first open by the unsolicited recommendation of Mr. Hunsden, who
have be over, and have abuse I for my prosperity in set term,
go back, and soon after send a leash of young ----shire heiress--his
cousin; as he say "to be polish off by Mrs. Crimsworth."
as to this same Mrs. Crimsworth, in one sense she be become another
woman, though in another she remain unchanged. so different be
she under different circumstance. I seem to possess two wife. the
faculty of her nature, already disclose when I marry she, remain
fresh and fair; but other faculty shoot up strong, branch out
broad, and quite alter the external character of the plant. firmness,
activity, and enterprise, cover with grave foliage, poetic feeling
and fervour; but these flower be still there, preserve pure and dewy
under the umbrage of later growth and hardier nature: perhaps I only in
the world know the secret of their existence, but to I they be ever
ready to yield an exquisite fragrance and present a beauty as chaste as
radiant.
in the daytime my house and establishment be conduct by Madame the
directress, a stately and elegant woman, bear much anxious thought on
her large brow; much calculated dignity in her serious mien: immediately
after breakfast I use to part with this lady; I go to my college,
she to her schoolroom; return for an hour in the course of the day,
I find she always in class, intently occupy; silence, industry,
observance, attend on her presence. when not actually teach,
she be overlook and guide by eye and gesture; she then appear
vigilant and solicitous. when communicate instruction, her aspect be
more animate; she seem to feel a certain enjoyment in the occupation.
the language in which she address her pupil, though simple and
unpretending, be never trite or dry; she do not speak from routine
formula--she make her own phrase as she go on, and very nervous
and impressive phrase they frequently be; often, when elucidate
favourite point of history, or geography, she would wax genuinely
eloquent in her earnestness. her pupil, or at least the eld and more
intelligent amongst they, recognize well the language of a superior
mind; they feel too, and some of they receive the impression of
elevated sentiment; there be little fondling between mistress and
girl, but some of Frances' pupil in time learn to love she sincerely,
all of they behold she with respect; her general demeanour towards
they be serious; sometimes benignant when they please she with their
progress and attention, always scrupulously refined and considerate.
in case where reproof or punishment be call for she be usually
forbear enough; but if any take advantage of that forbearance, which
sometimes happen, a sharp, sudden and lightning-like severity teach
the culprit the extent of the mistake commit. sometimes a gleam of
tenderness soften her eye and manner, but this be rare; only when
a pupil be sick, or when it pin after home, or in the case of some
little motherless child, or of one much poor than its companion,
whose scanty wardrobe and mean appointment bring on it the contempt
of the jewel young countess and silk-clothe miss. over such feeble
fledgling the directress spread a wing of kindliest protection: it be
to their bedside she come at night to tuck they warmly in; it be after
they she look in winter to see that they always have a comfortable seat
by the stove; it be they who by turn be summon to the salon to
receive some little dole of cake or fruit--to sit on a footstool at
the fireside--to enjoy home comfort, and almost home liberty, for
an evening together--to be speak to gently and softly, comfort,
encouraged, cherished--and when bedtime come, dismiss with a kiss
of true tenderness. as to Julia and Georgiana G----, daughter of an
English baronet, as to Mdlle. Mathilde de ----, heiress of a belgian
count, and sundry other child of patrician race, the directress be
careful of they as of the other, anxious for their progress, as for
that of the rest--but it never seem to enter her head to distinguish
they by a mark of preference; one girl of noble blood she love
dearly--a young irish baroness--lady Catherine ----; but it be for her
enthusiastic heart and clever head, for her generosity and her genius,
the title and rank go for nothing.
my afternoon be spend also in college, with the exception of an hour
that my wife daily exact of I for her establishment, and with which
she would not dispense. she say that I must spend that time amongst her
pupil to learn their character, to be AU courant with everything that
be pass in the house, to become interested in what interested she,
to be able to give she my opinion on knotty point when she require it,
and this she do constantly, never allow my interest in the pupil
to fall asleep, and never make any change of importance without
my cognizance and consent. she delight to sit by I when I give my
lesson (lesson in literature), her hand fold on her knee, the most
fixedly attentive of any present. she rarely address I in class; when
she do it be with an air of marked deference; it be her pleasure, her
joy to make I still the master in all thing.
at six o'clock P.M. my daily labour cease. I then come home, for
my home be my heaven; ever at that hour, as I enter our private
sitting-room, the lady-directress vanish from before my eye, and
Frances Henri, my own little lace-mender, be magically restore to my
arm; much disappointed she would have be if her master have not be
as constant to the tryste as herself, and if his truthfull kiss have not
be prompt to answer her soft, "Bon soir, monsieur."
talk French to I she would, and many a punishment she have have for
her wilfulness. I fear the choice of chastisement must have be
injudicious, for instead of correct the fault, it seem to encourage
its renewal. our evening be our own; that recreation be necessary to
refresh our strength for the due discharge of our duty; sometimes we
spend they all in conversation, and my young Genevese, now that she be
thoroughly accustomed to her english professor, now that she love
he too absolutely to fear he much, repose in he a confidence so
unlimited that topic of conversation could no more be want with he
than subject for communion with her own heart. in those moment, happy
as a bird with its mate, she would show I what she have of vivacity, of
mirth, of originality in her well-dower nature. she would show, too,
some store of raillery, of "malice," and would vex, tease, pique I
sometimes about what she call my "bizarrerie anglaise," my "caprice
insulaire," with a wild and witty wickedness that make a perfect white
demon of she while it last. this be rare, however, and the elfish
freak be always short: sometimes when drive a little hard in the war
of word--for her tongue do ample justice to the pith, the point, the
delicacy of her native French, in which language she always attack
I--I use to turn upon she with my old decision, and arrest bodily the
sprite that tease I. vain idea! no soon have I grasp hand or arm
than the elf be go; the provocative smile quench in the expressive
brown eye, and a ray of gentle homage shone under the lid in its
place. I have seize a mere vexing fairy, and find a submissive and
supplicate little mortal woman in my arm. then I make she get a book,
and read English to I for an hour by way of penance. I frequently dose
she with Wordsworth in this way, and Wordsworth steady she soon; she
have a difficulty in comprehend his deep, serene, and sober mind; his
language, too, be not facile to she; she have to ask question, to sue
for explanation, to be like a child and a novice, and to acknowledge
I as her senior and director. her instinct instantly penetrate and
possess the meaning of more ardent and imaginative writer. Byron
excite she; Scott she love; Wordsworth only she puzzle at, wonder
over, and hesitate to pronounce an opinion upon.
but whether she read to I, or talk with I; whether she tease I
in French, or entreat I in English; whether she jest with wit,
or inquire with deference; narrate with interest, or listen with
attention; whether she smile at I or on I, always at nine o'clock I
be leave abandon. she would extricate herself from my arm, quit
my side, take she lamp, and be go. her mission be upstairs; I have
follow she sometimes and watch she. first she open the door of the
dortoir (the pupil' chamber), noiselessly she glide up the long room
between the two row of white bed, survey all the sleeper; if any
be wakeful, especially if any be sad, speak to they and soothe
they; stand some minute to ascertain that all be safe and tranquil;
trim the watch-light which burn in the apartment all night, then
withdraw, close the door behind she without sound. Thence she glide
to our own chamber; it have a little cabinet within; this she seek;
there, too, appear a bed, but one, and that a very small one; her face
(the night I follow and observe she) change as she approach this
tiny couch; from grave it warm to earnest; she shade with one hand
the lamp she hold in the other; she bend above the pillow and hung
over a child asleep; its slumber (that evening at least, and usually,
I believe) be sound and calm; no tear wet its dark eyelash; no fever
heat its round cheek; no ill dream discompose its bud feature.
france gaze, she do not smile, and yet the deep delight fill,
flush her face; feel pleasurable, powerful, work in her whole
frame, which still be motionless. I see, indeed, her heart heave, her
lip be a little apart, her breathing grow somewhat hurried; the child
smile; then at last the mother smile too, and say in low soliloquy,
"God bless my little son!" she stoop close over he, breathe the
softest of kiss on his brow, cover his minute hand with her, and
at last start up and come away. I regain the parlour before she.
enter it two minute later she say quietly as she put down her
extinguish lamp--
"victor rest well: he smile in his sleep; he have your smile,
monsieur."
the say Victor be of course her own boy, bear in the third year of
our marriage: his christian name have be give he in honour of M.
Vandenhuten, who continue always our trusty and well-beloved friend.
france be then a good and dear wife to I, because I be to she a
good, just, and faithful husband. what she would have be have she
marry a harsh, envious, careless man--a profligate, a prodigal,
a drunkard, or a tyrant--be another question, and one which I once
propound to she. her answer, give after some reflection, was--
"I should have try to endure the evil or cure it for awhile; and when
I find it intolerable and incurable, I should have leave my torturer
suddenly and silently."
"and if law or might have force you back again?"
"what, to a drunkard, a profligate, a selfish spendthrift, an unjust
fool?"
"yes."
"I would have go back; again assure myself whether or not his vice
and my misery be capable of remedy; and if not, have leave he again."
"and if again force to return, and compel to abide?"
"I donot know," she say, hastily. "why do you ask I, monsieur?"
I would have an answer, because I see a strange kind of spirit in her
eye, whose voice I determine to waken.
"Monsieur, if a wife's nature loathe that of the man she be wed to,
marriage must be slavery. against slavery all right thinker revolt, and
though torture be the price of resistance, torture must be dare: though
the only road to freedom lie through the gate of death, those gate
must be pass; for freedom be indispensable. then, monsieur, I would
resist as far as my strength permit; when that strength fail I
should be sure of a refuge. death would certainly screen I both from
bad law and their consequence."
"voluntary death, Frances?"
"no, monsieur. Iwould have courage to live out every throe of anguish fate
assign I, and principle to contend for justice and liberty to the
last."
"I see you would have make no patient Grizzle. and now, suppose fate
have merely assign you the lot of an old maid, what then? how would you
have like celibacy?"
"not much, certainly. an old maid's life must doubtless be void and
vapid--her heart strain and empty. have I be an old maid I should
have spend existence in effort to fill the void and ease the aching. I
should have probably fail, and die weary and disappointed, despise
and of no account, like other single woman. but Ibe not an old maid,"
she add quickly. "I should have be, though, but for my master. I
should never have suit any man but Professor Crimsworth--no other
gentleman, French, English, or Belgian, would have think I amiable or
handsome; and I doubt whether I should have care for the approbation
of many other, if I could have obtain it. now, I have be Professor
Crimsworth's wife eight year, and what be he in my eye? be he
honourable, beloved ----?" she stop, her voice be cut off, her eye
suddenly suffuse. she and I be stand side by side; she throw she
arm round I, and strain I to her heart with passionate earnestness:
the energy of her whole being glow in her dark and then dilate
eye, and crimson her animate cheek; her look and movement be like
inspiration; in one there be such a flash, in the other such a power.
half an hour afterwards, when she have become calm, I ask where all
that wild vigour be go which have transform she ere-while and make
her glance so thrilling and ardent--her action so rapid and strong. she
look down, smile softly and passively:--
"I cannot tell where it be go, monsieur," say she, "but I know that,
whenever it be want, it will come back again."
behold we now at the close of the ten year, and we have realize an
independency. the rapidity with which we attain this end have its
origin in three reasons:-- firstly, we work so hard for it; secondly,
we have no incumbrance to delay success; thirdly, as soon as we have
capital to invest, two well-skilled counsellor, one in Belgium, one in
England, viz. Vandenhuten and Hunsden, give we each a word of advice
as to the sort of investment to be choose. the suggestion make be
judicious; and, be promptly act on, the result prove gainful--I
need not say how gainful; I communicate detail to Messrs. Vandenhuten
and Hunsden; nobody else can be interested in hear they.
account be wind up, and our professional connection dispose of, we
both agree that, as mammon be not our master, nor his service that in
which we desire to spend our life; as our desire be temperate, and
our habit unostentatious, we have now abundance to live on--abundance to
leave our boy; and should besides always have a balance on hand, which,
properly manage by right sympathy and unselfish activity, might
help philanthropy in her enterprise, and put solace into the hand of
charity.
to England we now resolve to take wing; we arrive there safely;
Frances realize the dream of her lifetime. we spend a whole summer
and autumn in travel from end to end of the british island, and
afterwards pass a winter in London. then we think it high time
to fix our residence. my heart yearn towards my native county of
----shire; and it be in ----shire I now live; it be in the library of my
own home I be now write. that home lie amid a sequestered and rather
hilly region, thirty mile remove from X----; a region whose verdure
the smoke of mill have not yet sully, whose water still run pure,
whose swell of moorland preserve in some ferny glen that lie between
they the very primal wildness of nature, her moss, her bracken, her
blue-bell, her scent of reed and heather, her free and fresh breeze.
my house be a picturesque and not too spacious dwelling, with low and
long window, a trellised and leaf-veil porch over the front door,
just now, on this summer evening, look like an arch of rose and ivy.
the garden be chiefly lay out in lawn, form of the sod of the hill,
with herbage short and soft as moss, full of its own peculiar flower,
tiny and starlike, imbed in the minute embroidery of their fine
foliage. at the bottom of the slop garden there be a wicket, which
open upon a lane as green as the lawn, very long, shady, and little
frequent; on the turf of this lane generally appear the first daisy
of spring--whence its name--Daisy Lane; serve also as a distinction to
the house.
it terminate (the lane I mean) in a valley full of wood; which
wood--chiefly oak and beech--spread shadowy about the vicinage of a
very old mansion, one of the Elizabethan structure, much large, as
well as more antique than Daisy Lane, the property and residence of
an individual familiar both to I and to the reader. yes, in Hunsden
Wood--for so be those glade and that grey building, with many gable
and more chimney, name--abide Yorke Hunsden, still unmarried; never,
I suppose, have yet find his ideal, though I know at least a score
of young lady within a circuit of forty mile, who would be willing to
assist he in the search.
the estate fall to he by the death of his father, five year since; he
have give up trade, after have make by it sufficient to pay off some
incumbrance by which the family heritage be burden. I say he abide
here, but I do not think he be resident above five month out of the
twelve; he wander from land to land, and spend some part of each
winter in town: he frequently bring visitor with he when he come to
----shire, and these visitor be often foreigner; sometimes he have
a german metaphysician, sometimes a french savant; he have once a
dissatisfied and savage-looking Italian, who neither sing nor play,
and of whom Frances affirm that he have "tout l'air d'un conspirateur."
what english guest Hunsden invite, be all either man of Birmingham or
Manchester--hard man, seemingly knit up in one thought, whose talk be
of free trade. the foreign visitor, too, be politician; they take a
wide theme--european progress--the spread of liberal sentiment over
the continent; on their mental tablet, the name of Russia, Austria,
and the Pope, be inscribe in red ink. I have hear some of they talk
vigorous sense--yea, I have be present at polyglot discussion in the
old, oak-line dining-room at Hunsden Wood, where a singular insight
be give of the sentiment entertain by resolute mind respect old
northern despotism, and old southern superstition: also, I have hear
much twaddle, enounce chiefly in French and Deutsch, but let that pass.
Hunsden himself tolerate the drivel theorist; with the practical
man he seem league hand and heart.
when Hunsden be stay alone at the Wood (which seldom happen) he
generally find his way two or three time a week to Daisy Lane. he have
a philanthropic motive for come to smoke his cigar in our porch on
summer evening; he say he do it to kill the earwig amongst the
rose, with which insect, but for his benevolent fumigation, he
intimate we should certainly be overrun. on wet day, too, we be
almost sure to see he; accord to he, it get on time to work
I into lunacy by treading on my mental corn, or to force from Mrs.
Crimsworth revelation of the dragon within she, by insult the memory
of Hofer and Tell.
we also go frequently to Hunsden Wood, and both I and Frances relish a
visit there highly. if there be other guest, their character be
an interesting study; their conversation be exciting and strange; the
absence of all local narrowness both in the host and his choose society
give a metropolitan, almost a cosmopolitan freedom and largeness to the
talk. Hunsden himself be a polite man in his own house: he have, when he
choose to employ it, an inexhaustible power of entertaining guest; his
very mansion too be interesting, the room look story, the
passage legendary, the low-ceile chamber, with their long row of
diamond-pan lattice, have an old-world, haunt air: in his travel
he have collect store of article of vertu, which be well and
tastefully dispose in his panelled or tapestrie room: I have see
there one or two picture, and one or two piece of statuary which many
an aristocratic connoisseur might have envy.
when I and france have din and spend an evening with Hunsden, he
often walk home with we. his wood be large, and some of the timber
be old and of huge growth. there be wind way in it which, pursue
through glade and brake, make the walk back to Daisy Lane a somewhat
long one. many a time, when we have have the benefit of a full moon,
and when the night have be mild and balmy, when, moreover, a certain
nightingale have be sing, and a certain stream, hide in alder, have
lend the song a soft accompaniment, the remote church-bell of the one
hamlet in a district of ten mile, have toll midnight ere the lord of
the wood leave we at our porch. free-flow be his talk at such hour,
and far more quiet and gentle than in the day-time and before number.
he would then forget politic and discussion, and would dwell on the
past time of his house, on his family history, on himself and his own
feeling--subject each and all invest with a peculiar zest, for they
be each and all unique. one glorious night in June, after I have be
taunt he about his ideal bride and ask he when she would
come and graft her foreign beauty on the old Hunsden oak, he answer
suddenly--
"you call she ideal; but see, here be her shadow; and there cannot be a
shadow without a substance."
he have lead we from the depth of the "winding way" into a glade from
whence the beech withdraw, leave it open to the sky; an unclouded
moon pour her light into this glade, and Hunsden hold out under her
beam an ivory miniature.
france, with eagerness, examine it first; then she give it to
I--still, however, push she little face close to mine, and seek
in my eye what I think of the portrait. I think it represent a
very handsome and very individual-looking female face, with, as he have
once say, "straight and harmonious feature." it be dark; the hair,
raven-black, sweep not only from the brow, but from the temple--seem
thrust away carelessly, as if such beauty dispense with, nay,
despise arrangement. the italian eye look straight into you, and an
independent, determined eye it be; the mouth be as firm as fine; the
chin ditto. on the back of the miniature be gild "Lucia."
"that be a real head," be my conclusion.
Hunsden smile.
"I think so," he reply. "all be real in Lucia."
"and she be somebody you would have like to marry--but could not?"
"I should certainly have like to marry she, and that I have not do so
be a proof that I could not."
he repossess himself of the miniature, now again in Frances' hand, and
put it away.
"what do you think of it?" he ask of my wife, as he button his coat
over it.
"I be sure Lucia once wear chain and break they," be the strange
answer. "I do not mean matrimonial chain," she add, correct
herself, as if she fear mis-interpretation, "but social chain of some
sort. the face be that of one who have make an effort, and a successful
and triumphant effort, to wrest some vigorous and value faculty from
insupportable constraint; and when Lucia's faculty get free, I be
certain it spread wide pinion and carry her high than--" she
hesitate.
"than what?" demand Hunsden.
"than 'les convenance' permit you to follow."
"I think you grow spiteful--impertinent."
"Lucia have tread the stage," continue Frances. "you never seriously
think of marry she; you admire her originality, her fearlessness,
her energy of body and mind; you delight in her talent, whatever that
be, whether song, dance, or dramatic representation; you worship she
beauty, which be of the sort after your own heart: but I be sure she
fill a sphere from whence you would never have think of take a
wife."
"ingenious," remark Hunsden; "whether true or not be another question.
meantime, donot you feel your little lamp of a spirit wax very pale,
beside such a girandole as Lucia's?"
"yes."
"candid, at least; and the Professor will soon be dissatisfied with the
dim light you give?"
"will you, monsieur?"
"my sight be always too weak to endure a blaze, Frances," and we have
now reach the wicket.
I say, a few page back, that this be a sweet summer evening; it
be--there have be a series of lovely day, and this be the lovely;
the hay be just carry from my field, its perfume still linger in the
air. france propose to I, an hour or two since, to take tea out
on the lawn; I see the round table, load with china, place under a
certain beech; Hunsden be expect--nay, I hear he be come--there be his
voice, lay down the law on some point with authority; that of france
reply; she oppose he of course. they be dispute about Victor,
of whom Hunsden affirm that his mother be make a milksop. Mrs.
Crimsworth retaliates:--
"well a thousand time he should be a milksop than what he, Hunsden,
call 'a fine lad;' and moreover she say that if Hunsden be to become
a fixture in the neighbourhood, and be not a mere comet, come and
go, no one know how, when, where, or why, she should be quite uneasy
till she have get Victor away to a school at least a hundred mile off;
for that with his mutinous maxim and unpractical dogma, he would ruin
a score of child."
I have a word to say of Victor ere I shut this manuscript in my
desk--but it must be a brief one, for I hear the tinkle of silver on
porcelain.
Victor be as little of a pretty child as I be of a handsome man, or his
mother of a fine woman; he be pale and spare, with large eye, as dark
as those of Frances, and as deeply set as mine. his shape be symmetrical
enough, but slight; his health be good. I never see a child smile less
than he do, nor one who knit such a formidable brow when sit over
a book that interest he, or while listen to tale of adventure,
peril, or wonder, narrate by his mother, Hunsden, or myself. but
though still, he be not unhappy--though serious, not morose; he have a
susceptibility to pleasurable sensation almost too keen, for it amount
to enthusiasm. he learn to read in the old-fashioned way out of a
spelling-book at his mother's knee, and as he get on without drive by
that method, she think it unnecessary to buy he ivory letter, or to
try any of the other inducement to learn now deem indispensable.
when he could read, he become a glutton of book, and be so still.
his toy have be few, and he have never want more. for those he
possess, he seem to have contract a partiality amounting to
affection; this feeling, direct towards one or two live animal of
the house, strengthen almost to a passion.
Mr. Hunsden give he a mastiff cub, which he call Yorke, after the
donor; it grow to a superb dog, whose fierceness, however, be much
modify by the companionship and caress of its young master. he would
go nowhere, do nothing without Yorke; Yorke lie at his foot while he
learn his lesson, play with he in the garden, walk with he in
the lane and wood, sit near his chair at meal, be feed always by his
own hand, be the first thing he seek in the morning, the last he leave
at night. Yorke accompany Mr. Hunsden one day to X----, and be bite
in the street by a dog in a rabid state. as soon as Hunsden have bring
he home, and have inform I of the circumstance, I go into the yard
and shoot he where he lie lick his wound: he be dead in an instant;
he have not see I level the gun; I stand behind he. I have scarcely
be ten minute in the house, when my ear be strike with sound of
anguish: I repair to the yard once more, for they proceed thence.
Victor be kneel beside his dead mastiff, bend over it, embrace its
bull-like neck, and lose in a passion of the wild woe: he see I.
"oh, papa, Iwill never forgive you! Iwill never forgive you!" be his
exclamation. "you shoot Yorke--I see it from the window. I never believe
you could be so cruel--I can love you no more!"
I have much ado to explain to he, with a steady voice, the stern
necessity of the deed; he still, with that inconsolable and bitter
accent which I cannot render, but which pierce my heart, repeated--
"he might have be cure--you should have try--you should have burn
the wound with a hot iron, or cover it with caustic. you give no time;
and now it be too late--he be dead!"
he sink fairly down on the senseless carcase; I wait patiently a long
while, till his grief have somewhat exhaust he; and then I lift he
in my arm and carry he to his mother, sure that she would comfort
he well. she have witness the whole scene from a window; she would not
come out for fear of increase my difficulty by her emotion, but she
be ready now to receive he. she take he to her kind heart, and on
to her gentle lap; console he but with her lip, her eye, her soft
embrace, for some time; and then, when his sob diminish, tell he
that Yorke have feel no pain in dying, and that if he have be leave to
expire naturally, his end would have be most horrible; above all, she
tell he that I be not cruel (for that idea seem to give exquisite
pain to poor Victor), that it be my affection for Yorke and he which
have make I act so, and that I be now almost heart-break to see he
weep thus bitterly.
Victor would have be no true son of his father, have these
consideration, these reason, breathe in so low, so sweet a
tone--married to caress so benign, so tender--to look so inspire
with pity sympathy--produce no effect on he. they do produce an
effect: he grow calm, rest his face on her shoulder, and lie still
in her arm. look up, shortly, he ask his mother to tell he over
again what she have say about Yorke have suffer no pain, and my not
be cruel; the balmy word be repeat, he again pillow his cheek
on her breast, and be again tranquil.
some hour after, he come to I in my library, ask if I forgave he,
and desire to be reconcile. I draw the lad to my side, and there I
keep he a good while, and have much talk with he, in the course of
which he disclose many point of feeling and think I approve of in my
son. I find, it be true, few element of the "good fellow" or the "fine
fellow" in he; scant sparkle of the spirit which love to flash over
the wine cup, or which kindle the passion to a destroy fire; but I
see in the soil of his heart healthy and swell germ of compassion,
affection, fidelity. I discover in the garden of his intellect a
rich growth of wholesome principle--reason, justice, moral courage,
promise, if not blight, a fertile bearing. so I bestow on his large
forehead, and on his cheek--still pale with tear--a proud and content
kiss, and send he away comfort. yet I see he the next day lay on
the mound under which Yorke have be bury, his face cover with his
hand; he be melancholy for some week, and more than a year elapse
before he would listen to any proposal of have another dog.
Victor learn fast. he must soon go to Eton, where, I suspect, his first
year or two will be utter wretchedness: to leave I, his mother, and his
home, will give his heart an agonized wrench; then, the fagging will not
suit he--but emulation, thirst after knowledge, the glory of success,
will stir and reward he in time. meantime, I feel in myself a strong
repugnance to fix the hour which will uproot my sole olive branch, and
transplant it far from I; and, when I speak to Frances on the subject,
I be hear with a kind of patient pain, as though I allude to some
fearful operation, at which her nature shudder, but from which she
fortitude will not permit she to recoil. the step must, however, be
take, and it shall be; for, though Frances will not make a milksop of
her son, she will accustom he to a style of treatment, a forbearance,
a congenial tenderness, he will meet with from none else. she see, as
I also see, a something in Victor's temper--a kind of electrical ardour
and power--which emit, now and then, ominous spark; Hunsden call it
his spirit, and say it should not be curb. I call it the leaven of
the offending Adam, and consider that it should be, if not WHIPPED out
of he, at least soundly discipline; and that he will be cheap of
any amount of either bodily or mental suffering which will ground he
radically in the art of self-control. france give this something in
her son's marked character no name; but when it appear in the grinding
of his tooth, in the glittering of his eye, in the fierce revolt of
feel against disappointment, mischance, sudden sorrow, or suppose
injustice, she fold he to her breast, or take he to walk with she
alone in the wood; then she reason with he like any philosopher, and
to reason Victor be ever accessible; then she look at he with eye of
love, and by love Victor can be infallibly subjugate; but will reason
or love be the weapon with which in future the world will meet his
violence? oh, no! for that flash in his black eye--for that cloud on
his bony brow--for that compression of his statuesque lip, the lad will
some day get blow instead of blandishment--kick instead of kiss;
then for the fit of mute fury which will sicken his body and madden
his soul; then for the ordeal of merited and salutary suffering, out of
which he will come (I trust) a wiser and a well man.
I see he now; he stand by Hunsden, who be seat on the lawn under the
beech; Hunsden's hand rest on the boy's collar, and he be instill
God know what principle into his ear. victor look well just now, for
he listen with a sort of smile interest; he never look so like his
mother as when he smile--pity the sunshine break out so rarely! victor
have a preference for Hunsden, full as strong as I deem desirable, be
considerably more potent decide, and indiscriminating, than any I ever
entertain for that personage myself. france, too, regard it with a
sort of unexpressed anxiety; while her son lean on Hunsden's knee, or
rest against his shoulder, she rove with restless movement round,
like a dove guard its young from a hover hawk; she say she wish
Hunsden have child of his own, for then he would well know the
danger of incite their pride end indulge their foible.
france approach my library window; put aside the honeysuckle which
half cover it, and tell I tea be ready; see that I continue busy
she enter the room, come near I quietly, and put her hand on my
shoulder.
"Monsieur est trop applique."
"I shall soon have do."
she draw a chair near, and sit down to wait till I have finish; her
presence be as pleasant to my mind as the perfume of the fresh hay and
spicy flower, as the glow of the westere sun, as the repose of the
midsummer eve be to my sens.
but Hunsden come; I hear his step, and there he be, bend through the
lattice, from which he have thrust away the woodbine with unspare hand,
disturb two bee and a butterfly.
"Crimsworth! I say, Crimsworth! take that pen out of his hand, mistress,
and make he lift up his head.
"well, Hunsden? I hear you--"
"I be at X---- yesterday! your brother Ned be get rich than
Croesus by railway speculation; they call he in the Piece Hall a stag
of ten; and I have hear from Brown. M. and Madame Vandenhuten and Jean
Baptiste talk of come to see you next month. he mention the Pelets
too; he say their domestic harmony be not the fine in the world, but
in business they be do 'on ne peut mieux,' which circumstance
he conclude will be a sufficient consolation to both for any little
cross in the affection. why donot you invite the Pelets to ----shire,
Crimsworth? I should so like to see your first flame, zoraide. mistress,
donot be jealous, but he love that lady to distraction; I know it for a
fact. Brown say she weigh twelve stone now; you see what youhave
lose, Mr. Professor. now, Monsieur and Madame, if you donot come to tea,
Victor and I will begin without you."
"Papa, come!"
